                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IDENTIFYING AMBIGUITY SHOCKS IN BUSINESS CYCLE MODELS USING
                             SURVEY DATA

                                       Anmol Bhandari
                                      Jaroslav Borovička
                                            Paul Ho

                                     Working Paper 22225
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22225


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2016




We thank Bryan Kelly, Monika Piazzesi, Tom Sargent, Martin Schneider and Balint Szoke for
helpful comments, and Mathias Trabandt for sharing codes with us. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Anmol Bhandari, Jaroslav Borovička, and Paul Ho. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Identifying Ambiguity Shocks in Business Cycle Models Using Survey Data
Anmol Bhandari, Jaroslav Borovička, and Paul Ho
NBER Working Paper No. 22225
May 2016
JEL No. C11,C63,D81,D84,E24,E32

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a framework to analyze economies with agents facing time-varying concerns for
model misspecification. These concerns lead agents to interpret economic outcomes and make
decisions through the lens of a pessimistically biased 'worst-case' model. We combine survey data
and implied theoretical restrictions on the relative magnitudes and comovement of forecast biases
across macroeconomic variables to identify ambiguity shocks as exogenous fluctuations in the
worst-case model. Our solution method delivers tractable linear approximations that preserve the
effects of time-varying ambiguity concerns and permit estimation using standard Bayesian
techniques. Applying our framework to an estimated New-Keynesian business cycle model with
frictional labor markets, we find that ambiguity shocks explain a substantial portion of the
variation in labor market quantities.

Anmol Bhandari                                  Paul Ho
Department of Economics                         Princeton University
University of Minnesota                         pho@princeton.edu
bhandari@umn.edu

Jaroslav Borovička
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jaroslav.borovicka@nyu.edu
1    Introduction
Survey data on households’ expectations about future macroeconomic outcomes reveal significant
pessimistic average biases and comovement of these biases at business cycle frequencies. In this
paper, we present a theory where such pessimism stems from households’ concerns that the under-
lying model they use for decision-making is potentially misspecified. In doing so, we depart from
the rational expectations assumption and replace it with a tightly specified framework that links
households’ decisions and expectations adjusted for plausible misspecification fears. This depar-
ture is disciplined using data on macroeconomic variables along with survey data on households’
expectations. We use this framework to quantify the magnitude and economic channels through
which misspecification concerns affect aggregate outcomes.
    Our theoretical foundation is an extension of the robust preference model of Hansen and Sargent
(2001a,b). Agents endowed with robust preferences are concerned that the particular model they
view as their ‘benchmark’ model of the economy may be misspecified. Instead of only using the
benchmark model, they consider a set of models that are statistically hard to distinguish from the
benchmark model. The concerns for model misspecification lead them to choose the model from
this set that delivers the lowest utility. This ‘worst-case’ model is then the basis for their decisions,
as in the utility-minimizing prior in the multiple prior framework of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989)
and Epstein and Schneider (2003). The robust preference framework thus represents a particular
form of ambiguity aversion.
    We extend this robust preference framework to allow the agents to be exposed to shocks to
their ambiguity concerns. The time-variation in ambiguity concerns induces fluctuations in agents’
worst-case beliefs and endogenously affects equilibrium dynamics. While our extension delivers a
more flexible specification of the time-variation in the worst-case model, it still tightly restricts
the beliefs across alternative states in a given period. Agents fear outcomes with adverse utility
consequences and overweight their probabilities in a specific way.
    In order to identify the variation in the worst-case model empirically, we assume that agents’
forecasts in the survey data are based on their worst-case model. Our theoretical framework yields
directly testable predictions about the mean distortions and comovement of these forecasts under
the worst-case model. Specifically, the model predicts a one-factor structure for the survey forecasts
of macroeconomic variables, with loadings determined by the covariance of these variables with
shocks that have adverse utility consequences. These cross-equation restrictions also allow us to
distinguish fluctuations in ambiguity concerns from alternative specifications of subjective beliefs.
    We show that household forecasts for key macroeconomic variables in the University of Michigan
Surveys of Consumers are indeed significantly pessimistically biased, with a discernible business
cycle component. We start by estimating a vector-autoregression (VAR) that embeds household
survey data, explicitly restricting the belief distortion (or wedge) between the worst-case model
and the data-generating probability measure. A common component of these belief distortions in
alternative survey answers identifies a latent factor that captures the time-variation in the worst-
case model, and its impact on observable macroeconomic quantities.

                                                   1
   We then combine the robust preference framework and the survey data in a dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium model with frictional labor markets, sticky prices and a monetary authority
that follows an interest rate rule. We estimate this model using Bayesian methods and study the
quantitative role of the ambiguity shocks in the dynamics of the labor market and the comovement
of macroeconomic variables.
   The results from the VAR and structural models show a common pattern. The worst-case belief
is identified from the common variation of the biases in survey answers, and it explains a significant
amount of variation in these biases. Ambiguity-averse households interpret high unemployment,
low GDP growth and high inflation states as particularly adverse to their utility, and overweight
worst-case probabilities of those states substantially.
   An adverse ambiguity shock also has significant contractionary effects, propagated particularly
strongly through the labor market. In the labor market with search and matching frictions, cre-
ation of new matches and hiring depend on the assessment of the future surpluses generated in a
new match. An increase in ambiguity concerns leads to a more pessimistic evaluation of future
surpluses and therefore to lower match creation, which increases unemployment and decreases out-
put. Fluctuations in ambiguity concerns effectively act as variation in the risky component of the
stochastic discount factor, providing a testable structural explanation of the discount rate shock in
Hall (2015) linked to observable survey data.
   On the technical side, we develop a series expansion technique that incorporates the impact of
time-varying ambiguity concerns in the first-order approximation of the model. The main challenge
is that the worst-case model distortion arises endogenously and needs to be computed jointly
with the equilibrium dynamics, as agents overweight states with low utility realizations. The
approximation method leads to a tractable linear solution for the equilibrium dynamics with a role
for ambiguity shocks that can be estimated using standard Bayesian techniques.
   The paper contributes to the growing literature that quantitatively assesses the role of ambiguity
aversion in the macroeconomy, building on alternative decision-theoretical foundations by Gilboa
and Schmeidler (1989), Epstein and Schneider (2003), Klibanoff et al. (2005, 2009), Ju and Miao
(2012), Hansen and Sargent (2001a,b), Strzalecki (2011) and others. Applications to macroeconomic
models include Cagetti et al. (2002) and Bidder and Smith (2012). For a survey of applications in
finance, see Epstein and Schneider (2010).
   Perhaps the closest to our paper is the work by Ilut and Schneider (2014) and Bianchi et al.
(2014), who utilize the recursive multiple-prior preferences of Epstein and Schneider (2003). The
main difference between their approach and ours to model ambiguity aversion is how the set of
potential misspecifications is parameterized in each case. The multiple-prior framework does not
restrict the relative magnitudes of individual shock distortions under the worst-case model, and thus
introduces a heavier burden on identification through observable data. In our setting, exposures
of household continuation values to the underlying shocks endogenously determine the distortions.
These exposures are pinned down by cross-equation restrictions that arise from optimizing behav-
ior of forward-looking agents and impose consistency between the worst-case model and implied


                                                  2
continuation values. We explicitly characterize these restrictions and utilize them in our estimation
and identification of ambiguity shocks. Another difference is that we use data on cross-sectional
average distortions measured in household survey answers, for which our theory has direct quanti-
tative predictions, as a source of identification of the ambiguity shocks. Ilut and Schneider (2014)
instead use the forecast dispersion as a proxy for confidence and show an empirically plausible
relation of this measure to the notion of ambiguity aversion. Despite these differences, we view
both approaches as complementary.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes key empirical findings from the survey
data and discusses empirically testable predictions that distinguish ambiguity shocks from other
potential explanations of the belief biases. In Section 3, we estimate a latent factor model that
captures the time-variation in the common component of the belief biases. Motivated by these
findings, we introduce our extension of the robust preference framework in Section 4, link the
implications of the theory to the belief biases in survey data, and develop a tractable solution
technique for approximating the equilibrium dynamics. Section 5 is devoted to the construction and
estimation of the structural business cycle model that embeds robust preferences, and in Section 6,
we discuss implications of the findings and the role of ambiguity shocks in business cycle dynamics.
Section 7 concludes. The appendix contains detailed derivations of the developed approximation
method, description of the data, estimation details, and further results and robustness checks.


2        Survey expectations
We start by analyzing data on households’ expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of
Consumers (Michigan Survey). These surveys collect answers to questions about the households’
own economic situation as well as their forecasts about the future state of the economy. Specifi-
cally, we focus on the forecasts of future inflation, unemployment rate and the Index of Consumer
Expectations, which we use as a proxy for GDP growth forecast. A detailed description of the
construction of the data and additional statistics are provided in Appendix C.
        We are interested in deviations in these survey answers from rational expectations forecasts.
The construction of these belief wedges necessarily requires taking a stand on how to determine
the probability measure that generates the data. We assume that the Survey of Professional Fore-
casters (SPF) provides unbiased estimates for the variables we study. Ang et al. (2007), Croushore
(2010), Faust and Wright (2013) and others document that professional survey forecasts systemati-
cally outperform other forecasting methods.1 We also prefer the SPF forecasts to rational forecasts
generated in our model because potential misspecification in the constructed model would system-
atically bias the measurement of the belief wedges, a critical input to our analysis. Nevertheless, as
a robustness check, we construct these wedges in Appendix G using several alternatives that also
    1
    While some studies report modest biases in SPF forecasts, these biases are an order of magnitude smaller
than those we find in household surveys, and not robust to the chosen time period. See, e.g., Elliott et al. (2008)
and Capistrán and Timmermann (2009), who rationalize these biases by assuming forecasters with asymmetric loss
functions.



                                                        3
                              inflation    unemployment        negative GDP growth
                     4
survey wedge (%)



                     2


                     0


                    −2
                               1985        1990         1995          2000        2005        2010         2015
                     3
                              inflation    unemployment        negative GDP growth
                     2
survey wedge (%)




                     1

                     0

                    −1

                    −2
                               1985        1990         1995          2000        2005        2010         2015
                                                                   year



Figure 1: Difference in survey expectations between the Michigan Survey and Survey of Profes-
sional Forecasters. Top panel original data, bottom panel HP-filtered and standardized. GDP
growth forecast for the Michigan Survey is constructed using a projection on the Index of Con-
sumer Expectations, and the GDP growth wedge is plotted with a negative sign. Details on the
construction of the data series are in Appendix C. NBER recessions shaded.


use model-implied forecasts. We show that for each variable these wedges are highly correlated
across alternative measurements and yield similar results.
                   Figure 1 shows the differences in survey expectations between the Michigan Survey and the
Survey of Professional Forecasters for inflation, unemployment and GDP growth. The survey
expectations are mean one-year ahead expectations in the survey samples. The Michigan Survey
does not contain a question about GDP growth, and we therefore proxy it by projecting GDP
growth on the Index of Consumer Expectations (ICE) constructed from survey answers. We detail
the construction of the time series in Appendix C. Table 5 in Appendix C summarizes the moments
and correlations for the belief wedges.
                   The top panel of Figure 1 reveals that households’ expectations are systematically pessimisti-
cally biased — relative to professional forecasters, households overpredict future unemployment


                                                               4
and inflation, and underpredict GDP growth (with the exception of the boom period during the
late 1990s). The average belief wedge over the sample period for the inflation, unemployment and
GDP growth wedge is 1.01%, 0.55% and −1.73%, respectively.2
    Moreover, despite a substantial amount of noise, the three time series for the belief wedges have
a common business cycle component and are statistically significantly correlated. The correlation
coefficient for the unemployment and GDP growth wedges is −0.63, while the correlation between
the inflation and GDP growth wedges is −0.32, with a standard error of 0.07 and 0.08, respectively.
The comovement over the business cycle can be visually confirmed in the bottom panel of Figure 1
that plots HP-filtered and standardized data. All three variables are significantly correlated with
the business cycle, measured both using realized GDP growth and the output gap (see Table 5 in
Appendix C).
    While the unemployment rate wedge appears small relative to the other wedges, this is consistent
with a low volatility of the innovations to the realized unemployment rate. The large magnitude of
the inflation wedge, in particular in the post-2006 period, is consistent with the findings of Coibion
and Gorodnichenko (2015) and others. The fluctuations in the GDP growth wedge may appear
large, peaking at −4.37% in 2011Q3, in the quarter of the U.S. debt ceiling crisis.3 These large
fluctuations ask for additional scrutiny, especially given that the Michigan forecast is constructed
using the projection on the ICE index. First, given that GDP growth is volatile, it is not surprising
and in fact consistent with our theory that households report larger pessimistic biases. Second,
Figure 9 in Appendix C shows that while the constructed household forecast is systematically
pessimistically biased, it exhibits very similar business cycle patterns as the actual GDP growth and
the SPF forecasts. Finally, our theory predicts that the ratio of the mean of the belief wedge relative
to its time-series volatility should be constant across responses for different variables. Table 5 in
Appendix C shows that these ratios for the empirically measured belief wedges are in fact in the
very tight range of 1.28–1.47, despite the fact that they are all constructed from independent data.
This evidence is reassuring regarding the plausibility of the constructed wedges.

2.1    Forecast dispersion
Our theoretical framework formalizes the notion of pessimistic belief distortions through the struc-
ture of the robust preference model. The common component of the three belief wedges from
Figure 1 identifies the fluctuations in the worst-case model of economic agents. We embed the be-
lief distortions in a representative agent framework, which provides a justification for using average
forecasts as a measure of subjective expectations in the model.
    Mankiw et al. (2003), Bachmann et al. (2012) and others use measures of cross-sectional forecast
dispersion as a proxy for economic uncertainty. This proxy is typically based on the presumption
that a higher dispersion is indicative of more difficulty in estimating the forecast distribution,
   2
     The average bias in the SPF data for the three variables is 0.19%, 0.00% and 0.04%, respectively. None of these
numbers are statistically significant.
   3
     As Figure 9 in Appendix C shows, professional forecasters in that quarter were predicting one-year ahead growth
of 2.42%, while the constructed household forecast is −1.95%.


                                                         5
                     3

                     2
survey wedge (%)




                     1

                     0

                    −1
                                                            unemployment rate mean        interquartile range
                    −2
                               1985        1990         1995         2000         2005        2010         2015
                     6

                     4
survey wedge (%)




                     2

                     0

                    −2

                    −4
                                                            inflation mean    median      interquartile range
                    −6
                               1985        1990         1995         2000         2005        2010         2015



Figure 2: Dispersion in survey expectations in the Michigan Survey. The graphs show different
quantiles of the distribution of responses in the Michigan survey, net of the mean response in the
Survey of Professional Forecasters. The top panel shows the unemployment responses, bottom
panel the inflation responses. Details on the construction of the data series are in Appendix C.
NBER recessions shaded.

and therefore implies more ambiguity. Ilut and Schneider (2014) apply the same logic to use the
dispersion in the SPF forecasts as a proxy of household confidence in the forecasting model.
                   We plot the dispersion data from the Michigan survey for the unemployment rate and inflation
rate forecasts in Figure 2 for comparison. For the inflation data, we have information on the
quantiles of the cross-sectional distribution. For the unemployment rate forecast, we fit a sequence
of normal distributions to categorical answers using the same method as in Carlson and Parkin
(1975) and Mankiw et al. (2003), see Appendix C for details.
                   There is indeed substantial cross-sectional dispersion in the survey answers across individual
households. However, the interquartile range appears to be stable (except for the inflation answers
from early 1980s), and in the case of the unemployment answer also visibly comoves with the
business cycle. In Table 6 in Appendix C, we also report average inflation and unemployment
forecasts from the Michigan Survey for alternative age groups, geographical regions, quartiles of


                                                               6
the income distribution, men and women, and different levels of education. While there is some
heterogeneity in the biases, usually in the expected direction, substantial biases persist even for
groups with high incomes and high levels of acquired education. This justifies our assumption of
systematic pessimistic biases in the broad population of households.
   While it may be appealing to use cross-sectional dispersion in forecasts as a proxy for the am-
biguity concerns of each individual household, our theory does not provide such a direct link. We
seek to keep ambiguity concerns separate from the notion disagreement in forecasts across house-
holds. The model we develop in this paper is based on a representative agent framework that does
not feature heterogeneity in individual forecasts, and therefore yields no predictions about forecast
dispersion measures. However, it is possible to extend the framework by introducing heterogeneity
in agents’ concerns for uncertainty. Agents with differing degrees of ambiguity aversion deduce
alternative worst-case models from observable data, which then generates dispersion in forecasts in
the model. While conceptually interesting, this extension is beyond the scope of this paper.

2.2   News shocks and learning
Fluctuations in macroeconomic survey forecasts have also been investigated through the lens of
other theories. Barsky and Sims (2012) study the impact of innovations to the measure of consumer
confidence from the Michigan Survey and decompose these innovations into the contribution of news
shocks, representing arrival of information about future productivity (Pigou (1927), Beaudry and
Portier (2004)), and ‘animal spirits’ that capture fluctuations in agents’ subjective beliefs. We
address the decomposition problem by constructing the belief wedge as the difference between
households’ and professionals’ forecasts, thus differencing out the impact of news shocks while
preserving the role of fluctuations in subjective beliefs in the form of the households’ worst-case
model.
   Carroll (2003), Reis (2009), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) and many others contribute to
the large literature on learning and information acquisition in macroeconomics, imposing alternative
learning mechanisms on the side of economic agents. Learning is a plausible way of introducing a
wedge between agents’ beliefs and the data-generating measure, but it does not explain the large
and systematic pessimistic biases observed in household survey responses. Further, it is generally
inconsistent with the cross-equation restrictions in the structural model that we derive in Section 4,
which imply larger biases for shocks with a more adverse utility impact. Finally, learning models
imply slow adjustment of agents’ beliefs to economic shocks, and would therefore predict a relatively
optimistic bias in recessions, as agents do not fully incorporate the adverse realization of the current
state. We observe the opposite correlation between belief wedges and the business cycle in the data.
We consider a combination of ambiguity concerns and learning to be an appealing extension, see
Epstein and Schneider (2007), Hansen and Sargent (2007, 2010) or Bhandari (2015), but as in the
case of belief heterogeneity leave it for further research.




                                                   7
3    A one-factor model of distorted beliefs
We want to formalize the empirical facts that we established in the previous section. In order to do
that, we specify a statistical model that describes the joint dynamics of macroeconomic variables
and households’ expectations. In this model, households’ expectations are allowed to differ from
the expectations implied by the distribution of the data-generating process in ways consistent with
the robust preference specification derived in Section 4.
    We extract a common component in the variation of the belief wedge data, and study its
impact on the dynamics of the macroeconomic variables. We allow this component to depend
on a latent factor that represents exogenous movements in households’ expectations, relating the
resulting statistical setup to the factor-augmented vector autoregression (FAVAR) approach of Ang
and Piazzesi (2003) and Bernanke et al. (2005). Formally, this common component is a restricted
version of a change of measure that links subjective beliefs and the data-generating process, derived
in Appendix A. Piazzesi et al. (2015) and Jurado (2015) use analogous specifications to model
subjective beliefs in the bond market and in the macroeconomy, respectively.
    We specify a (k − 1) × 1 vector of observable economic variables yt and an unobservable scalar
latent process ft . In particular, consider the model

                                                                         y
                                          yt+1 = ψy yt + ψyf ft+1 + ψyw wt+1
                                                             f
                                          ft+1 = ρf ft + σf wt+1
                              
       ′           y ′    f
where wt+1 =     wt+1   , wt+1   ∼ N (0, Ik ) is a k × 1 vector of normally distributed iid shocks. We
                                                                .
can rewrite these equations, expressing the joint process xt = (yt′ , ft )′ as follows:
                          !                               !         !                    !          !
                                                                                              y
                   yt+1              ψy ψyf ρf                yt            ψyw ψyf σf       wt+1
                              =                                         +                     f         .   (1)
                   ft+1               0       ρf              ft             0    σf         wt+1

This process generates a filtered probability space (Ω, {Ft }∞
                                                             t=0 , P ) where P is the objective, data-
generating probability measure. Households’ expectations are represented by a subjective proba-
bility measure Pe that can differ from P . We describe the construction of Pe next.
    Let ζt be a subset of observable variables yt for which survey data is available. We define the
                          (τ )
τ -period belief wedge ∆t         as the difference between the τ -period forecasts under the beliefs of the
households and under objective expectations:

                                                   (τ )   . e
                                               ∆t         =E t ζt+τ − Et ζt+τ


      et ζt+τ is the time-t expectation of ζt+τ under the subjective probability measure of the
where E
                                                                      (τ )
households. In addition we define the τ -period average belief wedge ∆t as the average difference




                                                                8
in forecasts under the beliefs of the households and under objective expectations:
                                                         τ
                                             (τ )   . 1 X (s)
                                            ∆t      =      ∆
                                                      τ s=1 t

                                                            (τ )           (τ )
     We impose that the dynamics of belief wedges ∆t                and ∆t        can be summarized using the
scalar factor                                                      !
                                                            yt
                                          θt = (Fy , Ff )              .                                  (2)
                                                            ft
Individual one-period forecasts of the innovation means under the households’ expectations are
then represented by a vector of factor loadings H:

                                             et [wt+1 ] = Hθt .
                                             E                                                            (3)

Applying the law of iterated expectations, belief wedges for the τ -period forecasts can be written
as
                                            (τ )                   (τ )
                                          ∆t       = G(τ )
                                                      x xt + G0
                        (τ )      (τ )
where the coefficients Gx and G0         are derived in Appendix A.
     While we specified a flexible VAR specification for the dynamics of observable variables, we
imposed tight restrictions on the households’ expectations. The model (2)–(3) implies a one-factor
structure of belief wedges where θt captures the common comovement in these wedges. In this
latent factor model, we interpret θt as the time-varying measure of pessimism among the households
reflected in the survey data that impacts the dynamics of macroeconomic variables. In Section 4,
this one-factor structure together with particular restrictions on H and F = (Fy , Ff ) is derived
from the decision problem of the household endowed with robust preferences, where θt reflects the
time-variation in households’ ambiguity concerns.

3.1     Data and estimation
Data on macroeconomic variables are obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis database
(FRED), at quarterly frequency. The vector yt includes real GDP growth, the unemployment rate,
inflation, and the Federal Funds rate. We include three belief wedges from Figure 1 in the vector
  (4)
∆t , constructed as 4-quarter ahead average belief wedges between the Michigan Survey and SPF
forecasts for GDP growth, the unemployment rate and inflation. Appendix C provides details on
the construction of the data, presented in Section 2. The data for yt covers the period 1960Q2–
2015Q4. The belief wedges for GDP growth, the unemployment rate and inflation cover the periods
1968Q4–2015Q4, 1977Q4–2015Q4, and 1981Q2–2015Q4 respectively.
     In order to keep the estimation and interpretation of the model transparent, we restrict the
dynamics of beliefs and set Fy = 0, thereby setting θt = ft . This implies that fluctuations in
the belief wedges are driven purely by the belief factor ft , and not directly by the dynamics of


                                                       9
endogenous macroeconomic variables yt . In addition, we normalize Ff = 1 and set the element of
H corresponding to the GDP growth shock to be −1 in order to identify the sign and scale of θt .4
       More specifically, we estimate the model (1) together with a vector of observation equations for
the wedges
                                              (4)
                                            ∆t+1 = ψ∆f ft+1 + σ∆ ε∆
                                                                  t+1

where σ∆ is diagonal and ε∆
                          t+1 ∼ N (0, I) is a vector of normally distributed iid measurement errors.
               (4)
yt and ∆t are demeaned. We introduce a measurement error for every belief wedge in order to
absorb idiosyncratic noise in the survey responses, and focus on the extraction of the persistent
common factor predicted by the theoretical model. We seek estimates for the parameters

                                           {ψy , ψyf , ψyw , ρf , σf , H, σ∆ }

and the belief factor θt = ft . Appendix A solves for ψ∆f from the above parameters.
       We estimate the model using Bayesian methods. Further details, including the imposed priors
and estimated posteriors are summarized in Appendix D.

3.2      Results
A variance decomposition at the modal parameter estimate, summarized in Table 8 in Appendix D,
reveals that the factor shock explains 67.5%, 23.2%, and 9.7% of the variation in the GDP growth
wedge, unemployment wedge, and inflation wedge respectively. These results confirm the strong
correlation between the belief wedges that concern real quantities. Moreover, the posterior estimates
shown in Table 8 in Appendix D reveal a very tightly identified persistence ρf of this factor with
posterior mean of 0.8 at the quarterly frequency. The fact that a sizeable fraction of variation in the
wedges is explained by the persistent fluctuations in the factor θt provides evidence of systematic
comovement in households’ beliefs about future economic outcomes.
                                                                         (4)
       Figure 3 plots the impulse response functions of yt and ∆t              to a positive one standard deviation
shock    wtf    to θt = ft , with the factor response plotted in the bottom right panel. An increase in
θt leads household forecasts for GDP growth to be biased further downward relative to the SPF
forecasts, while the biases in the household forecasts for unemployment and inflation increase
relative to the SPF forecasts. The impulse responses of the belief wedges are consistent with the
correlations and average signs of the wedges described in Section 2.
       These results support the interpretation of θt as a time-varying measure of the level of pessimism
among households. From the perspective of the robust preference model that we develop in the
next section, households are concerned about a future path that exhibits low GDP growth, a high
unemployment rate and high inflation. An increase in θt makes these concerns stronger, biasing
households’ beliefs more strongly in this direction.
   4                                                                                  ′
     The shock exposure matrix ψyw is only identified as the covariance matrix ψyw ψyw  . For the purpose of estimation,
                                                                                                     ′
we shall impose a recursive identification scheme for ψyw . However, ψyw only appears as ψyw ψyw        in the formulas
                                                              ′
for the belief wedges. Therefore, given an estimate of ψyw ψyw  , the identification of ψyw does not play a role in the
estimation of the factor shocks wtf .


                                                          10
                   GDP growth              unemployment              inflation                  interest rate
                                     0.3                   0.4
           0                                                                           0
                                     0.2                   0.2
                                                                                  −0.2
       −0.4                          0.1                    0                     −0.4
       −0.8                           0                −0.2                       −0.6
               1      10        20         1   10     20    1          10        20    1            10          20
          GDP growth wedge unemployment wedge inflation wedge                                   belief factor
          0              0.15              0.15               0.6

                                     0.1                   0.1                        0.4
      −0.25
                                 0.05                     0.05                        0.2

       −0.5                           0                     0                          0
               1      10        20         1   10     20         1     10        20         1       10          20

Figure 3: Bayesian impulse response functions to the belief shock wf in the factor model. The
solid lines indicate median estimates, while the dashed line correspond to 10th and 90th percentile
error bands. GDP growth, inflation, and interest rate are annualized and in percentage deviations.
The unemployment rate is in percentage points. The GDP growth wedge and inflation wedge are
scaled to correspond to the belief wedges of annualized GDP growth and annualized inflation. The
horizontal axis is in quarters.


   The belief shock wf also has real effects. In response to a positive shock to θt , GDP growth
falls and unemployment rises. The impulse response for inflation is positive for the first year and
close to zero subsequently. The interest rate declines in response to the belief shock. At the modal
parameter estimate, θt explains 13.1%, 21.0%, 4.0% and 5.3% of the movements in GDP growth,
unemployment, inflation and interest rates, respectively.
   Our estimates suggest that a rise in pessimism has contractionary effects, and we emphasize
the especially large adverse response of unemployment. In Section 5, we develop and estimate a
structural macroeconomic model with a frictional labor market and ambiguity averse agents and
revisit these empirical findings. In line with the results from the factor model, the ambiguity shock
in the structural model generates nontrivial recessionary responses, with a particularly pronounced
response in the labor market.
   In Appendix G, we conduct two robustness exercises. First, we reestimate the factor model
using the median household inflation forecast instead of the mean and show that the results remain
virtually unchanged. Second, we replace the SPF forecast with the model-implied rational forecast
in the construction of the belief wedges. In this case, we find quantitatively modest differences that
we interpret as supportive of our approach in the construction of the belief wedges.




                                                      11
4        Robust preferences
Motivated by the empirical results from Sections 2 and 3, we now introduce a preference specifica-
tion that generates endogenous deviations of agents’ beliefs from the data-generating probability
measure. This model extends the robust preference framework of Hansen and Sargent (2001a,b)
to allow for a more flexible form of belief distortions, similar to Hansen and Sargent (2015). The
flexibility allows for time-variation in the degree of agents’ pessimism over time, which we identify
from survey data, while tightly restricting the structure of pessimistic distortions across individual
states, linking them to agents’ continuation values and equilibrium dynamics. We then develop
an approximation technique that incorporates the effects of time-varying belief distortions in a
tractable linear solution.
        Agents’ preferences are represented using the continuation value recursion

                                                                                β
                          Vt =      min         u (xt ) + βEt [mt+1 Vt+1 ] +       Et [mt+1 log mt+1 ]                   (4)
                                  mt+1 >0                                       θt
                                 Et [mt+1 ]=1


with period utility u (xt ). Here, xt is an n × 1 vector of stationary economic variables that follows
the Markovian law of motion
                                                      xt+1 = ψ (xt , wt+1 ) ,                                            (5)

where wt+1 ∼ N (0k , Ik×k ) an iid vector of normally distributed shocks under the data-generating
probability measure P .5
        These preferences have been formulated by Hansen and Sargent (2001a,b) as a way of introduc-
ing concerns for model misspecification on the side of the agents. The agent treats the measure P
as an approximating or benchmark model and considers potential stochastic deviations from this
model, represented by the strictly positive, mean-one random variable mt+1 . The minimization
problem in (4) captures the search for a ‘worst-case’ model that serves as a basis for the agent’s
decisions. The models that are considered by the agent are difficult to distinguish statistically from
the benchmark model, and the degree of statistical similarity is controlled by the entropy penalty
Et [mt+1 log mt+1 ], scaled by the penalty parameter θt . More pronounced statistical deviations that
are easier to detect are represented by random variables mt+1 with a large dispersion that yields
a large entropy. Here, recursion (4) is specified for a fixed stochastic utility flow u(xt ). In Section
5, we endow the agent with a set of controls, which gives rise to a min–max specification of the
recursion.
        The preferences considered by Hansen and Sargent (2001a,b) impose a constant parameter
θ > 0. As θ ց 0, the penalty for deviating from the benchmark model becomes more severe, and
the resulting preferences approach a utility-maximizing agent with rational expectations.
        We are interested in a specification that permits more flexibility in the set of models that the
    5
        For now we take the function ψ as given, but later derive it as a solution to a set of equilibrium conditions.




                                                                12
agent views as plausible. In particular, we envision the time-varying model

                                                       θt = θxt .                                                    (6)

where θ is a 1 × n vector of parameters. The solution of (4) satisfies

                                                        exp (−θt Vt+1 )
                                            mt+1 =                                                                   (7)
                                                      Et [exp (−θt Vt+1 )]

and mt+1 completely characterizes the worst-case model distortions relative to the benchmark
model. The variation in θt thus implies a time-varying model for the worst-case distortion.6 The
chained sequence of random variables mt+1 specifies a strictly positive martingale M recursively as
Mt+1 = mt+1 Mt with M0 = 1 that defines a probability measure Pe with conditional expectations

                                                       .
                                            et [xt+1 ] =
                                            E            Et [mt+1 xt+1 ] .

Consequently, the wedge between the one-period forecasts of xt+1 under the worst-case and bench-
mark models is given by
                                               . e
                                            ∆t = Et [xt+1 ] − Et [xt+1 ] .                                           (8)

Notice that the distortion (7) implies a large value of mt+1 for low realizations of the continuation
value Vt+1 . The worst-case model, represented by the probability measure Pe, thus overweighs
adverse states as ranked by the preferences of the agent. In this way, the preference model implies
tightly restricted endogenous pessimism on the side of the agents, generated by concerns for model
misspecification. The degree of pessimism is controlled by the evolution of θt .

4.1    A linear approximation
A wide range of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models with robust agents can be cast as
a solution to a system of expectational difference equations:


                                       0 = Et [e
                                               g (xt+1 , xt , xt−1 , wt+1 , wt )]                                    (9)

where ge is an n × 1 vector function. This vector of equations includes Euler equations of the robust
household, which can be represented using worst-case belief distortions mt+1 that are embedded
in ge. We are interested in deriving a tractable approximation of the equilibrium dynamics for xt
in the form of a Markovian law of motion of the form (5) from the system of equations (9). Part
of the solution is the worst-case distortion (7) with continuation values Vt+1 consistent with the
equilibrium dynamics, and the resulting biases (8). In this section, we sketch out how to compute
approximations to equilibria of this class of problems, with detailed calculations with provided in
   6
    Since θt is measurable with respect to the agent’s information set at time t, the preferences are dynamically
consistent. The linear specification of θt in general allows for negative values, in which case the conditional minimiza-
tion problem in (4) turns into a maximization problem of an ‘ambiguity-loving’ agent, and the distortion (7) implies
optimistic biases in survey responses.


                                                           13
Appendix B.
   Our approximation is constructed using a perturbation technique in the spirit of Sims (2002)
and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2004). Intuitively, the method builds a small-noise expansion around
agents’ worst-case model, in order to deliver time-varying effects of ambiguity concerns in a linear
approximation of the solution. The challenge stems from the endogeneity of the worst-case model
that agents use as a basis for their decisions. The feedback between agents’ worst-case model and
the equilibrium law of motion requires jointly solving for the continuation value recursion (4), the
probability measure Pe, and the law of motion (5).
   Assuming that the function ψ (x, w) is sufficiently smooth, we combine the series expansion
method of Holmes (1995) and Lombardo (2010) with an extension of the worst-case model approxi-
mation used in Borovička and Hansen (2013, 2014). The method, outlined in detail in Appendix B,
approximates the dynamics in the neighborhood of the deterministic steady state x̄ that is given
by the solution to x̄ = ψ (x̄, 0). The dynamics of the state vector xt can be approximated as

                                            xt ≈ x̄ + qx1t

where q is a perturbation parameter. The law of motion for the ‘first-derivative’ process x1t that
represents the local dynamics in the neighborhood of the steady state can be derived from the
linear approximation of (5):
                                    x1t+1 = ψq + ψx x1t + ψw wt+1                                 (10)

where ψq , ψx and ψw are conforming coefficient matrices. Similarly, we can construct a linear
approximation of the continuation value (4) where the deviation of the continuation value from its
steady state satisfies
                                          V1t = Vx x1t + Vq .                                     (11)

We show in Appendix B how to construct the solution (10)–(11) from a set of equilibrium conditions
(9), and how the solution depends on the dynamics of θt . Further, we show that under the agent’s
worst-case model Pe, the innovations wt+1 are distributed as
                                                                       
                               wt+1 ∼ N −θ (x̄ + x1t ) (Vx ψw )′ , Ik×k .

Instead of facing a vector of zero-mean shocks wt+1 , the agent perceives these shocks as having a
time-varying drift. The time-variation is determined by a linear approximation to θt from equation
(6), given by θ (x̄ + x1t ). The relative magnitudes of the distortions of individual shocks are given
by the sensitivity of the continuation value to the dynamics of the state vector, Vx , and the loadings
of the state vector on individual shocks, ψw . The agent perceives larger distortions during periods
when θt is large, and distorts relatively more the shocks which impact the continuation value more
strongly.




                                                  14
      Consequently, the dynamics of the model (10) under the agents’ worst-case beliefs satisfy
                                                   ′
                                                                              
                       x1t+1 =             ψq − ψw ψw                    ′
                                                      Vx′ θx̄ + ψx − ψw ψw Vx′ θ x1t + ψw w
                                                                                          et+1    (12)
                                = ψeq + ψex x1t + ψw w
                                                     et+1 .

The worst-case model alters both the conditional mean and the persistence of economic shocks.
Moreover, variables that tend to move ambiguity and the continuation value in opposite directions
tend to exhibit a higher persistence under the worst-case model.7

4.2      Worst-case model and survey responses
In Section 3, we estimated a one-factor model of biases embedded in survey responses on household
expectations of future economic variables. The preference framework introduced in this section
derives these biases using the endogenous worst-case probability distribution Pe. Assuming that
surveyed households provide answers regarding economic forecasts using Pe we can connect the
empirical observations on survey responses to the theoretical predictions on decisions under robust
preferences.
      Using the survey data and the rational forecasts from the linearized model (10), we identify the
belief wedges (8) as
                                    (1)                                            ′
                                  ∆t            et [wt+1 ] = −θ (x̄ + x1t ) ψw ψw
                                           = ψw E                               ′
                                                                                   Vx .           (13)

The one-factor structure in survey answers is driven by the time-variation in θ (x̄ + x1t ), with the
                                   ′ ) V ′ . This is the key restriction that the robust preference
constant vector of loadings − (ψw ψw    x
model imposes on the joint dynamics of the survey answers.
      Observe that this specification of belief wedges is a restricted case of the reduced-form model
(1)–(3). In the notation from Appendix A, we have

                                                       ′
                                                          ′                        ′
                                                                                       ′
                           F = θ,            H = − ψw ψw  Vx ,         H = −θx̄ ψw ψw  Vx .

The terms θ, ψw , Vx are functions of structural parameters in the model. Belief wedges for longer-
horizon forecasts are then computed using formulas from Appendix A.

4.3      Dealing with non-stationarities
For the purpose of applying the expansion method, we assumed that the state vector xt is stationary.
Our framework can, however, deal with deterministic or stochastic trends featured in macroeco-
nomic models. Specifically, let us assume that there exists a vector-valued stochastic process zt
such that the dynamics of xt can be written as

                                                       xt = x
                                                            bt + zt                               (14)
                                                 zt+1 − zt = φ (b
                                                                xt , wt+1 )
  7
      This statement is precisely correct in the scalar case, when ψx2 Vx θ < 0.


                                                             15
where x
      bt is a stationary vector Markov process that replaces dynamics (5):

                                             x
                                             bt+1 = ψ (b
                                                       xt , wt+1 ) .

The process zt thus has stationary increments and xt and zt are cointegrated, element by element.
A typical example of an element in zt is a productivity process with a permanent component. Once
we solve for the stationary dynamics of x
                                        bt , we can obtain the dynamics of xt in a straightforward
way using (14).
     In order to compute the non-stationary version of the continuation value recursion and the
appropriate worst-case distortions, consider as an example
                                                   h             i
                             u (xt ) = log Ct = log Cbt exp (zt ) = log C
                                                                        bt + zt ,                 (15)

                                            bt = C
where Ct is agent’s consumption process and C    b (b
                                                    xt ) is its stationary rescaling. We show in
Appendix B.6 that in this case, the continuation value can be written as

                                                               1
                                            Vt = Vb (b
                                                     xt ) +       zt                              (16)
                                                              1−β

and the worst-case model distortion is given by
                                                                             
                                 exp −θt Vb (b
                                             xt+1 ) + (1 − β)−1 φ (b
                                                                   xt , wt+1 )
                      mt+1   =   h                                             i .
                               Et exp −θt Vb (bxt+1 ) + (1 − β)−1 φ (b
                                                                     xt , wt+1 )

This type of belief distortion has stationary increments mt+1 and can be dealt with by applying
the first-order series expansion to the functions Vb (b
                                                      xt+1 ) and φ (b
                                                                    xt , wt+1 ) as above. Consequently,
the worst-case distribution of the shock vector is given by
                                                                      ′     
                                                                     −1
                        wt+1 ∼ N       −θ (x̄ + x
                                                b1t ) Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw , Ik×k .


The distortions thus inherit the contribution of the increment (1 − β)−1 φw of the non-stationary
process zt to the dynamics of the continuation value. The worst-case dynamics (12) and the belief
wedges (13) are modified accordingly. Specifically, we can compute the multiperiod belief wedges
  (τ )
∆t       using the recursive calculations outlined in Appendix A, imposing

                               F   = θ
                                                                      ′
                                                                 −1
                               H = −ψw Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw
                                                              ′
                               H = − θx̄ ψw Vx ψw + (1 − β)−1 φw .




                                                       16
5        A structural business cycle model
In this section we introduce the robust preference framework from Section 4 into a dynamic stochas-
tic general equilibrium model of the macroeconomy. We use this model to shed light on the ob-
servations in Section 3, especially the role of ambiguity shocks in explaining large fluctuations in
labor market outcomes.
        We implement and estimate a version of the New-Keynesian framework with a frictional labor
market introduced in Ravenna and Walsh (2008) and Christiano et al. (2015). In the frictional
labor market with search and matching, incentives of workers and firms to search for jobs and post
job vacancies are directly linked to their forecasts about the present value of a potential match.
Ambiguity shocks impact this present value by overweighting the probability of states with low
continuation values for the households, which are correlated with low values of the worker-firm
matches. Moreover, the search and matching environment and nominal rigidities provide a well-
defined notion of unemployment and inflation which directly map to the survey questions.

5.1        Model
The model economy is populated by a representative household endowed with robust preferences,
competitive producers of a homogeneous final good, and a two-tier structure of monopolistic pro-
ducers of intermediate goods who hire workers in a frictional labor market. Here, we focus on key
components of the model relevant for the analysis of the role of ambiguity shocks — households’
preferences, contracting in the labor market, and specification of exogenous sources of variation in
the model — deferring additional details to Appendix E.8

5.1.1        Representative household

The preferences of the representative household are given by the recursion

                                                                                  β
                    Vt =      min       max        u (xt ) + βEt [mt+1 Vt+1 ] +      Et [mt+1 log mt+1 ]              (17)
                            mt+1 >0 Ct ,It ,Bt+1                                  θt
                           Et [mt+1 ]=1


with time preference coefficient β and period utility over aggregate consumption Ct ,

                                               u (xt ) = log (Ct − bCt−1 )

where b determines the degree of habit formation. In line with our factor model specification from
                                                                                               .
Section 3, we assume that the stochastic process for the robust concerns is given by θt = θxt = ft
where ft follows an AR(1) process

                                                                          f
                                         ft+1 = (1 − ρf ) f + ρf ft + σf wt+1 .                                       (18)
    8
        A concise set of model equations can be found in the online technical appendix to Christiano et al. (2015).




                                                              17
The worst-case belief of the household is

                                                    exp (−θt Vt+1 )
                                         mt+1 =                        .                            (19)
                                                  Et [exp (−θt Vt+1 )]

   The magnitude of the belief distortion is determined by fluctuations in θt specified exogenously
in (18). However, the equilibrium dynamics in the model endogenously determines which states
yield low continuation values Vt+1 and are therefore evaluated as adverse by the household. These
states are then perceived as more likely under the worst-case model. Naturally, the dynamics of the
worst-case belief then endogenously depends on other sources of shocks introduced into the model,
which we describe in Section 5.1.4.
   The household faces the budget constraint
                                                  
     Pt Ct + PI,t It + Bt+1 ≤ RK,tuK       K
                                   t − au ut   PI,t Kt + (1 − lt ) Pt Dt + ξt lt + Rt−1 Bt − Tt .

Pt is the price of consumption goods and PI,t is the price of investment goods. Bt+1 denotes the
one-period risk-free bonds purchased in period t with return Rt , It is the quantity of investment
goods and Tt lump sum taxes net of profits. Household’s capital stock Kt earns rental rate RK,t ,
                                                                 
is utilized at rate uK                                         K
                     t subject to capital utilization cost au ut , and follows the law of motion
                                                                            
                                                                        It
                              Kt+1 = (1 − δK ) Kt + 1 − aI                         It
                                                                       It−1

where aI (·) is an adjustment cost that is increasing and convex.

5.1.2     Labor market

The household consists of a unit mass of workers who perfectly share consumption risk. Fraction lt
is employed and earns a wage ξt . Fraction 1 − lt is unemployed and collect unemployment benefits
Dt financed through lump sum taxes. At the end of period t, employed workers separate with
probability 1 − ρ and join the pool of unemployed who search for jobs at the beginning of period
t + 1. The total number of searchers at the beginning of period t + 1 therefore is 1 − ρlt and these
searchers face a job finding probability jt+1 . The law of motion for the mass of employed workers
thus is
                                  lt+1 = ρlt + (1 − ρlt ) jt+1 = (ρ + ηt+1 ) lt

where
                                                     jt+1 (1 − ρlt )
                                            ηt+1 =
                                                           lt
is the hiring rate. The value of an employed worker is
                                                                                            
                         et       St+1
              Wt = ξ t + E             ((ρ + (1 − ρ) jt+1 ) Wt+1 + (1 − ρ) (1 − jt+1 ) Ut+1 )       (20)
                                   St




                                                       18
where St+1 /St is the period t stochastic discount factor, ξt is the period t wage, and Ut+1 is the
value of being unemployed next period, given by the recursion
                                                                               
                                   et       St+1
                         Ut = Dt + E             (jt+1 Wt+1 + (1 − jt+1 ) Ut+1 ) .
                                             St

Denote by ϑt the real marginal revenue in period t from hiring an additional worker. The value of
the worker to a firm is given by the revenue generated in the match net of the wages paid,
                                                                
                                                   e    St+1
                                   Jt = ϑt − ξt + ρEt        Jt+1 .                                (21)
                                                         St

Free entry of firms implies that in equilibrium,

                                              Qt (Jt − κt ) = st

where Qt is the probability of filling a vacancy, κt is the fixed cost of hiring a worker, and st is the
cost of posting a vacancy.
    The important insight in this frictional labor market is that expectations operators in recur-
sions (20)–(21) inherit the probability measure Pe, indicating that both workers and firms evaluate
the distribution of future values of Wt , Ut and Jt under the worst-case beliefs of the household.
Ambiguity shocks then directly affect the incentives of firms to hire through their effect on the
valuation of the match surplus.
   This is a striking difference relative to the Walrasian spot market where workers are hired only
using one-period employment contracts. In such an environment, ambiguity concerns are absent
from the labor market decisions, since there is no uncertainty about economic conditions prevailing
in the given period.
   What remains to be determined is the split of the surplus from a match between the firm’s
surplus, Jt , and the worker’s surplus, Wt − Ut . As in Hall and Milgrom (2008) and Christiano et al.
(2015), we adopt the alternating offer bargaining protocol of Rubinstein (1982) and Binmore et al.
(1986). The outcome of this bargaining mechanism is the surplus splitting rule

                               Jt = β1 (Wt − Ut ) − β2 γt + β3 (ϑt − Dt )

with parameters βi , i = 1, 2, 3 that depend on the parameters of the bargaining problem and are
described in detail in Appendix E. Notice that when β2 = β3 = 0, we obtain the Nash bargaining
solution with worker’s share (1 + β1 )−1 . Relative to the Nash bargaining solution, the alternative
offer bargaining makes the firm’s surplus more procyclical, leading to smoother wages and more
procyclical hiring patterns over the business cycle.




                                                     19
5.1.3    Production and market clearing

The frictional labor market is embedded in a New-Keynesian framework with Calvo (1983) price
setting. A homogeneous final good Yt with price Pt is produced in a competitive market using the
production technology
                                         Z       1             λ
                                                                1
                                  Yt =                (Yi,t ) di ,
                                                                λ                      λ > 1.
                                              0

where Yi,t are specialized inputs with prices Pi,t . Final good producers solve the static competitive
problem                                                             Z    1
                                         max Pt Yt −                         Pi,t Yi,t di,
                                          Yi,t                       0

leading to the first-order conditions
                                                             λ
                                              Pt              λ−1
                                 Yi,t =                             Yt ,           i ∈ [0, 1] .
                                              Pi,t

Specialized inputs are produced by monopolist retailers indexed by i, using the production tech-
nology
                                                α
                                        Yi,t = ki,t (At hi,t )1−α − φt ,

where ki,t is the quantity of capital purchased, hi,t is the quantity of intermediate goods, At is the
neutral technology level, and φt is a fixed cost of production. The retailer purchases intermediate
goods at price Pth from a wholesaler in a competitive market and must finance the purchase by
borrowing Pth hi,t at the nominal interest rate Rt . The loan is repaid at the end of period t after
the retailer receives its sales revenues. Finally, the retailer is subject to the sticky price friction,
implying that every period he is allowed to reset the price with probability 1 − χ.
   Intermediate goods are produced by wholesalers using a technology that turns one unit of labor
into one unit of intermediate good. This implies the market clearing condition
                                            Z         1
                                                          hi,t di = ht = lt .
                                                  0

Market clearing for services of capital requires
                                              Z       1
                                                          ki,t di = uK
                                                                     t Kt .
                                                  0

The model is closed with an aggregate resource constraint
                                         
                     C t + I t + au u K
                                      t kt /Ψt + (st /Qt + κt ) ηt lt−1 + Gt = Yt


where Gt denotes government consumption and Ψt = Pt /PI,t denotes the relative price of investment
and reflects investment-specific technological progress.



                                                                20
5.1.4    Shock structure and monetary policy

We complete the model by specifying the sources of exogenous variation to the model. The monetary
authority follows the interest rate policy rule
                                  
          log Rt /R = ρR ln Rt−1 /R + (1 − ρR ) [rπ log (πt /π) + ry log (Yt /Yt∗ )] + σR wtR

where wtR is a monetary policy shock and

                                          Yt = Ct + It /Ψt + Gt

denotes real GDP. Yt∗ is the value of Yt along the non-stochastic steady state growth path, scaled
by the current level of productivity.
   Finally, we prescribe the dynamics of technology shocks. The neutral technology process At
exhibits iid growth
                                                   .
                                   log (At /At−1 ) = log (µA,t ) = σA wtA

while the investment-specific technological process Ψt has a mean-reverting growth rate

                                         .
                         log (Ψt /Ψt−1 ) = log (µΨ,t ) = ρΨ log (µΨ,t−1 ) + σΨ wtΨ .

The final source of exogenous variation is the ambiguity shock process (18). We assume that all
innovations are independent under the data-generating measure P :
                                                          ′
                                                              iid
                                      wtR , wtA , wtΨ , wtf ∼ N (0, I) .

As we have seen in Section 4, this property does not carry over to the worst-case model where the
distribution of future realizations of the shocks depends on the current level of ambiguity concern θt .
   Lastly, to ensure a balanced growth path in the non-stochastic steady state, the parameters
{φt , st , κt , γt , Gt , Dt } need to grow at the growth rate of the economy. The details of these adjust-
ments are in Appendix E.2.

5.2     Model solution and estimation
The equilibrium of the structural model sketched out in the previous section fits in the general
framework that we developed in Section 4. We use the expansion methods from Section 4.1 to
compute a linear approximation to the solution for the equilibrium dynamics. This facilitates the
implementation of standard Bayesian estimation methods for the estimation of the parameters and
latent processes in the structural model. Our goal is to quantify the role of ambiguity shocks in
the joint dynamics of output, unemployment, inflation and interest rates as well as the households’
belief wedges associated with these variables. Compared to the analysis in Section 3, the impact of
these shocks on the economy is restricted through the structure of the model, and we use survey
data as an additional source of information to aid identification.

                                                     21
        The crucial force driving the role of ambiguity concerns in the model is the interaction of
ambiguity shocks with other sources of exogenous variation under the households’ worst-case model.
Therefore, in order to make the estimation tractable and transparent, we calibrate a subset of
parameters to the posterior estimates from Christiano et al. (2015) listed in the bottom part of
Table 1, and focus our estimation on the parameter vector

                           {ρR , rπ , ry , σR , σA , ρΨ , σΨ , ρf , σf , σ∆,π , σ∆,u , σ∆,dY } ,

which consists of parameters associated with the monetary policy rule and the underlying shock
processes. The last three parameters are the standard deviations on the measurement errors. Our
priors for the monetary policy rule coefficients and stochastic processes for technology and monetary
policy shocks in line with those in Christiano et al. (2015).
    As in Section 3, we use data on GDP growth, the unemployment rate, Federal Funds rate, infla-
tion rate, the GDP growth wedge, unemployment wedge and inflation wedge with iid measurement
errors on the three wedges. The first part of Table 1 summarizes the results of our estimation.9


6        Understanding the role of ambiguity shocks
Table 2 provides the variance decomposition for key macroeconomic variables and the belief wedges.
Despite the noise in the survey answers, the estimated model picks up a meaningful amount of
common variation from the survey answers (up to 22%), and has a substantial impact on key
macroeconomic variables. In this section, we analyze in detail the mechanism through which
ambiguity shocks propagate into the economy. In Appendix G we provide additional discussion
and conduct a set of robustness checks with alternative belief wedge specifications that corroborate
our quantitative results.

6.1       Belief wedges and the worst-case model
Figure 4 depicts the impulse responses for the ambiguity shock wtf . A one-standard deviation
increase in ambiguity leads to a fall of about 2% in output growth on impact, and to almost
a 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate that peaks after about four quarters.
Inflation increases in the moment of the impact of the shock as well. These responses are larger
than those estimated using the factor model from Section 3 and depicted in Figure 3 but they
tell the same qualitative story — an increase in ambiguity is contractionary. The bottom row
of Figure 4 shows that households become pessimistic about GDP growth, expecting even lower
growth than the one predicted using the impulse response from the top left panel. Households also
overpredict inflation and unemployment. All shifts in beliefs are again consistent with the factor
model findings from Section 3.
    9
    The details of the data construction are in Appendix C. We estimate the model using a Metropolis–Hastings
algorithm. We take five chains with different initial draws and make 20,000 draws in each chain. The first 10,000
draws of each chain are dropped.


                                                           22
                                                         Prior             Posterior
   Parameter                                          D(Mean,Std)       Mean(90% HPD)

   Monetary policy rule
   ρR      Smoothing                                     B(0.7, 0.1)     0.79 (0.77, 0.81)
   rπ      Inflation                                     G(1.5, 0.1)     1.67 (1.59, 1.77)
   ry      Output                                       G(0.06, 0.01)    0.03 (0.02, 0.03)

   Shock processes
   ρf       AR(1) ambiguity                              B(0.5, 0.1)      0.87   (0.85,0.89)
   σf       Std. dev. ambiguity shock                    G(0.1, 0.1)      0.02   (0.01,0.02)
   100σA    Std. dev. neutral tech. shock                G(0.1, 1.0)      0.86   (0.81,0.91)
   ρΨ       AR(1) invest. tech.                          B(0.5, 0.1)      0.29   (0.25,0.33)
   100σΨ    Std. dev. invest. tech. shock                G(0.1, 1.0)      2.88   (2.56,3.18)
   100σR    Std. dev. monetary policy shock              G(0.2, 1.0)      0.24   (0.22,0.26)

   Measurement errors
   100σ∆,dY GDP growth wedge                            IG(0.8, 0.4)      0.40 (0.36,0.43)
   100σ∆,u  Unemployment wedge                          IG(0.4, 0.2)      0.17 (0.15,0.19)
   100σ∆,π  Inflation wedge                             IG(0.6, 0.3)      0.29 (0.26,0.32)

   Calibrated parameters
   β         Discount factor                               0.9968                  -
   100δk     Physical capital depreciation rate              2.5                   -
   χ         Calvo price stickiness                         0.75                   -
   λ         Price markup                                   1.42                   -
   ρ         Job survival probability                        0.9                   -
   M         Max. bargaining rounds per quarter              60                    -
   σ         Matching function elasticity                   0.55                   -
   100δ      Probability of bargaining breakup              0.19                   -
   400µ̄     Output growth per capita                        1.7                   -
   D         Replacement ratio                              0.37                   -
   100ηh     Hiring costs                                   0.46                   -
   100ηs     Vacancy costs                                  0.03                   -
   400µ̄Ψ    Investment per capital growth rate              1.2                   -
   400π̄     Inflation rate                                  2.5                   -
   g         Government consumption to output                0.2                   -
   b         Consumption habit                               0.8                   -
   α         Capital share                                  0.26                   -

Table 1: Structural model estimated and calibrated parameters. The priors B(µ, σ), G(µ, σ), and
IG(µ, σ) denote Beta, Gamma and Inverse-Gamma distributions with mean µ and standard devi-
ation σ.




                                              23
                                                                                                     meas.
              Variable                                            wA      wΨ      wR      wf         error
              log (Yt /Yt−1 )       GDP growth                   38.4    36.1     0.8    24.8             -
              ut                    Unemployment                 41.1    45.0     0.4    13.6             -
              πt                    Inflation                    53.2    44.1     0.1     2.6             -
              Rt                    Nominal interest             46.7    46.0     5.5     1.9             -
              ct − log Φt           Consumption                  58.0     6.0     0.3    35.7             -
              it − log (Φt Ψt )     Investment                   70.2    21.7     0.3     7.8             -
              ηt                    Hiring rate                  38.2    38.9     1.1    21.8             -
              Vt − log Φt           Continuation value           67.3     6.9     0.2    25.6             -
                  (4)
              ∆t (dY)               GDP growth wedge                 -        -     -    16.4          83.6
               (4)
              ∆t (u)                Unemployment wedge               -        -     -      6.3         93.7
               (4)
              ∆t (π)                Inflation wedge                  -        -     -    22.0          78.0

Table 2: Structural model variance decomposition at the posterior modes. All values are in percent.

                  GDP growth              unemployment               inflation                     interest rate
          1                          1                     0.4                           0.2

          0                                                0.2
                                    0.5                                                   0
         −1                                                 0

         −2                          0                 −0.2                         −0.2
              1         10     20         1   10      20    1            10        20    1             10          20
          GDP growth wedge    unemp. wedge                       inflation wedge                    ambiguity
          0              0.06                              0.2                          0.02


      −0.15                       0.03                     0.1                          0.01


       −0.3                          0                      0                             0
              1         10     20         1   10      20         1       10        20          1       10          20

Figure 4: Bayesian impulse response functions to the ambiguity shock wf in the structural model.
The responses of GDP growth, inflation rate and interest rate are reported in annualized percent,
and unemployment rate is in percentage points. The solid lines indicate median estimates, while
the dashed line correspond to the 10th and 90th percentile error bands. Horizontal axis in quarters.


   The structural model allows us to explain the economic mechanism underlying the role of
the ambiguity shock. This shock affects households’ concerns about model misspecification and
therefore alters their worst-case model Pe. In order to understand the impact of the ambiguity
shock, it is therefore useful to distinguish between the impulse responses under the data-generating
process P and under the worst-case model Pe. The former impulse responses are those observed by
the rational econometrician, while the latter are perceived by the household in the model.
   Figure 5 compares both responses to the ambiguity shock wtf . After an increase in ambiguity,


                                                      24
                  GDP growth                unemployment                  inflation                  interest rate
          1                             2                        1                          1

          0                             1                       0.5                        0.5
        −1
                                        0                        0                          0
        −2
              1        20         40        1     20      40          1      20       40         1        20         40

                  neutral tech.             investment tech.          monetary policy                 ambiguity
          0                             0                       0.5                     0.02


      −0.4                             −2                      0.25                     0.01


                                                                 0                          0
      −0.8                             −4
              1        20         40        1     20      40          1      20       40         1        20         40

Figure 5: Impulse response functions to the ambiguity shock wf in the structural model under
the data-generating measure P (black dashed line) and the worst-case model Pe (red solid line).
Impulse response functions evaluated at the mode of the posterior distribution. Horizontal axis in
quarters.


the households’ worst-case model becomes more pessimistically biased. In line with expression (12),
the worst-case impulse responses are more persistent — households expect the adverse effects of an
ambiguity increase on the economy to persist longer.
   The bottom row of Figure 5 depicts the impulse responses for the individual exogenous shocks
in the model. The dashed line in the bottom right panel depicts the response of the belief process
θt = ft to the innovation wtf under the data-generating measure P . The household indeed expects
that under the worst case model (red solid line) the ambiguity increase will be more persistent.
   Since the individual exogenous shocks are uncorrelated, there is no response of the technology
processes or the monetary policy shock to the innovation wtf — the dashed lines in the corre-
sponding panels are flat. The story under the worst-case model is very different and critical to the
understanding of the endogenous response of the macroeconomy to the ambiguity shock. Under
the worst-case model, the household believes that the shocks are correlated in an adverse way. An
increase in ambiguity worsens households’ expectations about the future path of the neutral and
investment-specific technology, and leads households to expect a monetary tightening.
   This particular correlation structure arises because these three innovations to the exogenous
processes all affect the continuation value Vt . In times with low neutral and investment-specific
productivity growth, and times in which the economy is hit by an exogenous monetary tightening
through the shock wtR are bad times, with a low continuation value Vt . Moreover, the continuation
value recursion (17) indicates that these bad times must be generated by low levels of current
and future consumption under the households’ worst-case model. The first panel Figure 6 indeed


                                                           25
                  consumption                  investment                  capital                     wage

          0                            0                          0                           0

      −2.5                            −5                     −2.5                            −1

        −5                         −10                           −5                          −2
              1       20         40    1          20        40        1       20        40        1     20      40

                  worker value                 firm value                 hiring rate             job finding rate

          0                            0                          0                           0

      −2.5                            −1                     −2.5                        −7.5

        −5                            −2                         −5                       −15
              1       20         40        1      20        40        1       20        40    1         20      40

Figure 6: Impulse response functions to the ambiguity shock wf in the structural model under
the data-generating measure P (black dashed line) and the worst-case model Pe (red solid line).
Impulse response functions evaluated at the mode of the posterior distribution. Horizontal axis in
quarters.


confirms this intuition — the household that faces an increase in ambiguity forecasts a large and
very persistent drop in consumption.
   The second panel in Figure 6 shows that the increase in ambiguity is also accompanied by an
increase in expected investment activity under the data-generating measure P , reflecting intertem-
poral consumption smoothing. However, the households’ worst-case expectations are much more
pessimistic, and this strong effect arises from the large distortion of the investment specific produc-
tivity shock. Under our estimated parameterization (see Table 1), the investment specific shock is
volatile, which allows for large pessimistic distortions that are hard to distinguish statistically and
therefore not penalized heavily by the entropy penalty in (17). At the same time, the shock has
a large impact on the productivity of the investment technology and future capital accumulation,
which in turn strongly affects future output and consumption paths. Combining these two effects
leads to the strong adverse response of investment and capital under the worst-case model.
   The effect on the inflation rate comes from a balance of two forces. Lower contemporaneous
aggregate demand pushes the intermediate goods producers that change prices to set them to lower
levels. At the same time, expectations of lower productivity imply higher marginal costs and this
pushes current and future prices upwards. At our current estimates, the net effect of an increase in
ambiguity is a higher equilibrium inflation rate in the year after the impact of the ambiguity shock.
At the same time, the response of the inflation wedge is positive, implying that the worst-case
model is biased toward an even higher inflation rate in the future.




                                                            26
6.2   Labor market dynamics
These pessimistic expectations interact in crucial ways through the frictional labor market whose
dynamics is captured by impulse responses in Figure 6. With search and matching rigidities,
hiring and bargaining decisions are based on the value of the discounted future surplus generated
by a match. Both firms and workers inherit the representative household’s beliefs to make future
forecasts when they compute their respective continuation values. Lower expected productivity and
higher expected interest rates lower the value of the match from the perspective of the worst-case
beliefs shared by the worker-firm pair. This lowers equilibrium hiring rates, and lower employment
also implies lower output. Equilibrium wages also fall, reflecting the decline in the surplus that is
particularly large and persistent under the worst-case model. All these effects are captured by the
remaining responses in Figure 6.
   This channel induced by fluctuations in household’s ambiguity concerns is a potent source of
fluctuations in the labor market. The variance decomposition in Table 2 reveals that ambiguity
shocks drive a substantial portion of the overall variation in labor market variables, for instance
more than 20% of the variation in the hiring rate.
   Our results also provide a structural explanation for the discount rate shocks in Hall (2015)
and their role in the labor market dynamics. When ambiguity concerns increase, agents evaluate
more pessimistically those cash flows that positively correlate with households’ continuation values.
Since the match surplus is procyclical, it is effectively discounted at a higher rate. Contrary to
Hall (2015), the discounting arises endogenously through the optimization problem of the robust
household, and the time-variation is empirically linked to the observable survey data.

6.3   The role of permanent shocks
In the model description, we emphasized the unit root specification of the technology processes
as a source of large and volatile belief wedges. An innovation to a persistent technology process
affects productivity for a long period of time, and therefore leads to a large movement in today’s
continuation value Vt . As a consequence, the belief distortion mt+1 in (19) is sufficiently volatile,
generating a large wedge between the data-generating process and the worst-case belief whose
magnitude is controlled by fluctuations in the belief shock θt . This persistence effect is exacerbated
when represented under the worst-case belief.
   We also estimated a version of the model with stationary technology shocks. In that version, the
magnitude of the belief distortions pushed the estimation of the dynamics of the belief shock into
the non-stationary region under the worst-case model. Stationary fluctuations in the model were
not sufficient to generate a sufficiently large distance between the data-generating and worst-case
model.
   The importance of persistent shocks is analogous to the role of ‘long-run risk’ shocks under
recursive preferences of the Epstein and Zin (1989) type. Under these preferences, the stochastic
discount factor is directly exposed to fluctuations in the continuation value Vt , generating aversion to
persistence for parameterizations where risk aversion is larger than the inverse of the intertemporal

                                                   27
                                      structural factor     VAR factor        consumer sentiment
standardized factors (%)
                             2



                             0



                            −2

                                       1985         1990         1995          2000        2005         2010         2015

Figure 7: A comparison of the extracted ambiguity factor with the negative of the Michigan Survey
measure of contemporaneous Index of Consumer Sentiment. The solid blue line is the smoothed
factor from the structural model, the purple dash-dotted line the smoothed factor from the VAR
specification. All data series are standardized.


elasticity of substitution. The crucial difference lies in the fact that an agent endowed with recursive
preferences understands aversion to uncertainty as a risk adjustment, not a belief distortion that is
reflected in the survey responses.

6.4                          Time-series variation
While the ambiguity factor ft is treated as unobservable to the econometrician in both the factor
and structural model, we can extract the filtered path for ft and compare it to observable statistics
to see whether fluctuations in ambiguity concerns are reflected in other time series. In Figure 7 we
plot the extracted series for the ambiguity factor obtained from the factor model and the structural
model, along with the negative of the Index of Consumer Sentiment reported by the Michigan
Survey.10
                           All three series are highly correlated and increase during recessions, attesting to a consistent
narrative of how ambiguity fluctuations interact with business cycle dynamics. Particularly notable
is the large increase in the extracted factor during the 2007–2009 recession and a subsequent slow
decline. Through the lens of the model, pessimistic expectations connected to a prolonged period
of increased ambiguity played a role in the slow recovery following the recession.

6.5                          Mean distortions and detection error probabilities
So far we focused on the role of ambiguity shocks in business cycle fluctuations. The model also
implies restrictions on the relative magnitude of the mean biases in the survey responses. We set
the mean level of ambiguity concerns E [θt ] = θ · f to minimize the distance between the mean
  10
     In Figure 12 in Appendix G, we also plot the time paths for the ambiguity factor and implied belief wedges
estimated using alternative belief wedge specifications that confirm the cyclical nature of the ambiguity factor and
associated belief wedges, providing additional robustness checks to our quantitative results.


                                                                         28
                                               mean wedges       forecast
                                                data model      error std.
                            GDP growth         −1.73 −1.76            1.88
                            Unemployment        0.55   0.35           0.46
                            Inflation           1.01   1.19           1.24

                               (4)
Table 3: Mean belief wedges ∆t in the data and implied by the structural model for the 4-quarter
ahead forecasts of inflation, unemployment and GDP growth, compared to the standard deviation
of the forecast errors in the factor model. The mean level of ambiguity concerns E [θt ] = θ · f is
found by minimizing the sum of squared percentage deviations in the mean belief wedges in the
model and in the data. Normalizing θ = 1, we find f = 0.1076.


belief wedges implied by the model and measured in household survey responses. The results are
summarized in Table 3. The relative magnitude of the model-implied mean belief wedges concerning
inflation, unemployment and GDP growth forecasts (1.19%, 0.55% and −1.76%, respectively) is
quite close to that in the data (1.01%, 0.55% and −1.73%, respectively). This is remarkable because
we estimated the model using fluctuations in the deviation of the belief wedges from their long-run
averages, without utilizing information on the mean wedges in any way.
   Anderson et al. (2003) and Hansen and Sargent (2011) advocate a different way of calibrating
the level of ambiguity concerns that is based on the statistical distinguishability of the benchmark
and worst-case model. They consider the likelihood ratio

                                       lT = log LTW − log LTB

where LTW and LTB are the likelihoods of a data sample of length T under the worst-case (W) and
benchmark (B) models, respectively. The probability of a classification error committed using the
likelihood ratio statistic for a data sample drawn from the benchmark model is
                                                         
                                       pTB = P lT > 0 | B ,

and, vice versa,
                                                         
                                       pTW = P lT < 0 | W .

The detection error probability is then defined as

                                               1 T       
                                        pT =     pB + pTW .
                                               2

The (constant) penalty parameter θ from equation (4) that captures the level of ambiguity concerns
is then fine-tuned to achieve a desired level of detection error for a data sample of a given length.
   We pinned down the level of ambiguity concerns E [θt ] using the mean biases in household
survey forecasts. In Figure 8, we plot the implied detection error probabilities as a function of the
length of the data sample. Details of the calculations are provided in Appendix F.



                                                 29
                        0.4                                                                       −1
                                                         pTB




                                                                         log(error probability)
                                                         pTW                                      −2
                        0.3
    error probability

                                                         pT
                                                                                                  −3
                        0.2
                                                                                                  −4

                        0.1
                                                                                                  −5

                         0                                                                        −6
                              0              25                50                                      0              25              50
                                  sample length (quarters)                                                 sample length (quarters)


Figure 8: Detection error probabilities in the structural model as a function of data sample length.
Probabilities constructed by simulating 100,000 samples from the benchmark and worst-case model,
respectively, and constructing sample versions of classification errors pTB and pTW , and the detection
error probability pT .


    The calculation reveals that the implied detection error probabilities are relatively low — it
takes about 5 years of data to tell the benchmark and worst-case model apart at a 5% error
probability, and about 9 years to achieve a 1% detection error. Viewed through the lens of the
structural model, the pessimistic biases embedded in the household survey answers are quite strong,
implying that households require a very high level of confidence to discard a model as implausible.
Table 3 shows that the mean belief wedges for the 4-quarter ahead forecasts are comparable to one
standard deviation of the forecast error computed using the factor model.
    Detection error calibrations in the existing literature are typically substantially more conser-
vative than our findings. For instance, Barillas et al. (2009) or Bidder and Smith (2012) choose
detection error probabilities in the range of 1% − 5% for data samples spanning about 50 years
to fit the magnitude of the equity premium. Although these detection error probabilities seem
to be low, our direct evidence from household surveys suggests that these calibrations may still
be too conservative when dealing with macroeconomic applications and households from typical
populations.


7          Conclusion
We develop a framework in which time-variation in ambiguity perceived by households generates
fluctuations in aggregate dynamics of the macroeconomy. The framework is based on an extension
of the robust preference model that introduces shocks to agents’ concerns about model misspec-
ification. We identify these ambiguity shocks using survey data from the University of Michigan
Surveys of Consumers and the Survey of Professional Forecasters. We show that in the data and in
an estimated business cycle model, the ambiguity shocks are a potent source of variation in labor


                                                                    30
market variables.
   The developed solution techniques are applicable to an extensive class of models that feature
agents with robust preferences. The linear approximation that captures time-variation in ambigu-
ity concerns is easy to implement and estimate, which immensely facilitates quantitative work in
dynamic equilibrium models with robust agents.
   In the paper, we consider ambiguity shocks generated by an exogenous source and identified
through fluctuations in biases of households’ survey responses. However, our framework also allows
for fluctuations in ambiguity concerns caused by movements in endogenous variables in the model
— for instance, ambiguity could increase in response to an increase in aggregate unemployment. We
leave the structural modeling and empirical identification of such mechanisms for future research.
   The structural interpretation of ambiguity shocks identified in our framework opens new direc-
tions for policy analysis under ambiguity, extending the work of Hansen and Sargent (2012), Adam
and Woodford (2012), Karantounias (2013), Orlik and Presno (2013), or Kwon and Miao (2013).
In parallel work, we study the implications of this framework for optimal monetary policy. A mon-
etary authority facing households endowed with robust preferences infers that policy changes lead
to endogenous changes in the worst-case model. The choice of optimal policy therefore involves
explicit management of households’ expectations by the monetary authority. Reciprocally, belief
wedges in survey responses are structurally tied to the dynamics of equilibrium allocations in the
model, and serve the useful purpose of providing the monetary authority with information about
the decision-making process of private agents.




                                                 31
Appendix
A    Distorted beliefs in the one-factor model

Let (Ω, {Ft }∞
             t=0 , P ) be the probability space generated by the innovations of model (1). The subjective
probability measure Pe is formally defined by specifying a strictly positive martingale M with one-period
increment                                                               
                                          Mt+1            1   2
                                 mt+1 =         = exp − |νt | + νt′ wt+1 .
                                           Mt             2

We then have E  et [wt+1 ] = νt . Using the notation xt = (y ′ , ft )′ , the factor structure (2)–(3) of households’
                                                            t
expectations is obtained by imposing the restriction

                                                         νt = H + HF xt

where F = (Fy , Ff ) in an 1 × n vector and H, H are k × 1 vectors.
   Let ζt = Zxt be the vector of variables for which we have observable data on households’ expectations
where Z is a selection matrix. Here, we derive results for more general dynamics that is in line with the
non-stationary model from Section 4. Specifically, we assume that

                                                   ζt     =    Zxt = Z x
                                                                       bt + zt
                                              x
                                              bt+1        =    ψq + ψx x
                                                                       bt + ψw wt+1
                                          zt+1 − zt       =    φq + φx x
                                                                       bt + φq wt+1 .

The process zt introduces an additional component of the dynamics that has stationary growth rates. The
factor model framework from Section 3 is obtained by setting the matrices H, ψq , ψx , ψw and φq to zero, in
which case
                                          xt+1 = ψx xt + ψw wt+1

is a concise form for (1).
     We are interested in τ -period ahead belief wedges

                                                 (τ )    et [ζt+τ ] − Et [ζt+τ ] .
                                             ∆t         =E

Guess that

                                                                                     (τ )
                                           Et [ζt+τ − ζt ] = G(τ
                                                              x x
                                                                 )
                                                                   bt + G0
                                           et [ζt+τ − ζt ] = G
                                           E                 e(τ
                                                              x x
                                                                 )      e(τ )
                                                                   bt + G0

       (τ ) (τ ) e (τ )  e (τ ) are conformable matrix coefficients with initial conditions
where Gx , G0 , G  x and G0

                                   (τ )    e  (τ )                         e  (τ )
                                 G0       =G 0       = 0n×1          G(τ )
                                                                      x = G0         = 0n×n .




                                                                32
We can then establish a recursive formula for the expectations under the data-generating measure

                         (τ )
          G(τ
           x x
              )
                bt + G0             =     Et [ζt+τ − ζt ] =                                                                       (22)
                                             h                                          i
                                                                                 (τ −1)
                                    =     Et Z (xt+1 − xt ) + G(τ x
                                                                     −1)
                                                                         x
                                                                         bt+1 + G0
                                                                              h                            i
                                           (τ −1)
                                    =     G0      + φq + Z + G(τ   x
                                                                     −1)
                                                                           ψq + Z + G(τ   x
                                                                                            −1)
                                                                                                  ψx + (φx − Z) xbt
                                                                     
                                          + Z + G(τ   x
                                                         −1)
                                                               ψw + φw Et [wt+1 ] .

Since Et [wt+1 ] = 0, we obtain
                                                                                 
                                               G(τ
                                                x
                                                   )
                                                            =        Z + G(τx
                                                                              −1)
                                                                                    ψx + (φx − Z)
                                                                                                
                                                 (τ )                (τ −1)
                                               G0           =       G0      + φq + Z + G(τ x
                                                                                             −1)
                                                                                                   ψq .

Under the subjective measure, the derivation is unchanged, except the last line in (22) that now involves the
                       et [wt+1 ] = H + HF x
subjective expectation E                   bt . Then
                                                                                                
                   e x(τ )
                   G            =        Z +G   e(τ
                                                 x
                                                    −1)
                                                          ψx + (φx  − Z) +   Z  + e
                                                                                  G (τ −1)
                                                                                    x        ψw + φw   HF
                                                                                                   
                   e (τ )
                   G            =       e (τ −1) + φq + Z + G
                                        G                       e(τ −1) ψq + Z + G    e (τ −1) ψw + φw H
                     0                    0                       x                     x


Consequently                                                             
                                                    (τ )       e(τ ) (τ )        e (τ ) − G(τ ) .
                                                 ∆t         = G x − Gx      x
                                                                            bt + G 0       0

In the case considered in Section 3 when H, φq , φx , φw and φq are all zero, we get explicit expressions

          Gx(τ )   =     Z (ψx )τ
                             τX
                              −1
            (τ )                           i                              −1            τ
          G0       =     Z          (ψx ) ψq = Z (I − ψx )                     (I − (ψx ) ) ψq
                             i=0
          e (τ )                                        τ
          G x      =     Z (ψx + ψw HF )
                             τX
                              −1
          e (τ )
          G        =     Z
                                                                i
                                    (ψx + ψw HF ) ψq = Z (I − (ψx + ψw HF ))
                                                                                                 −1                      τ
                                                                                                      (I − (ψx + ψw HF ) ) ψq .
            0
                             i=0


B     Series expansion of the worst-case model

The linear approximation in this paper is an extension of the series expansion method used in Holmes
(1995) or Lombardo (2010). Borovička and Hansen (2013, 2014) adapt the series expansion method to an
approximation of models with robust preferences that feature a constant penalty. Here, we further extend
this methodology to derive a linear approximation that allows for endogenously determined time-varying
belief distortions. The critical step in the expansion lies in the joint perturbation of the shock vector wt and
the penalty process θt .


B.1    Law of motion
We start with the approximation of the model for the law of motion (5) with a sufficiently smooth policy rule
ψ. We consider a class of models indexed by the scalar perturbation parameter q that scales the volatility



                                                                                33
of the shock vector wt
                                           xt (q) = ψ (xt−1 (q) , qwt , q)                                   (23)

and assume that there exists a series expansion of xt around q = 0:

                                                                  q2
                                         xt (q) ≈ x̄ + qx1t +        x2t + . . . .
                                                                  2
The processes xjt , j = 0, 1, . . . can be viewed as derivatives of xt with respect to the perturbation parameter,
and their laws of motion can be inferred by differentiating (23) j times and evaluating the derivatives at
q = 0, assuming that ψ is sufficiently smooth. Here, we focus only on the approximation up to the first
order:

                                           x̄    = ψ (x̄, 0, 0)                                              (24)
                                         x1t     = ψx x1t−1 + ψw wt + ψq .

We begin with a case where the equilibrium dynamics of xt is stationary. Extensions to non-stationary
environments are considered in Appendix B.6.


B.2    Continuation values
We now focus on the expansion of the continuation value recursion. Substituting the worst-case belief
distortion (7) into the recursion (4) yields

                                                      β
                                     Vt = u (xt ) −      log Et [exp (−θt Vt+1 )] .                          (25)
                                                      θt

We are looking for an expansion of the continuation value

                                                   Vt (q) ≈ V̄ + qV1t .                                      (26)

In order to derive the solution of the continuation value, we are interested in expanding the following
perturbation of the recursion:
                                                                                               
                                                      q                    θ (x̄ + x1t )
                  Vt (q) = u (xt (q) , q) − β                 log Et exp −               Vt+1 (q) .          (27)
                                                θ (x̄ + x1t )                    q

Here, we utilized the fact that θt = θxt ≈ θ (x̄ + x1t ). More importantly, the perturbation scales jointly
the volatility of the stochastic processes for Vt and u (xt ) with the magnitude of the penalty parameter θt .
In particular, the penalty parameter in the perturbation of equation (4) becomes q/θt and decreases jointly
with the volatility of the shock process. This assumption will imply that the benchmark and worst-case
models do not converge as q → 0, and the linear approximation around a deterministic steady state yields
a nontrivial contribution of the worst-case dynamics.
    Using the expansion of the period utility function

                                  u (xt (q) , q) ≈ ū + qu1t = ū + q (ux x1t + uq )




                                                           34
we get the deterministic steady state (zero-th order) term by setting q = 0:

                                                             −1
                                                 V̄ = (1 − β)     ū.

The first-order term in the expansion is derived by differentiating (27) with respect to q and is given by the
recursion
                                              1                                      
                          V1t = u1t − β               log Et exp −θ (x̄ + x1t ) V1t+1                     (28)
                                        θ (x̄ + x1t )
Since x̄ is constant and x1t has linear dynamics (24), we hope to find linear dynamics for V1t as well. Since
ut = u (xt ), we can make the guess that Vti (q) = V i (xt (q) , q) which leads to the following expressions for
the derivative of Vt :
                                              V1t = Vx x1t + Vq .

Using this guess and comparing coefficients, equation (28) leads to a pair of algebraic equations for the
unknown coefficients Vx and Vq :

                                              β        ′
                                 Vx   =   ux −  Vx ψw ψw Vx′ θ + βVx ψx
                                              2
                                              β           ′
                                 Vq   =   uq − θx̄Vx ψw ψw  Vx′ + βVx ψq + βVq
                                              2
The first from this pair of equations is a Riccati equation for Vx , which can be solved for given coefficients
ψx and ψw .


B.3    Distortions
With the approximation of the continuation value at hand, we can derive the expansion of the one-period
belief distortion mt+1 that defines the worst-case model relative to the benchmark model. As in (27), we
scale the penalty parameter θt jointly with the volatility of the underlying shocks:
                                                          
                                       exp − 1q θt Vt+1 (q)
                          mt+1 (q) =   h                    i ≈ m0,t+1 + qm1,t+1 .
                                     Et exp − 1q θt Vt+1 (q)

It turns out that in order to derive the correct first-order expansion, we are required to consider a second-order
expansion of the continuation value
                                                                  q
                                            Vt (q) ≈ V̄ + qV1t + V2t ,
                                                                  2
although the term V2t will be inconsequential for subsequent analysis. Substituting in expression (26) and
noting that V̄ is a deterministic term, we can approximate mt+1 with
                                                                              
                                          exp −θ (x̄ + x1t ) V1t+1 + 2q V2t+1
                             mt+1 (q) ≈                                       
                                        Et exp −θ (x̄ + x1t ) V1t+1 + 2q V2t+1

Differentiating with respect to q and evaluating at q = 0, we obtain the expansion




                                                        35
                                                                       
                                              exp −θ (x̄ + x1t ) V1t+1
                          m0t+1      =                                                                       (29)
                                           Et exp −θ (x̄ + x1t ) V1t+1
                                                    1
                          m1t+1      =     −                M0t+1 [V2t+1 − Et [M0t+1 V2t+1 ]]
                                             2θ (x̄ + x1t )

This expansion is distinctly different from the standard polynomial expansion familiar from the perturbation
literature. First, observe that m0t+1 is not constant, as one would expect for a zeroth-order term, but
nonlinear in V1t+1 . However, since Et [m0t+1 ] = 1 we can thus treat M0t+1 as a change of measure that will
adjust the distribution of shocks that are correlated with m0t+1 . We will show that with Gaussian shocks,
we can still preserve tractability. Further notice that Et [m1t+1 ] = 0.
     The linear structure of V1t also has an important implication for the worst-case distortion constructed
from m0t+1 . Substituting into (29) yields
                                                                              
                                                exp −θ (x̄ + x1t ) Vx ψw wt+1
                                   m0t+1    =                                   .
                                              Et exp −θ (x̄ + x1t ) Vx ψw wt+1

This implies that for a function f (wt+1 ) with a shock vector wt+1 ∼ N (0, I),

                            et [f (wt+1 )] = Et [mt+1 f (wt+1 )] ≈ Et [m0t+1 f (wt+1 )] .
                            E

The distortion generating the Pe (worst-case) measure is therefore approximated by the ‘zero-th’ order term
m0t+1 , and the vector wt+1 has the following distribution:

                                                                         ′    
                                         wt+1 ∼ N −θ (x̄ + x1t ) (Vx ψw ) , Ik .                                (30)

The mean of the shock is therefore time-varying and depends on the linear process x1t .


B.4    Equilibrium conditions
We assume that equilibrium conditions in our framework can be written as

                                          0 = Et [e
                                                  g (xt+1 , xt , xt−1 , wt+1 , wt )]                            (31)

where ge is an n × 1 vector function and the dynamics for xt is implied by (5). This vector of equations
includes expectational equations like Euler equations of the robust household, which can be represented
using worst-case belief distortions mt+1 . We therefore assume that we can write the j-th component of e
                                                                                                       g as

                                                                σ
                        gej (xt+1 , xt , xt−1 , wt+1 , wt ) = mt+1
                                                                j
                                                                   g j (xt+1 , xt , xt−1 , wt+1 , wt ) .

where σj ∈ {0, 1} captures whether the expectation in the j-th equation is under the household’s worst-case
model.11 In particular, all nonexpectational equations and all equations not involving agents’ preferences
have σj = 0. System (31) can then be written as

                                      0 = Et [Mt+1 g (xt+1 , xt , xt−1 , wt+1 , wt )]
  11
     The generalization to multiple agents with potentially heterogeneous concerns for robustness is straightforward,
see the construction in Borovička and Hansen (2013).


                                                              36
                    1
where Mt+1 = diag mσt+1  , . . . , mσt+1
                                      n
                                         is a diagonal matrix of the belief distortions, and g is independent of
the robustness parameter θt . As in Borovička and Hansen (2013), the zero-th and first-order expansions are

                           0    = Et [M0t+1 g0t+1 ] = g0t+1
                           0    = Et [M0t+1 g1t+1 ] + Et [M1t+1 g0t+1 ] = Et [M0t+1 g1t+1 ]

where the last equality follows from Et [m1t+1 ] = 0.
   For the first-order derivative of the equilibrium conditions, we have

                                                  0 = Et [M0t+1 g1t+1 ]                                          (32)

The first-order term in the expansion of gt+1 is given by

                   g1t+1   =      gx+ x1t+1 + gx x1t + gx− x1t−1 + gw+ wt+1 + gw wt + gq =                       (33)
                           =      [(gx+ ψx + gx ) ψx + gx− ] x1t−1 + [(gx+ ψx + gx ) ψw + gw ] wt +
                                  + (gx+ ψx + gx+ + gx ) ψq + gq + (gx+ ψw + gw+ ) wt+1

where symbols x+ , x, x− , w+ , w, q represent partial derivatives with respect to xt+1 , xt , xt−1 , wt+1 , wt and q,
respectively. Given the worst-case distribution of the shock vector (30), we can write

                                et [wt+1 ] = − (Vx ψw )′ θ [(x̄ + ψq ) + ψx x1t−1 + ψw wt ]
                                E

       i
Let [A] denote the i-th row of matrix A. Notice that

                                                                 i        ′
                                               [gx+ ψw + gw+ ] (Vx ψw ) θ

is a 1 × n vector. Construct the n × n matrix E by stacking these row vectors for all equations i = 1, . . . , n:
                                               n                              o
                                                                  i        ′
                                      E = stack σi [gx+ ψw + gw+ ] (Vx ψw ) θ

which contains non-zero rows for expectational equations under the worst-case model. Using matrix E, we
construct the conditional expectation of the last term in g1t+1 in (33). In particular

                    0   = Et [M0t+1 g1t+1 ] =
                        = [(gx+ ψx + gx ) ψx + gx− ] x1t−1 + [(gx+ ψx + gx ) ψw + gw ] wt +
                               + (gx+ ψx + gx+ + gx ) ψq + gq − E [(x̄ + ψq ) + ψx x1t−1 + ψw wt ]

    Equation (32) is thus a system of linear second-order stochastic difference equations. There are well-
known results that discuss the conditions under which there exists a unique stable equilibrium path to this
system (Blanchard and Kahn (1980), Sims (2002)). We assume that such conditions are satisfied. Comparing
coefficients on x1t−1 , wt and the constant term implies that

                                  0 =      (gx+ ψx + gx − E) ψx + gx−                                            (34)
                                  0 =      (gx+ ψx + gx − E) ψw + gw                                             (35)
                                  0 =      (gx+ ψx + gx+ + gx ) ψq + gq − E (x̄ + ψq )                           (36)



                                                            37
These equations need to be solved for ψx , ψw , ψq and Vx where

                                                          β        ′
                                            Vx = ux −       Vx ψw ψw Vx′ θ + βVx ψx
                                                          2
and                                              n                               o
                                        E = stack σi [gx+ ψw + gw+ ]i (Vx ψw )′ θ .                               (37)


B.5    Special case: θt is an exogenous AR(1) process
In the application, we consider a special case that restricts θt to be an exogenous AR(1) process. With a
slight abuse in notation, this restriction can be implemented by replacing the vector of variables xt with
           ′
(x′t , ft ) where ft is a scalar AR(1) process representing the time-variation in the concerns for robustness as
an exogenously specified ‘belief’ shock:

                                            ft+1 = (1 − ρf ) f¯ + ρf ft + σf wt+1
                                                                              f
                                                                                  .                               (38)

The dynamics of the model then satisfies

                                                      xt = ψ (xt−1 , wt , ft )                                    (39)
                          ′                                              ′
                                                                             ′    
with steady state x̄′ , f¯ . The vector θ in (6) is then partitioned as θ = θx , θf = (01×n−1 , 1) and thus
θt = ft . Constructing the first-order series expansion of (39), we obtain
                        !               !                        !           !                     !          !
                x1t+1              ψq            ψx     ρf ψxf         x1t           ψw   σf ψxf       wt+1
                            =               +                                    +                      f
                f1t+1              0              0       ρf           f1t            0     σf         wt+1

                    f
where wt+1 and wt+1    are uncorrelated innovations. The matrices ψx and ψw thus do not involve any direct
impact of the dynamics of the belief shock f1t and the matrix ψxf captures how the dynamics of f1t influences
the dynamics of endogenous state variables.
    Let us further assume that the system (31) represents the equilibrium restrictions of the model except
equation (38). In this case, the function g does not directly depend on f . Repeating the expansion of the
equilibrium conditions from Section B.4 and comparing coefficients on xt−1 , ft−1 , wt and the constant term
yields the set of conditions for matrices ψx , ψw , ψxf and ψq :

                                        0 =     (gx+ ψx + gx ) ψx + gx−                                           (40)
                                        0 =     (gx+ ρf ψxf − E) + (gx+ ψx + gx ) ψxf                             (41)
                                        0 =     (gx+ ψx + gx ) ψw + gw                                            (42)
                                        0 =     (gx+ ψx + gx+ + gx ) ψq + gq − Ef¯                                (43)

with

                  Vx    =       ux + βVx ψx                                                                       (44)
                                     βθ                                                       ′
                  Vf    =       uf −      Vf2 σf2 + 2Vx ψxf σf2 Vf + Vx σf2 ψxf ψxf
                                                                                 ′
                                                                                    + ψw ψw′
                                                                                               Vx                 (45)
                                      2
                                +β (Vf ρf + Vx ψxf ρf )
                                     n                                                          i o
                   E =          stack σ i gx+ ψxf σf2 (Vf + Vx ψxf ) + (gx+ ψw + gw+ ) ψw ′
                                                                                             Vx′      θ.          (46)


                                                                 38
This set of equations is the counterpart of equations (34)–(37) and can be solved sequentially. First, notice
that equations (40) and (42) can be solved for ψx and ψw , and these coefficients are not impacted by the
dynamics of ft . But the equilibrium dynamics of xt is affected by movements in ft through the coefficient
ψxf . The coefficient ρf ψxf introduces an additional component in the time-varying drift of xt , while σf ψxf
is an additional source of volatility arising from the shocks to household’s concerns for robustness.
    We solve this set of equations by backward induction. First, we use (34), (37) and (44) to find the
no-ambiguity solution for ψx , ψw , Vx . Then we postulate that (39) is in fact a time-dependent law of motion

                                               xt = ψ t (xt−1 , wt , ft )

with terminal condition at a distant date T

                                              xT = ψ T (xT −1 , wT , 0) .

This corresponds to assuming that starting from date T , ambiguity is absent in the model. Plugging this
guess to the set of equilibrium conditions, we obtain the set of algebraic equations
                                          
                            t+1
             0   =     gx+ ψxf  ρf − Et+1 + (gx+ ψx + gx ) ψxf   t
                                                                                                              (47)
                                                                                                   
                           βθ  t+1 2                 t+1 2 t+1
                                                                                        ′
           Vft   =   uf −          Vf σf + 2Vx ψxf        σf Vf + Vx σf2 ψxf  t+1    t+1
                                                                                   ψxf            ′
                                                                                            + ψw ψw  Vx′      (48)
                            2
                                             
                     +βρf Vft+1 + Vx ψxf  t+1

                     h                                                         i
         Et+1    =          t+1
                      gx+ ψxf     Vft+1 + Vx ψxf
                                               t+1
                                                     σf2 + (gx+ ψw + gw+ ) ψw
                                                                            ′
                                                                              Vx′ θ.                          (49)

Equation (47) can then be solved for
                                                                                      
                                   t                     −1                   t+1
                                  ψxf = (gx+ ψx + gx )            Et+1 − gx+ ψxf  ρf                          (50)

Iterating backwards on equations (48)–(50) backward until convergence yields the stationary solution of the
economy with ambiguity as a long-horizon limit of an economy where ambiguity vanishes at a distant T .
The system converges as long as its dynamics are stationary under the worst-case model. Once we find the
limit limt→−∞ Et = E, we can also determine
                                                                                  
                                                                          Ef¯ − gq .
                                                                     −1
                                    ψq = (gx+ ψx + gx+ + gx )


B.6    Nonstationary models
Consider the nonstationary dynamics introduced in Section 4.3. When the period utility function is given by
(15), i.e., u (xt ) = ub (b
                          xt ) + zt , then using the guess for the continuation value (16), we can rewrite equation
(25) as
                                          β        h                                            i
                    Vb (b          xt ) − log Et exp −θt Vb (b
                                                                                  −1
                        xt ) = ub (b                              xt+1 ) + (1 − β) φ (bxt , wt+1 )
                                          θt
with u
     b (b          b (xt ). The first-order expansion of φ yields
        xt ) = log C

                                       z̄t+1 − z̄t   =   φ (x̄, 0)
                                     z1t+1 − z1t     =   φq + φx x
                                                                 b1t + φw wt+1



                                                          39
where x̄ is the steady state of x
                                bt . We can now proceed as in the stationary case except using the expansion
of functions u      b
              b and V . We have
                                                          h                        i
                                                     −1                  −1
                                      V̄ = (1 − β)         ū + β (1 − β) φ (x̄, 0)

and
                                                    Vb1t = Vx x
                                                              b1t + Vq

with
                                  h                    i β                     2
                                                  −1                       −1
                Vx    =     ux + β Vx ψx + (1 − β) φx −     Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw θ
                                                          2
                                  h                       i β                                    2
                                                       −1                       −1
                Vq    =     uq + β Vq + Vx ψq + (1 − β) φq − θx̄ Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw                  .
                                                              2
The zero-th order distortion is consequently given by
                                                                              
                                                                         −1
                                                   b1t ) Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw wt+1
                                      exp −θ (x̄ + x
                          m0t+1   =   h                                         i
                                                                          −1
                                    Et exp −θ (x̄ + xb1t ) Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw wt+1

so that under the worst-case model,
                                                                         ′   
                                                                        −1
                             wt+1 ∼ N              b1t ) Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw , Ik .
                                          −θ (x̄ + x                                                     (51)


Equation (12) then becomes
                                                                   ′
                                                                −1
                      x
                      b1t+1       =   ψq − θx̄ψw Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw
                                                                   ′ 
                                                                 −1
                                      + ψx − ψw Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw θ x    b1t + ψw w
                                                                                   et+1

                                  =   ψeq + ψex x1t + ψw w
                                                         et+1 .

We are still solving the set of equations (34)–(36) but now with Vx and E given by
                                   h                    i β                              2
                                                   −1                          −1
                     Vx    = ux + β Vx ψx + (1 − β) φx −        Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw           θ
                                                            2
                                                                           ′ 
                     E     = stack σi [gx+ ψw + gw+ ]i Vx ψw + (1 − β)−1 φw θ .


   In the special case described in Section B.5, the belief shock ft is modeled as an exogenous AR(1) process.
The first-order dynamics of the stochastic growth rate can be expressed as

                                                                                 f
                            z1t+1 − z1t = φq + φx x
                                                  b1t + φxf f1t + φw wt+1 + φwf wt+1 .

The only modifications appearing in the model solution are those related to the continuation value recursion




                                                             40
and the shock distortion in E. Specifically,
                              h                     i
                                               −1
              Vx    =   ux + β Vx ψx + (1 − β) φx
                                                              
                                                          −1
              Vf    =   uf + β ρf Vf + ρf Vx ψxf + (1 − β) φxf
                          βθ                    2   βθ                                             2
                                            −1                                    −1
                        −    Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw −      Vx ψxf σf + Vf σf + (1 − β) φwf
                           2 (                       2                    )
                                                                  ′ i
                                i                              −1
                E =     stack σ (gx+ ψw + gw+ ) Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw          θ
                               h                                          ii 
                                i                                      −1
                        +stack σ gx+ ψxf σf Vf σf + Vx ψxf σf + (1 − β) φwf       θ

In the recursive form, Vf and E can be solved by iterating on the pair of equations
                                                                
                                                            −1
              Vft   = uf + β ρf Vft+1 + ρf Vx ψxf
                                               t+1
                                                   + (1 − β) φxf
                        βθ                −1
                                              2   βθ      t+1                        −1
                                                                                                       2
                        −  Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw −      Vx ψxf   σf + Vft+1 σf + (1 − β) φwf
                         2 (                       2                       )
                                                                   ′ i
                                                              −1
           Et+1               i
                    = stack σ (gx+ ψw + gw+ ) Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw             θ
                                h                                         ii 
                                    i t+1     t+1       t+1            −1
                        +stack σ gx+ ψxf σf Vf σf + Vx ψxf σf + (1 − β) φwf       θ.


together with equation (50) which remained unchanged.


C      Data

Macroeconomic data is collected from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis database (FRED).12 Data for
the Survey of Professional Forecasters are collected from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia website.13
The data on households’ expectations are obtained from the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers.14
See Table 4 for details.
    For the inflation rate, we record the cross-sectional mean, median and quartile answers. The survey
question on unemployment rate only records up/same/down responses. We use the method from Carlson
and Parkin (1975) and Mankiw et al. (2003) to fit a time series of normal distributions to these qualitative
responses. Let qtu , qts and qtd be the fractions of survey answers up, same, down, respectively, recorded at
time t. We assume that these categories are constructed from a continuous cross-sectional distribution of
                                            
responses with normal density N µt , σt2 . In particular, there exists a response threshold a such that an
answer on the interval [−a, a] is recorded as ‘same’. This implies
                                                                                            
                                                 −a − µt                              a − µt
                                   qtd = Φ                          qtu = 1 − Φ
                                                   σt                                   σt

and thus
                                                           
                              − a − µt = σt Φ−1 qtd                 a − µt = σt Φ−1 (1 − qtu )
  12
     https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/
  13
     https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/
  14
     http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/ See also Thomas (1999) for details on the survey methodology.



                                                               41
Macroeconomic variables (FRED)
πt              Consumer price index for all urban consumers: All items, seasonally adjusted
                (CPIAUCSL). Quarterly logarithmic growth rate, last month to last month of quarter.
ut              Civilian unemployment rate, quarterly, seasonally adjusted (UNRATE).
log (Yt /Yt−1 ) Real gross domestic product, quarterly, seasonally adjusted annual rate (GDPC96).
                Quarterly logarithmic growth rate.
it              Effective Federal Funds Rate (FEDFUNDS). Quarterly averages.

Households’
    h           iexpectations (Michigan Survey)
et P4 πt+j
E                    Expected change in prices during the next year (Table 32, variable PX1), mean response
        j=1
                     and quartiles of the cross-sectional distribution of individual answers. As response for
                     quarter t, we use the survey round from the first month of quarter t + 1. Questions:
                     “During the next 12 months, do you think that prices in general will go up, or go down,
                     or stay where they are now? ” and “By about what percent do you expect prices to go
                     up, on the average, during the next 12 months? ”
et [ut+4 ]
E                    Expected unemployment rate during next year (Table 30, variable UMEX), construc-
                     tion of mean response detailed in the main text. As response for quarter t, we use the
                     survey round from the first month of quarter t + 1. Question: “How about people out
                     of work during the coming 12 months – do you think there will be more unemployment
                     than now, about the same, or less? ”
et [log (Yt+4 /Yt )] Index of current conditions (Table 5, variable ICC) and index of consumer expectations
E
                     (Table 5, variable ICE) used as a proxy for the GDP growth forecast. Construction
                     described in the main text. As response for quarter t, we use the survey round from
                     the first month of quarter t + 1.

Survey
    hP of Professional
                 i            Forecasters
        4
Et      j=1 πt+j     Forecasted CPI inflation rate, seasonally adjusted (CPI). Forecast at time t is con-
                     structed as the mean survey forecast made in second month of quarter t + 1, for CPI
                     inflation rate between quarters t and t + 4.
Et [ut+4 ]           Forecasted unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted (UNEMP). Forecast at time t is
                     constructed as the mean survey forecast made in second month of quarter t + 1, for the
                     average unemployment rate in quarter t + 4.
Et [log (Yt+4 /Yt )] Forecasted GDP growth rate, logarithmic annual growth rate (RGDP). Forecast at
                     time t is constructed as the mean survey forecast made in second month of quarter
                     t + 1, for the logarithmic growth rate in quarterly GDP between quarters t and t + 4.


                 Table 4: Data definitions for the macroeconomic and survey variables.




                                                     42
and therefore
                                                                  2a
                                      σt   =                                  
                                                Φ−1     (1   − qtu )− Φ−1 qtd
                                      µt   = a − σt Φ        −1
                                                                  (1 − qtu )

The constant a is then determined so that the time-series average of the cross-sectional dispersions σt divided
by the observed average cross-sectional dispersion for the SPF forecast corresponds to the analogous ratio
for the inflation responses, for which we have dispersion data readily available.
     To construct a proxy for the GDP growth survey response, we regress the realized 4-quarter GDP growth
log (Yt /Yt−4 ) on the index of current conditions ICCt (see Table 4)

                                     log (Yt /Yt−4 ) = β0 + β1 ICCt + εt .

We then use the estimated regression coefficients to construct a proxy for the household’s subjective GDP
growth forecast using the index of consumer expectations ICEt

                                     et [log (Yt+4 /Yt )] = βb0 + βb1 ICEt .
                                     E

We construct the time series of belief wedges for the period 1982Q2–2015Q4 by taking the difference between
the household and SPF forecasts.


C.1    Details on the belief wedges
Table 5 contains time-series characteristics of the belief wedges. Table 6 shows the conditional time-series
averages of the households’ forecasts for different demographic groups.


D     Estimation of the one-factor model

Recall that we estimate the model
                         !                          !             !                        !          !
                                                                                                y
                    yt+1          ψy       ψyf ρf            yt            ψyw    ψyf σf       wt+1
                            =                                          +                        f
                    ft+1          0         ρf               ft             0      σf          wt+1
                        (4)
                      ∆t+1    =   ψ∆f ft+1 + σ∆ ε∆
                                                 t+1


We estimate the model using a Metropolis–Hastings algorithm. We take five chains with different initial
draws and make 20,000 draws in each chain. The first 10,000 draws of each chain are dropped.
    The priors and posterior parameter estimates are reported in Table 7. The Inverse-Gamma priors on
the standard deviations shrink the estimates away from zero in order to prevent overfitting. The priors for
the measurement error standard deviations have means that are scaled by the standard deviations of the
wedges. The variance decomposition at the estimated mode of the parameters is reported in Table 8.




                                                         43
                  6

                  4
GDP growth (%)




                  2

                  0

                 −2
                               Michigan forecast       SPF forecast        actual (one year ahead)
                 −4
                               1985             1990         1995              2000          2005          2010          2015

Figure 9: One-year GDP growth forecasts from the Survey of Professional Forecasters and Michigan Survey,
and the realized GDP growth (shifted one year ahead). The Michigan Survey forecast is constructed using
a projection on the Index of Consumer Expectations, see text in the appendix for details. NBER recessions
shaded.




                                                                                       correlation matrix
                                                                   (4)          (4)      (4)                               
                               mean                         std   ∆t   (π)     ∆t  (u) ∆t (dY) log (Yt /Yt−4 ) log Yt /Ȳt
                   (4)
  Inflation wedge ∆t (π)        1.01                       0.79       1.00        0.04     −0.32          −0.26     −0.31
                           (4)
  Unemployment wedge ∆t (u)     0.55                       0.39                   1.00     −0.63          −0.46     −0.34
                        (4)
  GDP growth wedge ∆t (dY) −1.73                           1.18                              1.00          0.41       0.68
  GDP growth log (Yt /Yt−4 )   2.66                       2.02                                            1.00       0.60
  Output gap log Yt /Ȳt       −1.87                       2.30                                                       1.00

Table 5: Time-series and business cycle statistics for the belief wedges. All values are in percent, time
period 1981Q2–2015Q4.




                      actual     SPF      all      18-34    35-44     45-54      55-64    65+      W     NC     NE       S
                 π      2.82     3.01   4.05        4.14     4.07      4.02       3.86    3.96   3.98   4.00   4.00   4.18
                 u      6.34     6.34   6.88        6.74     6.90      6.97       6.98    6.88   6.86   6.87   6.93   6.86

                                        male     female    bottom     2nd Q      3rd Q     top    HS     SC    COL     GS
                 π                      3.47       4.56       4.99      4.28       3.77   3.27   4.58   3.98   3.57   3.46
                 u                      6.79       6.95       7.03      6.90       6.85   6.73   6.97   6.88   6.77   6.79

Table 6: Demographic characteristics of households’ expectations on inflation and unemployment rate.
Time-series averages, all values are annualized and in percent, time period 1981Q2–2015Q4. Actual : actual
average inflation and unemployment rate; SPF : average SPF forecast; all : average household forecast; 18-34
etc: age groups; W : West region; NC : North-Central; NE : North-East; S : South; bottom, 2nd Q, 3rd Q, top:
income quartiles; HS : high-school education; SC : some college; COL: college degree; GS : graduate studies.




                                                                      44
                                                              Prior                   Posterior
         Parameter                                         D (Mean,Std)            Mean (90% HPD)

         VAR coefficients
         ψy,ii                                                 B (0.7, 0.2)
         ψy,ij , i 6= j                                         N (0, 2)
         100ψw,ii                                              IG (1, 0.5)
         ψw,ij /ψw,jj , i 6= j                                  N (0, 2)
         ψyf,dY                                                 N (0, 1)           −0.39 (−0.61, −0.16)
         ψyf,u                                                  N (0, 1)             0.10 (0.01, 0.19)
         ψyf,π                                                  N (0, 1)            0.08 (−0.00, 0.16)
         ψyf,R                                                  N (0, 1)           −0.06 (−0.12, 0.00)

         Factor coefficients
         ρf                                                    B (0.5, 0.1)          0.80 (0.73, 0.88)
         100σf                                                 IG (0.5, 0.2)         0.47 (0.28, 0.63)
         Hu                                                      N (0, 1)            0.51 (0.09, 0.88)
         Hπ                                                      N (0, 1)            0.56 (0.20, 0.92)
         HR                                                      N (0, 1)           0.14 (−1.62, 1.94)
         Hf                                                      N (0, 1)          −0.72 (−1.18, −0.26)

         Measurement errors
         100σ∆,dY       GDP growth wedge                       IG (0.6, 0.3)             0.16 (0.14, 0.17)
         100σ∆,u        Unemployment wedge                     IG (0.8, 0.4)             0.33 (0.30, 0.37)
         100σ∆,π        Inflation wedge                        IG (0.4, 0.2)             0.19 (0.17, 0.21)

Table 7: Factor model prior and posterior estimates. The priors IG (µ, σ) and B (µ, σ) denote Inverse-
Gamma and Beta distributions with mean µ and standard deviation σ.




                                                                                                   meas.
            Variable                                   wdY       wu      wπ        wR       wf     error
            log (Yt /Yt−1 )      GDP growth            56.0     27.2     1.8       2.0     13.1         -
            ut                   Unemployment           5.4     31.0    18.3      24.3     21.0         -
            πt                   Inflation              3.3     17.2    70.0       5.5      4.0         -
            Rt                   Nominal interest       4.4     19.3    36.3      34.7      5.3         -
              (4)
            ∆t (dY)              GDP growth wedge          -        -         -      -     67.5     32.5
             (4)
            ∆t (u)               Unemployment wedge        -        -         -      -     23.2     76.8
             (4)
            ∆t (π)               Inflation wedge           -        -         -      -      9.7     90.3

    Table 8: Factor model variance decomposition at the posterior modes. All values are in percent.




                                                      45
E     Details on the New-Keynesian model

E.1    Alternating offer bargaining
As in Hall and Milgrom (2008) and Christiano et al. (2015), we assume that wages are determined by the
alternating offer bargaining protocol of Rubinstein (1982) and Binmore et al. (1986).
    At the start of period t, lt matches are determined. Each worker then engages in bilateral bargaining
with a wholesaler firm over the current wage rate ξt that is conditional on all other period t matches as well
as beliefs about future wage bargains.
    The bargaining takes place across τ subperiods within the period, where τ is even. Conditional on all
previous offers having been rejected, the firm makes a wage offer every odd subperiod, while the worker
makes a wage offer every even subperiod. The recipient can accept or reject an offer. If the recipient rejects
an offer, she can end negotiations or plan to make a counteroffer in the next subperiod. In the latter case,
the bargaining breaks down with probability δ. We assume that when indifferent between accepting and
rejecting an offer, an agent accepts it.
    Christiano et al. (2015) show that the solution to the bargaining problem yields the condition

                                    Jt = β1 (Wt − Ut ) − β2 γt + β3 (ϑt − Dt )

where βi = αi+1 /αi , with αi defined as follows:

                                                                       τ
                                              α1 = 1 − δ + (1 − δ)
                                                                  τ
                                              α2 = 1 − (1 − δ)
                                                     1−δ
                                              α3 = α2       − α1
                                                        δ
                                                   1 − δ α2
                                              α4 =          + 1 − α2 .
                                                   2−δ τ

E.2    Growth rate and functional forms
The model has two sources of growth — neutral and investment-specific technological progress. For a
balanced growth path in the nonstochastic steady state, we require that the elements {φt , st , κt , γt , Gt , Dt }
grow in the long run at the same rate
                                                      α
                                             Φt = Ψt1−α At

which corresponds to the stochastic aggregate growth rate of the economy. We thus set

                                                           ′                        ′
                                  (φt , st , κt , γt , Gt , Dt ) = (φ, s, κ, γ, G, D) Ωt

where Ωt is defined as
                                                  Ωt = Φ0.05 0.95
                                                        t−1 Ωt−1 .

The capacity utilization cost is set to
                                                                                           
                                           0.11      2                          0.11
                             au u K
                                  t       =      ϕ uK
                                                    t    + 0.89ϕuK
                                                                 t +ϕ                  −1
                                             2                                     2




                                                           46
where ϕ is chosen so that the steady state value of uK
                                                     t is one. Finally, investment adjustment costs are given
by                                                                                 
               It      1        √         It                         √         It
        aI           =    exp     15.7        − µ × µΨ     + exp − 15.7            − µ × µΨ     −1
              It−1     2                 It−1                                 It−1
where µ and µΨ denote the unconditional growth rates of Φt and Ψt respectively. The functional forms and
parameter values for Ωt , au and aI are taken from Christiano et al. (2015).


F      Detection error probabilities

Let {xt }Tt=1 be a sample of data simulated from the linear approximation of the benchmark model (10). The
log-likelihood of the data under the benchmark model is, up to an additive constant15

                                       T −1
                                     1X                         ′     ′ −1
                     log LTB   = −          (xt+1 − ψq − ψx xt ) (ψw ψw ) (xt+1 − ψq − ψx xt ) =
                                     2 t=0
                                       T −1
                                     1X ′
                               = −          w wt+1 .
                                     2 t=0 t+1

Under the worst-case model (12), the data follows

                         1 X                        ′                              
                           T −1
                                                           ′ −1
       log LTW   =     −          xt+1 − ψeq − ψex xt (ψw ψw )    xt+1 − ψeq − ψex xt
                         2 t=0
                           T −1                                  ′ ′                              ′ 
                         1X                                  −1                                     −1
                 =     −          wt+1 + θt Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw             wt+1 + θt Vx ψw + (1 − β) φw
                         2 t=0
                             T −1
                           1X ′
                 =     −          w
                                  e wet+1
                           2 t=0 t+1

where the second line follows from the distribution of wt+1 under the nonstationary version of the worst-case
model (51), and θt = θ (x̄ + xbt ). Simulating N samples from the law of motion for the benchmark model,
we compute the classification error pTB as the fraction of samples for which log LTW > log LTB , and revert the
role of the two models to compute pTW .


G      Robustness checks

In this appendix, we show the robustness of our findings for two alternative definitions of belief wedges:

    (i) Median: We construct the belief wedge for the inflation forecast using the median (instead of mean)
        responses in the Michigan Survey and SPF.

    (ii) Model-implied: We use the forecasts from the Michigan Survey and construct the wedges relative to
         the forecast implied by the model (VAR forecast for the factor model and the forecast generated by
         the structural model at the modal parameters, respectively).

We re-estimate both the factor model from Section 3 and the structural model from Section 5 using these
alternative definitions. For the model-implied specification, the observation equations for wedges are replaced
 15
    For notational simplicity, we assume that data xt is a subset of the observable variables that makes the law of
                                                     ′
motion (10) stochastically non-singular, so that ψw ψw is invertible.



                                                         47
with
                                      et ζt+τ = Et ζt+τ + ∆(τ ) + σ ∆ εt
                                      E                    t       t
                                                                                                    (τ )
where E et ζt+τ are the observed data on household forecasts, Et ζt+τ is the model-based forecast, ∆ is the
                                                                                                      t
implied belief wedge, and εt are the measurement errors.
    The results for the factor model are summarized in Tables 9 and 10 and the corresponding impulse
responses are in Figure 10. The estimation using median inflation forecasts yields essentially unchanged
results. The results for the estimation that computes belief wedges relative to model-implied forecasts show
qualitatively very similar responses but the relative magnitudes of the belief wedge responses are smaller for
the GDP growth and the unemployment rate. Table 10 reveals that the belief factor in the specification with
model-implied wedges is able to explain a large share of variation in the household forecasts (63%, 29% and
13%, respectively), but is significantly less successful in explaining the variation in the constructed wedges
(35%, 10% and 21%). This confirms our view that it is appropriate to construct belief wedges directly from
observable data on household and SPF forecasts, rather than relying on household forecast data relative to
model-implied forecasts.
    For the structural model, the estimation results and the variance decomposition are summarized in
Tables 11 and 12. The corresponding impulse responses are in Figure 11. These results corroborate those
from the robustness checks in the factor model and we see that the results are essentially unchanged across
the different ways of defining the wedges.
    In Figure 12, we plot the time-series paths for the belief wedges and the implied factor across the alter-
native measurement choices in the structural model. The model-implied wedges (dotted red) are constructed
using the smoothed shocks at the posterior modes. The last panel in Figure 12 plots the standardized time
series for the extracted factor in all the three cases. We see that the wedges are highly correlated and
the common component has very similar dynamics over the business cycle, confirming the results from the
baseline specification.




                                                     48
                   GDP growth                   unemployment                     inflation                     interest rate
                                      0.3                           0.4                                0
           0
                                      0.2                           0.2
                                                                                                    −0.2
        −0.4
                                      0.1                            0

        −0.8                           0                     −0.2                                −0.4
               1      10        20          1       10     20     1                10          20     1            10          20

           GDP growth wedge      unemp. wedge                                 inflation wedge                  belief factor
           0                0.15                                    0.3                              0.6

                                      0.1                           0.2                              0.4
       −0.25
                                     0.05                           0.1                              0.2

        −0.5                           0                             0                                 0
               1      10        20          1       10     20             1        10          20          1       10          20

Figure 10: Impulse response functions to the belief shock wf in the factor model. GDP growth, inflation
rate and interest rate in annualized percent, and unemployment rate in percentage points. The solid lines
use wedges defined as the difference in the mean responses of the household and professional forecasters, the
dashed lines use the wedges computed with the median household survey responses, and the dotted lines use
the wedges relative to the model-implied forecasts. Horizontal axis in quarters.



                        Parameter                                               base     med          mod

                        VAR coefficients
                        ψyf,dY                                                 −0.39    −0.41        −0.27
                        ψyf,u                                                   0.10     0.11         0.08
                        ψyf,π                                                   0.08     0.08         0.05
                        ψyf,R                                                  −0.06    −0.05        −0.02

                        Factor coefficients
                        ρf                                                      0.80     0.81         0.85
                        100σf                                                   0.47     0.56         0.51
                        Hu                                                      0.51    −0.46         0.80
                        Hπ                                                      0.14     0.53         0.29
                        HR                                                      0.56     0.22         1.03
                        Hf                                                     −0.72    −0.72        −1.68

                        Measurement errors
                        100σ∆,dY GDP growth wedge                                0.16        0.16      0.12
                        100σ∆,u  Unemployment wedge                              0.33        0.33      0.38
                        100σ∆,π  Inflation wedge                                 0.19        0.22      0.22

Table 9: Factor model parameters estimated using alternative measures of wedges. The column ‘base’ uses
wedges defined as the difference in the mean responses of the household and professional forecasters, the
column ‘med’ computes the wedges using the median household survey responses, and the column ‘mod’
computes the wedges relative to the model-implied forecasts.



                                                               49
 Variable                                           wdY                    wu                   wπ
                                            base    med      mod    base   med    mod    base   med    mod
 log (Yt /Yt−1 )      GDP growth            56.0    56.7     62.7   27.2   26.9   22.3    1.8    1.7    1.8
 ut                   Unemployment           5.4     5.3      4.0   31.0   30.5   23.9   18.3   18.6   17.3
 πt                   Inflation              3.3     3.1      3.5   17.2   16.7   17.7   70.0   70.8   62.9
 Rt                   Nominal interest       4.4     4.2      6.1   19.3   18.8   27.2   36.3   36.7   18.5
   (4)
 ∆t (dY)              GDP growth wedge          -        -      -      -      -      -      -      -      -
   (4)
 ∆t (u)               Unemp. wedge              -        -      -      -      -      -      -      -      -
  (4)
 ∆t (π)               Inflation wedge           -        -      -      -      -      -      -      -      -
 et log (Yt+4 /Yt )
 E                    GDP growth forecast       -        -    2.2      -      -    7.7      -      -    8.6
 et ut+4
 E                    Unemp. forecast           -        -    3.3      -      -   17.6      -      -   17.0
 et πt+4
 E                    Inflation forecast        -        -    4.2      -      -   20.4      -      -   36.9

 Variable                                           wR                     wf               meas. error
                                            base    med      mod    base   med    mod    base med mod
 log (Yt /Yt−1 )      GDP growth             2.0     1.9      1.6   13.1   12.8   11.6      -     -     -
 ut                   Unemployment          24.3    24.3     29.9   21.0   21.3   25.0      -     -     -
 πt                   Inflation              5.5     5.6      8.8    4.0    3.8    7.1      -     -     -
 Rt                   Nominal interest      34.7    34.6     32.1    5.3    5.7   16.0      -     -     -
   (4)
 ∆t (dY)              GDP growth wedge          -        -      -   67.5   67.0   35.1   32.5   33.0   64.9
  (4)
 ∆t (u)               Unemp. wedge              -        -      -   23.2   24.6   10.5   76.8   75.4   89.5
  (4)
 ∆t (π)               Inflation wedge           -        -      -    9.7    5.8   20.7   90.3   94.2   79.3
 et log (Yt+4 /Yt )
 E                    GDP growth forecast       -        -    7.8      -      -   63.2      -      -   10.6
 et ut+4
 E                    Unemp. forecast           -        -   29.4      -      -   29.0      -      -    3.6
 et πt+4
 E                    Inflation forecast        -        -   10.6      -      -   12.7      -      -   15.2

Table 10: Factor model variance decomposition using estimates from alternative measures of wedges. The
column ‘base’ uses wedges defined as the difference in the mean responses of the household and professional
forecasters, the column ‘med’ computes the wedges using the median household survey responses, and the
column ‘mod’ computes the wedges relative to the model-implied forecasts.




                                                    50
                   GDP growth                   unemployment                     inflation                     interest rate
           1                           1                            0.6                              0.3

           0                                                        0.4
                                      0.5                                                             0
                                                                    0.2
          −1
                                                                     0
          −2                           0                                                         −0.3
               1      10        20          1       10     20             1        10          20     1               10       20

           GDP growth wedge      unemp. wedge                                 inflation wedge                   ambiguity
           0                0.06                                    0.2                             0.02


       −0.15                         0.03                           0.1                             0.01


        −0.3                           0                             0                                0
               1      10        20          1       10     20             1        10          20          1          10       20

Figure 11: Impulse response functions to the ambiguity shock wf in the structural model. GDP growth,
inflation rate and interest rate in annualized percent, and unemployment rate in percentage points. The solid
lines use wedges defined as the difference in the mean responses of the household and professional forecasters,
the dashed lines use the wedges computed with the median household survey responses, and the dotted lines
use the wedges relative to the model-implied forecasts. Horizontal axis in quarters.



                     Parameter                                                        base      med            mod

                     Monetary policy rule
                     ρR       Smoothing                                                 0.79    0.79           0.72
                     rπ       Inflation                                                 1.67    1.68           1.50
                     ry       Output                                                    0.03    0.03           0.03

                     Shock processes
                     ρf       AR(1) ambiguity                                           0.87    0.86           0.86
                     σf       Std. dev. ambiguity shock                                 0.02    0.02           0.02
                     100σA    Std. dev. neutral tech. shock                             0.86    0.86           0.86
                     ρΨ       AR(1) invest. tech.                                       0.29    0.29           0.25
                     100σΨ    Std. dev. invest. tech. shock                             2.88    2.97           2.72
                     100σR    Std. dev. monetary policy shock                           0.24    0.24           0.26

                     Measurement errors
                     100σ∆,dY GDP growth wedge                                          0.40    0.40           0.55
                     100σ∆,u  Unemployment wedge                                        0.17    0.17           0.29
                     100σ∆,π  Inflation wedge                                           0.29    0.29           0.41

Table 11: Structural model parameters estimated using alternative measures of wedges. The column ‘base’
uses wedges defined as the difference in the mean responses of the household and professional forecasters,
the column ‘med’ computes the wedges using the median household survey responses, and the column ‘mod’
computes the wedges relative to the model-implied forecasts.



                                                               51
 Variable                                          wA                     wΨ                   wR
                                            base   med      mod    base   med    mod    base   med    mod
 log (Yt /Yt−1 )      GDP growth            38.4   37.9     43.2   36.1   37.7   31.2    0.8    0.9    0.6
 ut                   Unemployment          41.1   40.2     46.2   45.0   47.1   39.6    0.4    0.4    0.2
 πt                   Inflation             53.2   52.1     52.4   44.1   45.6   45.6    0.1    0.1    0.1
 Rt                   Nominal interest      46.7   45.9     47.3   46.0   47.2   46.2    5.5    5.8    5.5
 ct − log Φt          Consumption           58.0   61.9     70.7    6.0    6.8   4.7     0.3    0.3    0.2
 it − log (Φt Ψt )    Investment            70.2   72.1     81.4   21.7   23.7   18.3    0.3    0.4    0.2
 ηt                   Hiring rate           38.2   38.0     42.9   38.9   40.4   33.8    1.1    1.1    0.9
 Vt − log Φt          Continuation value    67.3   68.7     74.0    6.9    7.6   5.0     0.2    0.2    0.1
   (4)
 ∆t (dY)              GDP growth wedge         -        -      -      -      -    -        -      -      -
   (4)
 ∆t (u)               Unemp. wedge             -        -      -      -      -    -        -      -      -
  (4)
 ∆t (π)               Inflation wedge          -        -      -      -      -    -        -      -      -
 et log (Yt+1 /Yt )
 E                    GDP growth forecast      -        -   28.8      -      -   37.8      -      -    0.2
 et ut+4
 E                    Unemp. forecast          -        -   46.3      -      -   39.6      -      -    0.2
 et πt+4
 E                    Inflation forecast       -        -   57.3      -      -   32.5      -      -    0.1

 Variable                                          wf                 meas. error
                                            base   med      mod    base med mod
 log (Yt /Yt−1 )      GDP growth            24.8   23.5     25.0      -     -     -
 ut                   Unemployment          13.6   12.2     14.0      -     -     -
 πt                   Inflation              2.6    2.1      1.9      -     -     -
 Rt                   Nominal interest       1.9    1.2      1.0      -     -     -
 ct − log Φt          Consumption           35.7   31.0     24.5      -     -     -
 it − log (Φt Ψt )    Investment             7.8    3.8      0.1      -     -     -
 ηt                   Hiring rate           21.8   20.6     22.4      -     -     -
 Vt − log Φt          Continuation value    25.6   23.5     20.9      -     -     -
   (4)
 ∆t (dY)              GDP growth wedge      16.4   15.1      6.9   83.6   84.9   93.1
  (4)
 ∆t (u)               Unemp. wedge           6.3    5.3      2.5   93.7   94.7   97.5
  (4)
 ∆t (π)               Inflation wedge       22.0   19.9      9.1   78.0   80.1   90.9
 et log (Yt+4 /Yt )
 E                    GDP growth forecast      -      -     11.4      -      -   21.9
 et ut+4
 E                    Unemp. forecast          -      -     13.2      -      -    0.7
 et πt+4
 E                    Inflation forecast       -      -      1.6      -      -    8.5

Table 12: Structural model variance decomposition using estimates from alternative measures of wedges.
The column ‘base’ uses wedges defined as the difference in the mean responses of the household and profes-
sional forecasters, the column ‘med’ computes the wedges using the median household survey responses, and
the column ‘mod’ computes the wedges relative to the model-implied forecasts.




                                                   52
                                  4
                                       baseline   median   model-implied
            GDP growth wedge

                                  2

                                  0

                                 −2

                                 −4
                                       1985        1990       1995         2000   2005   2010           2015

                                  2
            unemployment wedge




                                  1

                                  0

                                 −1

                                 −2
                                       1985        1990       1995         2000   2005   2010           2015

                                  4
            inflation wedge




                                  2

                                  0

                                 −2

                                 −4
                                       1985        1990       1995         2000   2005   2010           2015

                                  3
ambiguity factor




                                 1.5

                                  0

                           −1.5

                                 −3
                                       1985        1990       1995         2000   2005   2010           2015

Figure 12: Comparison across structural model specifications with alternative measures of belief wedges.
The first three panels are the smoothed time-series for the GDP growth wedge, unemployment wedge and
inflation wedge. All wedges are annualized and demeaned. The last panel is the smoothed time-series for
the standardized factor. In all panels, the ‘baseline’ specification uses wedges defined as the difference in
the mean responses of the household and professional forecasters, ‘median’ computes the wedges using the
median household survey responses, and ‘model-implied’ computes the wedges relative to the model-implied
forecasts.


                                                                     53
References
Adam, Klaus and Michael Woodford. 2012. Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy in a Microfounded
  New Keynesian Model. Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (5):468–487.

Anderson, Evan W., Lars Peter Hansen, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2003. A Quartet of Semigroups for
  Model Specification, Robustness, Prices of Risk, and Model Detection. Journal of the European
  Economic Association 1 (1):68–123.

Ang, Andrew and Monika Piazzesi. 2003. A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Struc-
  ture Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables. Journal of Monetary Economics
  50 (4):745–787.

Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei. 2007. Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or Surveys
  Forecasts Inflation Better? Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (4):1163–1212.

Bachmann, Rüdiger, Steffen Elstner, and Eric R. Sims. 2012. Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
  Evidence from Business Survey Data. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (2):217–
  249.

Barillas, Francisco, Lars Peter Hansen, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2009. Doubts or Variability?
  Journal of Economic Theory 144 (6):2388–2418.

Barsky, Robert B. and Eric R. Sims. 2012. Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of
  Innovations in Consumer Confidence. American Economic Review 102 (4):1343–1377.

Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier. 2004. An Exploration into Pigou’s Theory of Cycles. Journal
  of Monetary Economics 51 (6):1183–1216.

Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz. 2005. Measuring the Effects of Monetary Pol-
  icy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 120 (1):387–422.

Bhandari, Anmol. 2015. Doubts, Asymmetries, and Insurance. Job market paper.

Bianchi, Francesco, Cosmin Ilut, and Martin Schneider. 2014. Uncertainty Shocks, Asset Supply
  and Pricing over the Business Cycle.

Bidder, Rhys and Matthew E. Smith. 2012. Robust Animal Spirits. Journal of Monetary Economics
  59 (8):738–750.

Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky. 1986. The Nash Bargaining Solution in
  Economic Modelling. RAND Journal of Economics 17 (2):176–188.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Charles M. Kahn. 1980. The Solution of Linear Difference Models
  under Rational Expectations. Econometrica 48 (5):1305–1312.

                                              54
Borovička, Jaroslav and Lars Peter Hansen. 2013. Robust Preference Expansions.

———. 2014. Examining Macroeconomic Models through the Lens of Asset Pricing. Journal of
  Econometrics 183 (1):67–90.

Cagetti, Marco, Lars Peter Hansen, Thomas J. Sargent, and Noah Williams. 2002. Robustness and
  Pricing with Uncertain Growth. The Review of Financial Studies 15 (2):363–404.

Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework. Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics 12 (3):383–398.

Capistrán, Carlos and Allan Timmermann. 2009. Disagreement and Biases in Inflation Expecta-
  tions. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41 (2–3):365–396.

Carlson, John A. and Michael Parkin. 1975. Inflation Expectations. Economica 42 (166):123–138.

Carroll, Christopher D. 2003. Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Fore-
  casters. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1):269–298.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2015. Unemployment and
  Business Cycles. Forthcoming in Econometrica.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Infor-
  mation Rigidities? Journal of Political Economy 120 (1):116–159.

———. 2015. Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All? Inflation Expectations and the
  Missing Disinflation. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1):197–232.

Croushore, Dean. 2010. An Evaluation of Inflation Forecasts from Surveys Using Real-Time Data.
  B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 10 (1).

Elliott, Graham, Ivana Komunjer, and Allan Timmermann. 2008. Biases in Macroeconomic Fore-
  casts: Irrationality or Asymmetric Loss?      Journal of the European Economic Association
  6 (1):122–157.

Epstein, Larry G. and Martin Schneider. 2003. Recursive Mutiple-Priors. Journal of Economic
  Theory 113 (1):1–31.

———. 2007. Learning under Ambiguity. Review of Economic Studies 74 (4):1275–1303.

———. 2010. Ambiguity and Asset Markets. Annual Review of Financial Economics 2 (1):315–346.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin. 1989. Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior
  of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework. Econometrica 57 (4):937–969.

Faust, Jon and Jonathan H. Wright. 2013. Forecasting Inflation. In Handbook of Economic Fore-
  casting: Volume 2A, chap. 1, 3–56. Elsevier B.V.

                                               55
Gilboa, Itzhak and David Schmeidler. 1989. Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-Unique Prior.
  Journal of Mathematical Economics 18 (2):141–153.

Hall, Robert E. 2015. High Discounts and High Unemployment. Stanford University.

Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom. 2008. The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage
  Bargain. American Economic Review 98 (4):1653–1674.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent. 2001a. Acknowledging Misspecification in Macroeco-
  nomic Theory. Review of Economic Dynamics 4 (3):519–535.

———. 2001b. Robust Control and Model Uncertainty. The American Economic Review 91 (2):60–
  66.

———. 2007. Recursive Robust Estimation and Control without Commitment. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory 136 (1):1–27.

———. 2010. Fragile Beliefs and the Price of Uncertainty. Quantitative Economics 1 (1):129–162.

———. 2011. Wanting Robustness in Macroeconomics. In Handbook of Monetary Economics,
  Volume 3B, chap. 20, 1097–1157. Elsevier B.V.

———. 2012. Three Types of Ambiguity. Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (5):422–445.

———. 2015. Sets of Models and Prices of Uncertainty. Working paper, University of Chicago and
  New York University.

Holmes, Mark H. 1995. Introduction to Perturbation Methods. Springer.

Ilut, Cosmin and Martin Schneider. 2014. Ambiguous Business Cycles. American Economic Review
   104 (8):2368–2399.

Ju, Nengjiu and Jianjun Miao. 2012. Ambiguity, Learning, and Asset Returns. Econometrica
  80 (2):559–591.

Jurado, Kyle. 2015. Advance Information and Distorted Beliefs in Macroeconomics and Financial
  Fluctuations. Job market paper.

Karantounias, Anastasios G. 2013. Managing Pessimistic Expectations and Fiscal Policy. Theoret-
  ical Economics 8 (1):193–231.

Klibanoff, Peter, Massimo Marinacci, and Sujoy Mukerji. 2005. A Smooth Model of Decision
  Making under Ambiguity. Econometrica 73 (6):1849–1892.

———. 2009. Recursive Smooth Ambiguity Preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 144 (3):930–
  976.



                                              56
Kwon, Hyosung and Jianjun Miao. 2013. Three Types of Robust Ramsey Problems in a Linear-
  Quadratic Framework. October.

Lombardo, Giovanni. 2010. On Approximating DSGE Models by Series Expansions. ECB Working
  paper No. 1264.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. 2003. Disagreement about Inflation Ex-
  pectations. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 18:209–248.

Orlik, Anna and Ignacio Presno. 2013. On Credible Monetary Policies with Model Uncertainty.

Piazzesi, Monika, Juliana Salomao, and Martin Schneider. 2015. Trend and Cycle in Bond Premia.

Pigou, Arthur C. 1927. Industrial Fluctuations. MacMillan, London.

Ravenna, Federico and Carl E. Walsh. 2008. Vacancies, Unemployment, and the Phillips Curve.
  European Economic Review 52 (8):1494–1521.

Reis, Ricardo. 2009. Optimal Monetary Policy Rules in an Estimated Sticky. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (2):1–28.

Rubinstein, Ariel. 1982. Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model. Econometrica 50 (1):97–109.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martı́n Uribe. 2004. Solving Dynamic General Equilibrium Models
  Using a Second-Order Approximation to the Policy Function. Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control 28 (4):755–775.

Sims, Christopher A. 2002. Solving Rational Expectations Models. Computational Economics
  20 (1–2):1–20.

Strzalecki, Tomasz. 2011.    Axiomatic Foundations of Multiplier Preferences.     Econometrica
  79 (1):47–73.

Thomas, Jr., Lloyd B. 1999. Survey Measures of Expected U.S. Inflation. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 13 (4):125–144.




                                              57
