                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              PARENTAL RESPONSES TO CHILD SUPPORT OBLIGATIONS:
                    EVIDENCE FROM ADMINISTRATIVE DATA

                                       Maya Rossin-Slater
                                         Miriam Wüst

                                      Working Paper 22227
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22227


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2016




We thank Paul Bingley, Marianne Bitler, Janet Currie, Olivier Deschenes, Mette Gortz, Nabanita
Datta Gupta, Hilary Hoynes, Peter Kuhn, Ilyana Kuziemko, Shelly Lundberg, Mai Heide Ottosen,
Petra Persson, and Heather Royer, as well as seminar participants at UC Santa Barbara, the
University of Copenhagen, Stanford University, UC Riverside, the Norwegian School of
Economics (NHH), Boston University, University of Chicago-Harris School, RAND, the Public
Policy Institute of California, the SFI annual conference, the ESPE annual conference, the
University of Wisconsin IRP Summer Research Workshop, the NBER Summer Institute
Children's Meeting, the EALE conference, the All-California Labor Economics Conference, and
the AEA meetings for their helpful comments. Rossin-Slater thanks the Danish National Centre
for Social Research (SFI) for a research fellow appointment that allows access to the data, and
gratefully acknowledges funding from the Regents Junior Faculty Fellowship at UC Santa
Barbara. Wust gratefully acknowledges financial support for the research of this paper from the
Danish Council for Independent Research (grant 11-116669). All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Maya Rossin-Slater and Miriam Wüst. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Parental Responses to Child Support Obligations: Evidence from Administrative Data
Maya Rossin-Slater and Miriam Wüst
NBER Working Paper No. 22227
May 2016
JEL No. H40,I30,J12,J13,J16

                                          ABSTRACT

We leverage non-linearities in Danish child support guidelines and rich administrative data to
provide causal estimates of parental behavioral responses to child support obligations. We
estimate that a 1,000 DKK ($149) increase in a father's obligation is associated with a 506 DKK
($75) increase in his payment. A higher obligation also reduces father-child co-residence,
pointing to substitution between financial and non-pecuniary investments. Further, obligations
increase parental post-separation fertility, and reduce labor supply among high-income fathers.
Our findings suggest that government efforts to increase child investments through mandates on
parents can be complicated by their behavioral responses to them.


Maya Rossin-Slater
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
maya.rossin-slater@ucsb.edu

Miriam Wüst
The Danish National Center for Social Research
Herluf Trolles Gade 11
1052 Copenhagen
miw@sfi.dk
1    Introduction

Most modern governments engage in redistributive policies, whereby income is transferred from
individuals who are taxed to individuals who receive benefits. The implicit “donors” and “recipi-
ents” under these policies usually do not have any direct connection, and a large body of research
has examined the behavioral responses of these two groups separately. For instance, the literature
on the elasticity of taxable income examines the behavior of donors, while studies on fertility and
labor supply effects of welfare programs focus on the actions of the recipients.1
    As a result of the sharp increase in the proportion of children growing up in single-parent
households, a different type of redistributive policy has evolved in the last several decades. In
the hopes of improving these children’s financial circumstances and shifting the burden of their
support away from traditional welfare programs, governments mandate child support payments
from non-custodial parents to the custodial parents and their children.2 Under this redistributive
policy, the donors (typically, fathers) have a clear connection to the recipients (typically, mothers
and children). Thus, its impacts depend on both the recipients’ and the donors’ preferences and
constraints, as well as their interactions with one another.
    In this paper, we apply a novel identification strategy to rich administrative data from Denmark
to estimate the causal effects of child support obligations on a wide range of parental behaviors,
thus studying responses among both donors and recipients. Our empirical analysis is motivated
by existing theoretical models that highlight the intertwined nature of parental incentives and the
complexity of their potential responses to child support obligations (see, e.g.: Weiss and Willis,
1985; Willis, 1999; Flinn, 2000). These models demonstrate that child support obligations do not
resolve the underlying collective-goods problem among separated parents, as custodial parents have
full allocative power over how to spend the non-custodial parents’ payments. As a consequence,
non-custodial parents may view their obligations as taxes, which may not always benefit their
children. Moreover, when the child support obligation is linked to the custody arrangement (e.g., if
    1
      For surveys of research on the elasticity of taxable income, see Gruber and Saez, 2002; Saez et al., 2012; Piketty
and Saez, 2013. For surveys of research on behavioral responses to welfare programs see Hoynes, 1997; Moffitt, 1998;
Schoeni and Blank, 2000; Moffitt, 2002.
    2
      In the U.S., 9 percent of children under age 18 lived with only one biological parent in the household in 1960, while
over 26 percent do today. Many Western European countries have similar rates—for example, about 22 percent of
British children, 18 percent of Danish children, and 15 percent of German children live with only one parent. Children
in single-mother households are disproportionately low-income. In the U.S., children in single-mother households are
twice as likely to live in poverty relative to the average child. In Denmark (the setting for this paper), children in
single-mother households are three times more likely to live in poverty relative to the average child. Data for U.S.
are from the 1960 Decennial Census and the 2013 Current Population Survey. Data for the European countries are
from EU Community Statistics on Income and Living Conditions, 2007. For more information on child poverty rates
in Europe, see: http://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/rc10_eng.pdf.



                                                            1
the obligation is different depending on whether the parents share custody), it may affect parental
decisions about child custody, as well as other voluntary and non-pecuniary investments and contact
with children. These decisions may in turn have downstream effects on other parental behaviors,
including family formation with new partners and labor market activities.
    The existing evidence on the causal effects of child support obligations is limited. Researchers
are faced with two main challenges. First, child support obligations are not randomly assigned,
making it difficult to disentangle their causal effects from the possible influences of other (unobserv-
able) differences between families. Second, researchers face a substantial data constraint, especially
in the United States, where most of the existing work has been set (see Garfinkel et al., 1998;
Del Boca, 2003; Lerman and Sorenson, 2003; Pirog and Ziol-Guest, 2006; Cancian et al., 2011;
Huang and Han, 2012 for some surveys). Most U.S. data sets contain information on individuals
in a given household, making it impossible to link children to their non-custodial parents. Addi-
tionally, much of the existing literature uses survey data with self-reported income measures, which
may be missing or inaccurate for a significant fraction of respondents (Weinberg, 2006). Since child
support obligations are largely determined by parental income, it is difficult to match non-custodial
parents to their obligations. To our knowledge, no existing studies have exploited variation in child
support obligations across individuals with different incomes.
    This paper addresses the first challenge by using quasi-exogenous variation stemming from non-
linearities in and yearly changes to the child support formula in Denmark, where obligations are
set according to an annually updated step function of the non-custodial parent’s income.
    We address the second challenge by taking advantage of administrative data on the universe
of Danish children linked to their parents regardless of their residence status and with precise
information on parental income. We are thus able to comprehensively analyze the effects of child
support obligations on fathers’ payments to children, fathers’ likelihood of co-residence with their
children, as well as both parents’ post-separation family formation and labor market behavior.3
    Our estimation strategy is analogous to the simulated instrumental variables (IV) approach in
Dahl and Lochner (2012) and Chetty et al. (2011), who use expansions in the U.S. Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC) benefits—which have differentially impacted families with different incomes and
numbers of children—to identify the causal effects of family income on child outcomes.4 In our
    3
      Our analysis focuses on studying the effects of fathers’ child support obligations because they are much more
likely than mothers to become the non-custodial parents in case of separation. According to Statistics Denmark, in
2010, about 26 percent of children lived with only one biological parent (and potentially their new partners). Out
of them, 23 percent lived with only their mothers, while 3 percent lived with only their fathers. While we observe
information on whether the father lives with his child post-separation, we purposely do not drop these fathers since
we show that residence with the child is an outcome that can be affected by the child support obligation.
    4
      For two other recent examples of the simulated IV approach, see: (i) Milligan and Stabile (2011), who analyze


                                                         2
setting, we exploit the structure of the Danish child support formula—which differentially impacts
the obligations of fathers with different incomes, numbers of children, and years of separation—to
analyze the effects of child support obligations.
    Specifically, we use a father’s predicted average child support obligation to instrument for his
actual obligation over all post-separation years. This predicted obligation is calculated using solely
the father’s income and number of children measured in the year of separation; it does not take
into account any changes to the father’s income or number of children after separation, which may
reflect endogenous responses.
    Since the predicted average obligation is a direct function of each father’s separation year, in-
come in that year, and his number of children in that year, all of our specifications include flexible
control functions with the main effects and double interactions of these three variables (following
similar models in Dahl and Lochner, 2012; Chetty et al., 2011; Gruber and Saez, 2002, among
others). Causal identification therefore relies on an assumption that—conditional on the father’s
separation year, income, and number of children in that year—the remaining (formula-driven)
variation in predicted child support obligations is orthogonal to other determinants of parental
behaviors. In support of this assumption, we: (i) provide evidence that the variation in predicted
obligations is uncorrelated with numerous parental characteristics that are not used in setting them
(such as each parent’s education, each parent’s age, and maternal income), (ii) show that the pre-
dicted obligations do not impact selection into divorce, separation, or out-of-wedlock/cohabitation
childbearing in the first place, (iii) show that our results are robust to different ways of predict-
ing average obligations, including using the father’s income in the year before separation, and (iv)
demonstrate that predicted obligations are uncorrelated with fathers’ pre-separation labor supply
behavior.
    Our empirical results point to important parental behavioral responses to child support obliga-
tions. First, we show that child support obligations are moderately effective at increasing financial
transfers from non-custodial fathers to children. Among the divorced and separated parents in
our sample, a 1, 000DKK ($149) increase in a father’s average annual child support obligation is
associated with a 506DKK ($75) increase in his average annual payment.
    Next, we examine how the child support obligation affects the likelihood that a father ever
resides with his child post-separation. In Denmark, parents who share equally in physical custody
the effects of Canadian tax benefits on child outcomes, and (ii) Brown et al. (2014), who study the long-term effects
of Medicaid coverage on adult outcomes. This method is also motivated by the earlier work of Currie and Gruber
(1996), who analyze the effects of Medicaid on infant health. Finally, the idea of using non-linearities in benefit or
tax schedules to separately identify them from effects of income goes back to an older literature on tax evasion and
tax prices (Slemrod, 1985; Feenberg, 1987).


                                                          3
are not mandated to make child support payments; hence, a higher obligation may increase the
incentive for the father to live with his child at least part of the time so to avoid making a larger
payment. However, mothers, who have substantial say in custody decisions, have the opposite
incentive to refuse to share custody and instead receive the higher payment. Moreover, fathers may
treat financial transfers as substitutes for other forms of non-pecuniary investments and contact
with children, which would also lead to a negative relationship between child support obligations
and father-child co-residence. We find that these latter forces dominate in our data—an additional
1, 000DKK in a father’s average annual obligation leads to a 2 percent reduction in the likelihood
that he resides with his child in at least one year post-separation.
   We also analyze parental fertility responses. We find that a 1, 000DKK increase in the father’s
average annual child support obligation leads to a 3.3 percent increase in the likelihood that the
mother has an additional child post-separation, consistent with similar evidence on child support
and fertility from the U.S. (Kim et al., 2015), and with a positive income-fertility relationship in
other studies analyzing child tax and welfare benefits in Western Europe and Canada (Laroque and
Salanié, 2008; Brewer et al., 2012; Milligan, 2005).
   Fathers face unique fertility incentives in our context. First, our result on father-child co-
residence suggests that an increase in the father’s obligation may lead to less attachment to his
existing children and more time available to invest in new offspring. Second, due to non-linearities
in the child support guidelines and the fact that the per-child obligation is set according to the
father’s total number of children (including those born within subsequent unions) but only applies
to his non-custodial children, some fathers can reduce their obligations by having more children
within unions with new partners. We find evidence consistent with these positive fertility incentives:
a 1, 000DKK increase in a father’s average annual obligation increases his likelihood of having a
subsequent child by 3.7 percent. This effect is driven by fathers having children while married to
or cohabiting with new partners, and by fathers who do not reside with their older children.
   Finally, we find that fathers change their labor market behavior in response to child support
obligations, while mothers do not. Overall, a 1, 000DKK increase in a father’s average annual child
support obligation reduces his labor force participation by 0.2 percent. This average treatment effect
masks important heterogeneity, however. Fathers with separation year incomes in the lowest income
range, who must all pay the same lump-sum base amount, actually increase their labor supply. In
contrast, fathers with separation year incomes in higher ranges—who must make supplemental
payments and thus face a competing incentive to reduce their earnings—are the ones driving the
decline in labor force participation. This labor supply decline reflects transitions into disability


                                                  4
insurance and discretionary early retirement programs. As such, we provide additional support for
the relationship between the relative value of labor market participation and the take-up of these
programs, which has been previously documented both in Scandinavia (Bratsberg et al., 2010;
Bingley et al., 2011) and in the U.S. (Black et al., 2002; Autor and Duggan, 2003).
    Our findings suggest that government interventions into families with divorced and unmarried
parents result in important parental behavioral changes that can distort their intended impacts
on child investment levels, public spending, and overall child well-being. While fathers respond to
child support obligations with increased financial transfers to their children, they also reduce their
contact with them. Moreover, the increases in both parents’ subsequent fertility rates point to
possible reductions in the allocation of resources toward the existing children whom child support
guidelines are meant to help. Finally, the decreases in paternal labor supply among higher-income
fathers demonstrate the market distortions generated by the “tax-like” nature of child support
mandates. Our results suggest that although child support mandates may shift some of the cost of
single-mother household support from welfare programs to the non-custodial fathers, they also pass
part of this cost on to other government programs such as disability insurance and early retirement.
In sum, our results highlight the role of parental agency in family resource allocation, and suggest
that government efforts to increase child investment levels through mandates on parents can be
complicated by their behavioral responses to them.
    The rest of the paper unfolds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the Danish child support
system, which is crucial for understanding our identification strategy. Section 3 outlines a set
of hypotheses (with a more formal model presented in Appendix B) to highlight the channels
through which fathers’ child support obligations could affect parental behaviors, and summarizes
the existing evidence on child support. Section 4 describes our data, while Section 5 presents our
empirical strategy. Section 6 presents our results and a variety of robustness tests, and Section 7
concludes.


2   The Danish Child Support System

In Denmark, a central government body called the State Administration (Statsforvaltningen) han-
dles all issues related to divorce, separation, and child support. Parents who have sole physical
custody of their children can request a formal child support agreement from this agency, which
then assigns child support obligations to the non-custodial parents. As noted above, throughout
this paper, we focus on the effects of non-custodial fathers’ child support obligations; thus, from
here on, we refer to the father as the default non-custodial parent.

                                                  5
    Child support obligations are determined according to a formula that is a step function of the
father’s current gross income; this step function changes every year and varies with the father’s
number of biological children under age 18, including any new children from subsequent unions.
For example, a father with one non-custodial child and one child from a new union is treated as a
two-child parent (although he only has to make payments for the non-custodial child).
    The per-child obligation consists of a “normal amount” and an “extra amount,” the sum of which
all non-custodial fathers must pay. Non-custodial fathers with incomes above certain thresholds
must also pay an additional percentage of the normal amount that ranges between 25 and 300
percent. The locations of the thresholds are increasing with the number of children. Moreover,
in every year, the State Administration has increased both the normal and extra amounts above
the rate of inflation, and has changed the locations of the thresholds. According to the State
Administration, the changes in the child support formula over time are meant to follow average
wage development in Denmark. However, during most years in our analysis sample, the nominal
growth rate in child support obligations has been above the growth rate in average income among
fathers. Appendix Figure A1 shows that the annual growth rate in the nominal normal amount
was higher than the growth rate in paternal nominal average income in all years during 2000-2008
except 2005 and 2007. Appendix Table A1 depicts the child support scheme for three of our analysis
years: 1999, 2005, and 2008.5
    The non-custodial father must start child support payments in the year when he no longer lives
with his children (i.e., married parents who separate do not need to wait until they are divorced). He
is required to make monthly payments directly to the custodial mother. In case of non-compliance,
the State Administration can issue reminders, and the tax authorities can withhold non-custodial
fathers’ tax benefits and refunds, as well as seize their assets.6
    The structure of the child support formula leads to non-linear variation in the child support
obligations faced by non-custodial fathers depending on their incomes, their numbers of children,
and the year: 1) in the same year, non-custodial fathers face different obligations depending on their
incomes and numbers of children, 2) at the same amount of real income, non-custodial fathers face
different obligations depending on the year and number of children, and 3) non-custodial fathers
with the same number of children face different obligations depending on their incomes and the
   5
     Information on annual child support guidelines comes from the State Administration. For more information,
please see http://www.statsforvaltningen.dk/site.aspx?p=6404.
   6
     Only non-custodial fathers who are on social assistance and under a formal agreement have child support payments
automatically deducted from their benefits and transferred to the mothers by the municipality government. As
described in Section 4, our analysis sample consists of relatively higher-income fathers who are very unlikely to
qualify for social assistance.



                                                         6
year. This variation is displayed in the top panel of Figure 1, which plots the annual child support
obligations in real year 2000 DKK for parents with one and two children in sub-figures (a) and (b),
respectively.7
       The State Administration’s child support formula applies to all previously married, previously
cohabiting, and never-married/non-cohabiting parents in the same way.8 However, while most
parents seek government intervention in determining child support payments, not all do. According
to the best data available on the formal agreement rate, 75 percent of divorced and separated parents
had a formal child support agreement in 2006.9 The rest of the parents either equally share physical
custody or make informal agreements.
       Parents who equally share physical custody of their children do not face child support obliga-
tions at all. Parents who opt for an informal agreement do not face enforced mandates from the
government on payment amounts. However, the annually updated child support formula—which is
posted both on the Internet and at the State Administration office—may serve as a guide for their
voluntary payments. Custodial mothers can always seek a formal agreement if the non-custodial
fathers’ voluntary payments do not match the suggested amounts stated in the guidelines. Further-
more, non-custodial fathers have strong incentives to make payments: most of the child support
paid up to the amount specified by the guidelines, regardless of whether it is paid under a formal
agreement or is voluntary, is tax-deductible.10
       In sum, while these factors encourage non-custodial fathers to follow the State Administration’s
guidelines, it is clear that the formula forms the basis for a majority—but not all—of the divorced
and separated fathers’ child support payments. However, since we cannot identify formal agree-
ments and observe physical custody arrangements imperfectly in our data, our empirical analysis
identifies the effects of government-mandated formal child support obligations on all divorced and
separated parents. We discuss this issue further in Sections 4 and 5.
   7
      In Appendix Figure A2, we display the father’s separation year income in percentiles rather than levels (based
on the income distribution in our entire sample of fathers). The figure shows that the first threshold in the formula
occurs around the 60th-70th income percentile, depending on the year and the number of children.
    8
      The only distinction is that among previously married couples, paternity of the ex-husband of the mother is pre-
sumed and does not need to be established. Among previously cohabiting or never-married/non-cohabiting parents,
the parents can either sign a “Declaration of Care and Responsibility” form if they wish to share custody, or the
father can sign an “Acknowledgement of Paternity” form if the parents do not want to share custody. If neither form
is signed, then the mother is required to designate a father on the child’s birth certificate, and a DNA test is ordered
to confirm paternity. Almost all children have a legal father, who is obligated to make child support payments. See
http://www.york.ac.uk/inst/spru/research/childsupport/denmark.pdf and Skinner et al. (2007) for more details.
    9
      See http://www.york.ac.uk/inst/spru/research/childsupport/denmark.pdf and Skinner et al. (2007) for more
details.
   10
      The extra amount is not tax-deductible. The extra amount was introduced in 2000 and has varied from 1, 224DKK
($182) to 1, 270DKK ($189) per child per year during our analysis time frame. The value of the tax deduction for
the normal amount results in a compensation for around one third of the payment.



                                                           7
3     Hypotheses and Existing Evidence

3.1     How Might Child Support Obligations Affect Parental Behaviors?

This section describes the channels through which non-custodial fathers’ child support obligations
could affect parental behaviors after separation.11 We present a more formal theoretical framework
in Appendix B, drawing on several existing models of interaction within non-intact families (e.g.,
Weiss and Willis, 1985; Del Boca and Flinn, 1995; Willis, 1999; Flinn, 2000; Del Boca and Ribero,
2003; Roff and Lugo-Gil, 2012).
      The thought experiment behind our empirical analysis is to ask: What is the effect of a
1, 000DKK increase in a father’s child support obligation, holding all else equal? We begin our
analysis by studying child support payments. A father who always perfectly complies with his
obligations will increase his payment one-for-one (i.e., by 1, 000DKK exactly). However, a father
who would have made a supplemental voluntary payment if the obligation were lower may just
substitute the formal payment for his voluntary transfer, implying a less than one-for-one increase
in the payment. Additionally, a father may respond to the increase in the obligation by adjust-
ing other post-separation behaviors (as discussed next). These behavioral responses will in turn
affect his subsequent obligations (and, therefore, his payments), also leading to a less than perfect
correlation between obligations and payments.
      Next, we ask whether increasing the child support obligation affects father-child contact. Our
administrative data contain only one measure of contact—we observe whether fathers live with
their children for at least some time post-separation. The predicted impact of increased obligations
on father-child co-residence is theoretically ambiguous: On the one hand, since fathers who share
in physical custody are not required to pay any child support, a higher obligation may incentivize
father-child co-residence. On the other hand, the mother—as the potential recipient of the higher
obligation—has the opposite incentive to refuse to allow father-child co-residence.12 Furthermore,
   11
      Child support obligations, which, in theory, make separation and family formation more costly for non-custodial
fathers and increase custodial mothers’ bargaining power, may also influence the rates of divorce and separation
among parents who are still together, as well as the rates of childbearing outside marriage and cohabitation among
men and women who are not yet parents (Brown and Flinn, 2011). Other policies, such as unilateral divorce laws and
joint custody reforms, which aim to affect the outcomes of families with divorced and unmarried parents, have been
shown to also impact divorce and marriage rates (Stevenson and Wolfers, 2006; Wolfers, 2006; Halla, 2013). Such
effects can complicate the study of outcomes among separated parents because of bias due to the treatment (in our
setting, the child support obligation) being correlated with selection in or out of the sample of analysis. However, this
issue is not empirically relevant in our context. As discussed in detail in Section 5, we find no relationship between
child support obligations and the likelihood of parental separation in our data.
   12
      In practice, parents can either agree on a custody arrangement or go to the court if they are unable to reach an
agreement. Hence, if the mother refuses to share physical custody, the father can take the issue to court. However,
prior to a reform in October 2007, which made joint legal custody the default determination (and hence made
joint physical custody more likely as well), courts were likely to rule in favor of maternal sole custody. Thus, it is


                                                           8
father-child contact may be influenced through the child quality production function. If parental
financial and time investments are complements, a higher obligation will increase the return to the
father’s time spent with his child. If, instead, financial and time investments are substitutes, then
a higher obligation may encourage the father to substitute away from time spent with his child.
    We then study both parents’ post-separation fertility. For a mother, an increase in the father’s
obligation generates a positive income shock, which may increase her demand for subsequent chil-
dren (assuming that child quantity is a normal good). Analogously, an increase in the obligation
represents a negative income shock for the father, which may decrease his demand for subsequent
children. However, there are at least two additional channels that generate a positive effect on
the father’s post-separation fertility. First, since a higher obligation can reduce contact with his
existing children, the father may have higher demand for additional children with new partners
and more time to invest in these new offspring. Second, since the thresholds in the Danish child
support step function are increasing in the number of biological children, and since the father must
only make payments to existing non-custodial children, some fathers can reduce their obligations
by having additional children in new unions.13
    Finally, we study both parents’ labor market outcomes. Fathers face heterogeneous labor supply
incentives. For a father with an income below the first threshold in the child support step function,
an increase in the obligation is a flat negative income shock, which should reduce demand for leisure
and increase labor supply. In contrast, a father with an income above the threshold faces a type
of tax on earnings. He has an incentive to lower his labor supply to reduce his earnings and avoid
paying the additional child support amount. For a mother, an increase in the obligation is a positive
income shock that is independent of her own earned income. As such, we may expect an increase
in maternal demand for leisure and therefore a reduction in her labor supply.14
    In sum, the question of parental behavioral responses to child support obligations is complex
and with several theoretically ambiguous predictions; it is ultimately an empirical question. Below,
reasonable to assume that, during our sample time frame of 1999-2008, mothers had substantial influence over the
custody decision.
  13
     We should also note that there are differential incentives for mothers’ and fathers’ subsequent fertility outside
marriage and cohabitation. In particular, although a father may lower his per-child obligation by having more
children, fertility within unions is more attractive than fertility out-of-wedlock/cohabitation, since he is only subject
to the child support obligation for his non-custodial children. By contrast, relative to the father, a mother may have
a larger incentive to have subsequent children out-of-wedlock/cohabitation as receipt of a higher payment for her
existing children may increase her expectation of child support payments associated with subsequent offspring from
new partners. See Kim et al. (2015) for more discussion of the relationship between child support and maternal
non-marital fertility.
  14
     Maternal labor supply may also be affected through impacts on father-child co-residence and fertility. For
example, if fathers are more likely to reside with their children, then mothers may have more time available to work.
By contrast, if mothers have more children post-separation, then they may have a higher incentive to stay home.



                                                           9
we review the existing evidence on this question, and then proceed to describe our own analysis.


3.2      Existing Evidence on Child Support

There are two strands of existing literature on issues related to child support, both focused on the
U.S. setting. One strand has used a structural model approach to directly estimate parameters
of utility functions among separated parents (see, e.g., Del Boca and Flinn, 1995; Flinn, 2000;
Del Boca and Ribero, 2003; Brown and Flinn, 2011; Roff and Lugo-Gil, 2012; Tartari, 2014). This
approach is useful for generating predictions about the impacts of various policy counterfactuals
(e.g., perfect institutional enforcement of child support obligations versus weak enforcement). As
with all such structural estimations, however, functional form assumptions and concerns about
endogeneity present some limitations.
       We take a complementary approach by using quasi-exogenous variation in an existing policy
and studying the reduced-form impacts of child support obligations on a wide range of parental
behaviors. While our results cannot directly speak to parental preferences or overall welfare, our
analysis instead focuses on producing causal estimates.
       We thus more directly contribute to the strand of existing literature, which uses variation across
U.S. states in child support enforcement spending or the implementation of specific policies (such
as automatic wage withholding) to identify their effects (for an overview, see: Garfinkel et al.,
1998; Del Boca, 2003; Lerman and Sorenson, 2003; Pirog and Ziol-Guest, 2006; Cancian et al.,
2011; Huang and Han, 2012). Several such studies have shown that these factors are correlated
with higher child support payments (Sorensen and Halpern, 1999; Freeman and Waldfogel, 2001;
Sorensen and Olivier, 2002; Cancian et al., 2007), and have varied effects on non-mandated forms of
involvement (Argys and Peters, 2001; Peters et al., 2004; Nepomnyaschy, 2007; Nepomnyaschy and
Garfinkel, 2010; Gunter, 2013).15 The evidence on paternal labor supply is also mixed: Freeman
and Waldfogel (1998) find no correlation between child support enforcement and fathers’ work
behavior, while Holzer et al. (2005) and Cancian et al. (2013) show a negative relationship between
child support mandates and paternal formal labor supply. With regard to family formation, there
is evidence that greater child support enforcement is negatively correlated with overall non-marital
fertility rates, possibly implying that a deterrence effect on men may dominate the opposite effect
on women (Case, 1998; Huang, 2002; Plotnick et al., 2004; Aizer and McLanahan, 2006).
  15
    In particular, Argys and Peters (2001), Peters et al. (2004), and Nepomnyaschy (2007) all show that child
support enforcement and payments are correlated with increased father-child contact (i.e., formal payments and
contact are complements); Nepomnyaschy and Garfinkel (2010) find evidence of substitution between formal and
voluntary payments; Gunter (2013) shows that formal payments and in-kind transfers may be substitutes as well.



                                                     10
    On the whole, the current literature has not yet painted a complete picture of how child sup-
port obligations affect parental behavior. Moreover, existing studies may be limited in their ability
to establish causal relationships as child support enforcement spending and the timing of policy
implementation may be correlated with other state time-varying factors that could affect the out-
comes of interest (e.g., local labor market conditions, other welfare programs, changes to population
demographics, etc.). Additionally, by relying on self-reported income in survey data, most of the
existing work does not match fathers to their actual child support obligations.
    Most recently, four papers have used proprietary data from Wisconsin to study the impacts of
child support on parental employment, cohabitation, and new partner fertility. In the first paper,
Cancian et al. (2013) exploit the fact that birthing costs are charged to unmarried fathers as child
support when their children’s births are covered by Medicaid. Using variation in birthing costs
across 23 counties, they show that higher child support debt is associated with lower subsequent
earnings among low-income fathers. The other three studies use data from a small randomized
experiment conducted on single mothers in Wisconsin’s Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) program: Relative to the control group, mothers who received higher child support pay-
ments in this experiment were less likely to cohabit with new partners (Cancian and Meyer, 2014),
more likely to have a subsequent non-marital birth with a new partner (Kim et al., 2015), and no
more or less likely to work (Cuesta and Cancian, 2015).
    Our work builds on this literature by applying a new identification strategy and using adminis-
trative population-level data to lend causal estimates of the effects of child support obligations on
a comprehensive set of parental behavioral outcomes.


4   Data

We use administrative data on all children born in Denmark over 1985-2008, their siblings and
their parents. For each year the parent resides in Denmark, we observe his/her annual income from
different sources, cohabitation and marital status, labor market behavior (employment, labor force
status, and annual wages), and educational attainment, as well as demographics such as exact date
of birth and country of origin.
    Administrative data has clear advantages over survey data—we can rely on accurately measured
key variables such as income and family structure, and observe outcomes for a large sample of
separated parents. At the same time, administrative data has its drawbacks. For example, we do
not observe whether parents have formal or informal child support agreements, fathers’ visits with
their non-custodial children, or fathers’ in-kind transfers and non-monetary gifts to their children.

                                                 11
We discuss these issues in Section 5, and shed some light on these variables using supplemental
survey data.


Analysis Sample To construct our analysis sample, we begin with all fathers who are observed
in the register data in every year over 1998-2010 and who either (i) were married to or cohabiting
with their oldest children’s mothers at childbirth (or in 1998 for oldest children born before), or (ii)
had a first child between 1999 and 2008 while not married to or cohabiting with the child’s mother.
We define the father’s “separation year” as the year in which the father either no longer resides
with his oldest child’s mother or has a first child while not living with the child’s mother. As child
support guidelines prior to 1999 did not exhibit as much variation with respect to income and were
often not enforced, we limit to the 124, 114 fathers with separation years between 1999 and 2008.16
We choose 2008 as the final separation year to allow for at least three years of post-separation
observations in the data.
       Finally, we limit the sample to fathers who had either one or two children aged less than 18
at the time of separation and who had annual separation year incomes in a 100, 000DKK window
surrounding the range of the first three thresholds in the child support schedule, where much of the
variation occurs (between 175, 000DKK/$25,991 and 505, 000DKK/$75,004).17 These restrictions
create a sample of 73,303 fathers linked to their children and their children’s mothers. As we
describe in detail in Section 5, our analysis is cross-sectional, and thus uses one observation per
father.18


Outcomes We consider four sets of outcomes. First, we study fathers’ child support payments.
The administrative data contain tax-deductible annual payments made by non-custodial fathers
that are reported to the tax authorities. Thus we observe all payments made above the non-tax-
deductible extra amount. Unfortunately, as noted above, our data do not have information on
whether the payments are made under formal agreements or voluntarily.
  16
      The information that the child support guidelines were not as strictly enforced before 1999 comes from personal
communication with the State Administration. There was no specific reform; the tightening of rules likely stemmed
from internal administrative changes within the agency. Since parents are more likely to be responsive to child
support obligations when they are actually enforced, we only exploit variation in child support guidelines from 1999
onwards.
   17
      We drop fathers with more than two children at the time of separation because they constitute a relatively small
fraction of the sample (10%) and experience much of the child support formula variation at higher income levels
where the data contain fewer observations.
   18
      The 73,303 observations represent unique fathers who are linked to their oldest children’s mothers. However,
mothers can appear multiple times in these data as they can have multiple first births with different partners from
whom they separate. When we analyze mothers’ outcomes, we only consider their first separation spells and are left
with 71,575 unique mother observations.



                                                         12
    Second, to measure paternal physical custody, we study father-child co-residence in any year
post-separation. This measure is imperfect because we can only observe one residence address per
individual per year in our data. Thus, this measure includes both joint and sole-father physical
custody arrangements, but underestimates joint custody because it does not capture joint custody
arrangements in which the child is registered at the mother’s home in all years post-separation.
    Third, we study both parents’ post-separation fertility. Since we have the universe of birth
records through 2010, we are able to capture this outcome very accurately in our data.
    Fourth, we examine both parents’ labor market behavior, using information on their labor force
participation, earnings, and take-up of programs such as disability insurance and early retirement.


5   Empirical Methods

We are interested in the effects of fathers’ child support obligations on parental behaviors after
separation. Consider a model of the form:


                              YiP OST = π0 + π1 AvgObligi + κ0 Xi + ui                              (1)


for each father i. YiP OST is an outcome of interest measured post-separation, such as the father’s
average annual child support payment. AvgObligi is the father’s average child support obligation
during the time of separation, Xi is a vector of observable parental characteristics (such as education
and income), and ui is the error term.
    The primary concern with estimating equation (1) using ordinary least squares is that unob-
served omitted variables (i.e., those contained in ui ) are correlated both with the father’s child
support obligation and with parental outcomes. For example, in the U.S., child support obligations
are often assigned in courts. Although a judge is generally required to follow his state’s child sup-
port guidelines, he may also take into account information about the parents that is unobservable
to the researcher (e.g., how much conflict the parents have, how close the father is to the child, etc.)
when setting the father’s obligation. These characteristics of the family may in turn be correlated
with parental behavior post-separation—for instance, a judge may assign a higher child support
obligation to a father who seems closer to his non-custodial child, and this father may be less likely
to start a new family after separation.


Using Variation from the Danish Child Support Guidelines The Danish context presents
a unique opportunity to address these endogeneity concerns. As we described in detail in Section


                                                  13
2, in Denmark, child support obligations are determined entirely according to a formula set by a
central government agency, and not through the court system. A father’s obligation is a non-linear
function of his income and number of children, and this function changes in every year during our
analysis time frame.
   Since income thresholds in the child support formula induce discontinuities in obligations, a
regression discontinuity (RD) design may seem like the natural estimation strategy. However,
there are several issues with implementing an RD in this setting. First, the thresholds are relatively
close together in the annual income distribution (for example, in some cases, the thresholds are just
5, 000DKK ($742) apart), meaning that there are not enough observations immediately surrounding
each threshold to implement an RD in practice. Second, the locations of the thresholds change every
year. Thus, a father’s income might place him on one side of a threshold in one year and on the other
side in another year (even if he does not change his income). Note that we do not study behavioral
responses to the year-to-year changes in child support obligations within fathers in a panel data
framework, as these responses may take a longer time to materialize. Instead, we study the effects of
child support obligations averaged over multiple years post-separation and compare cross-sectionally
across fathers who face different average obligations. The annually changing thresholds therefore
make it difficult to create a uniform RD treatment variable in the average obligation (in other
words, is a father who is just above a threshold in year 1 and just below a threshold in year 2 in the
“above” or “below” group?). Third, the fact that there are multiple thresholds in each year and
for each number of children makes it challenging to center the observations around any particular
threshold.
   Thus, instead of estimating an RD, we exploit the full scope of variation in the child support
formula by comparing across fathers who have different incomes, different numbers of children, and
different separation years, while controlling flexibly for the main effects and double interactions of
income, number of children, and year. To implement this empirical design, we first use the child
support guidelines to calculate each father’s annual child support obligation based on his income
and number of children aged less than 18 in each year post-separation observed in our data. For
example, for fathers who separate in 2005, we calculate child support obligations for each year
over 2005-2010. We then calculate the average annual obligation for each father over the time of
separation.
   Importantly, we calculate child support obligations for all divorced and separated fathers in
our sample. As we explained in Section 4, we do not have information on formal agreements and
we measure joint physical custody imperfectly. Consequently, we cannot limit our analysis only


                                                 14
to parents who have formal child support agreements. However, even if we were able make this
sample selection, we believe that doing so would be problematic. Child support obligations may
impact decisions about formal agreements and custody arrangements, meaning that selecting the
sample on these potentially endogenous variables would create biased estimates.
    Consider now the following specification:

                                      T
                           h     1 X                             i
    P OST
  Yitk    = θ0 + θ1                      gt+j (It+j , Kidsk,t+j ) + λ0 Xit + σt + f (Iit , Ii,t+1 , . . . , Ii,t+T ) + ρkt
                               T + 1 j=0

        T
        X
    +         ρk,t+j + σt × f (Iit , Ii,t+1 , . . . , Ii,t+T ) + ρkt × f (Iit , Ii,t+1 , . . . , Ii,t+T ) + σt × ρkt + εitk   (2)
        j=1

for each father i who separated from his oldest child’s mother in year t, with k number of children
                                                                                  P OST is an outcome
aged less than 18, and with T total years observed post-separation in the data. Yitk
                                                     1    PT
of interest measured post-separation.              T +1    j=0 gt+j (It+j , Kidsk,t+j )      is the father’s average annual
child support obligation in thousands of real year 2000 DKK during the time of separation based
on the child support formula, g(·)t+j , which varies in every year post-separation and depends on
the father’s income, It+j , and total number of children, Kidsk,t+j .
    The vector Xit includes controls for a variety of family characteristics measured in the year
of separation: father’s age and age squared, dummies for the father’s education (less than high
school, high school, vocational/short-term higher education, college/university, and missing), an
indicator for the father being born in western Europe, mother’s age and age squared, dummies for
the mother’s education (less than high school, high school, vocational/short-term higher education,
college/university, and missing), an indicator for the mother being born in western Europe, mother’s
total income in year 2000 DKK, oldest child’s age and age squared, youngest child’s age and age
squared, an indicator for the oldest child being male, an indicator for the youngest child being male,
and indicators for original parental relationship status (married, cohabiting, never-married/non-
cohabiting). σt are fixed effects for the year of separation, ρkt are fixed effects for the father’s
                                                                             PT
number of children under age 18 in the year of separation,                      j=1 ρk,t+j   is a set of fixed effects for the
father’s number of children still under 18 in each year after separation, and f (Iit , Ii,t+1 , . . . , Ii,t+T )
is a flexible function of the father’s real gross income in each year post-separation.
    Since equation (2) controls flexibly for the three determinants of child support obligations—
father’s income, number of children, and the year of separation—the effects of child support obli-
gations are identified off the non-linearities in and annual changes to the child support guidelines
that generate differences in average obligations for fathers who (i) have the same income and year


                                                                15
of separation, (ii) have the same income and number of children, or (iii) have the same number of
children and year of separation.
                                                                                     1    PT
   Yet an important concern remains. The key treatment variable,                   T +1    j=0 gt+j (It+j , Kidsk,t+j ),

is calculated using the father’s income and number of children in each year after separation. How-
ever, post-separation changes to the father’s income and number of children may occur in response
to the child support obligations and are thus potentially endogenous.


Simulated IV Method To deal with this issue, we follow the simulated IV approach (Dahl and
Lochner, 2012; Chetty et al., 2011; Brown et al., 2014; Milligan and Stabile, 2011). For each father,
we calculate a predicted obligation in each year post-separation using his gross income and number
of children at the time of separation. These predicted obligations account for the father’s children
aging out of child support by turning 18, but do not take into account any new children that he
has with subsequent partners or any changes in the father’s income post-separation. As such, the
variation in predicted obligations comes only from variation in what the father would have to pay
based on changes in the formula, holding constant any possible behavioral responses. We calculate
the average predicted obligation over the time of separation, and use this predicted measure to
instrument for the actual average obligation. The first stage regression takes the form of:

       T                                            T
  1 X                                       h 1 X                                i
          gt+j (It+j , Kidsk,t+j ) = η0 +η1            gt+j (It , OrigKidsk,t+j ) +ζ 0 Xit +δt +f (Iit )+αkt
T + 1 j=0                                    T + 1 j=0

                                T
                                X
                            +         αk,t+j + δt × f (Iit ) + αkt × f (Iit ) + δt × αkt + eitk                     (3)
                                j=1

          1    PT
where   T +1     j=0 gt+j (It , OrigKidsk,t+j )      is the average predicted obligation, calculated using the
father’s separation year income, It , and his number of “original” children (i.e., those that he had
at the time of separation) that are still under 18 in every year, OrigKidsk,t+j . The IV model is:

                                          T            d
                                     1 X
                                       h                             i
                 P OST
               Yitk      = β0 + β1           gt+j (It+j , Kidsk,t+j ) + γ 0 Xit + δt + f (Iit ) + αkt
                                   T + 1 j=0

                                T
                                X
                            +         αk,t+j + δt × f (Iit ) + αkt × f (Iit ) + δt × αkt + itk                     (4)
                                j=1

We include fixed effects for the year of separation, δt , and fixed effects for the number of children in
the year of separation, αkt . We also include a set of indicators for the father’s number of children
still under age 18 in each year post-separation (but not including any new children born after


                                                             16
                            PT
separation), denoted by       j=1 αk,t+j .       The model includes a flexible function of the father’s real
gross income in the year of separation f (Iit ), and all of the double interactions between income,
number of children, and the year of separation. The key coefficient of interest is β1 , which measures
the effect of a 1, 000DKK increase in the average annual child support obligation on the outcome
of interest.
                                                                                        1    PT
   The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots the average predicted obligation,               T +1    j=0 gt+j (It , OrigKidsk,t+j ),

by year of separation and father’s income, for one- and two-child families in sub-figures (c) and
(d), respectively. The figure shows non-linear variation in the average predicted obligation across
fathers with different separation year incomes, years of separation, and numbers of children. Most
noticeably, there is a “kink” in the relationship between the average predicted obligation and the
father’s separation year income in each year. This “kink” arises from the non-linearity in the child
support formula around the first income threshold. In some specifications, we limit our sample to
fathers with separation year incomes within a small window around the first threshold to exploit
this non-linearity more explicitly.
   Figure 2 depicts the identifying variation in equations (3) and (4) more clearly. We first regress
the average predicted obligations on fixed effects for the year of separation, number of children, and
20, 000DKK (approximately $3, 006) bins of the father’s separation year income, and the double
interactions of these three variables. We then calculate the residuals, and scatter all possible resid-
uals within each 20, 000DKK income bin separately by families with one child (in blue circles) and
two children (in red triangles) in sub-figures (a) and (b), respectively. We make similar scatterplots
of average predicted obligation residuals within each separation year in sub-figures (c) and (d). In
other words, sub-figures (a) and (b) show all of the variation in average predicted obligations that
remains within each 20, 000DKK income bin for one- and two-child families separately (after con-
trolling for all of the fixed effects and double interactions), while sub-figures (c) and (d) show this
variation within each separation year. Our preferred empirical specification, which uses indicators
for 20, 000DKK income bins as the function f (Iit ) as well as dummies for the year of separation
and number of children and their double interactions, essentially compares vertically across fathers
who are represented by the different blue circles and red triangles in these figures.
   Finally, while our baseline estimates represent the effects of average annual obligations over all
the years of separation, we also investigate the timing of their impacts more closely. For these
analyses, we estimate the following IV models:

                                         τ
                                      h1 X            d                i
               Yik,t+τ +1 = β0 + β1             gt+j (It+j , Kidsk,t+j ) + γ 0 Xit + δt + f (Iit ) + αkt
                                      τ   j=0


                                                           17
                           τ
                           X
                       +         αk,t+j + δt × f (Iit ) + αkt × f (Iit ) + δt × αkt + ik,t+τ +1                  (5)
                           j=1

where τ ranges between 1 and 5. Thus, for years τ ∈ [1, 5]—the first five years of separation—we
                                                                                    1   Pτ
study the relationship between outcomes measured in year t+τ +1 and                 τ    j=0 gt+j (It+j , Kidsk,t+j ),
                                                                                                   d

which denotes obligations averaged over the preceding post-separation years only (i.e., years t to
t + τ ).


Identifying Assumption The identifying assumption for the estimation of equations (3), (4),
and (5) is that—conditional on the father’s year of separation, and his income and number of
children in that year—there are no omitted variables that systematically covary with both predicted
child support obligations and parental post-separation behaviors. The separation year fixed effects
control for any overall trends in parental outcomes over the time of our analysis, and absorb any
effects of national policies that may have been implemented in any given year.19 Fixed effects
for the number of children and their interactions with separation year fixed effects control for the
fact that one- and two-child families may be different and may have different trends over time.
Finally, for f (Iit ), we use different order polynomials as well as non-parametric specifications with
indicators for small income bins to control for a flexible relationship between the father’s separation
year income and the outcomes of interest. We allow for this relationship to be different over time
and across families with different numbers of children by including interactions between f (Iit ) and
the fixed effects for separation year and number of children.
       There are several remaining possible threats to identification. First, our sample is limited to par-
ents who have divorced or separated. If separation decisions are made in response to (anticipated)
child support obligations, then our analysis could be subject to sample selection bias. We examine
the relationship between child support obligations and the likelihood of parental separation in Table
1. For these regressions, our sample contains all fathers observed over 1999-2010 (i.e., we do not
limit to separated fathers).20 We only keep father-year observations until the year of separation (if
it occurs). Our outcome of interest is an indicator for parents separating, divorcing, or having an
out-of-wedlock/cohabitation birth. We regress this outcome on the child support obligation that
a father would face in that year (calculated based on his income and number of children), with a
  19
     Additionally, the year of separation fixed effects control for differences in the length of separation time, T ,
observed in our data.
  20
     We do, however, make the same sample restrictions on income, number of children, and years of observation
as before: We limit to fathers who were either married to or cohabiting with their oldest children’s mothers at the
time of childbirth (or in 1998 for oldest children born before), or who had a first child between 1999 and 2010 while
not cohabiting with their child’s mother. We also only keep father-year observations with nominal incomes between
175, 000 and 505, 000DKK and with either one or two children aged less than 18.


                                                           18
full set of fixed effects and interactions for the number of children, year, and different functions
of the father’s income.21 The results show that child support obligations are not systematically
correlated with the likelihood of parental separation. While there are some significant coefficients in
specifications using lower-order polynomial functions in father’s income, they have opposite signs.
Moreover, in our preferred specification that includes indicators for 20, 000DKK bins of father’s in-
come, we find no statistically significant relationship. We thus conclude that, in our data, parents
do not seem to make their separation decisions in anticipation of child support obligations.
       Second, while we inherently cannot test whether the variation in predicted child support obli-
gations is correlated with omitted unobservable factors, we can check whether it is related to any
observable parental characteristics that are not used in the child support formula. For these re-
gressions, we focus on our main analysis sample and estimate reduced-form versions of equation
(4), omitting the controls in vector Xit and with the following outcomes (measured in the year of
separation): father’s age, mother’s age, indicators for the father’s and mother’s education levels
(university, vocational/short-term higher education, high school only), and mother’s income. Table
2 and Appendix Table A2 present results from specifications that use indicators for 20, 000DKK
bins and 4th order polynomials as the father’s income functions f (Iit ), respectively. Predicted
obligations have no statistically significant relationships with any of the variables that we consider.
       A third concern for our identification strategy is that fathers may respond to future child support
obligations by changing their incomes before separation. Such anticipatory behavior would make
our instrument—based on the father’s separation year income—potentially endogenous. Since
the child support formula is a fairly complex non-linear function of the father’s income that is
changed in every year, most fathers are unlikely to be able to predict their average post-separation
obligations very accurately. Nevertheless, we evaluate the plausibility of this issue in two ways in
Section 6: (i) we show that our results are similar when we predict child support obligations using
the father’s income in the year before separation, and (ii) we provide evidence that fathers’ labor
supply behavior in the years before separation is uncorrelated with future obligations.


Summary Statistics In our main analysis sample, real average annual child support obligations
have ranged between 783DKK ($116) and 42, 608DKK($6, 328) in year 2000 DKK, representing
between 0.4 and 26 percent of fathers’ annual gross incomes.22 The median real average annual
  21
     In column 5, when we include indicators for 20, 000DKK bins in the father’s income, for computational feasibility,
we collapse the data into cells according to the interactions these father income bins, years 1999-2010, and the number
of children. The regression in column 5 is weighted by the number of observations in each cell and has standard
errors clustered on the cell level.
  22
     The average annual obligation can be lower than the annual obligation depicted in Figures 1a and 1b because
we account for children aging out of child support by turning 18. Thus, some fathers have a positive obligation in


                                                          19
obligation is 14, 620DKK ($2, 171).
    Appendix Table A3 provides summary statistics on other selected variables in our data. Column
1 reports information on all fathers in our sample, while columns 2-4 split the sample by parental
relationship status—previously married, previously cohabiting, and never-married/non-cohabiting,
respectively. For comparison, column 5 reports summary statistics for all parents of children born
in 1985-2010 who appear in the register data over 1998-2010.23 The average separation year real
gross incomes for fathers and mothers in our sample are 286, 300DKK and 205, 600DKK, respec-
tively, which are slightly lower than the corresponding average real incomes of 307, 700DKK and
211, 000DKK for all Danish fathers and mothers during this time period. The parents in our sample
are also less likely to have a university education than parents in the general population.
    Appendix Table A3 also presents further information on the average annual child support obli-
gations that we calculate and the payments we observe. Here, we report the predicted and actual
annual tax-deductible obligations (i.e., obligations net of the extra amount) so that we can more
accurately compare them to the tax-deductible payments we see in our data. For all fathers in
our sample over the time of separation, the average annual obligation net of the extra amount is
17, 500DKK, while the average annual payment net of the extra amount is 9, 211DKK.


Differences Between Obligations and Payments We investigate the discrepancy between
obligations and payments further in Appendix Table A4. Fathers pay about 53 percent of their tax-
deductible obligation. This gap is partially driven by the 19 percent of sample fathers who make zero
child support payments post-separation. These “non-payers” are likely comprised of two groups:
(i) fathers without formal agreements (including those who have full or joint physical custody of
their children), and (ii) fathers who are completely non-compliant with their obligations.24
    While we inherently cannot distinguish between these two groups in our data, we provide some
indirect evidence suggesting that joint and sole-father physical custody arrangements likely play
a large role in explaining the zeros. As described in more detail in Appendix C, we link our
administrative data to survey data with parent-reported information on custody arrangements.
Since the surveys were only conducted in selected years and have small sample sizes, we do not use
these data for our main analysis and instead just examine them descriptively. We show that survey
the first few years post-separation and zero obligation in the subsequent years because their children have aged out,
leading to a small average amount.
  23
     There is no year of separation for these families; the statistics reported are averages over 1998-2010.
  24
     A third possibility in our data is that some fathers make child support payments but do not report them to the
tax authorities. However, given that all payments above the extra amount are tax deductible, this seems unlikely as
fathers have a strong incentive to report these transfers.




                                                         20
reports of joint and sole-father physical custody arrangements coincide with lower average post-
separation child support payments and with a higher prevalence of zero payments by fathers. The
survey data also show that about 22 percent of fathers have either joint or sole physical custody,
which is close to the percentage of “non-payers” that we observe in our sample.25
         While the “non-payers” account for some of the gap between average obligations and payments,
they do not explain all of it. Among those who pay a strictly positive amount, fathers on average
pay 66 percent of their tax-deductible obligation. Seventy-two percent of the fathers in the sample
pay more than zero but less than their obligation, while 9 percent pay the amount of the obligation
or more. The “under-payment” likely results the fact that we observe both mandated and voluntary
payments in one variable where voluntary payments do not need to follow any guidelines, as well as
possibly from imperfect compliance. “Over-payment” is most common among previously married
parents and is likely driven by voluntary payments.
         Finally, it may be that some of the fathers whom we observe “under-paying” give supplemental
gifts or in-kind transfers to their children that are not recorded in our administrative data. The
survey has some information on these types of non-pecuniary transfers. For example, about 18
percent of mothers report that the father has bought some winter clothes for his child, while
around 4 percent report that the father has paid for childcare.26 These numbers suggest that large
in-kind transfers are not pervasive in our analysis population.


6        Results

6.1        First Stage Results

Before presenting the results from our IV regressions—where we report the first stage coefficient and
corresponding F -statistic in all tables—we briefly discuss the strength of the first stage relationship
between predicted and actual obligations, its independence of the chosen functional form, and the
sources of variation that drive it.
         In Appendix Table A5, we report results from estimating the first stage regression of predicted
obligations on actual obligations (equation (3)), controlling for different functions of the father’s
real separation year income: linear (column 1), quadratic (column 2), cubic (column 3), quartic
(column 4), and indicators for 20, 000DKK bins (column 5). Across all specifications, the first
    25
     We also explored heterogeneity in joint custody rates by family characteristics. Joint custody is relatively more
prevalent among parents of children who were older at the time of separation and parents from higher socio-economic
status groups (those with more than a high school education and with incomes above the median in our sample).
  26
     These figures come from the 1999 wave of the Danish longitudinal survey of children (DALSC) where children of
interviewed mothers were three years old. See Appendix C for details.



                                                         21
stage is very strong (the F -statistic ranges between 1, 972 and 5, 190). Our preferred specification
in column 5 indicates that each 1, 000DKK increase in the average predicted obligation is associated
with a 840DKK increase in the actual average obligation.
      Appendix Figure A3 illustrates the variation that drives the first stage relationship. Appendix
Figure A3a plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from first stage regressions estimated
separately by year of separation, using only the variation in average predicted obligations across
father’s income and number of children. Here, we see that the first stage is somewhat stronger in
years 2000-2002 than in the other years, although all coefficients are positive, statistically significant,
and with overlapping confidence intervals. Appendix Figure A3b presents coefficients from first
stage regressions estimated separately by each 20, 000DKK income bin, using only the variation
across years of separation and number of children. The coefficients across income bins are quite
similar and almost all statistically significant, except for the three highest income bins where
we have few observations. Appendix Figure A3c shows coefficients from first stage regressions
estimated separately for one- and two-child families, using only the variation across father’s income
and years of separation. The first stage relationship is stronger for one- than two-child families,
although both coefficients are above 0.7 and statistically significant. Overall, although there are
some differences across coefficients, these results suggest that the identification comes from all three
sources of variation (separation year income, year of separation, and number of children).


6.2     Child Support Payments and Father-Child Co-Residence

We first study how child support obligations affect fathers’ child support payments and father-child
co-residence. Table 3 presents results from estimating equation (4) using two-stage least-squares
(2SLS) for the following outcomes measured post-separation: father’s average annual child support
payment, an indicator for the father’s average child support payment being greater than his average
obligation, an indicator for the father paying zero child support in at least one year, and an indicator
for the father living with his oldest child in at least one year. In these models, the f (Iit ) function
is captured by indicators for 20, 000DKK bins in the father’s real separation year income.
      Column 1 shows that a 1, 000DKK increase in the average annual child support obligation is
associated with a 506DKK increase in the average annual payment. In Section 3, we hypothesized
that the lack of a one-for-one correlation may be in part driven by supplemental voluntary payments.
Indeed, in column 2, we show that a higher obligation reduces the likelihood that a father pays
more than what he is obligated to pay, suggesting that mandated payments may be partially
substituting for voluntary payments that fathers would have otherwise made. Additionally, the


                                                    22
less than perfect correlation between obligations and payments may be due to the other parental
behavioral responses, which we analyze below.
      Column 3 shows that fathers facing higher obligations are less likely to pay zero child support
in at least one post-separation year. This effect seems to be driven by a reduction in paternal
physical custody (column 4): a 1, 000DKK increase in the average obligation is associated with a
2.1 percent decrease in father-child co-residence post-separation.
      As discussed in Section 3, there are two opposing forces on paternal physical custody. On the
one hand, relative to fathers with lower child support obligations, fathers facing larger obligations
may have a greater incentive to avoid paying them by sharing in physical custody. On the other
hand, mothers have the opposite incentive to receive the higher payments by making sure that
fathers do not share in physical custody. Additionally, fathers with higher obligations may be
more likely to substitute away from other forms of non-pecuniary involvement with their children.
Our empirical results suggest that the latter forces dominate in our sample, leading to a negative
relationship between obligations and paternal physical custody rates.
      In Appendix Figure A4, we investigate the timing of the paternal physical custody effect during
the length of separation. This figure presents the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from
five separate IV regressions of equation (5). For years x ∈ [1, 5]—the first five years of separation
displayed on the x-axis—each regression uses an indicator for the father living with his oldest child
in year x + 1 post-separation as the dependent variable and the average annual obligation over the
preceding post-separation years (0 to x) as the explanatory variable. The results suggest that the
magnitude of the reduction in the paternal physical custody rate is increasing over the length of
separation, although the confidence intervals are wide enough such that we cannot reject that all
five coefficients are equal.
      In sum, these results suggest that, while government-mandated child support obligations are
moderately effective in increasing fathers’ monetary payments to children, they may also crowd-out
other forms of father involvement, such as voluntary payments and father-child co-residence.


6.3     Parental Subsequent Family Formation

Next, we proceed to examine parental fertility post-separation. Tables 4 and 5 present the 2SLS
results for family formation outcomes for the mothers and fathers, respectively.
      We find that, for both parents, higher child support obligations lead to increased subsequent
fertility with new partners. In particular, the first columns in both tables show that each 1, 000DKK
increase in the child support obligation is associated with 3.2 and 3.7 percent increases in the


                                                  23
likelihoods of mothers and fathers having more children, respectively. Notably, as seen in columns
2 to 4, fathers increase their fertility only within marriage or cohabitation, while mothers increase
their fertility both in and outside these unions.
       We also explore the timing of the fertility effects for mothers and fathers in Appendix Figures A5
and A6, respectively. For fathers, fertility increases materialize after 4 to 5 years post-separation,
while for mothers, the positive impacts on fertility are present 3 and 5 years after separation.
       As we discussed in Section 3, the positive impact on maternal fertility is consistent with higher
child support obligations generating greater income effects. The magnitude of our estimate—a 3.2
percent increase for every 1, 000DKK increase in obligations—is within the bounds of estimates in
the literature. In fact, Kim et al. (2015)—in the only existing study on the causal effect of child
support receipt on maternal (non-marital) fertility in Wisconsin—find a 4% increase in fertility for
every 1, 000DKK in payments (after converting from U.S. dollars to Danish krones). The broader
income-fertility literature delivers comparable estimates as well. For example, Milligan (2005) finds
a 3.4 percent increase in fertility associated with a 1, 000DKK increase in tax benefits in Quebec.
In France, the relevant relationship is a 4 percent increase in fertility for every 1, 000DKK increase
in benefits (Laroque and Salanié, 2008). In the UK, there is a slightly more modest 2 percent
increase in fertility for every 1, 000DKK increase in welfare benefits stemming from a 1999 reform
(Brewer et al., 2012).27
       For fathers, the positive relationship between obligations and fertility is consistent with two
incentives. First, we found above that higher obligations are associated with a reduced incidence of
father-child co-residence. Thus, fathers who are facing higher obligations may have less attachment
to their existing children and more demand for new offspring with new partners. Second, fathers
with incomes in certain ranges above the child support step function thresholds can reduce their
obligations to non-custodial children by having more children within new unions.28 Column 5 of
Table 5 shows that the fertility increase is driven by fathers who do not reside with their older
children post-separation, consistent with the first incentive.
       Finally, the fact that fathers facing larger obligations only increase fertility within marriage or
  27
      More precisely, Kim et al. (2015) find that a $300 (in U.S. dollars) increase in child support payments leads to a
(marginally significant) 8% increase in subsequent non-marital fertility among single mothers. $300 is approximately
2, 000DKK. Milligan (2005) finds that a $1, 000 (in Canadian dollars) increase in tax benefits increases fertility by
17%. $1, 000 Canadian dollars is approximately 5, 000DKK. Laroque and Salanié (2008) find that 100 Euros per
month (i.e., 1, 200 Euros per year) increase higher-parity fertility by 37%. 1, 200 Euros is approximately 8, 954DKK.
Brewer et al. (2012) find that the mean £900 increase in welfare benefits following a 1999 reform led to a 15% increase
in fertility among low-income married women. £900 is approximately 8, 300DKK. The muted response in the U.K.
may be in part due to an accompanying work incentive that likely reduced fertility.
   28
      In our sample, a father who had one child at the time of separation can save up to 11, 040DKK in annual
obligations by having an additional child. The average saving is 1, 973DKK.



                                                          24
cohabitation is consistent with them expecting higher costs of future children born outside these
unions. By contrast, mothers receiving higher child support payments for current children may
expect higher transfers for future children if they separate again. Thus, higher obligations are
associated with increased maternal fertility both in and outside new partnerships.


6.4      Parental Labor Market Behavior

Finally, we analyze the effects of child support obligations on parental labor market outcomes.
Table 6 presents the 2SLS results on fathers’ post-separation labor market behavior. We find that,
on average, higher obligations are associated with a reduction in the amount of time fathers spend
in the labor force. Specifically, each 1, 000DKK in the child support obligation reduces the fraction
of years post-separation during which they have any positive labor income by 0.2 percent and
increases the proportion of years they spend not in the labor force (“NILF”) by 5 percent at the
respective sample means. Columns 6 to 8 of Table 6 show that this increase is driven by transitions
into disability leaves and retirements (including discretionary early retirements).29 In contrast, we
find no effects on exiting the labor force to receive means-tested welfare benefits, as this transition
is likely unrealistic for the majority of our (relatively higher-income) fathers.30 For mothers, we
find no consistent evidence of changes to labor market behavior (see Appendix Table A6).
       Since labor market outcomes are measured both before and after separation, we can test for
anticipatory effects on paternal labor force participation pre-separation. In Figure 3, in addition
to looking at the timing of effects post-separation, we also study whether obligations in the year of
separation are correlated with paternal labor force participation in the five years before separation.
We find that the coefficients in the years before separation are all very close to zero, and that the
positive effect on the likelihood of the father being out of the labor force begins to materialize about
3 years following separation.
  29
      In Denmark, individuals mainly receive disability income through the Social Disability Pension (SDP) program.
SDP is granted based on several medical and social criteria, and there are three levels depending on the degree of
work capacity. Eligibility for the lowest level depends on work capacity having been reduced to below half the normal
level, based on an evaluation using a combination of health and social criteria. Thus, although transitioning from
the labor force and into disability leave is not costless, the subjectivity in the eligibility requirements leaves room for
behavioral responses on this margin that may be unrelated to changes in fathers’ actual health conditions. The main
retirement program in Denmark is the Old Age Pension program, for which individuals are eligible starting at age 65.
The Post-Employment Wage (PEW) program is the program for early retirement, for which individuals are eligible
during ages 60-64. Other eligibility requirements for the PEW include sufficient contributions to the Unemployment
Insurance fund and being in the labor force at age 59. See Larsen and Pedersen (2012) for more information.
   30
      Our estimate on labor supply is somewhat larger than what is reported in Cancian et al. (2013)—the most recent
study on the relationship between child support obligations and labor supply in the U.S.—who find that a $1, 000
increase in child support debt reduces formal earnings by about 3 percent. However, Cancian et al. (2013) use a
highly selected sample from Wisconsin, and further limit the analysis to low-income fathers who were working for a
single employer all four quarters prior to the birth of their first child.



                                                            25
       Moreover, although our results point to higher obligations being associated with lower average
paternal labor supply, they conceal important heterogeneity in responses. As we hypothesize in
Section 3, the structure of the child support guidelines creates divergent labor supply incentives
depending on where the father’s income is located relative to the step function thresholds. To test
for such differential responses, we include an interaction term with an indicator for the father’s
separation year income being above the first threshold in that year in Table 7. We find that fathers
with separation year incomes below the first threshold actually increase their labor supply. The
decline in labor force participation is driven entirely by fathers with separation year incomes above
the first threshold, who have an incentive to reduce their labor supply in order to avoid paying the
additional percentages of the normal amount.
       Overall, as postulated in Section 3, the decline in paternal labor force participation implies
that, at least for some (higher-income) fathers, child support obligations play the role of income
taxes, with the substitution effect dominating the income effect. Our findings are broadly consistent
with other studies on the relationship between the relative value of labor market participation and
disability/retirement program take-up in the U.S., Canada, and Europe.31 Thus, our estimates
point to an unintended consequence of child support mandates on public budgets: Although they
may shift the burden of single-mother household support from welfare programs to non-custodial
fathers, they also may pass part of this cost on to other government programs including disability
insurance and early retirement.


6.5      Heterogeneous Effects of Child Support Obligations

Appendix Figures A7-A11 analyze heterogeneous treatment effects by exploring different sources
of the identifying variation: In each of these figures for our main outcomes, the sub-figures plot
coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from IV regressions that only use two sources of variation:
(a) separately by year of separation, using only variation across paternal income and number of
children; (b) separately by each 50, 000DKK ($7,582) income bin, using only variation across years
of separation and number of children; and (c) separately for one- and two-child families, using only
the variation across father’s income and years of separation.32
       For average child support payments, the coefficients are almost all positive and with overlapping
confidence intervals. The estimated negative effects on father-child co-residence are somewhat
  31
     See, e.g., Black et al. (2002); Autor and Duggan (2003); Gruber (2000); Gruber and Wise (2004, 2009); Bratsberg
et al. (2010); Bingley et al. (2011).
  32
     For the IV heterogeneity analysis, we use 50, 000DKK income bins instead of the baseline 20, 000DKK bins to
retain slightly larger sub-group sample sizes.



                                                        26
stronger in the middle years in our sample (early 2000s) and among lower-income fathers, although
the coefficients are generally not individually statistically significant. The positive effect on paternal
post-separation fertility is slightly larger in the earlier sample years, among lower-income fathers,
and fathers with one child at separation. The increase in maternal post-separation fertility is
noticeably larger among mothers whose children’s fathers are lower-income and who only had one
child at separation. While the overall effect on the father’s time spent NILF is positive for most
separation years and for fathers with both one and two children, the heterogeneity analysis by
paternal income replicates the pattern in Table 7, with fathers in the lowest income bin decreasing
their time spent NILF, and fathers in the highest income bin driving the overall positive effect. On
the whole, since we lose variation and sample size when we consider these separate sub-groups, it
is difficult to draw definitive conclusions from these figures. Nevertheless, just like in Appendix
Figure A3, this analysis suggests that all three sources of the identifying variation—separation
year income, year of separation, and number of children—contribute to the estimation of the main
results.
       In Appendix Table A7, we consider differences in effects between previously married, previously
cohabiting, and never-married/non-cohabiting parents. For all outcomes except for the father’s
labor force participation, the coefficients are of the same sign between the first two groups and
slightly larger in magnitude for previously married parents (see Panels A and B). However, we see
differential effects on father’s labor force participation—a higher obligation increases (decreases)
the amount of time a father spends out of the labor force among previously married (previously
cohabiting) fathers. Further exploration of this result suggests that it reflects the heterogeneity
in effects on labor supply by fathers’ separation year incomes (see Table 7), as previously married
fathers on average have higher incomes than previously cohabiting fathers. When we consider
never-married/non-cohabiting parents in Panel C, we lose a lot of power and obtain much larger
standard errors. There are positive and large effects on child support payments and maternal
fertility, and no statistically significant effects on any of the other outcomes in this sub-group.33
  33
     We have also examined heterogeneous treatment effects across parents with oldest children of different genders.
Across all of the outcomes that we consider, we see no meaningful (or statistically significant) differences in the
behavior of parents who have boys relative to that of parents who have girls. The lack of gender differences may be
surprising in light of evidence from the U.S. that parents are less likely to get divorced and unmarried fathers are more
likely to acknowledge paternity when they have boys than when they have girls (Lundberg and Rose, 2003; Bedard
and Deschenes, 2005; Lundberg et al., 2007; Dahl and Moretti, 2008; Almond and Rossin-Slater, 2013). However, our
results suggest that, at least in Denmark, parents respond similarly to child support obligations regardless of whether
they have sons or daughters.




                                                           27
6.6      Additional Results

Alternative Specifications We test the robustness of our main results across different speci-
fications in Appendix Tables A8 and A9. Appendix Table A8 considers four different polynomial
functions of the father’s separation year income: linear (Panel A), quadratic (Panel B), cubic (Panel
C), and quartic (Panel D). Appendix Table A9 considers four alternative “bin” indicator functions
of the father’s separation year income: 50,000DKK bins (Panel A), 25, 000DKK bins (Panel B),
15, 000DKK bins (Panel C), and 10, 000DKK bins (Panel D). On the whole, the coefficients across
these different specifications are quite stable and mostly statistically significant.34 These robustness
tests provide support for the validity of the identification strategy and the strength of the results.


Results from Narrow Window Around First Threshold As demonstrated in the bottom
panel of Figure 1, there is a “kink” in the relationship between the average predicted obligation
and the father’s income that arises from the non-linearity in obligations at the first threshold in the
child support formula in each year. We exploit this variation more explicitly by limiting our sample
to fathers with separation year incomes in narrow windows surrounding this threshold. Appendix
Table A10 shows results from using the following windows: 20, 000DKK (Panel A), 40, 000DKK
(Panel B), 60, 000DKK (Panel C), 80, 000DKK (Panel D), and 100, 000DKK (Panel E). Note that
all of the sample sizes in this table are smaller than those in our baseline analysis, where we use a
100, 000DKK window surrounding the first three thresholds.
       Although we lose substantial power, the coefficients in Appendix Table A10 are quite similar
to the main ones we report for four out of the five outcomes we consider. When we consider father
NILF as an outcome, however, we find negative coefficients in Panels A-D, and a positive coefficient
in Panel E, although none is statistically significant at the 5% level. We believe that this pattern
reflects the treatment effect heterogeneity with respect to income relative to the first threshold
that we saw in Table 7. In narrow windows around the threshold, the increase in labor supply
among lower-income fathers seems to, if anything, outweigh the decrease in labor supply among
higher-income fathers.


Alternative Instruments We examine the sensitivity of our results to alternative ways of pre-
dicting child support obligations in the simulated IV framework in Appendix Table A11. In Panel
A, we address the concern that fathers may respond to their obligations by changing their separa-
  34
    The only exception is that the result on paternal labor force participation is somewhat sensitive to the polynomial
function in the father’s separation year income, and flips in sign when we include a cubic polynomial.




                                                          28
tion year income by presenting IV results for our main outcomes where we use the father’s income
measured in the year before separation to predict child support obligations. Our results are sim-
ilar to the main ones described above, suggesting that endogenous income changes in the year of
separation are unlikely to generate substantial biases in our analysis.
      In Panel B, we use a different function of child support obligations instead of a simple average.
Specifically, we calculate a weighted average, discounting obligations in each year after separation.
Our instrument thus becomes:

                                        T
                                1       X        1
                           PT                          · gt+j (It , OrigKidsk,t+j ),
                                   1
                             j=0 (1+r)j j=0   (1 + r)j

and we use an analogous weighted average measure of the actual obligation as well. We assume
a 5 percent discount rate with 2 percent inflation (i.e., r = 0.03). The results with this weighted
average measure are very similar to the main ones we have presented.
      In Panel C, we calculate each father’s average predicted obligation using the father’s predicted
income in each year post-separation instead of simply using the separation year income. We first
regress the father’s income in each year post-separation on a set of pre-determined characteristics
observed in the separation year: the father’s separation year income, the father’s age and age
squared, dummies for the father’s education, and an indicator for the father being from Western
Europe. We use the father’s predicted income in each year after separation to calculate his average
predicted obligation, which we then use to instrument for his actual average obligation. Again, we
find similar coefficients to those in our baseline results.
      In Panel D, we test the robustness of our results to controlling for the father’s post-separation
year income. While we believe this control to be endogenous, the results are largely unchanged
when we include it into our models.


6.7     Are Child Support Obligations Good or Bad for Families?

Throughout this paper, we have documented parental behavioral responses to child support obli-
gations. Yet an important question regarding the overall welfare of children and parents in split
families remains largely unanswered. Is a higher child support obligation good or bad for these
families?
      To try to shed some light on this question, we first think through the implications of our
behavioral results for the welfare costs and benefits associated with a 1, 000DKK increase in the
child support obligation. First, we find that a 1, 000DKK increase in the obligation is associated


                                                      29
with a 506DKK increase in the father’s payment to the mother-child household. Thus, one benefit
is a 506DKK increase in the mother-child household’s income multiplied by the marginal utility
of that household. Since the child support payment is tax-deductible for the father, this transfer
entails a cost to the father of 506DKK ×(1 − τ ) multiplied by his marginal utility, where τ is the
marginal tax rate applied to the 506DKK in income he would have kept in the absence of making
the payment. There is also a loss in tax revenue of 506DKK ×τ .35 Comparing only these benefits
and costs implies the increase in the child support obligation should only be welfare-improving if the
marginal utility of consumption in single-mother households is sufficiently higher than the marginal
utility of consumption among fathers (i.e., if maternal income is sufficiently lower than paternal
income). In our analysis sample, maternal annual income is on average 80, 600DKK ($12, 180)
lower than paternal annual income (see Appendix Table A3).
       Second, we need to take into account paternal labor supply responses. Results in Table 6 suggest
that the average effect of a 1, 000DKK increase in the obligation is a reduction in labor supply.
Given that this result is driven by higher-income fathers and that the marginal tax rate is increasing
in income, there could potentially be a non-trivial loss in tax revenue. In our data, among fathers
with separation year incomes above the first threshold, the difference in average post-separation
incomes between those who spend all years in the labor force and those who spend at least one year
out of the labor force is 351, 000 − 278, 000 = 73, 000DKK ($11, 048).36 Multiplying by the relevant
marginal tax rates implies an average per-father revenue loss of approximately 34, 099DKK.37
       Moreover, there are costs associated with fathers entering the DI and early retirement systems
instead of working. In 2008, public expenditure on disability pensions amounted to about 16.5
billion DKK ($2.5 billion) in Denmark.38 Given that there were about 240, 000 recipients in that
year, this translates to approximately 69, 000DKK ($10, 428) per recipient.39 We estimate that a
1, 000DKK increase in obligations leads to a 0.0012 increase in DI take-up, which can be valued at
  35
      The mother-child household does not pay taxes on the child support income it receives. Thus, the tax revenue loss
is not compensated by additional tax payments from the mother-child household. Marginal tax rates in Denmark
are: 0% for personal income up to 41, 000DKK; 37.48% for incomes between 41, 001 and 279, 800DKK; 43.48%
for incomes between 279, 801 and 335, 800DKK; and 59% for incomes above 335, 800DKK. See https://www.cfe-
eutax.org/taxation/personal-income-tax/denmark.
   36
      By the envelope theorem, there should be no loss in the father’s individual welfare from the labor supply response,
assuming he is behaving optimally. The marginal cost of foregone consumption due to lower income should be equal
to the marginal benefit of increased leisure.
   37
      The loss in average per-father tax revenue is calculated as follows: [(351, 000 − 335, 800) = 15, 200 × 0.59] +
[(335, 800 − 278, 00) = 57, 800 × 0.4348] = 34, 099DKK.
   38
      See OECD.Stat for more details: http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=SOCX_AGG.
   39
      In 2008, the Danish age 18-64 population was 3,418,273 according to Statistics Denmark, and approximately 7
percent of them were receiving disability income (Bingley et al., 2011). This amounts to 0.07 ∗ 3, 418, 273 = 239, 279
recipients.




                                                           30
at approximately 20 million DKK ($3 million).40
    Third, we observe changes in father-child co-residence and both parents’ post-separation fertility.
The welfare effects of increased fertility are hard to measure, and in part depend on the optimal
fertility rate for Denmark. Since the current fertility rate in Denmark is 1.7 and lower than the
replacement rate, it is possible to make an argument that higher fertility is welfare-improving.41
However, the fact that the increase in fertility is happening among parents who already have
children with prior partners makes welfare implications more complicated since per-child resources
likely decline in these families. Similarly, it is difficult to assess whether the decline in father-child
co-residence is beneficial or hurtful to families.
    In sum, a complete welfare analysis of child support obligations is nearly impossible. Neverthe-
less, the discussion here suggests that any welfare calculation must account for parental behavioral
responses in addition to the direct costs and benefits associated with the transfer of income from
non-custodial fathers to single-mother households.
    Finally, since one of the primary goals of child support policies is to improve the well-being
of children, we have also attempted to analyze child outcomes as an alternative way of studying
welfare. We have examined effects on children’s outpatient visits to general hospitals, emergency
room (ER) visits, and hospitalizations at general hospitals. Our analyses yield mostly small and
insignificant coefficients.42 However, these are rather extreme measures of child welfare, and they
do not shed light on important outcomes such as measures of children’s psychological well-being.


7    Conclusion

As growing numbers of children in developed countries have parents who are divorced or separated,
understanding the causal impacts of government interventions targeting their families is important.
Since unmarried and divorced mothers have historically retained physical custody of their children
and had full parental rights, most of these government interventions are centered around encourag-
ing father involvement. These policies share the underlying assumption that father involvement is
essential to child well-being and seek to reduce public spending by shifting the burden of support
of single-mother households from government programs to the children’s fathers.
    However, the implications of such policies for both child well-being and public budgets depend
  40
     This value is calculated as follows: We estimate a 0.0012 increase in the likelihood of disability insurance take-
up, which translates to 0.0012 ∗ 240, 000 = 288 additional recipients. This means that costs are increased by 292 ∗
69, 000DKK= 19, 872, 000DKK.
  41
     See: http://kff.org/global-indicator/total-fertility-rate/ for data on fertility rates.
  42
     These results are available on request.




                                                          31
crucially on their causal impacts on parental behavior. This type of research has thus far been
infeasible on a large scale in the United States primarily due to data constraints, and the Danish
context provides a unique opportunity to study these issues. We exploit Danish administrative
data together with non-linearities in child support guidelines that assign non-custodial parents
different obligations according to their incomes, numbers of children, and separation years to study
the causal effects of child support mandates on parental outcomes. We estimate that a 1, 000DKK
increase in a father’s average annual child support obligation is associated with about a 506DKK
increase in the average annual child support payment.
   We also show parental responses on other margins. In particular, higher obligations reduce the
likelihood that fathers live with their children in at least one year post-separation, providing some
evidence of substitution between monetary and non-pecuniary paternal investments. Additionally,
we find that child support obligations increase post-separation fertility for both parents. Both
parents are more likely to have additional children while married to or cohabiting with new partners;
mothers are also more likely to have children outside these unions. The fertility effect for mothers
is consistent with a positive income-fertility relationship, while the fertility effect for fathers is
consistent with increased demand for new offspring as a result of reduced contact with existing
children. Finally, we find evidence that among higher-income fathers for whom child support
obligations represent taxes on earnings, higher obligations are associated with reductions in labor
force participation and transitions into disability insurance and early retirement programs.
   The findings in this paper point to important parental behavioral responses to redistributive
policies meant to address the needs of children growing up with divorced or separated parents.
By placing mandates on non-custodial parents to make financial transfers to their children, these
policies can disincentivize other forms of non-pecuniary involvement. Moreover, these obligations
generate shocks to parental income and time allocation, and can thus impact their subsequent
family formation decisions and the division of resources across children. As such, the net impacts
on child investment levels and overall child well-being are complicated and ambiguous. Our results
cannot directly speak to these implications, although future research might shed light on these
issues by exploring the effects of child support mandates on a wide range of children’s outcomes.
   The net effects on public spending are also potentially unclear. As we discuss in Section 6.7,
the fact that some fathers respond to higher obligations by exiting the labor force and taking up
disability insurance or early retirement benefits reveals a possible increase in public sector costs
and a reduction in tax revenues. Of course there may also be some savings for public budgets, such
as those due to reductions in maternal take-up of municipal benefits and support programs (e.g.,


                                                 32
reduced-cost childcare and housing subsidies), which we do not observe in our data. Nevertheless,
our findings suggest that child support mandates could have unintended consequences for public
spending.

References
Aizer, A. and McLanahan, S. (2006). The impact of child support enforcement on fertility,
  parental investments, and child well-being. Journal of Human Resources, 41 (1), 28–45.
Almond, D. and Rossin-Slater, M. (2013). Paternity acknowledgment in 2 million birth records
 from michigan. PloS one, 8 (7), e70042.
Argys, L. M. and Peters, H. E. (2001). Interactions between unmarried fathers and their
 children: The role of paternity establishment and child-support policies. American Economic
 Review, 91 (3), 125–129.
Autor, D. and Duggan, M. (2003). The rise in the disability rolls and the decline in unemploy-
 ment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (1), 157–206.
Bedard, K. and Deschenes, O. (2005). Sex preferences, marital dissolution, and the economic
 status of women. Journal of human Resources, 40 (2), 411–434.
Bingley, P., Gupta, N. D. and Pedersen, P. J. (2011). Disability Programs, Health and Re-
  tirement in Denmark since 1960. Working Paper 17138, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bjarnason, T. and Arnarsson, A. M. (2011). Joint physical custody and communication with
  parents: a cross-national study of children in 36 western countries. Journal of Comparative Family
  Studies, pp. 871–890.
Black, D., Daniel, K. and Sanders, S. (2002). The impact of economic conditions on participa-
 tion in disability programs: Evidence from the coal boom and bust. American Economic Review,
 pp. 27–50.
Bratsberg, B., Fevang, E. and Røed, K. (2010). Disability in the welfare state: An unemploy-
 ment problem in disguise? Tech. Rep. 4897, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Brewer, M., Ratcliffe, A. and Smith, S. (2012). Does welfare reform affect fertility? evidence
 from the uk. Journal of Population Economics, 25 (1), 245–266.
Brown, D., Kowalski, A. E. and Lurie, I. Z. (2014). Medicaid as an Investment in Children:
 What is the Long-Term Impact on Tax Receipts? Working Paper 20835, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.
Brown, M. and Flinn, C. J. (2011). Family law effects on divorce, fertility and child investment,
 New York University, unpublished manuscript.
Cancian, M., Heinrich, C. and Chung, Y. (2013). Discouraging disadvantaged fathers’ em-
 ployment: An unintended consequence of policies designed to support families. Journal of Policy
 Analysis and Management, 32 (4), 758–784.
—, Meyer, D. and Roff, J. (2007). Testing New Ways to Increase the Economic Well-Being of
 Single-Parent Families: The Effects of Child Support Policies on Welfare Participants. Discussion
 Paper 1330-07, Institute for Research on Poverty.
— and Meyer, D. R. (2014). Testing the economic independence hypothesis: The effect of an ex-
 ogenous increase in child support on subsequent marriage and cohabitation. Demography, 51 (3),
 857–880.



                                                33
—, — and Han, E. (2011). Child support: responsible fatherhood and the quid pro quo. The
 ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 635 (1), 140–162.
Case, A. (1998). The effects of stronger child support enforcement on nonmarital fertility. In
 I. Garfinkel, S. McLanahan, D. Meyer and J. Seltzer (eds.), Fathers under fire: The revolution
 in child support enforcement, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 191–215.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N. and Rockoff, J. (2011). New evidence on the long-term impacts
 of tax credits, Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Cuesta, L. and Cancian, M. (2015). The effect of child support on the labor supply of custodial
 mothers participating in tanf. Children and Youth Services Review, 54, 49–56.
Currie, J. and Gruber, J. (1996). Saving babies: The efficacy and cost of recent changes in the
 medicaid eligibility of pregnant women. Journal of Political Economy, 106 (6), 1263–1296.
Dahl, G. B. and Lochner, L. (2012). The impact of family income on child achievement: Evi-
 dence from the earned income tax credit. American Economic Review, 102 (5), 1927–1956.
— and Moretti, E. (2008). The demand for sons. The Review of Economic Studies, 75 (4),
 1085–1120.
Del Boca, D. (2003). Mothers, fathers, and children after divorce: The role of institutions. Journal
 of Population Economics, 16, 399–422.
— and Flinn, C. J. (1995). Rationalizing child-support decisions. The American Economic Review,
 pp. 1241–1262.
— and Ribero, R. (2003). Visitations and transfers after divorce. Review of the Economics of the
 Household, 1, 187–204.
Feenberg, D. (1987). Are tax price models really identified: The case of charitable giving. National
  Tax Journal, pp. 629–633.
Flinn, C. J. (2000). Modes of interaction between divorced parents. International Economic Re-
  view, 41 (3), 545–578.
Freeman, R. B. and Waldfogel, J. (1998). Does child support enforcement policy affect male
 labor supply. In I. Garfinkel, S. McLanahan, D. Meyer and J. Seltzer (eds.), Fathers Under Fire:
 The Revolution in Child Support Enforcement, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 94–127.
— and — (2001). Dunning delinquent dads: The effects of child support enforcement policy on
 child support receipt by never married women. Journal of Human Resources, 36 (2), 207–225.
Garfinkel, I., Mclanahan, S., Meyer, D. and Seltzer, J. (1998). Fathers under fire: The
 revolution in child support enforcement. Russell Sage Foundation Publications.
Gruber, J. (2000). Disability insurance benefits and labor supply. The Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 108 (6), 1162–1183.
— and Saez, E. (2002). The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and implications. Journal of
 public Economics, 84 (1), 1–32.
— and Wise, D. A. (2004). Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Micro-
 Estimation. University of Chicago press.
— and — (2009). Social security programs and retirement around the world: Fiscal implications of
 reform. University of Chicago press.
Gunter, S. P. (2013). Effects of child support pass-through and disregard policies on in-kind child
 support. Review of Economics of the Household, 11 (2), 193–209.


                                                34
Halla, M. (2013). The effect of joint custody on family outcomes. Journal of the European Eco-
 nomic Association, 11 (2), 278–315.
Holzer, H. J., Offner, P. and Sorensen, E. (2005). Declining employment among young black
 less-educated men: The role of incarceration and child support. Journal of Policy Analysis and
 Management, 24 (2), 329–350.
Hoynes, H. W. (1997). Work, welfare, and family structure: What have we learned? In A. Auer-
 bach (ed.), Fiscal Policy: Lessons from Economic Research, MIT Press, pp. 101–146.
Huang, C.-C. (2002). The impact of child support enforcement on nonmarital and marital births:
 Does it differ by racial and age groups? Social Service Review, 76 (2), 275–301.
— and Han, K.-Q. (2012). Child support enforcement in the united states: Has policy made a
 difference? Children and Youth Services Review, 34 (4), 622–627.
Kampmann, J. and Nielsen, H. W. (2004). Socialized childhood: Children’s childhoods in Den-
 mark. In A.-M. Jensen, A. Ben-Arieh, C. Conti, M. N. Ghiolla Phadraig and H. W. Nielsen
 (eds.), Children’s Welfare in Ageing Europe, vol. 2, pp. 649–702.
Kim, Y., Cancian, M. and Meyer, D. R. (2015). Child support and subsequent nonmarital
  fertility with a new partner. Journal of Family Issues, p. 0192513X14565701.
Laroque, G. and Salanié, B. (2008). Does fertility respond to financial incentives? Discussion
  Paper 3575, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Larsen, M. and Pedersen, P. J. (2012). Paid Work after Retirement: Recent Trends in Denmark.
  Discussion Paper 6537.
Lerman, R. I. and Sorenson, E. (2003). Child support: Interactions between private and public
  transfers. In Means-tested transfer programs in the United States, University of Chicago Press,
  pp. 587–628.
Lundberg, S., McLanahan, S. and Rose, E. (2007). Child gender and father involvement in
  fragile families. Demography, 44 (1), 79–92.
— and Rose, E. (2003). Child gender and the transition to marriage. Demography, 40 (2), 333–349.
Milligan, K. (2005). Subsidizing the stork: New evidence on tax incentives and fertility. Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 87 (3), 539–555.
— and Stabile, M. (2011). Do child tax benefits affect the well-being of children? evidence
 from canadian child benefit expansions. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3 (3),
 175–205.
Moffitt, R. (2002). Welfare programs and labor supply. In A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.),
 Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 4, Elsevier, pp. 2393–2430.
Moffitt, R. A. (1998). The effect of welfare on marriage and fertility. In R. A. Moffitt (ed.),
 Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior:: Research Perspectives, National Academies
 Press, p. 50.
Neal, D. (2004). The relationship between marriage market prospects and never-married mother-
 hood. Journal of Human Resources, 39 (4), 938–957.
Nepomnyaschy, L. (2007). Child support and father-child contact: Testing reciprocal pathways.
 Demography, 44 (1), 93–112.
— and Garfinkel, I. (2010). Child support enforcement and fathers’ contributions to their non-
 marital children. The Social service review, 84 (3), 341.


                                               35
Peters, H. E., Argys, L. M., Howard, H. W. and Butler, J. (2004). Legislating love: the
 effect of child support and welfare policies on father–child contact. Review of Economics of the
 Household, 2 (3), 255–274.
Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2013). Optimal labor income taxation. In A. J. Auerbach, R. Chetty,
  M. Feldstein and E. Saez (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 5, pp. 391–474.
Pirog, M. A. and Ziol-Guest, K. M. (2006). Child support enforcement: Programs and policies,
  impacts and questions. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25 (4), 943–990.
Plotnick, R. D., Garfinkel, I., McLanahan, S. S. and Ku, I. (2004). Better child support
 enforcement can it reduce teenage premarital childbearing? Journal of Family Issues, 25 (5),
 634–657.
Roff, J. and Lugo-Gil, J. (2012). A model of child support and the underground economy.
 Labour Economics, 19 (5), 668–681.
Saez, E., Slemrod, J. and Giertz, S. H. (2012). The elasticity of taxable income with respect
  to marginal tax rates: A critical review. Journal of Economic Literature, 50 (1), 3–50.
Schoeni, R. and Blank, R. (2000). What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on welfare
  participation, employment, income, poverty, and family structure. Working Paper 7627, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Skinner, C., Bradshaw, J. and Davidson, J. (2007). Child Support Policy: An International
  Perspective. Research report, Department for Work and Pensions.
Slemrod, J. (1985). An empirical test for tax evasion. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  pp. 232–238.
Sorensen, E. and Halpern, A. (1999). Child support enforcement: How well is it doing? Dis-
  cussion Paper 99-11, The Urban Institute.
— and Olivier, H. (2002). Child support reforms in PRWORA: Initial impacts. Discussion Paper
 02-02, The Urban Institute.
Stevenson, B. and Wolfers, J. (2006). Bargaining in the shadow of the law: Divorce laws and
  family distress. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (1), 267–288.
Tartari, M. (2014). Divorce and the cognitive achievement of children, University of Chicago,
 unpublished manuscript.
Weinberg, D. H. (2006). Income data quality issues in the CPS. Monthly Labor Review, 129, 38.
Weiss, Y. and Willis, R. (1985). Children as collective goods and divorce settlements. Journal
 of Labor Economics, 3 (3), 268–292.
Willis, R. J. (1999). A theory of out-of-wedlock childbearing. Journal of Political Economy,
 107 (S6), S33–S64.
Wolfers, J. (2006). Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? a reconciliation and new
 results. The American Economic Review, 96 (5), 1802–1820.




                                               36
Figure 1: Government-Mandated Child Support Obligations by Separation Year and Average Pre-
dicted Obligation by Father Income in Separation Year, Year 2000 DKK
                  (a) 1 Child Families                                       (b) 2 Child Families




                   (c) 1 Child Families                                      (d) 2 Child Families




Notes: Sub-figures (a) and (b) show the relationship between a non-custodial father’s income and the child support
obligation by year for families with one and two children, respectively. Sub-figures (c) and (d) show the relationship
between a non-custodial father’s income and the average predicted obligation by year of separation for families with
one and two children, respectively. Units are 1000s of real year 2000 DKK.




                                                         37
Figure 2: Variation in the Average Predicted Obligation by 20K Father Income Bin, Separation
Year, and Number of Children


                       (a) 1 Child                                            (b) 2 Children




                       (c) 1 Child                                            (d) 2 Children




Notes: These figures plot the variation in the residuals of a regression of average predicted obligations on fixed
effects for the year of separation, 20, 000DKK income bins, and number of children and their double interactions.
Sub-figures (a) and (b) show the variation in the average predicted obligation residuals within each 20, 000DKK
income bin separately by the number of children. Sub-figures (c) and (d) show the variation in the average
predicted obligation residuals within each separation year separately by the number of children. Units are 1000s of
real year 2000 DKK.




                                                        38
Figure 3: Effect of Child Support Obligations on Fathers Being Not in the Labor Force (NILF):
By Number Years Before and After Separation




Notes: This figure presents the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from 11 separate regressions. For years
x ∈ [1, 5], each regression has an indicator for the father being not in the labor force (NILF) in year x + 1 post-
separation as the dependent variable and the average annual obligation over the preceding post-separation years (0 to
x) as the explanatory variable (instrumented by the average predicted obligation which is calculated using separation-
year income and separation-year number of children). For years x ∈ [−5, 0], each regression has an indicator for the
father being not in the labor force (NILF) in year x pre-separation as the dependent variable and the obligation in
the year of separation as the explanatory variable. See notes under Table 2 for more information on the sample.




                                                         39
      Table 1: Effect of Child Support Obligations on the Likelihood of Parental Separation

                          Dep. Var.: Parents Separated or Had Out-of-Wedlock/Cohabitation Birth
                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)                    (5)
                           Poly 1         Poly 2         Poly 3         Poly 4                20K Bins
Child support           0.000263∗∗∗ 0.000176∗∗∗ -0.000125∗∗ -0.0000791                        -0.000409
obligation              [0.0000332] [0.0000414] [0.0000544] [0.0000650]                       [0.000329]
Mean, dept. var.           0.0316         0.0316         0.0316         0.0316                  0.0235
Obs. (father-years)       2286550        2286550        2286550        2286550                 2286550
Number cells                                                                                     330
Notes: In columns 1-4, units of analysis are father-year observations. In column 5, the units of analysis are cells
according to the interactions of 20,000 DKK father income bins, year, and number of children. The regression
in column 5 is weighted by the number of father-year observations in each cell. The sample is a panel of fathers of
children born in 1985-2010, who appear in the register data in every year over 1998-2010, and who were either married
to, cohabiting with, or never-married/non-cohabiting with their oldest child’s mother at the time of childbirth for
children born in 1998 or later or in 1998 for children born before. Only father-year observations until the year of
separation (if it occurs) are kept. The sample is further limited to father-year observations with nominal incomes
between 175,000 and 505,000 DKK. (100,000 DKK surrounding the range of the first three cutoffs), and who have
either one or two children aged less than 18. In columns 1-4 (column 5), the outcome of interest is an indicator
for (fraction of) the parents either separating, divorcing, or have an out-of-wedlock/cohabitation child. All income
variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. In columns 1-4, standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity;
in column 5, robust standard errors are clustered on the cell level.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                         40
                                Table 2: Correlation between Average Predicted Obligation and Parental Characteristics

                                 (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)               (8)            (9)
                                F.Age         M.Age         F.Ed:Uni        F.Ed:Voc         F.Ed:HS         M.Ed:Uni         M.Ed:Voc          M.Ed:HS         M.Inc.
     Average predicted          0.0121        -0.0138        0.00206        -0.00249        0.0000825          0.00207         -0.000104        0.000278         0.392
     obligation                [0.0214]       [0.0189]      [0.00149]       [0.00178]       [0.000679]        [0.00160]        [0.00179]       [0.000676]       [0.284]
     Mean, dept. var.            36.33         34.14          0.133           0.551            0.0345           0.197            0.433            0.0527         205.7
     Obs.                        73303         73250          73303           73303            73303            73303            73303            73303          70618
     Notes: “F.” refers to fathers’ characteristics, while “M.” refers to mothers’ characteristics. The sample is limited to fathers of children born in 1985-2010, who




41
     appear in the register data in every year over 1998-2010, and who were either married to, cohabiting with, or never-married/non-cohabiting with their oldest
     child’s mother at the time of childbirth for children born in 1998 or later or in 1998 for children born before. For parents who were never-married/non-cohabiting,
     the year of separation refers to the year of their oldest child’s birth. The sample is further limited to fathers who were either never-married/non-cohabiting and
     had a child between 1998 and 2008 or who separated or divorced from their oldest child’s mother between 1999 and 2008, who had nominal incomes between
     175,000 and 505,000 DKK in the year of separation (100,000 DKK surrounding the range of the first three cutoffs), and who had either one or two children aged
     less than 18 at the time of separation. The average predicted obligation is calculated using the father’s income in the year of separation, the number of chidren
     under 18 in each year post-separation (i.e., accounting for children who age out when they turn 18 but not counting any new children born post-separation), and
     the formula in each year. All regressions include a full set of fixed effects and interactions for number of children, year, and 20,000 DKK bins in the father’s
     separation year income. Additionally, the regressions include indicators for the number of children still under age 18 in each year post-separation that the parents
     had (not including any new children born post-separation). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
     Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Table 3: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Fathers’ Child Support Payments and
Father-Child Co-Residence

                             (1)                    (2)                        (3)                     (4)
                         Avg CS Paid        Pay More Than Oblig.          Ever Pay Zero        Ever Live w/ Child
Average child               0.506∗∗∗                -0.00258∗                -0.0132∗∗∗             -0.00567∗∗∗
support obligation          [0.0365]                [0.00150]                 [0.00145]              [0.00200]
Mean, dept. var.             9.263                    0.0756                    0.737                   0.278
Fst. Stage Coef.             0.851                     0.851                   0.851                    0.851
Fst. Stage F-Stat            2291.7                   2291.7                   2291.7                  2291.7
Obs.                         70468                    70468                    70468                   70468
Notes: The outcomes are defined as follows: 1) “Avg CS Paid” refers to the average annual child support paid by
the father in the years post-separation; 2) “Pay More Than Oblig.” refers to an indicator for the father’s average
child support payment being greater than his average child support obligation post-separation; 3)“Ever Pay Zero”
refers to an indicator for zero child support paid by the father in at least one year post-separation; 4) “Ever Live
w/ Child” refers to an indicator for the father living with the child at least one year post-separation. All income
variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Table 2 for more information on the sample.
All regressions include fixed effects for 20,000 DKK bins in the father’s separation year income, number of children
at separation, year of separation, and their double interactions. All regressions include controls (measured in the
year of separation) for the father’s age and age squared, dummies for the father’s education (less than high school,
high school, vocational/short-term higher ed, college/university, and missing), an indicator for the father being from
Western Europe, mother’s age and age squared, dummies for the mother’s education (less than high school, high
school, vocational/short-term higher ed, college/university, and missing), an indicator for the mother being from
Western Europe, mother’s total income in year 2000 DKK, oldest child’s age and age squared, youngest child’s age
and age squared, an indicator for the oldest child being male, an indicator for the youngest child being male, and
indicators for original parental relationship status (married, cohabiting, never-married/non-cohabiting). Additionally,
the regressions include indicators for the number of children still under age 18 in each year post-separation that the
parents had (not including any new children born post-separation). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                          42
Table 4: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Mothers’ Post-Separation Fertility

                                                        Mother Has More Kids After Sep.
                                    (1)                    (2)                      (3)                    (4)
                                   Overall                 Mar.                    Coh.               Not Mar./Coh.
Average child                    0.00603∗∗∗             0.00380∗∗∗             0.00149∗∗                0.000809∗∗
support obligation               [0.000990]             [0.000698]             [0.000732]               [0.000369]
Mean, dept. var.                    0.185                 0.0658                 0.0922                    0.0287
Fst. Stage Coef.                    0.852                  0.852                 0.852                     0.852
Fst. Stage F-Stat                   2280.6                2280.6                 2280.6                    2280.6
Obs.                                68772                 68772                  68772                     68772
Notes: The outcomes are defined as follows: 1) “Overall” refers to an indicator for the mother having any children
post-separation (regardless of relationship status); 2) “Mar.” refers to an indicator for the mother having more
children post-separation while married to a new partner; 3) “Coh.” refers to an indicator for the mother having more
children post-separation while cohabiting with a new partner; 4) “Not Mar./Coh.” refers to an indicator for the
mother having more children post-separation while neither married or cohabiting. All income variables are in year
2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Tables 2 and 3 for more information on the sample, specifications,
and controls. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




 Table 5: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Fathers’ Post-Separation Fertility

                                                    Father Has More Kids After Sep.
                           (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)                 (5)
                          Overall          Mar.           Coh.       Not Mar./Coh. Not living w/ older child
Average child      0.00680∗∗∗ 0.00323∗∗∗ 0.00324∗∗∗                      0.000241                  0.00741∗∗∗
support obligation [0.00113] [0.000861] [0.000815]                      [0.000450]                  [0.00101]
Mean, dept. var.           0.186          0.0805        0.0830            0.0238                      0.148
Fst. Stage Coef.           0.851          0.851         0.851              0.851                      0.851
Fst. Stage F-Stat          2291.7         2291.7        2291.7            2291.7                     2291.7
Obs.                       70468          70468         70468             70468                      70468
Notes: The outcomes are defined as follows: 1) “Overall” refers to an indicator for the father having any children
post-separation (regardless of relationship status); 2) “Mar.” refers to an indicator for the father having more children
post-separation while married to a new partner; 3) “Coh.” refers to an indicator for the father having more children
post-separation while cohabiting with a new partner; 4) “Not Mar./Coh.” refers to an indicator for the father having
more children post-separation while neither married or cohabiting; 5) “Not living w/ older child” refers to an indicator
for the father having more children post-separation while not living with his oldest child. All income variables are in
year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Tables 2 and 3 for more information on the sample, specifications,
and controls. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                           43
                   Table 6: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Fathers’ Post-Separation Labor Market Outcomes

                                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)              (8)
                                 Any Wage          Log Wage            Emp.           Self-Emp.            NILF               Dis.             Welf.             Ret.
     Average child                -0.00166∗         -0.00114         -0.000783        -0.000365         0.00207∗∗∗        0.00120∗∗∗        -0.000139         0.00120∗∗∗
     support obligation          [0.000976]         [0.00457]        [0.00117]        [0.000990]        [0.000543]        [0.000351]        [0.000309]        [0.000303]
     Mean, dept. var.               0.915             12.26             0.832           0.0610            0.0418            0.0112            0.0249           0.00364
     Fst. Stage Coef.              0.852             0.855              0.851           0.851             0.851             0.851             0.851             0.851




44
     Fst. Stage F-Stat             2301.7            2253.4            2291.7           2291.7            2291.7            2291.7            2291.7           2291.7
     Obs.                          70455             69018             70468            70468             70468             70468             70468             70468
     Notes: The outcomes are defined as follows: 1) “Any Wage” refers to the proportion of years the father has any wage income post-separation, 2) “Log Wage”
     refers to the log of the father’s average annual wage income in the years post-separation, 3) “Emp.” refers to the proportion of years the father is employed in
     the private or public sector (not self-employed) post-separation, 4) “Self-Emp.” refers to the proportion of years the father is self-employed post-separation, 5)
     “NILF” refers to the proportion of years the father is not in the labor force post-separation, 6) “Dis.” refers to the proportion of years the father is not in the
     labor force due to disability leave post-separation, 7) “Welf.” refers to the proportion of years the father is not in the labor force and receiving welfare benefits,
     and 8) “Ret.” refers to the proportion of years the father is not in the labor force due to retirement (including early retirement) post-separation. All income
     variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Tables 2 and 3 for more information on the sample, specifications, and controls. Standard
     errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
     Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
     Table 7: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Fathers’ Post-Separation Labor Market Outcomes: Heterogeneity by Income
     Relative to the First Guideline Threshold

                                       (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)
                                    Any Wage         Log Wage             Emp.          Self-Emp.           NILF              Dis.             Welf.              Ret.
     Average child                  0.00220∗          0.0147∗∗         0.00381∗∗         -0.00210        -0.000821         -0.000629        -0.000130          0.000128
     support obligation             [0.00132]         [0.00592]        [0.00161]         [0.00133]       [0.000753]        [0.000489]       [0.000445]        [0.000398]
     Average Obligation            -0.00241∗∗∗       -0.0101∗∗∗       -0.00286∗∗∗       0.00106∗∗        0.00179∗∗∗       0.00114∗∗∗        -0.0000157       0.000672∗∗∗
     * Above Threshold 1            [0.000445]        [0.00198]        [0.000543]       [0.000424]       [0.000288]       [0.000208]        [0.000158]        [0.000135]
     Above Threshold 1              0.0464∗∗∗         0.227∗∗∗         0.0564∗∗∗          -0.0172∗       -0.0327∗∗∗        -0.0211∗∗∗         0.00248         -0.0139∗∗∗




45
                                    [0.00956]         [0.0434]          [0.0118]         [0.00921]        [0.00608]         [0.00438]        [0.00328]         [0.00286]
     Mean, dept. var.                 0.915             12.26            0.832             0.0610           0.0418           0.0112           0.0249            0.00364
     Obs.                             70455             69018            70468             70468            70468            70468            70468              70468
     Notes: This table presents results from regressions that include an interaction with an indicator for the father’s separation year nominal income being above
     the first threshold in the child support guidelines. The outcomes are defined as follows: 1) “Any Wage” refers to the proportion of years the father has any
     wage income post-separation, 2) “Log Wage” refers to the log of the father’s average annual wage income in the years post-separation, 3) “Emp.” refers to the
     proportion of years the father is employed in the private or public sector (not self-employed) post-separation, 4) “Self-Emp.” refers to the proportion of years the
     father is self-employed post-separation, 5) “NILF” refers to the proportion of years the father is not in the labor force post-separation, 6) “Dis.” refers to the
     proportion of years the father is not in the labor force due to disability leave post-separation, 7) “Welf.” refers to the proportion of years the father is not in the
     labor force and receiving welfare benefits, and 8) “Ret.” refers to the proportion of years the father is not in the labor force due to retirement (including early
     retirement) post-separation. All income variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Tables 2 and 3 for more information on the sample,
     specifications, and controls. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
     Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
                                      Online Appendix — Not for Publication


A    Appendix Figures and Tables


Figure A1: Growth Rate of the “Normal Amount” Compared with the Growth Rate of Average Nominal
Income Among Fathers




Notes: This figure shows the growth rate in the nominal “normal amount” of the child support obligation (in blue) compared
with the growth rate in the average nominal income among fathers in our sample (in red).




                                                           46
Figure A2: Government-Mandated Child Support Obligations by Year and Father’s Income Percentiles,
Year 2000 DKK


                                                    (a) 1 Child Families




                                                    (b) 2 Child Families




Notes: This figure shows the relationship between a non-custodial father’s income percentile and the child support obligation
by year for families with one and two children (a and b, respectively). Units are 1000s of real year 2000 DKK.




                                                             47
           Figure A3: First Stage Coefficients by Year, 20K Income Bin, and Number of Children


                     (a) By Year of Separation                                (b) By 20K Income Bin




                                                 (c) By Number of Children




Notes: These figures show the first stage coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from separate regressions by year of
separation (sub-figure a), 20K DKK income bin (sub-figure b), and number of children (sub-figure c). Units are 1000s of real
year 2000 DKK.




                                                             48
Figure A4: The Effects of Child Support Obligations on Father-Child Co-Residence: By Number Years
After Separation




Notes: This figure presents the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from five separate regressions. For years x ∈ [1, 5], each
regression has an indicator for the father living with his oldest child in year x + 1 post-separation as the dependent variable
and the average annual obligation over the preceding post-separation years (0 to x) as the explanatory variable (instrumented
by the average predicted obligation which is calculated using separation-year income and separation-year number of children).
See notes under Table 2 for more information on the sample. All regressions include fixed effects for 20,000 DKK bins in
the father’s separation year income, number of children at separation, year of separation, and their double interactions. All
regressions include controls (measured in the year of separation) for the father’s age and age squared, dummies for the father’s
education (less than high school, high school, vocational/short-term higher ed, college/university, and missing), an indicator for
the father being from Western Europe, mother’s age and age squared, dummies for the mother’s education (less than high school,
high school, vocational/short-term higher ed, college/university, and missing), an indicator for the mother being from Western
Europe, mother’s total income in year 2000 DKK, oldest child’s age and age squared, youngest child’s age and age squared, an
indicator for the oldest child being male, an indicator for the youngest child being male, and indicators for original parental
relationship status (married, cohabiting, never-married/non-cohabiting). Additionally, the regressions include indicators for the
number of children still under age 18 in each year post-separation that the parents had (not including any new children born
post-separation). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.




                                                                49
Figure A5: The Effects of Child Support Obligations on Mothers’ Subsequent Fertility: By Number Years
After Separation




Notes: This figure presents the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from five separate regressions. In particular, for years
x ∈ [1, 5]—the first five years of separation displayed on the x-axis—each regression has an indicator for the mother having
more children in year x + 1 post-separation as the dependent variable and the average annual obligation over the preceding
post-separation years (0 to x) as the explanatory variable (instrumented by the average predicted obligation which is calculated
using separation-year income and separation-year number of children). See notes under Table 2 for more information on the
sample, and notes under Appendix Figure A4 for more information on the estimation and controls.




                                                               50
Figure A6: The Effects of Child Support Obligations on Fathers’ Subsequent Fertility: By Number Years
After Separation




Notes: This figure presents the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from five separate regressions. In particular, for years
x ∈ [1, 5]—the first five years of separation displayed on the x-axis—each regression has an indicator for the father having
more children in year x + 1 post-separation as the dependent variable and the average annual obligation over the preceding
post-separation years (0 to x) as the explanatory variable (instrumented by the average predicted obligation which is calculated
using separation-year income and separation-year number of children). See notes under Table 2 for more information on the
sample, and notes under Appendix Figure A4 for more information on the estimation and controls.




                                                               51
Figure A7: IV Coefficients by Year, 50K Income Bin, and Number of Children for Average Child Support
Paid as Outcome


                     (a) By Year of Separation                               (b) By 50K Income Bin




                                                 (c) By Number of Children




Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from separate IV regressions by year of separation
(sub-figure a), 50K DKK income bin (sub-figure b), and number of children (sub-figure c). The outcome is the average child
support paid in the years post-separation. Units are 1000s of real year 2000 DKK.




                                                            52
Figure A8: IV Coefficients by Year, 50K Income Bin, and Number of Children for Father-Child Co-Residence
as Outcome


                     (a) By Year of Separation                                (b) By 50K Income Bin




                                                 (c) By Number of Children




Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from separate IV regressions by year of separation
(sub-figure a), 50K DKK income bin (sub-figure b), and number of children (sub-figure c). The outcome is an indicator for the
father ever residing with his child post-separation. Units are 1000s of real year 2000 DKK.




                                                             53
Figure A9: IV Coefficients by Year, 50K Income Bin, and Number of Children for Father Has More Kids as
Outcome


                     (a) By Year of Separation                                (b) By 50K Income Bin




                                                 (c) By Number of Children




Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from separate IV regressions by year of separation
(sub-figure a), 50K DKK income bin (sub-figure b), and number of children (sub-figure c). The outcome is an indicator for the
father having more children post-separation. Units are 1000s of real year 2000 DKK.




                                                             54
Figure A10: IV Coefficients by Year, 50K Income Bin, and Number of Children for Mother Has More Kids
as Outcome


                     (a) By Year of Separation                                (b) By 50K Income Bin




                                                 (c) By Number of Children




Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from separate IV regressions by year of separation
(sub-figure a), 50K DKK income bin (sub-figure b), and number of children (sub-figure c). The outcome is an indicator for the
mother having more children post-separation. Units are 1000s of real year 2000 DKK.




                                                             55
Figure A11: IV Coefficients by Year, 50K Income Bin, and Number of Children for Father is NILF as
Outcome


                     (a) By Year of Separation                               (b) By 50K Income Bin




                                                 (c) By Number of Children




Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from separate IV regressions by year of separation
(sub-figure a), 50K DKK income bin (sub-figure b), and number of children (sub-figure c). The outcome is the average number
of years that the father is not in the labor force (NILF) post-separation. Units are 1000s of real year 2000 DKK.




                                                            56
                          Table A1: Child Support Obligation Schemes: 1999, 2005, 2008

1999: Normal Amount = 9,132 DKK; Extra Amount = 0 DKK
Obligation                                       Income Range (1 Child)                Income Range (2 Children)
Normal                                           <=275,000                             <=290,000
Normal + 25% × Normal                            275,001-290,000                       290,001-315,000
Normal + 50% × Normal                            290,001-315,000                       315,001-355,000
Normal + 100% × Normal                           >315,000                              >355,000

2005: Normal Amount = 10,824 DKK; Extra Amount = 1,392 DKK
Obligation                                       Income Range (1 Child)                Income Range (2 Children)
Normal   +   Extra                               <=325,000                             <=345,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   25% × Normal            325,001-345,000                       345,001-380,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   50% × Normal            345,001-380,000                       380,001-420,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   100% × Normal           380,001-500,000                       420,001-600,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   200% × Normal           500,001-900,000                       600,001-1,100,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   300% × Normal           >900,000                              >1,100,000

2008: Normal Amount = 11,628 DKK; Extra Amount = 1,500 DKK
Obligation                                       Income Range (1 Child)                Income Range (2 Children)
Normal   +   Extra                               <=350,000                             <=370,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   25% × Normal            350,001-370,000                       370,001-405,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   50% × Normal            370,001-405,000                       405,001-450,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   100% × Normal           405,001-600,000                       450,001-700,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   200% × Normal           600,001-1,000,000                     700,001-1,200,000
Normal   +   Extra   +   300% × Normal           >1,000,000                            >1,200,000

Notes: Information on the child support schemes comes from from Statsforvaltningen.   For more information, please see
http://www.statsforvaltningen.dk/site.aspx?p=6404.




                                                         57
     Table A2: Correlation between Average Predicted Obligation and Parental Characteristics, Using a 4th Order Polynomial in Father’s
     Income

                                 (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)            (9)
                                F.Age        M.Age        F.Ed:Uni        F.Ed:Voc        F.Ed:HS         M.Ed:Uni        M.Ed:Voc         M.Ed:HS         M.Inc.
     Average predicted          0.0136      -0.0237       -0.000315       -0.000976      -0.000116        0.000100        -0.0000268        0.000337       0.0146
     obligation                [0.0213]     [0.0190]      [0.00144]       [0.00174]      [0.000659]       [0.00155]        [0.00174]       [0.000671]      [0.277]
     Mean, dept. var.           36.33        34.14          0.133           0.551           0.0345          0.197            0.433           0.0527         205.7
     Obs.                       73303        73250          73303           73303           73303           73303            73303           73303          70618




58
     Notes: “F.” refers to fathers’ characteristics, while “M.” refers to mothers’ characteristics. The sample is limited to fathers of children born in 1985-2010,
     who appear in the register data in every year over 1998-2010, and who were either married to, cohabiting with, or never-married/non-cohabiting with
     their oldest child’s mother at the time of childbirth for children born in 1998 or later or in 1998 for children born before. For parents who were never-
     married/non-cohabiting, the year of separation refers to the year of their oldest child’s birth. The sample is further limited to fathers who were either
     never-married/non-cohabiting and had a child between 1998 and 2008 or who separated or divorced from their oldest child’s mother between 1999 and 2008,
     who had nominal incomes between 175,000 and 505,000 DKK in the year of separation (100,000 DKK surrounding the range of the first three cutoffs), and
     who had either one or two children aged less than 18 at the time of separation. The average predicted obligation is calculated using the father’s income in the
     year of separation, the number of chidren under 18 in each year post-separation (i.e., accounting for children who age out when they turn 18 but not counting
     any new children born post-separation), and the formula in each year. All regressions include a fourth-order polynomial in the father’s separation year
     income, and a full set of fixed effects and interactions for number of children and year, and interactions between them and the father’s income polynomial.
     Additionally, the regressions include indicators for the number of children still under age 18 in each year post-separation that the parents had (not including
     any new children born post-separation). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
     Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
                                             Table A3: Summary Statistics

                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)         (5)
                                                  All Sep. Prev. Mar. Prev. Coh. Never Mar/Coh All Parents
Average child                                      9.213         10.20          9.030              5.735               —
support paid                                      (8.508)       (9.528)        (7.710)            (5.136)
Average tax-ded.                                   18.10         18.60          18.35              15.10               —
obligation, current income/number kids            (8.578)       (9.482)        (7.939)            (5.779)
Average predicted                                  15.14         15.84          15.42              11.15               —
tax-ded. obligation                               (7.120)       (7.844)        (6.707)            (2.788)
1st child’s age at                                 6.925         9.649          5.685                0               8.572
sep.                                              (5.585)       (5.420)        (4.333)              (0)             (9.214)
Dad age at sep.                                    36.33         39.69          34.34              29.50             38.67
                                                  (7.581)       (7.059)        (6.533)            (5.972)           (10.04)
Dad inc. at sep.                                   286.3         298.6          279.7              258.6             307.7
                                                  (71.92)       (72.88)        (68.74)            (68.45)           (273.8)
Dad ed: uni/college                                0.133         0.161          0.111             0.0939             0.205
                                                  (0.339)       (0.368)        (0.314)            (0.292)           (0.404)
Dad ed: short                                      0.551         0.565          0.554              0.476             0.470
high-ed/vocational                                (0.497)       (0.496)        (0.497)            (0.499)           (0.499)
Dad ed: high school                               0.0345        0.0355         0.0303             0.0463            0.0513
                                                  (0.183)       (0.185)        (0.171)            (0.210)           (0.221)
Mom age at sep.                                    34.14         37.18          32.40              27.78             36.14
                                                  (7.111)       (6.334)        (6.497)            (5.934)           (9.359)
Mom inc. at sep.                                   205.7         224.7          196.3              161.2             211.0
                                                  (73.18)       (73.07)        (68.48)            (63.97)           (136.9)
Mom ed: uni/college                                0.197         0.231          0.176              0.133             0.263
                                                  (0.398)       (0.422)        (0.381)            (0.339)           (0.440)
Mom ed: short                                      0.433         0.481          0.417              0.287             0.368
high-ed/vocational                                (0.495)       (0.500)        (0.493)            (0.452)           (0.482)
Mom ed: high school                               0.0527        0.0453         0.0545             0.0769            0.0680
                                                  (0.223)       (0.208)        (0.227)            (0.266)           (0.252)
Obs.                                              73,303        34,656          30,466             8,181            866,038
Notes: All income variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. In columns (1)-(4), the sample is limited to fathers of
children born in 1985-2010, who appear in the register data in every year over 1998-2010, and who were either married to,
cohabiting with, or never-married/non-cohabiting with their oldest child’s mother at the time of childbirth for children born in
1998 or later or in 1998 for children born before. For parents who were never-married/non-cohabiting, the year of separation
refers to the year of their oldest child’s birth. The sample is further limited to fathers who were either never-married/non-
cohabiting and had a child between 1998 and 2008 or who separated or divorced from their oldest child’s mother between 1999
and 2008, who had nominal incomes between 175,000 and 505,000 DKK in the year of separation (100,000 DKK surrounding the
range of the first three thresholds), and who had either one or two children aged less than 18 at the time of separation. Column
(5) reports summary statistics for all parents of children born in 1985-2010 who appear in the register data over 1998-2010.
There is no year of separation for these families; the statistics reported are averages over 1998-2010.
                                                              59
                             Table A4: Child Support Payment Variables, More Details

                                      (1)                      (2)                      (3)                           (4)
                                    All Sep.               Prev. Mar.                Prev. Coh.                 Never Mar/Coh
CS Paid as Pct. of                   0.515                    0.561                      0.491                        0.409
Obligation
Zero CS Paid                         0.193                    0.190                      0.175                        0.272

CS Paid as Pct. of                   0.638                    0.693                      0.595                        0.562
Obligation, no 0s
0 < CS Paid <                        0.731                    0.704                      0.772                        0.696
Obligation
CS Paid >=                           0.0757                   0.106                     0.0529                        0.0317
Obligation
Obs.                                 73,303                  34,656                     30,466                        8,181
Notes: This table reports the fraction of all individuals in each column that are in each of the categories denoted on the left-hand
side. See notes under Appendix Table A3 for more information on the sample.




                                                                60
            Table A5: First Stage, Average Predicted Obligations and Actual Average Obligations

                                                     Dep. Var.: Average Child Support Obligation
                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                   (5)
                                  Poly 1               Poly 2              Poly 3               Poly 4               20K Bins
Average predicted                0.597∗∗∗             0.695∗∗∗            0.639∗∗∗             0.744∗∗∗               0.851∗∗∗
obligation                      [0.00841]             [0.0149]            [0.0151]             [0.0174]               [0.0178]
Mean, dept. var.                   19.91                19.91               19.91                19.91                  19.91
Obs.                              70468                70468               70468                70468                  70468
F-stat                            5032.2               2188.2              1783.3               1832.7                 2291.7
R-squared                          0.749                0.750               0.753                0.754                  0.756
Notes: Predicted and actual obligations as well as all income variables are reported in 1000s of real year 2000 DKK. This table
reports results from a first stage regression of actual average obligations (calculated using fathers’ current incomes and numbers
of children in each year post-separation) on average predicted obligations (calculated using fathers’ separation year incomes and
numbers of children). See notes under Table 2 for more information on the sample. The following functions of the father’s real
income in the year of separation are included: column 1 — linear polynomial, column 2 — quadratic polynomial, column 3 —
cubic polynomial, column 4 — quartic polynomial, column 5 — indicators for 20,000 DKK bins. All regressions include a full set
of fixed effects and interactions for number of children, year of separation, and the interactions between them and the father’s
income function. All regressions include controls (measured in the year of separation) for the father’s age and age squared,
dummies for the father’s education (less than high school, high school, vocational/short-term higher ed, college/university, and
missing), an indicator for the father being from Western Europe, mother’s age and age squared, dummies for the mother’s
education (less than high school, high school, vocational/short-term higher ed, college/university, and missing), an indicator
for the mother being from Western Europe, mother’s total income in year 2000 DKK, oldest child’s age and age squared,
youngest child’s age and age squared, an indicator for the oldest child being male, an indicator for the youngest child being
male, and indicators for original parental relationship status (married, cohabiting, never-married/non-cohabiting). Additionally,
the regressions include indicators for the number of children still under age 18 in each year post-separation that the parents had
(not including any new children born post-separation). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                61
Table A6: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Mothers’ Post-Separation Labor Market
Outcomes

                                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)
                               Any Wage              Log Wage                Emp.              Self-Emp.               NILF
Average child                   0.000843              0.00894∗              0.00122             0.000443             0.000699
support obligation              [0.00101]             [0.00460]            [0.00117]           [0.000586]           [0.000822]
Mean, dept. var.                  0.848                 11.82               0.753                0.0237               0.0690
Fst. Stage Coef.                   0.853                 0.842               0.852                0.852                0.852
Fst. Stage F-Stat                 2277.7                2105.2              2280.6               2280.6               2280.6
Obs.                              68700                 65366               68772                68772                68772
Notes: The outcomes are defined as follows: 1) “Any Wage” refers to the proportion of years the mother has any wage income
post-separation, 2) “Log Wage” refers to the log of the mother’s average annual wage income in the years post-separation,
3) “Emp.” refers to the proportion of years the mother is employed in the private or public sector (not self-employed) post-
separation, 4) “Self-Emp.” refers to the proportion of years the mother is self-employed post-separation, and 5) “NILF” refers
to the proportion of years the mother is not in the labor force post-separation. All income variables are in year 2000 real units
of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Tables 2 and 3 for more information on the sample, specifications, and controls. Standard errors
robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                               62
                  Table A7: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations by Parental Pre-Separation Relationship Status

                                                       (1)                      (2)                      (3)                     (4)                      (5)
                                                   Avg CS Paid            F. Live w/Child            F. More Kids            M. More Kids              F. NILF
     A. Previously Married
     Average child                                    0.589∗∗∗                -0.00529∗∗               0.00531∗∗∗              0.00329∗∗∗             0.00272∗∗∗
     support obligation                               [0.0455]                 [0.00238]                [0.00132]               [0.00112]             [0.000634]

     Mean, dept. var.                                  10.25                    0.313                     0.151                   0.133                 0.0405
     Fst. Stage Coef.                                  0.855                    0.855                     0.855                   0.855                 0.855
     Fst. Stage F-Stat                                 1678.8                   1678.8                    1678.8                  1673.4                1678.8
     Obs.                                              33014                    33014                     33014                   32826                 33014
     B. Previously Cohabiting
     Average child                                    0.446∗∗∗                 -0.00590                 0.00666∗∗              0.00880∗∗∗             -0.0000137
     support obligation                               [0.0712]                 [0.00419]                [0.00276]               [0.00252]              [0.00115]




63
     Mean, dept. var.                                  9.084                    0.228                     0.222                   0.238                 0.0397
     Fst. Stage Coef.                                  0.832                    0.832                     0.832                   0.831                 0.832
     Fst. Stage F-Stat                                 460.7                    460.7                     460.7                   454.6                 460.7
     Obs.                                              29528                    29528                     29528                   28830                 29528
     C. Not Married/Cohabiting
     Average child                                     0.740∗∗                 -0.0241                  -0.00408                 0.0309∗               -0.00523
     support obligation                                [0.306]                 [0.0213]                 [0.0165]                 [0.0188]              [0.00550]

     Mean, dept. var.                                   5.798                    0.322                    0.197                   0.210                 0.0548
     Fst. Stage Coef.                                   0.726                    0.726                    0.726                   0.731                 0.726
     Fst. Stage F-Stat                                  14.35                    14.35                    14.35                   12.98                 14.35
     Obs.                                               7926                     7926                     7926                    7116                   7926
     Notes: “F.” refers to fathers’ outcomes, while “M.” refers to mothers’ outcomes. Panel A limits the sample to parents who were previously married, panel
     B limits the sample to parents who were previously cohabiting but not married, and panel C limits the sample to parents who were neither married nor
     cohabiting. All income variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Tables A3 and 3 for more information on the sample, specifications,
     and controls. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
     Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Table A8: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Main Outcomes, Different Polynomial Spec-
ifications

                                (1)                     (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)
                            Avg CS Paid          F. Live w/Child          F. More Kids          M. More Kids            F. NILF
A. Poly 1
Average child                  0.445∗∗∗              -0.00172                0.000735               0.00150             0.0105∗∗∗
support obligation             [0.0253]              [0.00122]              [0.000966]             [0.000912]          [0.000438]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                  0.186                  0.185              0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.597                   0.597                  0.597                  0.596               0.597
Fst. Stage F-Stat               5032.2                 5032.2                 5032.2                 4910.8              5032.2
Obs.                            70468                  70468                  70468                  68772               70468
B. Poly 2
Average child                  0.525∗∗∗             -0.00664∗∗∗             0.00393∗∗∗            0.00412∗∗∗            0.000604
support obligation             [0.0359]              [0.00185]               [0.00127]             [0.00113]           [0.000517]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                  0.186                  0.185              0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.695                   0.695                  0.695                  0.698               0.695
Fst. Stage F-Stat               2188.2                 2188.2                 2188.2                 2171.7              2188.2
Obs.                            70468                  70468                  70468                  68772               70468
C. Poly 3
Average child                  0.571∗∗∗             -0.00609∗∗∗             0.00382∗∗∗            0.00459∗∗∗           -0.000864
support obligation             [0.0403]              [0.00212]               [0.00142]             [0.00127]           [0.000599]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                  0.186                  0.185              0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.639                   0.639                  0.639                  0.640               0.639
Fst. Stage F-Stat               1783.3                 1783.3                 1783.3                 1764.7              1783.3
Obs.                            70468                  70468                  70468                  68772               70468
D. Poly 4
Average child                  0.540∗∗∗             -0.00735∗∗∗             0.00761∗∗∗            0.00685∗∗∗           0.00273∗∗∗
support obligation             [0.0403]              [0.00224]               [0.00127]             [0.00115]           [0.000647]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                  0.186                  0.185              0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.744                   0.744                  0.744                  0.748               0.744
Fst. Stage F-Stat               1832.7                 1832.7                 1832.7                 1831.9              1832.7
Obs.                            70468                  70468                  70468                  68772               70468
Notes: “F.” refers to fathers’ outcomes, while “M.” refers to mothers’ outcomes. Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate
regression. All income variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. The following functions of the father’s real income in
the separation year are included: Panel A — linear polynomial, Panel B — quadratic polynomial, Panel C — cubic polynomial,
Panel D — quartic polynomial. All regressions include the controls listed in the notes under Table 3 and a full set of fixed effects
and interactions for number of children, year of separation, and the interactions between them and the father’s income function.
Additionally, the regressions include indicators for the number of children still under age 18 in each year post-separation that
the parents had (not including any new children born post-separation). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01



                                                                64
Table A9: IV Effects of Average Child Support Obligations on Main Outcomes, Different Bin Specifications


                                (1)                     (2)                    (3)                   (4)                    (5)
                            Avg CS Paid          F. Live w/Child           F. More Kids          M. More Kids            F. NILF
A. 50K Bins
Average child                  0.513∗∗∗             -0.00444∗∗∗              0.00533∗∗∗            0.00441∗∗∗           0.00134∗∗∗
support obligation             [0.0330]              [0.00163]                [0.00106]            [0.000969]           [0.000420]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                   0.186                 0.185               0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.797                   0.797                   0.797                 0.799                0.797
Fst. Stage F-Stat               2950.0                 2950.0                  2950.0                2922.6               2950.0
Obs.                            70468                  70468                   70468                 68772                70468
B. 25K Bins
Average child                  0.525∗∗∗             -0.00577∗∗∗              0.00572∗∗∗            0.00589∗∗∗           0.00239∗∗∗
support obligation             [0.0371]              [0.00199]                [0.00116]             [0.00101]           [0.000547]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                   0.186                 0.185               0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.820                   0.820                   0.820                 0.821                0.820
Fst. Stage F-Stat               2227.3                 2227.3                  2227.3                2213.2               2227.3
Obs.                            70468                  70468                   70468                 68772                70468
C. 15K Bins
Average child                  0.512∗∗∗             -0.00713∗∗∗              0.00739∗∗∗            0.00680∗∗∗           0.00283∗∗∗
support obligation             [0.0373]              [0.00207]                [0.00114]            [0.000996]           [0.000576]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                   0.186                 0.185               0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.857                   0.857                   0.857                 0.859                0.857
Fst. Stage F-Stat               2175.5                 2175.5                  2175.5                2169.3               2175.5
Obs.                            70468                  70468                   70468                 68772                70468
D. 10K Bins
Average child                  0.524∗∗∗             -0.00592∗∗∗              0.00735∗∗∗            0.00696∗∗∗           0.00265∗∗∗
support obligation             [0.0378]              [0.00211]                [0.00114]            [0.000987]           [0.000593]

Mean, dept. var.                9.263                   0.278                   0.186                 0.185               0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                0.866                   0.866                   0.866                 0.866                0.866
Fst. Stage F-Stat               2089.2                 2089.2                  2089.2                2082.0               2089.2
Obs.                            70468                  70468                   70468                 68772                70468
Notes: “F.” refers to fathers’ outcomes, while “M.” refers to mothers’ outcomes. Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate
regression. All income variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. The following functions of the father’s real income
in the year of separation are included: Panel A — indicators for 50,000 DKK bins, Panel B — indicators for 25,000 DKK bins,
Panel C — indicators for 15,000 DKK bins, Panel D — indicators for 10,000 DKK bins. All regressions include the controls
listed in the notes under Table 3 as well as a full set of fixed effects and interactions for number of children, year of separation,
and the interactions between them and the father’s income function. Additionally, the regressions include indicators for the
number of children still under age 18 in each year post-separation that the parents had (not including any new children born
post-separation). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01


                                                                 65
                  Table A10: IV Results Using Narrow Windows Surrounding First Threshold

                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)
                             Avg CS Paid         F. Live w/Child         F. More Kids          M. More Kids           F. NILF
A. 20K Window
Average child                   0.374∗∗∗             -0.00493               0.0196∗∗∗             0.0201∗∗∗          -0.00279∗
support obligation              [0.0731]             [0.00621]              [0.00295]             [0.00295]          [0.00163]

Mean, dept. var.                 8.928                 0.284                  0.193                 0.186              0.0261
Fst. Stage Coef.                 1.355                 1.355                  1.355                 1.359              1.355
Fst. Stage F-Stat                462.8                 462.8                  462.8                 460.3              462.8
Obs.                             13463                 13463                  13463                 13190              13463
B. 40K Window
Average child                   0.410∗∗∗             -0.00277               0.0135∗∗∗             0.0149∗∗∗           -0.00110
support obligation              [0.0605]             [0.00443]              [0.00232]             [0.00232]           [0.00112]

Mean, dept. var.                 8.959                 0.283                  0.188                 0.186              0.0267
Fst. Stage Coef.                 1.167                 1.167                  1.167                 1.170              1.167
Fst. Stage F-Stat                837.4                 837.4                  837.4                 832.0              837.4
Obs.                             26454                 26454                  26454                 25895              26454
C. 60K Window
Average child                   0.450∗∗∗             -0.00451               0.0125∗∗∗             0.0149∗∗∗           -0.00127
support obligation              [0.0506]             [0.00354]              [0.00196]             [0.00189]          [0.000856]

Mean, dept. var.                8.962                   0.282                  0.189                0.187              0.0283
Fst. Stage Coef.                 1.119                 1.119                  1.119                 1.124               1.119
Fst. Stage F-Stat               1159.5                 1159.5                 1159.5               1155.0              1159.5
Obs.                            38295                  38295                  38295                37504               38295
D. 80K Window
Average child                   0.411∗∗∗             -0.00168               0.0125∗∗∗             0.0119∗∗∗         -0.0000544
support obligation              [0.0436]             [0.00298]              [0.00164]             [0.00158]         [0.000746]

Mean, dept. var.                8.979                   0.282                  0.189                0.188              0.0305
Fst. Stage Coef.                 1.103                 1.103                  1.103                 1.108               1.103
Fst. Stage F-Stat               1498.8                 1498.8                 1498.8               1492.0              1498.8
Obs.                            47964                  47964                  47964                46946               47964
E. 100K Window
Average child                   0.441∗∗∗             -0.00324               0.0110∗∗∗             0.0105∗∗∗           0.000601
support obligation              [0.0396]             [0.00261]              [0.00144]             [0.00134]          [0.000662]

Mean, dept. var.                8.999                   0.280                  0.190                0.190              0.0331
Fst. Stage Coef.                 1.072                 1.072                  1.072                 1.076               1.072
Fst. Stage F-Stat               1816.2                 1816.2                 1816.2               1807.3              1816.2
Obs.                            55583                  55583                  55583                54334               55583
Notes: “F.” refers to fathers’ outcomes, while “M.” refers to mothers’ outcomes. Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate
regression. In each panel, the sample is limited to fathers with separation year incomes within the specified window of the
                                                                66 are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under
first threshold in the child support formula. All income variables
Appendix Table A3 and Table 3 for more information on the sample, specifications, and controls. Standard errors robust to
heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
                                           Table A11: Robustness of IV Results

                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)                    (5)
                              Avg CS Paid       F. Live w/Child        F. More Kids       M. More Kids            F. NILF
A. Using Father’s Income in Year Before Separation to Predict Average Obligations
Average child          0.539∗∗∗    -0.00800∗∗∗    0.00591∗∗∗     0.00213      0.00200∗∗∗
support obligation     [0.0382]     [0.00211]      [0.00142]    [0.00132]     [0.000657]

Mean, dept. var.                   9.265               0.279                0.186              0.186                0.0403
Fst. Stage Coef.                   0.701              0.701                 0.701              0.706                 0.701
Fst. Stage F-Stat                 1859.1              1859.1               1859.1             1849.7                1859.1
Obs.                              68842               68842                68842              67192                 68842
B. Using Weighted Average of Present Discounted Values of Obligations
Weighted average       0.676∗∗∗   -0.00730∗∗∗    0.00900∗∗∗    0.00776∗∗∗                                        0.00278∗∗∗
of PDVs of obligations [0.0509]    [0.00268]      [0.00152]     [0.00133]                                        [0.000730]

Mean, dept. var.                   9.263              0.278                0.186              0.185                 0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                   0.655              0.655                 0.655              0.656                 0.655
Fst. Stage F-Stat                 1213.6              1213.6               1213.6             1207.0                1213.6
Obs.                              70468               70468                70468              68772                 70468
C. Using Fathers’ Predetermined Characteristics to Predict Future Obligations
Average child          0.534∗∗∗    -0.00329∗       0.00534∗∗∗   0.00295∗∗∗    0.00426∗∗∗
support obligation     [0.0383]    [0.00181]        [0.00124]    [0.00109]    [0.000559]

Mean, dept. var.                   9.263               0.278                0.186              0.185                0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                   0.674              0.674                 0.674              0.677                 0.674
Fst. Stage F-Stat                 2396.2              2396.2               2396.2             2390.5                2396.2
Obs.                              70468               70468                70468              68772                 70468
D. Controlling for the Father’s Post-Separation Income
Average child           0.500∗∗∗     -0.00602∗∗∗    0.00685∗∗∗                              0.00621∗∗∗           0.00286∗∗∗
support obligation      [0.0381]      [0.00210]      [0.00118]                               [0.00104]           [0.000550]

Mean, dept. var.                   9.263               0.278                0.186              0.185                0.0418
Fst. Stage Coef.                   0.812              0.812                 0.812              0.813                 0.812
Fst. Stage F-Stat                 2431.3              2431.3               2431.3             2424.8                2431.3
Obs.                              70468               70468                70468              68772                 70468
Notes: “F.” refers to fathers’ outcomes, while “M.” refers to mothers’ outcomes. Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate
regression. In Panel A, results are from specifications where average predicted obligations (which are used to instrument for
actual average obligations) are calculated based on the father’s income measured in the year before separation. In Panel B,
results are from specifications where the key explanatory variable is a weighted average of the net present discounted values
(NPVs) of obligations in each year post-separation, assuming a 3 percent real discount rate. We use the predicted weighted
average (with obligations set according to the father’s separation year income and number of children) to instrument for the
actual weighted average. In Panel C, results are from specifications where the average predicted obligation is calculated using
the father’s predicted income in years post-separation. Specifically, we first regress the father’s income in each year post-
separation on a set of pre-determined characteristics observed in the separation year:the father’s separation year income, the
father’s age and age squared, dummies for the father’s education (less than high school, high school, vocational/short-term
higher ed, college/university, and missing), and an indicator for the father being from Western Europe. We then use the father’s
predicted income in each year post-separation to calculate his average predicted obligation, which we then use to instrument
for his actual average obligation. In Panel D, results are from67specifications that control for the father’s income in each year
post-separation. All income variables are in year 2000 real units of 1,000 DKK. See notes under Appendix Table A3 and Table
3 for more information on the sample, specifications, and controls. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
B      A Theoretical Model

In Section 3, we described some mechanisms by which fathers’ child support obligations may impact parental
behavior. Here, we formalize these channels using a model. Our framework draws on several existing models
of interaction between divorced and unmarried parents (e.g., Weiss and Willis, 1985; Del Boca and Flinn,
1995; Willis, 1999; Flinn, 2000; Del Boca and Ribero, 2003; Roff and Lugo-Gil, 2012).
    Consider a set of separated parents with one child between them, where mothers are denoted by subscript
m and fathers are denoted by subscript f . Each parent obtains utility from child quality, Q, their own private
adult consumption, C, and their leisure time, L.43 Utility from child quality is comprised of two components:
Q0 (current child quality) and Q1 (child quality from a possible subsequent child born within a new union).
For simplicity, we do not explicitly model future children born outside marriage/cohabitation; however, we
discuss how incorporating this decision into the model would affect the main conclusions below. For each
parent i ∈ {m, f }, denote the number of subsequent children by ni , where ni can take on integer values
{0, 1, 2, . . .}.
    Additionally, assume that child quality is a function of two types of investments: financial, F , and time,
K. Denote the financial and time investments in the current child by F 0 and K 0 , respectively. For mothers’
subsequent children, financial and time investments are Fm     1 and K 1 , respectively; for fathers’ subsequent
                                                                        m
children, financial and time investments are Ff1 and Kf1 , respectively. We do not make any assumptions about
whether the financial and time investments are substitutes or complements in the child quality function;
although we discuss the implications of such assumptions further below.
    In terms of time allocation, each parent must divide his/her time between work in the labor market
(denoted by H), time investments into children, and leisure. Each parent i ∈ {m, f } earns wage wi in the
labor market, and total time available is denoted by T .
    We assume that the separated parents do not bargain cooperatively and instead face a static Stackelberg
game.44 In this setting, the non-custodial father can make two types of transfers to the custodial mother:
a financial transfer, s, and a time transfer, t. The custodial mother chooses how to allocate these transfers.
Intuitively, we can think of the time transfer as the amount of extra time freed up for the mother as a result
of the father offering to spend time with the child.45
  43
     Note that our framework differs from the model in Neal (2004), which assumes that “absent fathers do not enjoy any
consumption gains from having children”. We instead follow Willis (1999) and Flinn (2000) (among many others) by assuming
that non-custodial fathers in fact obtain utility from child quality. This assumption is arguably more realistic in our setting,
where an estimated 20 percent of Danish children with divorced or separated parents have fathers who share in their physical
custody (Bjarnason and Arnarsson, 2011), and another 45 percent have non-custodial fathers who visit with them at least every
other weekend (Kampmann and Nielsen, 2004).
  44
     The non-cooperation assumption is common in the literature on non-intact families (e.g., Weiss and Willis, 1985; Del Boca
and Flinn, 1995; Willis, 1999; Roff and Lugo-Gil, 2012). In an important contribution, Flinn (2000) instead develops a model
where separated parents can choose between cooperative and non-cooperative equilibria, and where institutions (e.g., judges
determining child support or custody settlements) are modeled as coordination devices. Such a model is useful for generating
predictions about the impacts of changes to institutional enforcement capabilities. For example, a key result of the model is
that when institutions can perfectly enforce compliance with child support obligations, the custodial parent loses the incentive
to engage in cooperative behavior; for a large set of parental preferences, perfect child support enforcement can thus lead to
lower child investments relative to imperfect enforcement. In our case, the empirical analysis uses variation in child support
obligation amounts, rather than in the degree of institutional enforcement (in fact, enforcement does not change throughout
our sample time frame). As such, we do not take this approach, and instead assume perfect complicance with child support
obligations (see below).
  45
     This set-up implicitly assumes that maternal and paternal time investments are perfect substitutes. Instead, it may be that
mothers view paternal time investments as less productive than their own. Such an assumption can be modeled by multiplying
t by some parameter 0 < ρ < 1 in the mother’s maximization problem below. Alternatively, mothers may place greater weight
on paternal time investments if they think it is important for children to spend time with a male role model. This assumption



                                                              68
   For subsequent children, we assume that the parents expect to bargain cooperatively with new partners.
Each parent i expects to be responsible for fraction λFi of the total financial investment and fraction λK
                                                                                                         i of
the total time investment per subsequent child born.
   More concretely, ∀i ∈ {m, f } parental utility is represented by the following function:
                                                                                                                           
                    0
              U Q       , Q1i , ni , Ci , Li                   0   0   0
                                                   = βi Uc Q (F , K ), ni ∗ Q       1
                                                                                        (Fi1 , Ki1 )    + (1 − βi )Ua Ci , Li


where Uc (·) represents utility from children, Ua (·) represents utility from adult activities, and βi , 0 < βi < 1,
represents the weight each parent places on his/her preferences toward children relative to other adult
consumption goods.46
    The mother chooses the optimal current and subsequent child investments, the number of subsequent
children she will have, and her own adult consumption and leisure, conditional on the father’s transfers, s
and t:47
                                                                                                                             
                                                           0   0   0           1     1    1
                         max                   βm Uc Q (F , K ), nm ∗ Q            (Fm , Km )          + (1 − βm )Ua Cm , Lm
            F 0 ,K 0 ,nm ,Fm
                           1 ,K 1 ,C ,L
                               m m m


                                                                                                                
                         s.t. F 0 + nm λFm Fm
                                            1
                                              + Cm = wm T − Lm − K 0 + t − nm λK  1
                                                                               m Km + s


    The father then maximizes his indirect utility function, taking into account the maternal optimal re-
sponse functions for current child investments, F 0 (s, t)∗ and K 0 (s, t)∗ . He chooses his optimal financial and
time transfers for the current child, the number of subsequent children he will have, his investments into
subsequent children, his private adult consumption, and his time spent in leisure. Additionally, we assume
that for the current child, the father is subject to a child support mandate, R, which depends on his earned
income, his number of children, and his time transfer, and is defined further below. The father thus solves
the following problem:
                                                   (                                                              
                                                     βf Uc Q0 F 0 (s, t)∗ , K 0 (s, t)∗ , nf ∗ Q1 Ff1 , Kf1
                                                                                                                 
                                   max
                            s,t,nf ,Lf ,Ff1 ,Kf1


                                                                                             )
        +(1 − βf )Ua wf (T − Lf − t − nf λK  1             F 1
                                          f Kf ) − s − nf λf Ff , Lf                                      s.t. s ≥ R(wf Hf , nf , t)

   The child support obligation for the current child, R(wf Hf , nf , t), is set according to a formula that
depends on the father’s earned income, wf Hf , his total number of biological children (nf + 1), and his time
transfer, t, in a way similar to the actual Danish child support guidelines that we study. In particular,
can be modeled by multiplying t by some parameter ρ > 1 in the mother’s maximization problem. The main conclusions of the
model remain qualitatively similar.
  46
     While we do not make any assumptions about a particular functional form of the utility function in this discussion, we note
that the utility function in this framework must allow for corner solutions as ni is allowed to be set to zero. More formally, it
must be that limx→0 U 0 (x) 6= ∞.
  47
     Prices of consumption goods are normalized to 1 for simplicity.




                                                                       69
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                   ξ          if wf Hf ≤ Y nf        and t ≤ t
                                                  
                            R(wf Hf , nf , t) =       ξ+τ      if wf Hf > Y nf        and t ≤ t
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                   0          if t > t
                                                  


for some ξ > 0, τ > 0, and t > 0. Additionally, Y nf > 0 and is strictly increasing in nf . In other
words, the guidelines are set such that fathers must pay a base amount, ξ, and fathers with incomes above
some threshold, Y nf , face an additional obligation of τ . The location of Y nf is increasing with the father’s
subsequent number of children, nf . The child support constraint is removed once fathers make high enough
time transfers, t. For example, in our context, fathers who share equally in physical custody of their children
do not need to pay child support.
    Denote the father’s optimal financial transfer by:
                                                                           
                                                   s∗ = max sunc , R(·)


where sunc is the (unconstrained) solution to the father’s optimization problem if the child support mandate
constraint is not binding.48


B.1    Possible Effects on Parental Behaviors

Consider two child support obligation schemes: R1 (wf Hf , nf , t) and R2 (wf Hf , nf , t), with ξ2 > ξ1 and
τ2 > τ1 . What happens to parental behaviors when we increase the child support obligation from R1 to
R2 ? Our model highlights the theoretical ambiguity of this question with regard to the following parental
behaviors:

Fathers’ Financial Transfers Consider three possible cases that depend on what fathers’ financial trans-
fers would have been in the absence of government intervention:
    First, if sunc ≥ R2 , the father optimally transfers as much or more than what is mandated under the
higher obligation, R2 . This father will not alter s∗ in response to a switch from the lower to the higher
obligation.
    Second, if R1 < sunc < R2 , then the father would optimally pay more than the lower obligation, R1 ,
but less than the higher obligation, R2 . When faced with a change from R1 to R2 , it may be optimal for
the father to increase s∗ from sunc to R2 . The magnitude of this increase is strictly less than the difference
between the two schemes, R2 − R1 . However, as discussed further below, some fathers may also respond by
having more children or lowering their labor supply so to reduce their R2 obligations from ξ2 + τ2 to ξ2 . If
ξ2 < sunc < ξ2 + τ2 , then there may be a decrease in s∗ from sunc to ξ2 .
  48
    As noted, we assume perfect compliance with child support mandates and do not model the compliance decision. This
decision is modeled explicitly through an incorporation of a cost associated with non-compliance in Del Boca and Flinn (1995)
and Flinn (2000). Modeling the compliance decision is important in a setting where the degree of institutional enforcement
changes and child support obligations are set endogenously (e.g., by judges). In our case, enforcement is stable over the analysis
time frame, and we argue that our variation in child support obligations is policy-driven and exogenous.




                                                               70
    Third, if sunc ≤ R1 , then the father would optimally pay less than the lower obligation. There are two
possibilites for these fathers as well. Some fathers may increase s∗ exactly from R1 to R2 (either from ξ1
to ξ2 or from ξ1 + τ1 to ξ2 + τ2 ). However, as before, if some fathers respond by having more children or
lowering their labor supply, s∗ may instead change from ξ1 + τ1 to ξ2 , which may reflect either an increase
or a decrease in optimal payments, depending on whether ξ2 is smaller or larger than ξ1 + τ1 .
    Thus, while increases in child support obligations are predicted to increase some fathers’ financial trans-
fers to their children, this relationship is complicated by other paternal behaviors, and may not be one-for-one
on average. Some fathers may just substitute for non-mandated transfers that they would have made in the
absence of government intervention. Additionally, fertility and labor supply responses may even lead to a
perverse relationship between child support mandates and actual payments.

Fathers’ Time Investments There are two opposing forces on fathers’ time investments. On the one
hand, since fathers who make high enough time transfers do not face the child support mandate, a higher
obligation may lead to an increase in t∗ as the father can forego a larger financial cost by being above t.
Additionally, if the higher obligation increases the father’s financial transfer, then paternal time transfers
may also increase if financial and time investments are complements in the child quality function.
    On the other hand, a higher obligation increases the maternal incentive to actually receive the higher
mandated financial transfer by ensuring (via her optimal response functions) that the father’s time transfer
does not exceed t. In our setting, when the father is faced with the higher obligation, the mother has a
greater incentive to make sure that the father does not share in physical custody.49 Moreover, as above, the
impacts on time transfers also depend on the child quality function, and there may be additional downward
pressure on paternal optimal time transfers, if financial and time investments are substitutes.

Both Parents’ New Family Formation Fathers face complex fertility incentives. First, for fathers
with incomes below the threshold, Y nf , a higher obligation represents a negative income effect, which may
decrease subsequent fertility. However, since the income threshold is increasing in the number of subsequent
children, and since the father is only mandated to make financial transfers to his one existing non-custodial
child, some (higher-income) fathers have an incentive to have more children so to reduce their child support
obligation from ξ + τ to ξ. Additionally, for fathers at all income levels, higher obligations may lead to less
time spent with existing children, t∗ , freeing up time available to invest in future children.
    For mothers, consider the case where higher obligations increase fathers’ financial transfers. For them,
higher obligations constitute larger positive income effects, resulting in greater investments in current chil-
dren as well as greater demand for subsequent children. Mothers also face an opposite incentive to lower
subsequent fertility because their time available to invest in subsequent children may be lower as a result of
a reduction in the paternal time transfer.
    Moreover, although we do not model this explicitly, there are different incentives for mothers’ and
fathers’ subsequent fertility outside marriage and cohabitation. In particular, although a father may lower
his per-child obligation by having more children out-of-wedlock/cohabitation (since the income threshold is
increasing in his total number of children), fertility within unions is relatively less costly as he is only subject
to child support mandate for his out-of-union children. By contrast, a mother may have larger incentives
   49
      In practice, parents can either agree on a custody arrangement or go to the court if they are unable to reach an agreement.
Hence, if the mother refuses to share physical custody, the father can in principle take the issue to court. However, prior to a
reform in October 2007, which made joint legal custody the default determination (and hence made joint physical custody more
likely as well), courts were likely to rule in favor of maternal sole custody. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that, during our
sample time frame of 1999-2008, mothers had substantial influence over the custody decision.




                                                               71
for childbearing outside unions because the receipt of a higher payment for her existing child may increase
her expectation of child support transfers associated with subsequent offspring from new partners.50

Both Parents’ Labor Market Behavior Fathers face opposing labor supply incentives. For a father
with earnings below the threshold, Y nf , the child support obligation is a flat negative income shock in the
amount of ξ. This shock is predicted to reduce demand for leisure and increase labor supply. In contrast, a
father with an income above the threshold faces a type of tax on earnings. This higher-income father has an
incentive to lower his labor supply in order to reduce his income and avoid paying the additional τ amount.
    For a mother, again consider the case where a higher obligation increases the father’s financial transfer.
The child support obligation is then a positive income shock that is not dependent on her own earned income.
As such, we may expect an increase in maternal demand for leisure and therefore a reduction in her labor
supply. Additionally, maternal labor supply may also be affected by possible changes to her time available
to work due to impacts on the father’s time transfer.


C      Evidence on Physical Custody Arrangements, In-Kind Transfers, and Child Support
       Payments from Survey Data

In Section 4, we argue that an important factor driving the zero payments we observe in our data is joint
physical custody arrangements. Unfortunately, the administrative data we use contain an imperfect measure
of physical custody based on whether the child is registered at the same address as the parent. As children
can only have one address in our data (irrespective of their custody arrangement), we underestimate joint
physical custody arrangements by looking at children who are registered at the same address as their fathers.
    To further examine the relationship between physical custody arrangements and child support payments,
we link our administrative data to survey data from Denmark. As sample sizes for children living in non-
intact families in available surveys are small, we pool data from two sources: first, the 2007 wave of the
Danish Longitudinal Survey of Children (DALSC), and second, the 2009 wave of the Children and Youth
in Denmark (CYD) survey.51 The DALSC is a panel study of all children born in Denmark in one week of
October 1995. The CYD is a survey conducted among random samples of seven cohorts aged 3-19 in 2009
and 2013. Both panel studies examine a broad set of topics related to children’s living conditions, including
custody arrangements.
    We link the survey information to the administrative data on child support payments. Similar to our
sample construction described in Section 4, we keep children whose fathers are in the administrative data in
all years after 1995 (the initiation year of the DALSC). We match 5, 738 DALSC and 5, 988 CYU children to
the administrative data (99/95% of the children with completed survey questionnaires). In 2007, the DALSC
children were 12 years old and thus we have a relatively large share of children who have experienced
a parental separation: After conditioning on the fathers being in the data for all years after 1995 and
experiencing a separation at any time during the period, we end up with 2, 024 separated fathers with
(singleton) children. For the CYD data, we end up with 1, 428 fathers.
    As we use parental reports on physical custody arrangements (the vast majority of questionnaires were
completed by mothers), we further condition on the parents having answered questions on the custody
  50
     Note that all of these fertility responses for fathers and mothers are relevant insofar as we hold the fertility responses of
the other parents constant. As these parents are all arguably in the same matching market post-separation, the net effects on
overall parental fertility rates also depend on the numbers of men and women and their relative bargaining powers.
  51
     For details on the DALSC and CYU please see http://www.sfi.dk/about_the_research-11402.aspx and
http://www.sfi.dk/children_and_young_people_in_denmark-7395.aspx.


                                                               72
arrangements (i.e., separated before the surveys in 2007/2009). Finally, we only look at one- and two-
children families with fathers in the relevant income range (around the guideline thresholds), as in the main
analysis. Our final survey sample consists of parents of 819 DALSC and 702 CYD children for a total sample
size of 1, 521.
    Appendix Table C1 divides this sample of children into three groups: Column 1 reports summary statis-
tics for the full survey sample of children with separated parents. Columns 2 and 3 show summary statistics
for the two sub-groups: children with sole-mother and children with either joint or sole-father physical cus-
tody arrangements as reported in the respective survey years (2007 for DALSC and 2009 for CYD). Joint
physical custody is defined as the child spending approximately half of the time with each parent (in the
survey year). Given that we only have 43 fathers with sole physical custody in our data, and as paternal
child support obligations do not apply to both joint and sole physical custody fathers, we pool the two
groups.
    In the top panel, we report means and standard deviations of some of the child support variables from the
administrative data. While our main analysis focuses on fathers’ child support obligations and payments,
we also describe maternal child support payments here as they are especially relevant for the joint and
sole-father physical custody arrangements.
    We find that fathers who share in the physical custody in the survey year (and especially if they have
sole custody) pay less child support over the separation time relative to fathers who do not. The percentage
of fathers with zero payments is higher among fathers who have sole or joint physical custody in the survey
year: 46 percent of sole- or joint-custody fathers make zero payments in that year (relative to 34 percent of
fathers whose children live in sole-mother custody arrangements). These figures illustrate that a large share
of the zeros we observe in our administrative data is likely driven by fathers who share in physical custody
of their children.
    Additionally, while the 22 percent of fathers with joint or sole physical custody in the survey year pay
less than their non-custody counterparts, the survey data also show that mothers pay more in these cases:
Mothers of children in sole-father or joint physical custody arrangements pay more than four times as much
as sole-custody mothers, and are less likely to ever have zero payments after separation. However, the
relatively low level of average post-separation mother payments reflects that mothers are most likely to have
physical custody of their children in some (if not all) of the pre-survey separation years.
    The last row in the top panel shows that our measure of father-child co-residence—an indicator for the
father having the same address as the child in any year post-separation—is reasonable (although imperfect).
Fathers who have joint or sole physical custody are more likely to be registered at the same address as their
child relative to fathers of children in sole-mother custody arrangements.
    Finally, the lower panels of the table focus on variables only available in two waves of the DALSC. First,
we look at the same sample of children in the 2007 DALSC and their parents’ reports from any of the
survey years (1996, 1999, 2003, 2007, 2011). These data show that joint physical custody arrangements
are relatively fluid over separation time: among parents who have a sole-mother arrangement in 2007, 13
percent have joint custody in any of the survey years. Overall, 33 percent of parents have a joint custody
arrangement in at least one of the survey years.
    Second, we use the 1999 DALSC wave to look at the prevalence of gifts and other in-kind transfers
between separated parents.52 We find that in-kind transfers are relatively uncommon: 19 percent of fathers
have bought winter clothing for their children and only around four percent of fathers contributed to the
costs of child care.
    In sum, using the available survey data (linked to our administrative data), we find that joint (and
  52
    Unfortunately, we only have survey information on this topic in the 1999 wave of the survey. In this year, the DALSC
children are three years old and thus we have even fewer children in families which have separated.


                                                          73
sole-father) physical custody arrangements (which we underestimate when using only administrative data
on addresses) coincide with lower average father child support payments, higher prevalence of zero payments
by fathers, and higher average mother payments. Moreover, as around 33 percent of parents have a joint
physical custody arrangement at some point post-separation, and as parents sharing physical custody do not
face child support mandates, we conclude that a large percentage of the observed zero-payments in our main
analysis data set is attributable to the prevalence of these arrangements. Finally, in-kind transfers between
parents (that are not included in the mandated or voluntary child support payments that we observe) appear
to be relatively uncommon in the Danish setting.




                                                     74
Table C1: Physical Custody Arrangements and Child Support Payments: Evidence from Administrative
Data Linked to Survey Data from DALSC (1999, 2007) and CYD (2009)

                                                  DALSC (2007) and CYD (2009) samples, admin. data
                                                (1)             (2)                            (3)
                                            All parents        Mother                   Joint and Father
Father: Child                                  11.38            11.80                          9.892
support payments in survey year               (12.16)          (12.32)                        (11.48)
Father: Zero child                             0.365            0.340                          0.455
support in survey year                        (0.482)          (0.474)                        (0.499)
Father: Average                                11.65            12.19                          9.702
child support paid after sep.                 (9.842)          (9.798)                        (9.769)
Father: Ever zero                              0.690            0.664                          0.780
child support after sep.                      (0.463)          (0.472)                        (0.415)
Father: Always zero                            0.155            0.132                          0.235
child support after sep.                      (0.362)          (0.339)                        (0.425)
Father: Average                                24.09            23.73                          25.39
child support obligation                      (10.11)          (9.874)                        (10.84)
Mother: Average                                1.077            0.619                          2.716
child support paid after sep.                 (3.267)          (2.359)                        (5.058)
Mother: Ever zero                              0.972            0.986                          0.922
child support after sep.                      (0.166)          (0.119)                        (0.269)
Father: Ever lives                             0.222            0.204                          0.286
with the child after sep.                     (0.416)          (0.403)                        (0.453)
Obs.                                           1,521              1,189                   332
                                                                   Survey data, DALSC (2007)
                                                 (1)               (2)                          (3)

Joint physical                                 0.325            0.130                          0.840
custody, any survey year                      (0.469)          (0.336)                        (0.367)
Obs.                                            819               594                    225
                                                                  Survey data, DALSC (1999)
                                                 (1)               (2)                          (3)

Father has bought                              0.192            0.181                          0.297
winter clothing                               (0.394)          (0.385)                        (0.463)
father has paid for                           0.0447           0.0321                          0.162
child care                                    (0.207)          (0.176)                        (0.374)
Obs.                                            380               343                            37
Notes: Columns 2-4 divide the sample by the physical custody arrangement (sole-mother, sole-father, joint) in the survey year
(2007/2009).
                                                             75
