                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       OPTIMAL CAPITAL CONTROLS AND REAL EXCHANGE RATE POLICIES:
                 A PECUNIARY EXTERNALITY PERSPECTIVE

                                       Gianluca Benigno
                                        Huigang Chen
                                      Christopher Otrok
                                      Alessandro Rebucci
                                        Eric R. Young

                                      Working Paper 22224
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22224


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2016




This is a substantially revised version of CEP Working Paper No. 1160, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis Working Paper No. 2012-025A, and CEPR DP No. 9936. The views expressed in this
paper are exclusively those of the authors and not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
the Federal Reserve System, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or MarketShare
Partners. Benigno thanks ESRC Grant ESRC grant ES/I024174/1 Macroeconomic of Financial
Globalization- REP-U623 for support. Otrok thanks the National Science Foundation under NSF
grant 0044709. We thank Javier Bianchi, Anton Korinek, Martin Uribe and seminar participants
at American University, CEPR ESSIM, NBER IFM Spring Meeting 2013, SED Meeting 2013 in
Seoul, Bank of France, IMF, University of Wisconsin, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, and
the 2016 ASSA Meetings.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Gianluca Benigno, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric
R. Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A Pecuniary Externality Perspective
Gianluca Benigno, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R. Young
NBER Working Paper No. 22224
May 2016
JEL No. E52,F38,F41

                                           ABSTRACT

A new theoretical literature studies the use of capital controls to prevent financial crises in models
in which pecuniary externalities justify government intervention. Within the same theoretical
framework, we show that when ex-post policies such as defending the exchange rate can contain
or resolve financial crises, there is no need to intervene ex-ante with capital controls. On the other
hand, if crises management policies entail some efficiency costs, then crises prevention policies
become part of the optimal policy mix. In the standard model economy used in the literature with
costly crisis management policies, the optimal policy mix combines capital controls in tranquil
times with support for the real exchange rate to limit its depreciation during crises times. The
optimal policy mix yields more borrowing and consumption, a lower probability of financial
crisis, and twice as large welfare gains than in the socially planned equilibrium with capital
controls alone.

Gianluca Benigno                                  Alessandro Rebucci
London School of Economics                        Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
Department of Economics                           100 International Drive
Houghton Street                                   Baltimore, MD 21202
London WC2A 2AE ENGLAND                           and NBER
G.Benigno@lse.ac.uk                               arebucci@jhu.edu

Huigang Chen                                      Eric R. Young
MarketShare Partners                              University of Virginia
huigang_chen@yahoo.com                            ey2d@virginia.edu

Christopher Otrok
Department of Economics
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
and Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis
otrokc@missouri.edu
1       Introduction
In response to the global …nancial crisis and its costly aftermath, a new policy paradigm
emerged in which old fashioned government policies such as capital controls and other re-
strictions on credit ‡ows became part of the standard crisis prevention policy toolkit (the
so called macro-prudential policies). A few, large emerging market economies experimented
with these tools. And even the traditionally conservative IMF changed its orthodox views
on capital controls, advocating the use of such measures when other tools are not available
or have run their course of action— see Blanchard and Ostry (2012) and IMF (2012).
    The key rationale underpinning the use of capital controls is …nancial stability.1 , 2 The
…nancial stability motive is the focus of the in‡uential contributions of Korinek (2010) and
Bianchi (2011).3 Their analysis is based on variants of a common theoretical framework pro-
posed by Mendoza (2002, 2010). In this framework, the scope for policy intervention arises
because of a pecuniary externality stemming from the presence of a key relative price in the
collateral constraint faced by private agents. In this environment, prudential interventions
(i.e. before a …nancial crisis occurs) may be desirable because they can make agents inter-
nalize the consequences of this externality on their individual decisions. Capital controls in
this setting can discourage …nancial excesses, reduce the amount that agents borrow, thereby
lowering the probability of a …nancial crisis, and hence enhance welfare.
    In this paper, we provide an integrated analysis of alternative policy tools that can be
interpreted in terms of …scal, monetary and macroprudential policies using the same model
economy studied by Bianchi (2011). We …nd that, when …nancial stability is the sole motive
for policy intervention, the optimal policy design aims at supporting the value of the collateral
and hence the agents’borrowing capacity during crises times. In this context, policies that
support the real exchange rate (or more generally collateral price support policies) during a
…nancial crisis dominates by a large margin, from a welfare point of view, prudential controls
on capital ‡ows. The dominance of price support policies relies (perhaps unrealistically) on
    1
     Blanchard and Ostry (2012) make explicit reference to the pecuniary externality perspective when mo-
tivating the IMF’s view on the use of capital controls: "If there are external e¤ ects from foreign borrowing
(think of ampli…ed crisis risks for the country, where the risks are not internalized by the borrower), then
capital controls can act as Pigouvian taxes and constitute an optimal response at the country level, helping
agents to internalize the external e¤ ects of their borrowing".
   2
     Historically, as documented by Magud, Reinhart, and Rogo¤ (2011), capital controls have been adopted
for fear of capital ‡ows reversal, fear of excessive risk taking, and to contain asset price bubbles. Other
traditional reasons include concerns for competitiveness and monetary policy independence— see more on
these below.
   3
     See also Lorenzoni (2008), Bianchi and Mendoza (2010), Jeanne and Korinek (2012, 2013) and Benigno
et al. (2013).



                                                     1
the assumption that they are costless to use. Indeed, when we assume that supporting the
value of collateral during crisis times is costly, it becomes optimal to combine price support
policies with macroprudential policies such as capital controls.
    In our analysis, then, the rationale for macroprudential policies relies on the extent to
which price support policies are cost-e¤ective rather than the amount that agents borrow
in the unregulated economy during tranquil times. This novel element of our analysis em-
phasizes the interaction between ex-ante (normal times) and ex-post (crises times) policy
interventions: when price support policy is fully e¤ective in crises times (i.e. it is able to
address the pecuniary externality distortion at no other cost) there is no scope for ex-ante
policy intervention. However, if the policy is costly in crises times, it is optimal to adopt
capital controls during normal times as a way to limit the occurrence of the crises, combined
with price support policies in crises times to mitigate their severity. We …nd that the optimal
combination of ex ante and ex post policy interventions achieves welfare gains of 1.10% of
tradable consumption relative to the unregulated economy, which is much higher than the
typical value found in the literature.
    As the vehicle to convey our messages, we adopt the same model economy as in Bianchi
(2011). This is a two-sector (tradables and nontradables) small open, endowment economy
with an occasionally binding international borrowing constraint. Quantitatively, this model
has been successful in reproducing the business cycle and the crisis dynamics properties of
a typical emerging market economy. In this class of models, a …nancial crisis event (also
labelled a Sudden Stop in capital or credit ‡ows) occurs when the constraint binds. In our
model, the value of total current income generated both in the tradable and nontradeable
sectors limits borrowing, denominated in units of tradable consumption. When the borrowing
constraint binds, the decline in the relative price of nontradables generates a balance sheet
e¤ect and leads to a Fisherian debt-de‡ation spiral.
    In this economy there is a well de…ned scope for government intervention, but there
are multiple instruments or tools with which policy could be conducted. The pecuniary
externality arises from the fact that individual agents do not internalize the aggregate e¤ect
of their borrowing decisions on the relative price of nontradable goods, which is the price that
enters the collateral constraint. There are three type of taxes that can be used to correct it: a
tax/subsidy on foreign debt or a tax/subsidy on tradable consumption and a tax/subsidy on
nontradable consumption. The tax on foreign debt is usually interpreted as a capital control,
while taxes on either tradable or nontradable consumption can be interpreted as a real
exchange rate interventions because they a¤ect directly the relative price of nontradables.4
  4
      The interpretation of the relative price of nontradables as the real exchange rate is standard in the


                                                     2
In our policy analysis, we consider all three instruments and study their relative e¤ectiveness
in welfare terms. Di¤erently from the existing literature, to conduct the policy analysis we
follow a Ramsey optimal taxation approach, assuming that the government budget is always
balanced.
    We …rst study the Ramsey problem when capital controls are the only policy tool avail-
able, and the government budget constraint is balanced through lump-sum transfers/taxes.
Consistent with Bianchi (2011) and Korinek (2010), we …nd that, in this case, it is Ramsey
optimal to limit the amount that agents borrow in normal times, while no action is needed
during crises times. The reason why capital controls are not used by the Ramsey planner in
crisis times is that, in this model, they cannot a¤ect the allocation when a crisis occurs (i.e.
when the borrowing constraint binds). Thus, in this setting, when capital controls are the
only policy tool available, the best that the government can do is to reduce the probability
that a crisis occurs by inducing the private sector to borrow less than in the decentralized
equilibrium.
    Next we show that a policy of supporting the real exchange rate during crisis times by
relaxing the borrowing constraint when it binds, can achieve a much higher level of welfare.
In fact, we show that such a policy can undo the borrowing constraint completely and, as
a result, support an equilibrium in which agents behave as if they were in an unconstrained
allocation. Importantly, as we shall see, this policy is time-consistent. The policy can be
implemented with a subsidy on non tradable consumption or a tax on tradable consumption.
The result hinges on the ability of the Ramsey planner to manipulate the value of collateral
with consumption taxes or subsidies that a¤ect the relative price of nontradable goods with-
out creating any other distortions. Indeed, since these consumption taxes or subsidies are
rebated or …nanced through lump-sum transfers or taxes, they are costless and do not entail
further distortions.
    Finally we show that, when lump-sum transfers/taxes are no longer available, price sup-
port policies during crisis times become costly, and capital controls in normal times com-
plement exchange rate policy in crises times under the optimal policy mix. When ex-post
policies are costless they can be used all the way to remove the borrowing constraint, and
there is no need to engage in ex-ante policy interventions such as capital controls. But when
the use of ex-post policies entails e¢ ciency losses or costs (such as when there are other
policy objectives to be traded o¤ for …nancial stability), then ex-ante policy interventions
literature. See for instance Bianchi (2011), Caballero and Lorenzoni (2014), Mendoza (2002), Korinek
(2010), Jeanne (2012). Alternatively, the consumption taxes (subsidies) could be interpreted more literally
as domestic …scal policy tools.



                                                    3
like prudential capital controls are called for to maximize welfare. Notice that this rationale
for the use of ex-ante policy interventions is not related to the amount that agents borrow
in the competitive equilibrium of the economy without government intervention. Under the
optimal policy with both instruments, there is more borrowing, a lower probability of crisis,
and as a result much higher welfare, with gains of 1.10% of tradable consumption relative
to the unregulated economy as compared to only .41% with capital controls alone.
    The paper relates to a few other recent contributions in the literature on pecuniary
externalities which focused both on ex ante and ex post policies. Benigno et al. (2013)
analyze the extent to which private agents overborrow or underborrow in a production version
of our economy. They show that the allocation chosen by a social planner away from the
crisis depends on the planner’s ability to mitigate a crisis, should one occur. Benigno et al.
(2013) do not analyze any implementation issues or optimal policy problems. Jeanne and
Korinek (2013) study the time-consistent mix of ex-ante macroprudential regulation and ex-
post bailout transfers in a three-period economy in which the relative price that enters the
borrowing constraint is an asset price. The presence of the asset price in the policy problem
opens the door to a time-consistency issue, which is their main focus and it is not present in
our model. Jeanne and Korinek (2013) also study the role of ex-ante and ex-post policies in
their model, but they restrict the set of policy tools along two dimensions: …rst they restrict
the use of distortionary taxation to the contingency in which the constraint binds, while we
allow the policy maker to choose freely which instrument to use both in normal and crisis
times; and second, they do not consider all the possible tools in the context of their model.
    Other new theoretical approaches rationalized the use of capital controls. One approach
motivates the use of capital controls with the possibility of manipulating the intra or in-
tertemporal terms of trade— conceptually analogous to the use of tari¤s to manipulate the
goods’terms of trade (Costinot, Lorenzoni and Werning (2014) and De Paoli and Lipinska
(2013). Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2015) examine the role of capital controls in an economy
with downward nominal wage rigidity and a …xed exchange rate regime. They focus on
competitiveness issues and are silent on the …nancial stability motive we focus on. Fahri and
Werning (2012) study capital controls as a way to address the impossibility to simultaneously
have an open capital account, a …xed exchange regime, and an independent monetary policy
(as known as the "impossible trilemma"). Likewise, Devereux and Yetman (2014) analyze
capital controls as a way to restore monetary policy e¤ectiveness when the nominal interest
rate reaches the zero lower bound in a global liquidity trap context.
    Other approaches have focused on the role of capital controls when there are multiple dis-
tortions or objectives. For instance, Brunnermeir and Sannikov (2014) show that restrictions


                                              4
to capital ‡ows can be welfare improving in an economy with multiple goods, incomplete
…nancial markets, and ine¢ cient production, but does not discuss issues of optimal mix
between ex-ante and ex-post interventions. Ottonello (2015) studies optimal exchange rate
policy with downward nominal wage rigidity, ‡exible exchange rates, and a borrowing con-
straint like the one in our model. His analysis focuses on a restricted set of instruments
similar to Jeanne and Korinek (2013) and discusses the trade-o¤s that exchange rate policy
faces between competitiveness and …nancial stability considerations.
    More broadly, our paper shares the emphasis on price support policies that limit the
depreciation of the real exchange rate during crisis times with the work of Chang, Cespedes
and Velasco (2012), who examine the role of other unconventional policy tools such as credit
policies and direct interventions in the foreign exchange market. While they study more
realistic forms of government intervention, they do not compute optimal policy, but rather
focus on the transmission mechanism of alternative policy tools.5 In an di¤erent framework,
Martin and Ventura (2014) also suggest policies that relax the collateral constraint by prop-
erly managing the size of “bubbles”. More generally, our study of alternative policy tools is
related to the work by Correia, Nicolini and Teles (2008) in which the role of price stickiness
for the design of monetary policy depends on the existence of alternative …scal policy tools.
    Finally, in terms of the solution techniques, we apply the same algorithm proposed by
Benigno et al. (2012) to solve numerically for the Markov Perfect optimal policy problem in
the context of a production version of our economy in which a time-consistency issue arises.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model environment,
the scope for government intervention, and the alternative government instruments that we
consider. Section 3 studies optimal capital control policy. Section 4 analyzes optimal real
exchange rate policy. Section 5 considers the joint use of capital controls and real exchange
rate policies when lump-sum transfers/taxes are not available, as well as some robustness
analysis. Section 6 relates the main results of the paper to countries’s experience with capital
controls and price support policies over the past 20 years or so. Section 7 concludes. The
numerical solution methods we use as well as other technical material including proofs and
extensions are reported in an appendix for online publication.
   5
    In an optimizing neoclassical framework without credit frictions, Calvo, Reinhart and Vegh (1995) also
analyze the role of real exchange rate targeting as a temporary stabilization policy.




                                                    5
2    The model environment
In this section we describe our model economy and discuss its key assumptions. We then
characterize the competitive equilibrium of the model that we examine. Next we identify
the externality that gives rise to scope for government intervention. And …nally, we discuss
the alternative government policy instruments that we will analyze in the rest of the paper.
   We consider a small open economy in which there is a continuum of households j 2 [0; 1]
that maximize the utility function

                                                    X
                                                    1
                                         Uj    E0             t
                                                                  u Ctj          ;                    (1)
                                                    t=0


where Ctj is the consumption basket for an individual j at time t, and is the subjective
discount factor. E0 denotes the conditional expectation at time 0: We assume that the period
utility function is isoelastic:
                                              1        1
                                  u Ctj            Ctj    :
                                            1
The consumption basket, Ct , is a CES aggregate of tradable and nontradable goods (omitting
the subscript j to simplify notation):
                             h       1          1                      1              1   i   1
                        Ct       !       CtT        + (1          !)           CtN                :   (2)

The parameter     is the elasticity of intratemporal substitution between consumption of
tradable and nontradable goods, while ! is the relative weight of the two goods in the utility
function.
   We normalize the price of tradable goods to 1 and denote the relative price of the non-
tradable goods with P N . The aggregate price index is then given by
                                  h                                             i11
                                                                           1
                              Pt = ! + (1             !) PtN                          :

Here we note that there is a one-to-one link between the aggregate price index P and the
relative price P N .
    Households maximize utility subject to their budget constraint, which is expressed in
units of tradable consumption, and a borrowing constraint. The asset menu includes only
a one-period bond denominated in units of tradable consumption. Each household has two
stochastic endowment streams of tradable and non-tradable output, fYtT g and fYtN g. For
simplicity, we assume that both fYtT g and fYtN g are Markov processes with …nite, strictly

                                                          6
positive support. Therefore the current state of the economy can be completely characterized
by the triplet fBt ; YtT ; YtN g. Thus, the budget constraint each household faces is

                        CtT + PtN CtN + Bt+1 = YtT + PtN YtN + (1 + r) Bt ;                          (3)

where Bt+1 denotes the bond holding at the end of period t, and (1 + r) is the given world
gross interest rate.
   Access to international …nancial markets is not only incomplete but also imperfect in
the sense that, by assumption, the amount that each individual can borrow is limited by a
multiple of his current total income:

                                             1
                                  Bt+1 >               YtT + PtN YtN :                               (4)

One justi…cation of (4) is in terms of liquidity constraints. By this interpretation, lenders
require households to …nance a fraction of their current expenses— which include con-
sumption, debt repayments and taxes— out of current income (see Mendoza (2002) for this
interpretation):
                          YtT + PtN YtN     CtT + PtN CtN (1 + r)Bt :                     (5)

In fact, by combining (5) with (3) we obtain (4). Another justi…cation of (4) appeals to
an environment in which the borrower engages in fraudulent activities during the period
in which the debt is contracted and prevents creditors from seizing any future income (see
Bianchi (2011) for this interpretation). Note here that (5) depends on pre-tax income rather
than post-tax income. So, in an environment with default, the individual who defaults is
left with her/his full tax-obligation.6
    At the empirical level, as Mendoza (2002) and Bianchi (2011) emphasize, a speci…cation
in terms of current income is consistent with evidence on the determinants of access to credit
markets, on lending criteria and guidelines used in mortgage and consumer …nancing (e.g.,
Jappelli 1990, Jappelli and Pagano, 1989). The assumption that nontradable goods can be
pledged as collateral is consistent with the evidence reported by Tornell and Westermann
(2005) on the use of international credit to …nance booms in the nontradable sector.
    The key feature of (4) is that it captures currency mismatches in the balance sheet of
the economy— see Krugman (1999). In fact borrowing is denominated in units of tradable
consumption, while both the tradable and the nontradable endowment can be pledged as
   6
    See section 5 for a discussion of what happens when households can default on their tax obligation as
well, and the borrowing constraint depends on post-tax income.



                                                   7
collateral. Indeed, currency mismatches have been one of the main vulnerability of emerging
market economies in the numerous …nancial crises of the 1990s and the 2000s and continued
to be a crucial policy challenge in the post global …nancial crisis period— see for instance
Cespedes, Chang and Velasco (2004, 2012), Shin (2013), and Acharya et al. (2015) for a
discussion.
    From a model perspective, a …nancial crisis occurs when the constraint binds and the
model dynamics changes nonlinearly; an event that is endogenous in the model. Yet the
long-run business cycle properties of the economy are only marginally a¤ected by the crises
events (Mendoza, 2010). A unique feature of this model environment, therefore, is to nest en-
dogenous …nancial crisis dynamics triggered by small exogenous disturbances within regular
business cycles.
    In our small open economy, the motive for borrowing arises from the assumption that
  (1 + r) < 1 so that agents are impatient compared to foreign lenders. However, we assume
that there is a lower bound on debt strictly greater than the natural debt limit, B > B n ,
such that Bt > B, for all t.7 This lower bound guarantees that the competitive equilibrium
of the economy without government intervention and without the international borrowing
constraint (4) is well de…ned. In particular, it guarantees that there is an ergodic distribution
of debt with …nite support, and both tradable and nontradable consumption have a strictly
positive lower bound, while the nontradable price also has …nite support with strictly positive
lower bound. In order to focus on non-trivial policies, we also assume that, given YtT and
YtN , when Bt = B, the competitive equilibrium allocation always violates the borrowing
constraint (4).8
    As we discuss in the online appendix, we …nally note that our calibration, and in particular
the assumption that tradable and nontradable goods are complement ( < 1), rules out the
possibility of multiple equilibria.


2.1     Competitive equilibrium
We provide a full characterization of the competitive equilibrium of the economy with the
borrowing constraint and no government intervention in the online appendix. In this equi-
librium, households maximize (1) subject to (3) and (4) by choosing CtN ; CtT and Bt+1 . The
   7
     If C T and C N are strong substitutes, this constraint may bind; since the evidence is that C T and C N
are complements, we can ignore this possibility.
   8
     This restriction amounts to a lower bound on .




                                                     8
intratemporal allocation between tradeable and non tradeable goods is given by
                                                      1               1
                                        (1       !)       CtN
                                                 1                1       = PtN :                         (6)
                                             !       (CtT )

Goods market clearing for tradeable goods yields

                                     CtT = YtT            Bt+1 + (1 + r) Bt ;                             (7)

while for non tradeable goods we have:

                                                     CtN = YtN :                                          (8)

   The quantitative properties of this equilibrium are well known (see Mendoza (2002) and
Bianchi (2011)). Here, it is important to note only that, as Bianchi (2011) illustrated, this
very same model can account well for key business cycles statistics as well as the incidence and
severity of …nancial crises in a typical emerging market economy like Argentina. Through-
out the paper, therefore, whenever we need to resort to numerical methods, for illustrative
purposes, we set all parameter values of the model exactly like in Bianchi (2011)— and a
summary table is reported in the online appendix.

2.1.1    Unconstrained Equilibrium

As we shall see below, two of the government policy instruments that we consider, when used
optimally, can completely remove the e¤ects of the constraint (4) and achieve an allocation
that is identical to the competitive equilibrium of the model without the borrowing constraint
(4). In what follows we refer to this allocation as the "unconstrained equilibrium" (UE) and
we characterize it in the online appendix.9
     In the deterministic steady state of the model, since agents are impatient, the allocation
will tend to converge towards the natural debt limit. 10 In our stochastic economy, agents
engage in precautionary saving so that the probability of hitting the natural debt limit is
zero.
    Also note here that the unconstrained equilibrium characterizes an allocation in which
…nancial markets are incomplete so that there are ine¢ cient variations in consumption due
   9
      As we discussed above, the existence of a lower bound on debt which is strictly greater than the natural
debt limit guarantees that the competitive allocation without borrowing constraint has an ergodic distribu-
tion of debt with …nite support under the assumption that (1 + r) < 1:
   10
      In our model, this level equals (minus) the annuity value of the lowest tradable endowment value.


                                                              9
to the lack of state contingent debt. For completeness, in the online appendix, we describe
the …rst best allocation in which agents in the small open economy have access to state
contingent securities and compare it with the unconstrained allocation.


2.2     Pecuniary externality
In order to understand the rationale for policy intervention in our model, we …rst follow the
recent literature— e.g., Lorenzoni (2008), Korinek (2010) and Bianchi (2011)— and focus on a
benevolent social planner problem with restricted planning abilities. In the rest of the paper,
we then focus on Ramsey optimal policy. In particular, we initially assume that the social
planner can directly choose the level of debt subject to the credit constraint while allowing
goods markets to clear competitively. Unlike the representative agent in the competitive
equilibrium of the model, the social planner internalizes the e¤ects of his/her borrowing
decisions on the equilibrium relative price of nontradables. This is relevant in our set up
because, when the constraint binds, the agents’borrowing capacity depends on the value of
the collateral, which in turn is determined endogenously by the equilibrium relative price of
nontradables.

2.2.1    Social planning problem

Speci…cally, the benevolent social planner maximizes (1) subject to the same borrowing
constraint (4) that private agents face and the market clearing conditions for tradables
and nontradables goods (7) and (8). In specifying this problem, the equilibrium price of
nontradables is determined competitively according to the pricing rule (6). This condition
also serves as a constraint on the planning problem to eliminate PtN from the borrowing
constraint.11
    Figure 1 illustrates graphically the consequences of the presence of the borrowing con-
straint by comparing the policy functions of the endogenous variables (CtT ; Bt+1 ; PtN ) for a
negative one-standard deviation shock.12 We consider the three allocations we de…ned above:
the competitive equilibrium with borrowing constraint (CE), the social planner problem (SP)
  11
     This formulation is usually referred to as "constrained-e¢ cient" planning problem in the literature. A
second possibility, sometimes referred to as the "conditionally-e¢ cient" problem, is to determine this relative
price by imposing as a constraint on the problem the competitive equilibrium policy function (in our case
PtN = f CE (Bt ; YtN ; YtT )). In our endowment economy, these two de…nitions give exactly the same result and
do not a¤ect the normative analysis. See Kehoe and Levine (1993) and Lorenzoni (2008) for more details
and a discussion.
  12
     A policy function is the non-linear equilibrium relation between the endogenous variables of the model
and its exogenous and endogenous states (in our case, the triplet Bt ; YtN ; YtT ).



                                                      10
and the unconstrained equilibrium (UE).13
    Figure 1 clearly shows the di¤erence between the policy functions of the constrained (CE
and SP) and the unconstrained (UE) equilibrium allocations. In particular the UE allocation
features a much higher level of tradable consumption and debt, as well as a higher relative
price of nontradable goods, compared to the CE and SP allocations. In the absence of the
borrowing constraint, agents can borrow freely from international capital markets to smooth
consumption for any given stock of existing debt. In contrast, the CE and SP allocations
are relatively close: they diverge only slightly in the region in which the constraint is not
binding, but it is expected to bind in the future; otherwise they coincide exactly including
particularly in the region in which the constraint binds.
    In the CE and the SP allocations, in the region in which the constraint binds (i.e., when
there is a …nancial crisis in our model), both consumption of tradables and the relative
price of nontradables fall sharply.14 This decline is the consequence of the so-called "Fish-
erian de‡ation" or …re sale mechanism emphasized in the …nancial crisis literature. When
borrowing is constrained, consumption is much lower relative to the desired amount in the
unconstrained equilibrium. Lower tradable consumption is accompanied by a decline in rela-
tive price of nontradables, which in turn reduces the value of collateral, tightening borrowing
capacity and reducing tradable consumption further, a feedback loop results in even lower
relative price of nontradables and tradable consumption.
    As emphasized by Lorenzoni (2008), Korinek (2010) and Bianchi (2011), when the con-
straint does not bind (i.e. in normal times), but it is expected to bind in the future with
some positive probability, agents in the competitive equilibrium consume more than in the
social planner allocation. As we show in appendix, this di¤erence arises because individ-
ual agents don’t take into account the additional bene…t of reducing consumption today,
captured by the term Et SP       SP
                             t+1 t+1 in the planning problem, which in turn represents the
marginal bene…t of consuming more when the constraint binds in the future.
    Note however that, in this endowment economy, for a given state Bt ; YtN ; YtT in which
the constraint binds, the CE and the SP allocations coincide. For a given amount of existing
debt, tradable consumption will be the same in the two allocations since it is constrained by
the borrowing limit. The equilibrium relative price of nontradables is also equalized, since
the consumption of nontradables is pinned down by its endowment.15
  13
     Complete solutions for these allocations have to be computed numerically, and we use the global solution
methods that we describe in appendix.
  14
     In the …gure, the binding region starts in correspondence to the kink in the policy functions.
  15
     Recall that the relative price of nontradables is proportional to the ratio of tradable over nontradable
consumption.



                                                     11
2.3     Alternative policy instruments
While there is a well de…ned scope for government intervention, in this economy, there is a
variety of instruments or tools with which policy could be conducted. In fact, in our model
economy, there are at least three types of taxes that can be used: a tax/subsidy on debt,
a tax/subsidy on tradable consumption and a tax/subsidy on nontradable consumption. In
our policy analysis, in the rest of the paper, we consider all of them, studying their relative
e¤ectiveness in welfare terms as well as their joint use.16
    To conduct the policy analysis we take a Ramsey optimal taxation approach assuming
that the government budget is always balanced. For given policy instrument(s), the Ramsey
planner maximizes the representative household’s utility function, subject to the resources
constraints and the …rst order conditions of its maximization problem.

Tax on debt The …rst policy tool that we examine is a tax B       t (< 0) or a subsidy (> 0)
on one-period debt issued at time t, Bt+1 . This instrument is usually referred to as a capital
control.17 When we allow for lump-sum transfers/taxation, the government budget constraint
is:
                                        Tt = B t Bt+1 ;                                     (9)

where Tt denotes the lump sum transfer or tax. In this case, the household’s budget constraint
in the competitive equilibrium of the model becomes

                 CtT + PtN CtN = YtT + PtN YtN + Tt        Bt+1 (1 +    B
                                                                        t )   + (1 + r) Bt ;           (10)

while the liquidity constraint becomes

                           YtT + PtN YtN       CtT + PtN CtN      (1 + r)Bt + Tt :                     (11)

Combining these three constraints, gives rise to the same international borrowing constraint
as before, so that access to international …nancial market continues to be constrained by (4).

Taxes on consumption The other two policy tools that we study are consumption taxes
on non-tradable and on tradable goods. Both policy tools in‡uence directly equation (6) and
  16
     Notice here that any given allocation could be implemented by di¤erent tax instruments. This indetermi-
nacy in the tax instruments depends on the fact that there are two decisions margins but we are considering
three possible policy tools— see also Costinot et al. (2014) on this.
  17
     One of the best known cases of a use of such a tool is the Brazilian IOF tax. See Pereira and Harris
(2012) for a detailed account of this actively researched country case.


                                                    12
a¤ect the relative price of nontradable goods, PtN , which in the context of our economy is a
proxy for the real exchange rate— see for example Mendoza (2002), Caballero and Lorenzoni
(2014), Korinek (2010), Bianchi (2011), Jeanne (2012), and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2015)
for the same interpretation. For this reason, in what follows, we refer to these two tools as
“real exchange rate policy” or "exchange rate policy" for brevity. Alternatively these taxes
can be also interpreted as …scal devaluation/revaluation when monetary policy tools are not
available (i.e. in a …xed exchange rate regime or in a currency union).
    With a tax on nontradable consumption, (1 + N     t ), the household’s budget constraint
becomes
                CtT + PtN (1 + N   N      T    N N
                               t )Ct = Yt + Pt Yt + Tt       Bt+1 + (1 + r) Bt ;         (12)

where N t > (<) 0 is now a tax (or a subsidy) on nontradable consumption and Tt > (<) 0
is a government lump-sum transfer (or tax). As in the case of capital controls, we assume
that the government budget balances period by period:

                                                N N N
                                         Tt =   t Pt C t :                              (13)

In this case, the liquidity constraint becomes

                   YtT + PtN YtN       CtT + (1 +      N    N N
                                                       t )Pt Ct    (1 + r)Bt + Tt ;     (14)

which combined with the individual and the government budget constraints above determines
the same international borrowing constraint as before (4).
   With a tax on tradable consumption, (1 + Tt ), the household now faces the following
budget constraint:

                      T   T
               (1 +   t )Ct   + PtT CtN = YtT + PtN YtN + Tt      Bt+1 + (1 + r)Bt :    (15)

The government budget constraint continues to balance period by period:

                                                   T T
                                           Tt =    t Ct ;                               (16)

and the borrowing constraint remains as in (4).




                                                  13
3    Optimal capital controls
We now study the optimal Ramsey problem when the policy tool is Bt . The Ramsey problem
for B
    t is to choose a competitive equilibrium that maximizes (1). More formally:


De…nition 1 For a given fB0 g and assuming that fYtT g and fYtN g are Markov processes
with …nite, strictly positive support, the Ramsey problem for B
                                                              t is to choose a competitive
equilibrium that maximizes
                                            X1
                                                  t
                                   U j E0           u (Ct ) ;
                                                     t=0

subject to the resource constraints (7) and (8), the government budget constraint (9), the
borrowing constraint
                                        1
                              Bt+1 >          YtT + PtN YtN ;                         (17)

and the …rst order conditions of the household,

                   u0 (Ct )CC T (1 +   B
                                           )=        t   + (1 + r) Et [u0 (Ct+1 )CC T ] ;   (18)
                                                 1              1
                                   (1       !)           CtN
                                            1               1       = PtN :                 (19)
                                        !       (CtT )
   We can now state the following proposition that quali…es the main result of Bianchi
(2011).

Proposition 1 In an economy de…ned by (1), (4), (12) and (9) with a tax on B              t as
                                                                 B
the government instrument, the Ramsey optimal policy with          as instrument replicates the
social planner allocation (SP). Moreover the optimal policy is time-consistent.
     PROOF: see online appendix.
     A few remarks are in order here. From a policy perspective, as discussed by Bianchi
(2011) and noted in the previous section, when the constraint binds (i.e. SPt  > 0), the social
planner allocation coincides with the competitive equilibrium allocation, and therefore it is
optimal to set B  t = 0. When the constraint does not bind, but it can bind with positive
probability in the next period (i.e. SPt  = 0, but Et [ SP    SP
                                                         t+1 t+1 ] > 0 in equation (44) in the
online appendix), the optimal state contingent B                               B
                                                   t is a tax on borrowing ( t < 0). Thus,
it is optimal to engage in a policy intervention even when the constraint does not bind but
might bind in the future. In this sense the optimal policy is “prudential”or “precautionary”
in nature. Intuitively, since B
                              t is impotent during the crisis, the best thing that policy can


                                                          14
do, conditional on having only the tax on debt as instrument, is to reduce the probability
that a crisis occurs by limiting the amount that agents borrow in equilibrium (i.e. by taxing
Bt+1 ). We also note here that, in the region in which the constraint binds ( t > 0), any
value of B t can implement the social planner allocation.
                                                            18

    Figure 2 plots the policy function of B  t ; for a negative one-standard deviation shock,
that solves the optimal policy problem above and replicates the SP allocation, as well as the
welfare gains for B t as a function of current bond holdings. Figure 3 reports the ergodic
distributions of debt in the CE and the SP allocations. Table 1 reports the ergodic mean
of debt as a share of (annual) income in units of tradable consumption, the unconditional
probability of a …nancial crisis in the model, as well as the average welfare gain associated
with this policy instrument relative to the CE.19
    Intuitively, when the economy approaches the binding region the tax rate goes to zero;
before the crisis hits, the higher is the probability that the constraint binds, the higher is
the tax on borrowing. Looking at the welfare gains we can see that they also peak when
the constraint binds, but revert to zero slower than the tax rate. The welfare gains of
optimal capital controls persist past the level of debt at which the constraint binds because
entering a crisis with less debt makes the crisis relatively less costly (see Figure 8 below and
its discussion on this latter point). As we can see from Figure 3 and Table 1, the policy
intervention reduces the debt/income ratio and the likelihood of a …nancial crisis. This
implies that the economy, on average, will borrow less under the optimal capital control
policy than in the competitive equilibrium and will experience fewer and less costly …nancial
crises.


4     Optimal exchange rate policy
We now consider the use of consumption taxes or equivalently real exchange rate inter-
ventions. We …rst examine the nontradable consumption tax. As we shall see, the tax on
tradable goods achieves the same results when used optimally.


4.1     Nontradable tax
                                                                    N
Like before, let us …rst de…ne the Ramsey problem when              t   is the policy instrument.
  18
     This is true as long as B is less than B , i.e. the maximum value of the tax rate consistent with the
constraint being binding.
  19
     See the appendix on the the solution method for the SP allocation and the computation of the welfare
gains.


                                                   15
De…nition 2 For a given fB0 g and assuming that fYtT g and fYtN g are Markov processes
with …nite, strictly positive support, the Ramsey problem for N
                                                              t as instrument is to choose
a competitive equilibrium that maximizes

                                                         X
                                                         1
                                                                     t
                                   Uj               E0                   u (Cj ) ;
                                                          t=0


subject to the resource constraints (7) and (8), the government budget constraint (13), the
borrowing constraint
                                         1
                               Bt+1 >          YtT + PtN YtN :                         (20)

and the …rst order conditions of the household

                        u0 (Ct )CC T =          t   + (1 + r) Et [u0 (Ct+1 )CC T ] ;        (21)
                                            1                   1
                              (1       !)           CtN
                                       1                 1          = PtN (1 +       N
                                                                                     t ):   (22)
                                   !       (CtT )
    It is noteworthy that the non-tradable consumption tax directly a¤ects the relative price
of nontradables (i.e. the real exchange rate). Note also that, in normal times and in the un-
constrained equilibrium, the determination of the consumption of tradable and non-tradable
goods is independent from PtN . Therefore, N   t is neutral when the constraint does not bind.
In fact, the Euler equation and the goods market equilibrium conditions are all that is needed
to determine consumption of tradables and nontradables when the constraint does not bind.
In contrast, when the constraint binds, N                                              N
                                           t is no longer neutral because changes in Pt a¤ect
the value of the collateral, and hence the consumption of tradable goods.
    The next proposition says that, when used optimally, this consumption tax can achieve
the unconstrained allocation (i.e., it assures that the borrowing constraint is never strictly
binding in the equilibrium of our economy so that t = 0 for all t). To characterize the
solution of this Ramsey problem we follow the same two steps of the previous proposition.
First we characterize a policy rule for N t that decentralizes the unconstrained competitive
equilibrium. Then we show that this equilibrium is the one that solves the Ramsey problem
above.

Proposition 2 In an economy de…ned by (1), (4), (12) and (13) with a tax on non-tradable
consumption N                                                           N
              t as the government instrument, there exists a policy for t that decentralizes
the unconstrained allocation. This policy is Ramsey optimal and time-consistent.


                                                             16
    PROOF: see online appendix.
    Several remarks are also in order here. The proposition above implies that real exchange
rate policy always dominates capital control policy in welfare terms. Under this policy, it is
possible to undo the constraint completely and replicate the unconstrained equilibrium. In
contrast, capital controls can only limit (by reducing the probability of hitting the constraint)
the distortionary e¤ects of the pecuniary externality associated with the constraint, but not
the constraint itself. As we can see from Table 1, these welfare di¤erences are quantitatively
very large.
    How does this policy work? The intuition for the result is that (22) directly links the tax
rate to the relative price of nontradables. When the borrowing constraint does not bind, the
policy tool is neutral in the sense that it a¤ects PtN , but not the consumption allocation. In
contrast, when the constraint binds, the tax is no longer neutral and can be used to a¤ect
the value of collateral in the borrowing constraint, and hence also tradable consumption.
By subsidizing the consumption of nontradable goods, the policy increases its relative price.
Crucially, when the constraint binds, a higher relative price increases the value of collateral
and avoids the debt-de‡ation mechanism that would otherwise ensue.20
    In equilibrium, agents anticipate that this policy will undo the constraint when it binds
and will behave as if the constraint does not exist (i.e. like in the unconstrained allocation).
As we can see from Figure 1, for a given endowment of nontradable goods, the uncon-
strained allocation (UE) entails a much higher price of nontradables and consumption of
tradable goods during tranquil times than in the two constrained allocations (the CE and
SP). Eventually (i.e. in …nite time) our economy will hit the borrowing constraint because
agents are relatively impatient. When that happens, under the optimal policy, N will be
set so that the multiplier on the constraint is zero (i.e. the constraint is just binding).
    Notice that the policy function for N is time-consistent, and hence promising to elimi-
nate the borrowing constraint by supporting the relative price of nontradable whenever the
constraint binds is fully credible in equilibrium.
    This optimal policy can also be implemented with a …xed tax rate. Since any policy
                       N                                                             N
schedule N  t 2 ( 1; ^ t ] can achieve the unconstrained allocation, for any ^ t that undoes
                                                                            N
the borrowing constraint, there also exists a …xed subsidy N  f ix 2 ( 1; ^ t ] that replicates such
allocation. This consideration is important because it simpli…es the practical implementation
of the policy. Indeed, for a given exogenous state fYtT ; YtN g with …nite support, it is possible
  20
     For this reason, in broader terms, we can interpret this policy as a collateral support policy. In this
speci…c case of our model it takes the form of a …scal policy intervention aimed at supporting the relative
price of non tradeable that enters the borrowing constraint.



                                                    17
to determine the corresponding …xed subsidy for which the constraint does not bind. The
                                                     N                N
…xed level of N                        N
                f ix will be such that f ix 2 ( 1; ^ t;min ], where ^ t;min is the lowest value of the
subsidy given the …nite support of the exogenous states.
    Welfare gains from optimal this policy tool are two orders of magnitude higher than the
gains from implementing the SP allocations (Table 1). Figure 4 plots the implied optimal
  N
    as a function of current bond holdings and the associated welfare gains for a negative
one-standard deviation shock. The implied subsidy and the welfare gains associated with it
increase with the level of existing debt. As we can see from Figure 4, this optimal policy
subsidizes nontradable consumption, limiting the downward pressure on the relative price of
non tradable goods. As a result, agents can borrow and consume much more in both good
and bad times. In this case, however, the probability of a crisis is zero, despite the fact that
borrowing and consumption are much higher than in the CE or the SP (Table 1).
    We note here that, for our calibration (which is the same as in Bianchi, 2011), agents
are very impatient and the incentive to borrow dominates the precautionary motive that
tends to contain their borrowing. The relative strength of this “impatience” e¤ect implies
that even when the initial net foreign assets position is positive, agents will borrow up to
the borrowing limit, so that a tax subsidy on nontradable consumption is needed to relax
the credit constraint. As the current debt position worsens, the state contingent tax subsidy
becomes bigger, tending towards the lower bound of -1.
    To quantify what a more realistic policy can achieve in welfare terms, we consider the
case of a …x, 10 percent non tradable subsidy. Such a policy yields an average relative price
of on nontradables that is approximately 10 percent less depreciated than in the competitive
equilibrium with an average welfare gain of 0.4 percent of permanent consumption. This is
about the same as that attained with the optimal capital control policy, which nonetheless
is a state contingent tax schedule (Table 1).


4.2     Tradable tax
We now discuss the last policy tool available ( Tt ), leaving the details in the online ap-
pendix. The tax on tradable consumption a¤ects not only the intratemporal relative price,
but also the intertemporal allocation of resources through the Euler equation. Despite this
di¤erence,we show in appendix that it is possible to …nd a policy for Tt that replicates the
unconstrained allocation, like in the case of the nontradable consumption tax N t . The dif-
ference between the two policies is that the subsidy on nontradable consumption requires
…nancing through lump sum taxes, while the revenues from the tax on tradables will be re-


                                                 18
bated as lump sum transfers to private agents. From a practical standpoint, this is important
as …scal space is typically limited in the midst of a …nancial crisis.
    Both policy tools ( Tt and N    t ) could be interpreted strictly in terms of …scal policy
actions or more broadly as policy aimed at targeting the real exchange rate. In a way the
latter interpretation is related to the recent literature that proposes to manipulate the real
exchange rate through the use of …scal tools— see for instance Lipinska and Von Tadden
(2009), Franco (2011) and Fahri, Gopinath and Itskhoki (2013). The di¤erence here is that
we want to limit the depreciation of the real exchange rate for …nancial stability purposes,
while in the literature on …scal devaluation the idea is to engineer a devaluation to gain
competitiveness.


5      Optimal capital controls and exchange rate policy
       with distortionary …nancing
Our analysis in the previous section showed that exchange rate policy dominates capital
control policy in welfare terms. Intuitively, in a debt-de‡ation environment, optimal policy
aims at relaxing the collateral constraint. In particular, we have shown that optimal policy
(in the form of taxes on consumption) supports the relative price that in‡uences the bor-
rowing constraint and in principle can undo the e¤ects of a binding constraint completely.
The result hinges on the ability of the Ramsey planner to manipulate the price of the col-
lateral without costs, because our policy instruments operates in the context of a balanced
government budget in which lump sum transfers or taxes are available.
    We now depart from this key assumption by considering an environment in which lump-
sum transfers/taxes are not available21 , so that it is costly to manipulate the price of the
collateral, which is the real exchange rate in our model. Such cost can be interpreted more
broadly as representing another distortion in the economy, a second objective of exchange
rate policy, or any situation in which managing the real exchange rate during a …nancial
crisis is di¢ cult.22
    Given the structure of our endowment economy, we consider two possibilities for the
government budget constraint. In the …rst one, the set of taxes is arbitrarily restricted to
  B        N
  t and t : In the second one, we allow the use of all the tax instruments discussed thus far,
  21
     In a model with heterogenous agents, lump sum instruments will have distributional implications. Here
we abstract from these issues but still we consider an environment in which lump sum instruments are not
available.
  22
     We discuss further this interpretation in the next section of the paper.


                                                   19
 B     N           T
 t ;   t ;   and   t .



5.1          Two policy instruments
In the …rst case, the government budget constraint becomes:

                                                      B                    N N N
                                                      t Bt+1       =       t Pt C t ;                    (23)

and the government budget is balanced by combining the tax on borrowing with a subsidy
on nontradable goods. The following de…nition states the corresponding Ramsey problem.

De…nition 3 For a given fB0 g and assuming that fYtT g and fYtN g are Markov processes
with …nite, strictly positive support, the Ramsey problem for N t and
                                                                      B
                                                                      t as instruments,
when (23) holds is to choose a competitive equilibrium that maximizes

                                                               X
                                                               1
                                         U       j
                                                          E0                t
                                                                                u Ctj   ;
                                                               t=0


subject to (7) and (8) and (20), and the …rst order conditions of the households

                         u0 (Ct )CC T (1 +       B
                                                 t )      =    t   + (1 + r) Et [u0 (Ct+1 )CC T ] ;      (24)
                                                      1                1
                                    (1       !)           CtN
                                             1                 1           = PtN (1 +       N
                                                                                            t ):         (25)
                                         !           (CtT )
    As we cannot characterize the solution of this problem analytically, we must rely on
numerical methods. To do so, we note …rst that, given our chosen instruments (i.e. N t and
 B                                   23
 t ), the problem is time consistent.   We then use a computational method that exploits the
Markov-Perfect nature of the equilibrium, proposed by Benigno et al. (2012) and summarized
in the appendix. For comparison purposes, the economy continues to be calibrated exactly
as in Bianchi (2011). Here we report and discuss only the solution.
    Figure 5 plots the policy function under the optimal policy for N      B
                                                                    t and t and the associ-
ated welfare gains in terms of tradeable consumption as a function of current bond holdings
for a negative one-standard deviation shock. Figures 6 describes the policy function for
  23
    To see this, note that we can reduce the optimal control problem to a time-consistent static problem by
considering the restricted problem in which the Ramsey planner maximizes agents’utility subject to (7), (8),
(20) and (25). We can then solve for the allocations, the multiplier on the credit constraint and the relative
price. Next, we use (23) and (24) to retrieve the path of taxes. In the appendix we provide an alternative
proof based on the equivalence between the commitment and the time-consistent problem.


                                                                    20
Bt+1 ; CtT and PtN under the optimal policy (OP, dashed line) and the competitive allocation
(CE, solid line). Figure 7 reports the ergodic distribution of debt. In order to assess the
severity of the crisis, Figure 8 also reports the ergodic distribution of total consumption
growth in unit of tradable consumption during crisis times (i.e., the change in consumption
from t 1 to t, given that the economy is in a …nancial crisis in period t). For this purpose,
a crisis is identi…ed, as in Bianchi (2011), by a constraint that binds strictly and a debt
reduction larger than one-standard deviation. In these plots, the constraint binds at a level
of debt of about -0.95, where the policy rules display a kink.
    As we can see from Figure 5, when exchange rate policy is costly, there is scope for both
ex-ante and ex-post interventions. During normal times, the optimal policy requires capital
controls whose revenues are rebated in the form of subsidies to nontradable consumption;
during crises times, the optimal policy requires subsidies to non-tradable consumption to
limit the depreciation of the relative price of nontradable goods, …nanced by a tax on the
amount that agents borrow.
    The optimal policy depends crucially on the interaction between ex-ante and ex-post
interventions. In the context of our simple economy, this interaction is a¤ected by the way
the policy interventions are …nanced. When …nancing of ex-post intervention is not costly
(i.e. there are lump-sum taxes) policies aimed at supporting the market price of collateral
are fully e¤ective and can achieve the unconstrained allocation. In contrast, when …nancing
of ex-post intervention is distortive, preventing excessive depreciation of the real exchange
rate becomes costly, and the optimal policy weights the marginal bene…t of relaxing the
borrowing constraint with the distortion introduced by capital controls. Indeed, when the
constraint binds, the tax on debt a¤ects Ct+1 through (24). Since the ex-post policy becomes
costly, it is no longer fully e¤ective in addressing the pecuniary externality, and it becomes
optimal to intervene during normal times to reduce the probability of meeting the borrowing
constraint. Consistent with this, we can see from a comparison of Figure 2 and Figure 5 that
the optimal capital control tax, in the region where the constraint is not binding, is much
smaller than the case in which capital control is the only government instrument.
    There are three other features of the optimal policy that are noteworthy. First, we note
that when the constraint is not binding, while the tax on the amount that agents borrow
a¤ects their borrowing decision, the subsidy to nontradable consumption is neutral and is
equivalent to a lump-sum transfer. On the other hand when the constraint binds, both
instruments a¤ect the real allocation.
    Second, in this set up, there continues to be more borrowing and consumption than in the
competitive equilibrium despite the fact that the economy experiences fewer and less severe


                                             21
crises (see Table 1 and Figure 8). The Ramsey planner achieves this by choosing a di¤erent
allocation of consumption, with relatively more consumption of tradable goods compared to
the competitive equilibrium allocation. As a consequence, the welfare gains of this optimal
policy mix are more than twice as large as those in which only capital controls are used, and
continue to be larger the more indebted is the economy (see Figure 5 and Table 1). This is
consistent with the old adage that where borrowing is allocated is at least as important as
how much borrowing takes place.
    Third and …nally, agents borrow more than in the competitive equilibrium allocation
during normal times even though optimal policy requires a tax on the amount agents borrow
(Figure 6 and 7). Intuitively, on the one hand, agents want to borrow less because their
borrowing is taxed; on the other hand, they are willing to borrow more since crises events
are mitigated (only in part in this case) by policy intervention (see Figure 8 and Table 1,
respectively). Indeed, the real exchange rate depreciates less during crises times compared to
the competitive equilibrium allocation and allows agents to consume more (Figure 6). In this
setting, therefore, the rationale for capital controls is not related to the amount that agents
borrow in the unregulated economy, the so called "overborrowing" on which the existing
literature focused on, but rather to the relative (in)e¤ectiveness of the ex post intervention.


5.2    Three policy instruments
Consider now a second possibility in which all available distortionary taxes can be combined
to balance the budget:
                                B          N N N         T T
                                t Bt+1 = t Pt Ct + t Ct :                               (26)

In this situation, it is possible to show that there is a combination of policy tools that can
achieve the unconstrained allocation even if there are no lump sum transfers/taxes. In the
appendix, we prove that we can always combine the triplet of policy tools ( N         T   B
                                                                                  t , t , t ) to
undo the international borrowing constraint.
    The policy implication of this last exercise echoes what we emphasized earlier: the set of
instruments and their relative e¤ectiveness is crucial for the optimal policy design. The third
instrument addresses the distortion introduced by the second one in crisis times. Intuitively,
it is possible to use the tax on tradable goods to undo the e¢ ciency losses caused by the
use of tax on borrowing when policy aims at supporting the real exchange rate. This is
consistent with the notion that with enough instruments we can always undo a friction. In
our context, this implies that the challenge for the policy maker is to identify the speci…c
combination of instruments that are most e¤ective in addressing the pecuniary externality


                                              22
and its interaction with the others relevant frictions in the economy.


5.3    Extensions
Our analysis shows that, in economies with occasionally binding collateral constraints, it is
optimal to design policies aimed at relaxing the constraint when it binds, and the desirability
of policies aimed at preventing crisis depends on the cost-e¤ectiveness of such crisis resolution
interventions. Here we want to discuss some extensions of the basic framework and show
how the general message of our optimal policy analysis is a robust feature of this model
environment.

Imperfect exchange rate intervention We …rst consider a more realistic case of costly
(or less than fully e¤ective) ex-post intervention, which we label "imperfect exchange rate
intervention," for example, because it is not be feasible to perfectly control the real exchange
rate during a crisis event. In practice, this might be due to imperfect credibility or because
of limited availability of foreign exchange reserves needed to support the nominal exchange
rate, as we discuss in section 6 below.
    To model this idea (fully developed in the appendix), we assume that when it is not
feasible to implement the desired level of the subsidy N , N must be set to zero. In appendix,
we show that under this policy it is not always possible to relax the collateral constraint, so
that it becomes optimal to intervene ex-ante, from a Ramsey planner perspective, like in the
case of distortionary …nancing discussed above. Intuitively, when exchange rate intervention
is imperfect, crises become more costly events, and it is desirable to tax borrowing in normal
times to limit the probability that a crisis occurs.

Borrowing constraint with post-tax income The second extension that we consider
is the situation in which the borrowing constraint depends on post-tax income as follows:

                                       1
                             Bt+1 >           YtT + PtN YtN    Tt :                         (27)


It is evident that, under this assumption, changes in N …nanced through Tt ; will not relax
the borrowing constraint. Despite this, it is possible to show that the general principle
of optimal policy design in this class of models that we stressed above continues to hold,
but it may require to use a di¤erent policy tools. In fact, in this speci…c case, the policy
maker needs use the tax on borrowing, B ; along with lump-sum transfers/taxes to relax
the constraint. When (27) holds and binds, the Ramsey planner will increase the value

                                               23
of the collateral by transferring resources to the household via Tt , at the a cost of higher
 B
   . Indeed, in the appendix, we show that this case is isomorphic to the case in which the
borrowing constraint depends on pre-tax income, and the available policy tools are N and
 B
   . The only di¤erence is that, in this case, the borrowing constraint is relaxed through Tt
rather than by engineering an increase PtN .

Production Lastly, we note that, when we have a production economy, and hence multi-
ple margins on which the pecuniary externality can distort decisions— see for instance the
economy analyzed by Benigno et al. (2012, 2013)— it is possible to show that exchange rate
policy alone via N cannot restore constrained e¢ ciency or remove the borrowing constraint.
For example, the optimal policy for N alone, in that more general setting, is a tax in normal
times and a subsidy in crisis times. That policy therefore has both a crisis prevention element
aimed at containing the frequency of …nancial crises, and a crisis resolution element aimed at
mitigating their e¤ect by relaxing the constraint when they do occur. To restore constrained
e¢ ciency or remove the borrowing constraint altogether, however, would require the use of
multiple tools. Indeed, in that model environment, collateral price support policies induce
distortions in the allocation of labor between tradeable and non-tradeable production that
requires the use of an o¤setting policy tool to fully restore e¢ ciency or contain the cost of
trying to remove the constraint.


6    Discussion
Our model is useful to discuss exchange rate policy in the real world, and the implied
"optimal" policies are consistent with the experience of emerging market economies over the
past 20 years or so.
    A …rst implication of our analysis is on the role of collateral price support policies when
they can be implemented in a costless way. In the context of our model, these policies take
the form of a …scal subsidy to the consumption of nontradable goods, …nanced in a lump
sum manner. This contains the fall of the relative price of nontradable (or the depreciation
of the real exchange rate in our model) that typically occurs during a sudden stop of capital
in‡ows. If such a policy is feasible, our analysis shows that, not only it contains the crisis
when one occurs, but it also eliminates the scope for any prudential measure such as capital
controls. This is because the intervention can removes the borrowing constraint altogether,
which is the only source of ine¢ ciency in our model economy. Of course, in reality, there
are other distortions, possibly leading to di¤erent conclusions and we discuss this possibility


                                              24
below.
    Which polices in the real world can support the real exchange rate and how costly are
they to implement? In practice, the real exchange rate is typically supported by defending
the nominal exchange rate by selling previously accumulated foreign exchange reserves. And
while accumulating or borrowing foreign exchange reserves is costly, drawing them down at
any particular point in time is costless.
    For example, during the global …nancial crisis, Brazil and Mexico faced a sudden stop in
private capital in‡ows following the Lehmann’s collapse in September 2008. The Brazilian
Real depreciated by more than 20 percent in a month against the US dollar, and the central
bank intervened heavily to defend it as predicted by our model. As Mesquita and Toros
(2010) emphasize, the main motivation for this intervention was the vulnerability of the
non-…nancial corporate sector to the depreciation of the Real because of their exposure in
the derivative market to US dollar swaps (proxyed in our model with borrowing in units of
tradable consumption). A similar experience was shared by Mexico when large corporate
entities were also exposed to foreign currency derivatives at the time of Lehmann’s collapse.
In their account of the Mexican experience, Chang, Cespedes and Velasco (2012) emphasize
how the response of the policy authorities consisted in foreign exchange market intervention
with the objective to limit the depreciation of the Mexican Peso in the face of currency
mismatches in the corporate sector balance sheet.
    More broadly, in the context of the recent US and European …nancial crises, the prescrip-
tion of our model can be interpreted as interventions that avoid the collapse of asset prices
when a crisis occurs. In this sense, our results not only rationalizes the need to set a ‡oor
under the exchange rate as in the emerging market crises of the 1990s and the 2000s, but
also the non-conventional policies of purchasing risky assets to contain "…re sales" and the
asset de‡ation spirals that characterized the United States and European crises.24
    O¢ cial reserves however are always limited, and this limited availability exposes countries
to costly speculative attacks. Many emerging market countries learned this lesson the hard
way in the 1990s and the 2000s as speculative attacks on limited pools of foreign exchange
reserves broke many pegs: Mexico in 1994, Thailand in 1997, South Korea and Indonesia
in 1998, Russia in 1998, Brazil in 1999, Argentina in 2001, Uruguay in 2002, etc. Once
out of reserves, these countries had to borrow foreign currency from the IMF under tight
macroeconomic adjustment programs to contain the initial devaluations. Indeed, as predicted
  24
    It is possible to show that the small open economy studied here is isomorphic to an environment in which
domestic banks intermediate foreign saving and households borrow using a domestic asset as collateral. In
that context, optimal ex post policy, when warranted, supports domestic asset prices.



                                                    25
by our model, supporting the exchange rate was a crucial component of all adjustment
programs supported by the IMF in Indonesia, South Korea, and Brazil during the period
1997-1999 (IMF Independent Evaluation O¢ ce, 2003). These adjustment programs turned
out to be economically and politically very costly. As a result, after these crises, countries
started to accumulate very large pools of o¢ cial reserves to deploy in support of the exchange
rate in the case of sudden halt in capital in‡ows as they did during the global …nancial
crisis.25 But even when accomplished gradually rather than borrowing from the IMF, reserve
accumulation is costly. Countries must save in a precautionary manner in a riskless asset
while continuing to borrow in risky instruments as long as they are in a net debtor position.
So there is a carry cost, or premium for holding reserves.
    Perhaps even more importantly, exchange rate policy also has other objectives than that
of maintaining …nancial stability by mitigating the e¤ects of currency mismatches. Exchange
rate policy is typically tasked to also address competitiveness issues and to contribute to
macroeconomic stability by helping to manage in‡ation. In our model, …nancial stability is
the only policy objective, as there are no other frictions justifying intervening in the economy
for macroeconomic stabilization or competitiveness reasons.
    If we were to introduce other frictions and hence policy objectives in our model, a trade o¤
would emerge similar to the one we studied in the previous section by assuming distortionary
…nancing of exchange rate policy. One example is a government that targets the real exchange
rate by manipulating the nominal parity in the presence of both a borrowing constraint like
ours and a nominal rigidity. In this case, the advantage of keeping the exchange rate relatively
appreciated is to support the agents’borrowing capacity. The disadvantage of would be to
cause unemployment in response to shocks. Our distortionary cost captures the essence of
costly ex post interventions in the presence of other distortions or government objectives.26
    Indeed, the second main policy implication of our analysis is that, if …nancial crises
cannot be contained or mitigated without incurring signi…cant costs, or there are additional
distortions to consider, a policy of crisis prevention becomes part of the optimal policy mix,
such as for instance using capital controls in a countercyclical manner. However, when both
ex ante and ex post interventions are used jointly under the optimal policy mix, the level
  25
     Emerging markets o¢ cial reserves (excluding gold) increased from about one trillion US dollar in 2000
to over 6 trillions in 2012 according to IMF IFS data (or about a third of world GDP valued at current US
dollars). While this spectacular accumulation of reserve assets cannot be explained entirely by prudential
or precautionary motives, most empirical studies concur that precautionary saving is the most important
determinant of this process.
  26
     Ottonello (2015) studies optimal exchange rate policy in such a set up and illustrates the trade o¤
between increasing agents’borrowing capacity (dubbed credit access policy) and unemployment. His analysis,
however, considers a restricted sets of policy instruments.



                                                    26
of the tax on borrowing is much lower than when the capital control is used as the only
instrument (cfr. Figure 2 and 5).
    This latter result is consistent with available empirical evidence on the use of capital
controls. As Fernandez, Rebucci, and Uribe (2015) pointed out, if countries were to use
capital controls in a prudential manner as implied by Proposition 1, we should observe
active use of countercyclical capital controls. However, when Fernandez et al (2015) looked
at a large number of countries over the period 1995-2011, found that capital controls are
virtually ‡at during episodes of boom and bust in output or the current account.
    In summary, we conclude from this review of country experiences over the past 20 years
or so that, while the mechanics of optimal policies implied by our model are di¤erent than
those typically implemented in the real world, the general principle followed by these policies
is very much consistent with them. The policies implied by our analysis are also consistent
with the available empirical evidence on the use of capital controls, in stark contrast to those
implied by the existing literature.


7    Conclusion
In response to the recent global …nancial crisis, a new policy paradigm emerged in which old
fashioned forms of government interventions such as capital controls and other quantitative
restrictions on credit ‡ows— the so called macro-prudential policies— have become part of
the standard policy toolkit. Arguably macro-prudential policies are desirable because they
can help prevent …nancial crises that otherwise would be too costly to endure or contain
with only ex post interventions.
    In this paper we study the optimal policy mix of ex post, crisis management policy
tools and ex ante, crisis prevention policy tools. We …rst show that when the Ramsey
planner can choose among di¤erent policy tools, ex post collateral price support policies
dominate prudential policy measures in welfare terms by two orders of magnitude. This
dominance is conditional on the extent to which price support policies do not entail e¢ ciency
losses. Indeed, when collateral price support policies can be used e¤ectively, there is no need
for macro prudential policies. In contrast, when crisis management policies are not fully
e¤ective because they are costly to implement, ex-ante policies such as capital controls can
be rationalized as a complement to collateral price support policies that limit the occurrence
of crises. The joint use of ex ante and ex post policies achieves a welfare gain of more than 1
percent of permanent consumption in our model; a gain that is twice as large as the welfare
gain of using only capital controls.

                                              27
    Our analysis is conducted in the context of a relatively simple quantitative model, but in
reality the trade-o¤s that policymakers face are richer that the ones implied by our frame-
work. For instance, there are bene…ts from a more depreciated exchange rate in terms of the
classical expenditure switching e¤ect of exchange rates that are not incorporated into our
analysis. To an extent, we can interpret our model as one in which balance-sheet considera-
tion dominates other exchange rate policy motives, but we acknowledge that a richer model
would be needed to quantify these issues. We regard the study of optimal monetary and
macro-prudential policy in a quantitative model in which pecuniary externalities interact
with nominal rigidities as an area of fruitful future research.




                                             28
References
 [1] Acharya Viral, Stephen Cecchetti, José De Gregorio, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Philip R.
     Lane, and Ugo Panizza (2015), "Emerging economy corporate debt: The threat to …nan-
     cial stability", http://www.voxeu.org/article/emerging-economy-corporate-debt-threat-
     …nancial-stability, VoxEu..

 [2] Blanchard, O. and J. Ostry (2012), “The multilateral approach to capital controls",
     http://www.voxeu.org/article/multilateral-approach-capital-controls, VoxEu.

 [3] Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E.R. Young (2013), “Financial Crises
     and Macro-Prudential Policies,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 89(2), pp.
     453-470.

 [4] Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E.R. Young (2012), “Optimal Policy
     for Macro-Financial Stability, ”CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9223.

 [5] Bianchi, J. (2011), “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,”
     American Economic Review 101(7), pp. 3400-3426.

 [6] Bianchi, J. and E.G. Mendoza (2010), “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ’Macro-
     Prudential’Taxes,”NBER Working Paper No. 16091.

 [7] Brunnermeier, M. and Sannikov, Y. (2014) “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
     Sector”, American Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 2 pp. 379-42.

 [8] Calvo, Gulliermo, Carmen Reinhart and Carlos Vegh (1995), “Targeting the Real Ex-
     change Rate: Theory and Evidence", Journal of Development Economics, Vol 47, 97-
     133.

 [9] Caballero Ricardo and Guido Lorenzoni (2014), "Persistent Appreciations and Over-
     shooting: A Normative Analysis", IMF Economic Review, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 1-47.

[10] Céspedes Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco (2004), "Balance Sheets and
     Exchange Rate Policy," American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 4, pp. 1183-1193.

[11] Cespedes F. L., Chang, R., and A. Velasco (2012) “Is In‡ation Target Still on Target?”,
     NBER Working Paper No. 18570.




                                            29
[12] Cespedes F. L., Chang, R., and A. Velasco (2013) “Financial Intermediation, Exchange
     Rates, and Unconventional Policy in an Open Economy”, NBER Working Paper No.
     18431.

[13] Correia, I., Juan P. Nicolini, Pedro Teles (2008) “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy:
     Equivalence Results”, Journal of Political Economy 168, 1, pp.141-170.

[14] Costinot Arnaud , Guido Lorenzoni, Ivan Werning (2014) “A Theory of Capital Controls
     as Dynamic Terms-of-Trade Manipulation”, February, Journal of Political Economy,
     122, 1.

[15] De Paoli Bianca and Anna Lipińska (2013), “Capital Controls: A Normative Analysis,”
     Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Reports No. 600, February 2013.

[16] Devereux, Michael B. and James Yetman (2014), "Capital Controls, Global Liquidity
     Traps and the International Policy Trilemma", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol.
     116, No. 1, pp. 158-189.

[17] Farhi Emmanuel and Ivan Werning (2012), “Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal Cap-
     ital Controls with Fixed Exchange Rates”NBER Working Paper No. 18199.

[18] Farhi Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath and Oleg Istkhoki (2013), “Fiscal Devaluation”, Review
     of Economic Studies, April 2014, Volume 81 (2).

[19] Franco Francesco (2011): “Improving competitiveness through …scal devaluation, the
     case of Portugal,”unpublished manuscript, Universidade Nova de Lisboa.

[20] Fernandez Andres, Alessandro Rebucci, Mart¬n Uribe (2015), "Are Capital Controls
     Countercyclical?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 76, pp. 1-14.

[21] IMF Independent Evaluation O¢ ce (2003), "The IMF and Recent Capital Account
     Crises: Indonesia, Kporea, and Brazil", Evaluation Report, Independent Evaluation
     O¢ ce, IMF, Washington DC, 2003.

[22] IMF      (2012)    “The     liberalization   and   managment     of  capital
     ‡ows:      an institutional view",        IMF sta¤ paper,    November 2012
     (http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf).

[23] Jappelli, Tullio (1990), "Who is credit constrained in the US economy?" The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, pp. 219–234.


                                            30
[24] Jappelli, Tullio, and Marco Pagano (1989), "Consumption and capital market imper-
     fections: An international comparison", American Economic Review, 79(5): 1088-1105.

[25] Jeanne, O. (2012) “Capital Flow Management”, AER Papers and Proceedings, Volume
     102, No. 3.

[26] Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek (2012), “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian
     Taxation Approach,”unpublished manuscript, Johns Hopkins University.

[27] Jeanne, O. and A.Korinek (2013), “Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up
     After the Crash”, NBER wp no 18675.

[28] Kehoe, T.J. and D. Levine (1993), “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 60(4), pp. 865-888.

[29] Korinek, A. (2010), Regulating capital ‡ows to emerging markets: An externality view,
     manuscript, Johns Hopkins University.

[30] Krugman, P. (1999), “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises,”
     International Tax and Public Finance 6(4), pp. 459-472.

[31] Lipińska, Ania, and L. von Thadden (2009): “Monetary and Fiscal Policy Aspects of
     Indirect Tax Changes in a Monetaty Union,”ECB Working Papers No. 1097.

[32] Lorenzoni, G. (2008), “Ine¢ cient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies 75(3),
     pp. 809-833.

[33] Magud, N.E., C.M. Reinhart, and K.S. Rogo¤ (2011), “Capital Controls: Myth and
     Reality –A Portfolio Balance Approach,”NBER Working Paper 16085.

[34] Martin, Alberto and Jaume Ventura, 2014. “Managing Credit Bubbles”. NBER Working
     Papers 19960, National Bureau of Economic Research.

[35] Mendoza, E.G. (2002), “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden
     Stop,”in Edwards, S. and J.A. Frankel (eds.), Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging
     Markets, University of Chicago Press and NBER.

[36] Mendoza, E.G. (2010), “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage: A Fisherian
     De‡ation of Tobin’s Q,”American Economic Review 100(5), pp. 1941-1966.

[37] Mesquita, M and M Toros (2010): “Brazil and the 2008 panic”, BIS Papers, no 54, pp
     113–20.

                                           31
[38] Ottonello P., "Optimal exchange-rate policy under collateral constraints and wage rigid-
     ity." Manuscript, Columbia University, 2015.

[39] Pereira da Silva L. A. and R. E. Harris”(2012), "Sailing through the Global Financial
     Storm: Brazil’s Recent Experience with Monetary and Macroprudential Policies to Lean
     Against the Financial Cycle and Deal with Systemic Risks”, Central Bank of Brazil WP
     No. 290, August.

[40] Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2015) “Prudential Policy for Peggers”, Journal of
     Political Economy, forthcoming.

[41] Tornell, Aaron, and Frank Westermann (2005), "Boom-bust cycles and …nancial liber-
     alization", MIT Press Books.




                                             32
                           Table 1: Ergodic Averages
                    Debt to Income    Prob. of Crisis   Welfare Gain
               CE      −29.2%              6.7%             NA
               SP      −28.4%              1.2%            0.41%
               UE        NA                0.0%            33.8%
               OP      −30.5%              4.9%            1.10%

Notes: CE denotes the competitive equilibrium allocation; SP the social planner al-
location; UE the unconstrained equilibrium; OP the optimal policy equilibrium with
both debt tax and nontradable consumption tax. The table reports ergodic means (in
percent). Welfare gains are relative to the CE and are measured in unit of tradable
consumption.
                         Figure 1: Alternative Allocations: Decision Rules

                               Debt                                         Tradable Consumption
 −0.6                                                           2

 −0.8
                                                              1.5
   −1

 −1.2
                                                                1
 −1.4

 −1.6
                                                              0.5
 −1.8

   −2                                                         0
   −1.1        −1       −0.9       −0.8      −0.7       −0.6 −1.1         −1        −0.9      −0.8       −0.7      −0.6
                               B(t)                                                        B(t)
                                                  Nontradable Price
                                  6

                                  5

                                  4
                                                                                                           CE
                                  3                                                                        SP

                                  2                                                                        UE

                                  1

                                  0
                                 −1.1        −1       −0.9       −0.8      −0.7      −0.6
                                                             B(t)

Notes: CE denotes the competitive equilibrium allocation; SP the social planner allocation; UE the unconstrained equilib-
rium. The figure plots the equilibium decision rules or policy functions of the endogenous variables plotted conditional on
one-standard deviation shocks. Borrowing decreases from left to right on the x-axis.
                                           Figure 2: Optimal Capital Control Policy

                                                           Tax Rate on Debt
                     0.2

                 0.15

                     0.1




  τB(t)
                 0.05

                      0

            −0.05
               −1.1                −1.05    −1    −0.95   −0.9      −0.85   −0.8   −0.75    −0.7      −0.65      −0.6
                                                                     B(t)
                              −3                                 Welfare Gain
                           x 10
                      6

                     5.5

                      5

                     4.5

                      4

                     3.5




     Percent of CT
                      3

                     2.5
                      −1.1         −1.05    −1    −0.95   −0.9      −0.85   −0.8   −0.75    −0.7      −0.65      −0.6
                                                                     B(t)

Notes: The figure plots the optimal debt tax rate and the associated welfare gain relative to the competitive equilibium
conditional on one-standard deviation shocks. Borrowing decreases from left to right on the x-axis.
                               Figure 3: Optimal Capital Control Policy

                                                 Ergodic Distributions
 0.035




  0.03


                                                                                                          CE
 0.025
                                                                                                          SP


  0.02




 0.015




  0.01




 0.005




      0
     −1.1      −1.05        −1       −0.95       −0.9       −0.85       −0.8      −0.75       −0.7      −0.65       −0.6
                                                             B(t)

Notes: The figure plots the ergodic distribution of debt in units of tradable consumption in the competitive equilibium (CE)
and the social planner allocations (SP). Borrowing decreases from left to right on the x-axis.
                                  Figure 4: Optimal Exchange Rate Policy

                                             Nontradable Consumption Tax
                   −0.2


                   −0.4


                   −0.6




  τN(t)
                   −0.8


                    −1
                          −1   −0.8   −0.6      −0.4       −0.2         0         0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8
                                                              B(t)
                                                        Welfare Gain
                    0.5

                   0.45

                    0.4

                   0.35




   Percent of CT
                    0.3

                   0.25
                          −1   −0.8   −0.6      −0.4       −0.2         0         0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8
                                                              B(t)

Notes:The figure plots the optimal nontradable consumption tax rate and the associated welfare gain relative to the com-
petitive equilibium conditional on one-standard deviation shocks. Borrowing decreases from left to right on the x-axis.
                            Figure 5: Optimal Capital Control and Exchange Rate Policy

                                       Taxes on Debt and Nontradable Consumption
                    0.5

                    0.4
                                                                                                            τB
                    0.3
                                                                                                            τN
                    0.2

                    0.1




  τN(t),τB(t)
                     0

                   −0.1

                   −0.2
                     −1.1     −1.05   −1    −0.95   −0.9      −0.85      −0.8      −0.75      −0.7     −0.65       −0.6
                                                               B(t)
                                                           Welfare Gain
                   0.14

                   0.12

                    0.1

                   0.08

                   0.06

                   0.04




   Percent of CT
                   0.02

                     0
                    −1.1      −1.05   −1    −0.95   −0.9      −0.85      −0.8      −0.75      −0.7     −0.65       −0.6
                                                               B(t)

Notes: The figure plots the optimal debt and nontradable consumption tax rates and the associated welfare gain relative
to the competitive equilibium, conditional on one-standard deviation shocks. Borrowing decreases from left to right on the
x-axis.
    Figure 6: Optimal Capital Control and Exchange Rate Policy: Decision Rules

                               Debt                                         Tradable Consumption
 −0.6                                                         1.2

 −0.7                                                           1

 −0.8                                                         0.8

 −0.9                                                         0.6

   −1                                                         0.4

 −1.1                                                        0.2
   −1.1        −1       −0.9       −0.8      −0.7       −0.6 −1.1         −1        −0.9      −0.8       −0.7      −0.6
                               B(t)                                                        B(t)
                                                  Nontradable Price
                                  3

                                2.5

                                  2                                                                        CE

                                1.5                                                                        OP


                                  1

                                0.5
                                 −1.1        −1       −0.9       −0.8      −0.7       −0.6
                                                             B(t)

Notes: CE denotes the competitive equilibrium allocation; OP the optimal policy equilibrium with both debt tax and
nontradable consumption tax. The figure plots the equilibium decision rules of the endogenous variables plotted conditional
on one-standard deviation shocks. Borrowing decreases from left to right on the x-axis.
                Figure 7: Optimal Capital Control and Exchange Rate Policy

                                                 Ergodic Distributions


 0.012




  0.01                                                                                                 CE

                                                                                                       OP

 0.008




 0.006




 0.004




 0.002




      0
     −1.1      −1.05        −1       −0.95       −0.9       −0.85       −0.8      −0.75       −0.7      −0.65       −0.6
                                                             B(t)

Notes: The figure plots the ergodic distribution of debt in units of tradable consumption in the competitive equilibium (CE)
and the optimal policy equilibrium with both debt tax and nontradable consumption tax (OP). Borrowing decreases from
left to right on the x-axis.
                                  Figure 8: Comparing Policy Regimes

                                                 Consumption Growth in Crises


              10
                                                                                                                   CE
               9
                                                                                                                   SP

                                                                                                                   OP
               8


               7


               6


               5


               4


               3


               2


               1


               0
                         −0.25       −0.2       −0.15        −0.1       −0.05         0         0.05         0.1
                                                        Consumption Growth

Notes: CE denotes the competitive equilibrium allocation; SP the social planner allocation; OP the optimal policy equilibrium
with both debt tax and nontradable consumption tax. The figure plots the ergodic distribution of consumption growth in
the period after the constraint was binding. Borrowing decreases from left to right on the x-axis.
A     Appendix (for online publication)
A.1     Competitive equilibria
In the competitive equilibrium of the economy with the borrowing constraint and without
government intervention (which we also call the "constrained allocation" for brevity), house-
holds maximize (1) subject to (3) and (4) by choosing CtN ; CtT and Bt+1 . The Lagrangian
for this problem is
                            "                                                                                      #
                  X
                  1                 1
                                         Ct1         +        t    Bt+1 +    1
                                                                                      YtT + PtN YtN      +
                        t          1
         L = E0
                                    T
                  t=0           t Yt    + PtN YtN                  Bt+1 + (1 + r) Bt             CtT   PtN CtN ;

with t and t denoting the multipliers on the borrowing constraint and the budget con-
straint, respectively. The …rst order conditions of this problem are:

                                          CT : u0 (Ct )CC T =                    t;                                    (28)

                                        CN : u0 (Ct )CC N =                      N
                                                                             t Pt ;                                    (29)

                                Bt+1 :       t   =        t   + (1 + r) Et             t+1   :                         (30)
                                                     1
                                t   Bt+1 +                         YtT + PtN YtN         =0                            (31)

Combining (28) and (29) we have:
                                                          1             1
                                        (1           !)           CtN
                                                     1              1       = PtN :                                    (32)
                                                 !       (CtT )

This constrained allocation can now be characterized completely by the …rst order conditions
(30), (31) and (32) and the goods market equilibrium conditions:

                                    CtT = YtT                 Bt+1 + (1 + r) Bt ;                                      (33)

and
                                                         CtN = YtN :                                                   (34)




                                                                  42
A.1.1   Parameter values

The parameter values of the model are set exactly as in Bianchi (2011):


    Structural parameters                                                Values
    Elasticity of substitution between tradable and non-tradable goods     = :83
    Intertemporal substitution and risk aversion                           =2
    Credit constraint parameter                                            = 0:75758 1/
    Relative weight of tradable and non-tradable goods                   ! = 0:31
    Discount factor                                                        = 0:91

    Exogenous variables                                                  Values
    World real interest rate                                             r = 0:04
    Steady state endowments                                              YN =YT =1

    Endowment process                                                    "                  #
                                                                             0:901 0:495
    Autocorrelation Matrix
                                                                              0:453 0:225
                                                                         "                      #
                                                                             0:00219 0:00162
    Variance-Covariance Matrix
                                                                             0:00162 0:00167

    Average values in the ergodic distribution                        Values
    Net foreign assets                                                B = 0:91
    1/ This value of implies a value for = :32 in Bianchi’s (2011) notation.




                                              43
A.1.2      Ruling out multiple equilibria

The borrowing constraint can induce multiple equilibria due to the possibility of a self-
ful…lling decline in the relative price of nontradables that can reduce the value of the collat-
eral, and the consumption of tradable goods, in a manner compatible with the initial decline
in the relative price of nontradables. More formally, by combining the borrowing constraint
(4), the budget constraint (3) and the pricing equation we obtain:
                                                  2                                      1
                                                                                             3
                                                                           1
                                         1                  (1       !)            CtN
                CtT = Bt (1 + r) + 1 +            4YtT +                             1
                                                                                             5   f CtT :
                                                                      1
                                                                 !        (CtT )

When the elasticity of intratemporal substitution is less than 1 (goods are complements),
a su¢ cient condition for unicity is that the derivative of the RHS of this expression with
                 0
respect to C T (f C T ), evaluated at the intersection point with the LHS is greater than
                                         1                                                                  0
1. Indeed, when Bt (1 + r) + 1 +                 YtT < 0 and          < 1; we have that lim f (C T ) = 0
                                                                                                   C T !0
                0
and lim f (C T ) = 1. These conditions, which are satis…ed in our calibration, combined
       C T !1
                                0
with the assumption that f C T > 1 evaluated at the intersection point, guarantee that
the equilibrium is unique— see also the discussion of Jeanne and Korinek (2012).
   Another issue that might arise in our model, given our speci…cation of the borrowing
constraint, is the possibility that, when the amount that the planner borrows increases, then
the relative price of nontradable rises the value of the collateral by more than the increase
in Bt+1 , thus leading to a relaxation of the borrowing constraint. Our calibration also rules
out the possibility of such a perverse dynamic.

A.1.3      Unconstrained allocation

In terms of equilibrium conditions, the allocation without the borrowing constraint, which
we call the "unconstrained allocation", is fully characterized by the following equations:

                                         u0 (CtU E )CCUTE =      UE
                                                                 t ;                                            (35)

                                                                          UE
                                    u0 (CtU E )CCUNE =     UE
                                                           t    PtN            ;                                (36)
                                       UE                         UE
                                       t     =   (1 + r) Et       t+1      ;                                    (37)

along with the goods market equilibrium conditions (7) and (8).27
  27
    See Mendoza (2002) for a comparison of the quantitative properties of the constrained and the uncon-
strained competitive equilibrium of the model.

                                                      44
A.1.4     First best allocation

With perfect access to complete asset markets, an allocation that we call the "…rst best",
households maximize utility subject to their budget constraint state-by-state and period-by-
period, expressed in units of tradable consumption.
      Let’s assume agents can trade a set of state-contingent securities at time 0, which pay
one unit of tradables in a particular state at time t. Let z t describe the history of shocks at
time t, and let 0 (z t ) denotes the time-zero probability of a particular history, with Q0 (z t )
denoting the time-zero price of a security paying one unit of tradables at time t in history
z t . We denote with t (zt+1 jz t ) the probability of being in state zt+1 in time t + 1 conditional
on a given history at time t. Then the period budget constraint of an individual agent is:
           X                       j
                   Qt (zt+1 jz t )Bt+1 (zt+1 ) + CtT + PtN CtN = YtT z t + PtN YtN z t + Btj :
            zt+1


Note here that state-contingent securities can only pay o¤ in terms tradable goods.28 We
also continue to assume that in our economy there is a lower bound on debt that is strictly
greater than the natural debt limit, B > B n . Since nontradable consumption is equal to
its endowment, which is positive in every state of nature, this lower bound guarantees that
tradable consumption has a strictly positive lower bound. Thus, the following constraint
needs to be satis…ed:
                                  Bt+1 z t+1     B z t+1

or
                                                      CtT > 0:

   Optimal behavior in this economy can be characterized in terms of the following …rst
order conditions:
                                      1  1     1
                           CT : (Ct )   ! CtT    = t zt ;                          (38)
                                          1                1         1
                             CN : (Ct )       (1      !)       CtN        =    t   z t PtN ;            (39)

                       Bt+1 z t+1 : Qt (zt+1 jz t )    t   zt =          (zt+1 jz t )   t+1   z t+1 :   (40)
  28
     This is a natural restriction, as agents in di¤erent countries can only promise to transfer tradable
goods to each other in di¤erent states because, by their nature, non-tradable goods cannot be transferred
internationally. In equilibrium non-tradable consumption must still equal non-tradable output in each state,
for each country.




                                                           45
Combining (38) and (39) we have:
                                                          1              1
                                            (1       !)       CtN
                                                     1             1          = PtN :                                           (41)
                                                 !       (CtT )

We can then combine (38) and (39) with the de…nition of the price index to get:

        2 0                             1
                                            11                           0                                       1
                                                                                                                     11   311
                       1     1                                                        1                1
               (Ct )       !     CtT                                          (Ct )          (1      !)    CtN
   Pt = 4! @                   t
                                            A            + (1          !) @                           t
                                                                                                                     A    5     :
                           t (z )                                                                 t (z )


From this expression we obtain
                                                                  (1    )(1     )            1
                                    ( t Pt )1        = (Ct )                        (Ct )         ;

which becomes
                                                          t Pt    = Ct

and holds for every state of nature. Since the price of a state contingent asset is common
across countries and it is the same as the one that the small open economy faces, we have
that
                        Qt (zt+1 jz t ) t z t = zt+1 jz t t+1 z t+1 ;

where     denote the rest of the world marginal utility of tradeable consumption. It is now
easy to obtain
                               Ct+1     Pt      Ct+1        Pt
                                            =                   :
                                Ct     Pt+1      Ct        Pt+1
                                                                          C0          P0
Iterating on this condition and de…ning                       0           C0          P0
                                                                                         ,   we …nally obtain the familiar,
complete market risk sharing condition

                                                     Ct                       Pt
                                                                   =      0      ;
                                                     Ct                       Pt

which links the ratio of the national price levels, or the real exchange rate, to the consumption
di¤erential with the rest of the world.
   Figure 1A plots the lifetime utility or the …rst best and unconstrained allocations and
shows that the two di¤ers signi…cantly only for high level of initial debt.




                                                                  46
A.2     Social planner allocation
A benevolent social planner maximizes (1) subject to the same borrowing constraint (4) that
private agents face and the market clearing conditions for tradables and nontradables goods
(7) and (8).
    In specifying this problem, the equilibrium price of nontradables is determined compet-
itively according to the pricing rule (6) that serves also as a constraint to the planning
problem. By substituting the relative price of nontradables, PtN in the borrowing constraint
(4) with the competitive pricing rule (6) we can write the Lagrangian of the planning problem
as
                           2                                                                                                                     3
                                              1
                                                  (Ct )1     +     SP
                                                                          YtT        Bt+1 + (1 + r) Bt                     CtT +
           X
           1
                           6
                                          1                        1;t                    "                                          1
                                                                                                                                               #! 7
                       t
  L = E0                   4       SP                              SP                 1                            (1     (
                                                                                                                        !) CtT   )                5;
             t=0
                               +   2;t   YtN        CtN +          t      Bt+1 +                  YtT +                 !YtN
                                                                                                                                         Y   N




                       SP
where SP      SP
        1;t ; 2;t and t    denote the multipliers and the superscript SP distinguishes them
from those in the constrained and unconstrained allocations. The planner must choose the
optimal path for CtT ; CtN and Bt+1 ; and the …rst order conditions for its problem are:

                                                                                SP
                                              CT : u0 (CtSP )CCSPT +            t
                                                                                      SP
                                                                                      t     =      SP
                                                                                                   1;t ;                                          (42)

                                                     CN : u0 (CtSP )CCSPN =               SP
                                                                                          2;t ;                                                   (43)
                                                     SP          SP                                SP
                                         Bt+1 :      1;t   =     t      + (1 + r) Et               1;t+1       :                                  (44)

                                          SP        SP         1
                                          t        Bt+1 +                 YtT + PtN YtN               =0                                          (45)

                                                                                 1
                                                                                      1
        SP         1       @PtN N             1    1 (1 !)       (1 !)(CtT )                          1
where   t                      Y
                           @CtT t
                                         =             !             !
                                                                                           YtN             :
    The key di¤erence between the planning allocation and the competitive one (with the
borrowing constraint) follows from examining equations (42) and (28). The planner inter-
nalizes the consequences of her/his decisions on PtN . When the constraint binds ( SP  t  > 0),
there is an additional bene…t in consuming an extra unit tradable consumption, represented
by the term SPt    t . This term captures the increase in the price of non-tradable goods asso-

ciated with the marginal increase in tradable consumption. As we we discuss in the paper,
this di¤erence between the two margins has intertemporal implications and a¤ects agents
behavior also when the constraint does not bind.



                                                                         47
A.3     Optimal policy with a tax on debt
Proof of Proposition 1 In an economy de…ned by (1), (4), (12) and (9) with a tax on B       t
                                                                   B
as the government instrument, the Ramsey optimal policy with         as instrument replicates
the social planner allocation (SP). Moreover the optimal policy is time-consistent.
    PROOF: Let’s consider …rst a less restricted version of the Ramsey problem in which the
planner maximizes (1) subject to (7) and (8), (17) and (19). This problem corresponds to the
social planner one (SP) de…ned above. The solution of the Ramsey problem for B cannot
achieve a higher welfare than the social planner allocation because the Ramsey problem is
more restricted than the social planner problem— by equation (18).
    We conjecture that the two allocation coincide. To verify this, note that the Euler
equation for the social planner problem is

                               SP            SP                                          SP
           u0 (CtSP )CCSPT +   t
                                    SP
                                    t    =   t
                                                                     SP
                                                   + (1 + r)Et [u0 (Ct+1 )CCSPT +        t+1
                                                                                               SP
                                                                                               t+1 ]:   (46)
                        t                                                     t+1


                                                                      B
It is easy to see that, if the Ramsey planner chooses 1 +             t   in equation (18) so that

                    B                               SP                       SP
                    t   = (u0 (CtSP )CCSPT ) 1 (    t
                                                          SP
                                                          t    (1 + r)Et [   t+1
                                                                                    SP
                                                                                    t+1 ]);             (47)
                                         t



the Euler equations (46) and (30) become identical. It follows that the solution of the Ramsey
problem for B and the social planner problem above coincide, and the expression (47) is
the Ramsey optimal policy for B     t .
    Moreover, since the optimal policy for B decentralizes the social planner problem, which
is a recursive problem that can be represented by value function iteration and only depends
on the current state ( Bt ; YtN ; YtT ), the equilibrium is subgame perfect and the policy rule
(47) is time-consistent.
    QED.


A.4     Optimal policy with a tax on nontradable consumption
Proof of Proposition 2 In an economy de…ned by (1), (4), (12) and (13) with a tax on
non-tradable consumption N    t as the government instrument, there exists a policy for
                                                                                             N
                                                                                             t
that decentralizes the unconstrained allocation. This policy is Ramsey optimal and time-
consistent.
   PROOF: For a given state YtN ; YtT ; Bt , let Bt+1
                                                   UE
                                                       be the next-period debt and PtN;U E the
current period relative price of non tradable goods in the economy de…ned by (1) and (3) but
without the credit constraint (4)— i.e., in the unconstrained economy satisfying (35)-(37).

                                                         48
   Next, let P^tN be the minimum price such that the credit constraint would be met if it
were present. Thus:                   (                     )
                                             UE    1      T
                                           B t+1 +     Y t
                            P^tN = max 0;      1     N
                                                              :
                                                   Yt

If we set N such that P^tN (1 + N    t )   PtN;U E , then the credit constraint does not bind. In
                           N;U E ^ N
other words, let ^N t = Pt       =Pt     1, then any N               N
                                                         t 2 ( 1; ^ t ] would eliminate the credit
constraint ( t = 0 8t) if it were present, and the competitive equilibrium of the economy
would coincide with the unconstrained allocation, which eventually converges to the lower
debt bound, B.
    Now, in the economy with the credit constraint, the Ramsey planner maximizes (1)
subject to (7) and (8), (22), (20), and (21). In this problem, any policy schedule such that
  N          N
  t 2 ( 1; ^ t ] can achieve an allocation that satis…es the …rst order conditions (35)-(37) of
the unconstrained allocation. Since N     t can a¤ect the allocation only when the constraint
binds, but it is neutral when the constraint does not bind, the Ramsey planner can achieve
                                                                                 N
at best the unconstrained allocation. Thus, the tax policy N          t 2 ( 1; ^ t ] is the optimal
                                                                   N
solution of the Ramsey problem. Moreover, any N         t 2 ( 1; ^ t ] is completely determined by
the current state fBt ; YtT ; YtN g and therefore it is time-consistent.
    QED.


A.5     Optimal policy with a tax on tradable consumption
                               T
The Ramsey problem when        t   is the policy instrument is as follows.

De…nition 4 For a given fB0 g and assuming that fYtT g and fYtN g are Markov processes
with …nite, strictly positive support, the Ramsey problem for Tt is to choose a competitive
equilibrium that maximizes
                                             X
                                             1
                                     j            t
                                   U      E0        u (Ct ) ;
                                                 t=0

subject to the resource constraints

                                   CtT = YtT     Bt+1 + (1 + r) Bt ;                          (48)

                                               CtN = YtN ;                                    (49)

the borrowing constraint
                                           1
                                Bt+1 >                 YtT + PtN YtN :                        (50)

                                                   49
the government budget constraint (16) and the …rst order conditions of the household
                                                                      "                       #
                      u0 (Ct )CCtT                                        u0 (Ct+1 )CCt+1
                                                                                      T

                              T
                                      =    t   + (1 + r) Et                           T
                                                                                                  :   (51)
                        1+    t                                              1+       t+1


with                                                        1
                                                1
                                     (1    !)       CtN                  PtN
                                                       1        =             :                       (52)
                                           1
                                          ! (CtT )                     1 + Tt

    The tax on tradable consumption a¤ects not only the intratemporal relative price in (52),
but also the intertemporal allocation of resources in (51). Despite this di¤erence, the next
proposition shows that it is possible to …nd a policy for Tt that replicates the unconstrained
allocation like in the case of the nontradable consumption tax N   t .


Proposition 3 In an economy de…ned by (1), (3), (15) and (16) with a tax on tradable
consumption Tt as the government instrument, there exists a policy for Tt that decentralizes
the unconstrained allocation and it is time-consistent.
    PROOF: Let the optimal non-tradable consumption tax be ^N     t . In the Ramsey problem
     T              1         N
for t , if we set 1+ T = 1 + t we can achieve the unconstrained allocation, and t 0 8t:
                      t
However, since Tt a¤ects also the intertemporal allocation of resources (51) we need to show
that there is a constant Tt such that the intertemporal margin is not a¤ected.
    To do so, we …rst note that, by imposing t 0 and setting Tt so that
                                                                "                     #
                                                                    u0 (Ct+1
                                                                         U N )C U N
                                                                                 T
                                                                               Ct+1
                                                (1 + r)Et               1+   T
                                                                             t+1
                               1
                                      T
                                          =                  UN
                                                                                          ;           (53)
                             1+       t             Et [u0 (Ct+1 )CCUTN ]
                                                                             t+1



the Euler equations of the Ramsey problem and the unconstrained equilibrium coincide. It
follows that the tax rate Tt that satis…es (53) must be constant (otherwise the intertemporal
margin would be distorted).
    By inspection of the unconstrained allocation, the non-tradable price has a strictly pos-
itive lower limit. Therefore there exists T (this is, the lower level of the tax on tradables
compatible with the strictly positive lower limit on the relative price of nontradables) such
that the borrowing constraint (4) is always satis…ed for any T > T . Thus, any constant tax
policy of the form Tt          T
                                 > T is an optimal policy such that the competitive equilibrium
replicates the unconstrained equilibrium. As T is completely determined by the current
state fBt ; YtT ; YtN g it is time-consistent.


                                                       50
   QED.


A.6     Optimal policy with distortionary …nancing
A.6.1    Time consistency of optimal policy with two instruments

We now prove formally that the Ramsey problem with two distortionary policy instruments
is time-consistent.
    Ramsey optimal policy with two distortionary policy instruments solves the following
problem:

                                                :                                     X
                                                                                      1
               R           N R         B R                                                  t
            (fBt+1 g; f    t   g; f    t   g)   = arg               max                         U (CtT ; CtN );   (54)
                                                            (fBt+1 g;f   N g;f B g)
                                                                         t     t      t=0


subject to conditions (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) for all t = 0; 1; .
   The time consistent optimal policy solves the following recursive problem

                C         N C       B C     :
              (Bt+1 ;     t     ;   t   )   = arg          max         U (CtT ; CtN ) + V C (Bt+1 )               (55)
                                                    (Bt+1 ;   N ; B)
                                                              t   t



subject to conditions (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) at time t: Here V C ( ) is the household
value function under the time consistent optimal policy, i.e.

                                              X
                                              1
                                                       t
                                      VC =                 U (CtT C ; CtN C )
                                               t=0


where fCtT C g and fCtN C g are sequences of tradeable and nontradable consumptions based
on the time consistent optimal policy. Note that the state of economy at time t is Bt , the
current level of debt. Hence, the value function depends solely on Bt . We want to establish
                                                                           R        C
that, in our economy, the Ramsey optimal policy is time consistent, i.e. Bt+1   = Bt+1 ; N
                                                                                         t
                                                                                           R
                                                                                             =
 NC    BR     BC
 t ; t    = t .
    To prove this, we shall take the following steps. First, we show that this is the case in a
three-period version of these two problems. Second, we look at a four-period case and show
that this can be reduced to the 3-period case. Next we show that we can always reduce
an n-period case to a n 1-period one for any n > 4. This establishes, by induction, that
in any …nite-period version of our model economy the two policy regimes coincide. Finally,
under the auxiliary assumption that the period utility function and the marginal utility of
consumption are bounded in the feasible set, we prove that Ramsey optimal policy in the


                                                       51
…nite-period model converges to Ramsey optimal policy in a in…nite-horizon version of our
economy.

Three-period model We start by examining the 3-period version of the original Ramsey
optimal policy problem:

                                          0     0         N R0        N R0         0     BR0       :
                                   (fB1R ; B2R g; f       0    ;      1    g; f BR
                                                                                0    ;   1   g)    =
                                                                                                               2
             arg                   max                   U (C0T ; C0N ) + U (C1T ; C1N ) +                         V C (B2 );   (56)
                   (fB1 ;B2 g;f     N ; N g;f B ; B g)
                                    0   1     0   1



subject to (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) for all t = 0; 1; .
    It is easy to see that the only potential source of di¤erence between the two policy
regimes comes from the Euler equation (24). In fact, when we optimizes at time t = 1 in the
time-consistent regime, we do not take into account that the choice of B2 a¤ects the Euler
equation at time t = 0;
                               UC0T (1 + B
                                         0 ) = 0 + (1 + r)UC1T ;

since from (7) B2 a¤ects UC1T .
    However this can result in di¤erences between the two policy regimes only if B2 a¤ects
U (C0T ) and U (C1T ; C1N ) + V C (B2 ) in opposite ways. Speci…cally, in order for the following
two problems

                                                                                                           2
                               max                  U (C0T ; C0N ) + U (C1T ; C1N ) +                          V C (B2 )        (57)
                (fB1 ;B2 g;f   N ; N g;f B ; B g)
                               0   1     0   1

                                                                                                       2
              =      max           U (C0T ; C0N ) +                max          U (C1T ; C1N ) +           V C (B2 ) ;
                  (B1 ;   N ; B)                              (B2 ;    N ; B)
                          0   0                                        1   1



to coincide, it is su¢ cient that the following derivatives have the same sign:

                                              @U0 (B2 )     @U1 (B1 ; B2 )
                                                        and                ,                                                    (58)
                                                @B2             @B2

where
                                                   :
                                          U0 (B2 ) =          max           U (C0T ; C0N );
                                                           (B1 ;   N ; B)
                                                                   0   0


subject to (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) at time t = 0, and

                                             :
                               U1 (B1 ; B2 ) = max U (C1T ; C1N ) + V C (B2 )
                                                     (   N ; B)
                                                         1   1




                                                                   52
subject to (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) at time t = 1.
    If this restriction holds, the maximization of U1 (B1 ; B2 ) with respect to B2 , yields the
same optimal value of B2 that maximizes U0 (B2 ). Therefore the maximization can be done
in a step-wise way (which gives the time consistent optimal policy) for the Ramsey program
on the left hand side of the equality (57).
    Thus, in order to show that in our economy Ramsey optimal policy is time consistent we
need to establish (58). To do this, we are going to show that both U0 (B2 ) and U1 (B1 ; B2 ) are
decreasing functions of B2 , given B1 . In fact, it is straightforward to see that the function
U0 (B2 ) is a decreasing function of B2 , since if the household knows that in period 2 she can
borrow more, she is able to consume more in period 1, and through the Euler equation (24),
she can also consume more in period 0.
    Next we want to show that U1 (B1 ; B2 ) is also a decreasing function of B2 , for given B1 . Let
B2 be the borrowing level in the competitive equilibrium without the borrowing constraint or
any tax intervention. So U1 (B1 ; B2 ) must achieves its maximum at B2 . Therefore U1 (B1 ; B2 )
decreases for any B2 B2 . We shall show that B2C B2 in the optimal plan that maximize
U1 (B1 ; B2 ) subject to (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) for t = 1.
    We know from our optimal policy analysis on the individual tax instruments, that the
optimal policy is such that N   1
                                  C
                                      0 and BC1     0. If the borrowing constraint is not binding,
we have from the Euler equation (24) that

                                                       B
                                     UC1T (1 +         1)   = (1 + r)UC2T :

         B
And if   1   < 0 and the B2 < B2 , we would have

                                 B
                     UC1T (1 +   1)   < UC1T = (1 + r)UC2T < (1 + r)UC2T ;

which is a contradiction.29 Therefore we conclude that if the borrowing constraint is not
binding, B2C B2 .
   If the constraint is binding, from the Euler equation (24) we have that > 0. Suppose
that B20    B2 is optimal in the economy without the borrowing constraint. We want to
show that the optimal policy in the economy with the borrowing constraint has B2      B20 .
Suppose this is not the case. Then we would have

                               B                                 B
                   UC1T (1 +   1)          < UC T 0 (1 +         1)   = (1 + r)UC T 0 < UC2T ;
                                                   1                               2

  29
    The …rst inequality comes from   C1T   > C1T and the fact that UC1T is a decreasing function of C1T . The
second inequality comes from C2T <   C2T   and the same logic.


                                                            53
                                                                                                                                0
which again contradicts the Euler equation (24).30 Therefore we must have that B2C B2C
B2 . Combining the previous two arguments, it follows that U1 (B1 ; B2 ) is also a decreasing
function of B and hence has the same sign of U0 (B2 ), which proves that 58 holds.

Finite-period model Let us now look …rst at the case of a four-period model. We will
show that this case can be reduced to the 3-period model above. In a four-period version of
our model, the Ramsey program solves the following problem

                                                                                      2                        3
                          max                    U (C0T ; C0N ) + U (C1T ; C1N ) +        U (C2T ; C2N ) +         V C (B3 );
          (fBi g3i=1 ;f   N g2 ;f B g2
                          i i=0   i i=0     )

subject to (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) for t = 1;    ; 3.
   Now note …rst that
                                  U (C0T ; C0N ) + U (C1T ; C1N )

is decreasing in B3 by the same reasoning as in the 3-period model, and that

                                                       U (C2T ; C2N ) + V C (B3 )

is also decreasing in B3 , since B3 B3 where B3 is the competitive equilibrium borrowing
level without the borrowing constraint or tax interventions. Therefore we have that

                                                                                       2                       3
                          max                    U (C0T ; C0N ) + U (C1T ; C1N ) +         U (C2T ; C2N ) +        V C (B3 )
           (fBi g3i=1 ;f N  2      B 2
                         i gi=0 ;f i gi=0   )
                                                                                                    2      0
                    =                     max                 U (C0T ; C0N ) + U (C1T ; C1N ) +         V C (B2 );
                          (fBi g2i=1 ;f   N g1 ;f B g1
                                          i i=0   i i=0   )

where
                                             0
                                          V C (B2 ) = max U (C2T ; C2N ) + V C (B3 )
                                                         B3 ;   N; B
                                                                2  2


subject to (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25) for t = 3. Thus, we reduced a four-period model
into a three-period model. It follows that the Ramsey optimal policy is time consistent in a
four-period version of our model.
    By using the same method, we can always reduce an n-period model into n 1 period
model for any n > 4. By induction, therefore, we showed that the Ramsey optimal policy
for any …nite-period version of our economy is time consistent.
  30
       The inequalities follow from the same reasonings in the case of a nonbinding borrowing constraint.




                                                                       54
In…nite-horizon model If we can establish the convergence of the Ramsey optimal policy
problem for a …nite-period version of our model to an in…nite-period version, we will have
established that Ramsey optimal policy is time consistent for (54). To do so, we need an
additional assumption, i.e. that both U ( ) and UC T ( ) are bounded in the feasible set.
    De…ne now the following mapping T : Fb ! Fb , where Fb is the set of bounded continuous
function de…ned on [B; 0] R+ ,

                    :
        T (V )(B; ) = min max U (C T ; C N )       (1 + r)UC T + (UC T   ) + V (B 0 ; );
                         0 B0;   B



subject to (7), (8), (20), (24) and (25).
    From the assumption that both U ( ) and UC T ( ) are bounded, it follows that is bounded.
Following Marcet and Marimon (2011), we also conclude that T is a contraction mapping.
    In addition, we note that T n (V )(B; 0) is the welfare function of a Ramsey optimal plan
for a n-period economy with V ( ) as the …nal period utility. Therefore from a standard
contraction mapping argument we have that

                                            :
                                      V ( ) = lim T n (V )( )
                                                 n!1


is well de…ned and is uniformly converging. V ( ) will be the …xed point of the contraction
mapping and is the welfare function of the in…nite-period economy under the Ramsey optimal
policy.
    By the uniform convergence of the welfare function, the …nite-period Ramsey optimal
policy converges to the in…nite-period Ramsey optimal policy. Therefore we established that
the Ramsey optimal policy for (54)is time consistent.
    QED

A.6.2    Three distortionary policy instruments

We now focus on the case in which all three distortionary policy tools are available to the
policy maker (see (26)).
    Suppose that the triplet of policy tools ( N   T   B
                                               t , t , t ) can completely remove the borrowing
constraint (4). The Euler equation for this economy would be:

                                      B
                                 1+   t                      t+1
                                      T   t   = (1 + r)Et      T
                                                                   :                       (59)
                                 1+   t                     1+ t+1




                                                  55
Remember now that the Euler equation for the unconstrained economy is:

                                     UE                            UE
                                     t    =    (1 + r) Et          t+1      :                 (60)

By comparing (59) and (60), we can see that in order to replicate the unconstrained equi-
librium the triplet of policy tools ( N   T   B
                                      t , t , t ) must satisfy:


                                         1+   B       Et 1+t+1
                                                            T
                                              t              t+1
                                              T
                                                  =          UE
                                                                    :                         (61)
                                         1+   t       Et     t+1


In addition, from the government budget constraint, we need to have

                           T         UE                 UE
                           t   CtT        +   N
                                              t   CtN        +      B UE
                                                                    t Bt+1        = 0:        (62)

And from the borrowing constraint, we must have that
                                                                                      T
                         UE          1                       UE             1+        t
                        Bt+1                  YtT + PtN             YtN               N
                                                                                          :   (63)
                                                                            1+        t


    To …nd the tax policy f B     T   N
                              t ; t ; t g that solves (61) to (63) we proceed recursively as
follows. Denote the stochastic steady state level of debt by B, and by B0 the level of debt
in the unconstrained equilibrium at which the constraint would become binding exactly in
the constrained economy. Now de…ne Bt = B U E (Bt 1 ), where B U E ( ) is the policy function
in the unconstrained equilibrium. From this policy function, we can obtain B0 > B1 >
    > Bt > Bt+1 >     > B, so that fBk g is a debt trajectory in the unconstrained solution
starting from B0 .
    Starting from k = 0, for any B 2 (B1 ; B0 ], we can compute

                                                                        1
                               1+    T
                                      (B)          B U E (B) +                  YtT
                                     N (B)
                                           =      1              UE
                               1+                       (PtN )          (B)YtN

from (63). Let’s set T0 (B) 0 in that interval and use the expression above to obtain N 0 (B).
              B
The value of 0 (B) in the (B1 ; B0 ] interval can then be determined by the government budget
constraint (62).
   Next, consider k = 1 and the associated interval (B2 ; B1 ]. Since we have already deter-
mined the value of T0 (B) and B    0 (B) for B 2 (B1 ; B0 ], by using (61), we can obtain the
          T
value of 1 (B). Again by assuming the borrowing constraint (61) is binding exactly, we can
determine the value of N  1 (B). Last, by using the government budget constraint (62) we can


                                                  56
determine the value of B 1 (B) and update to k = 2.
    By iterating recursively, we can always …nd the tax policy that replicates the uncon-
strained solution in an economy with the borrowing constraint.
    QED


A.7     Extensions
In this section we provide details of the extensions discussed in the paper.

A.7.1    Imperfect exchange rate intervention

Let us consider a situation in which both the capital control tax B and the non-tradable
consumption tax N are available to the government, and the budget is balanced with a
lump-sum tax T . However, the non-tradable consumption tax N can be used only some of
the times, depending on the realization of an exogenous random variable "t 2 f0; 1g that is
known to the government at the beginning of each period t: This random loss of access to N
could capture imperfect credibility of exchange rate policy or limited availability of revenue
to implement the subsidy. With such an imperfect form of exchange rate intervention, the
household budget constraint becomes

          CtT + (1 + "t   N    N N
                          t )Pt Ct     = YtT + PtN YtN + Tt             Bt+1 (1 +   B
                                                                                    t )   + (1 + r)Bt ;

the government budget now is

                                           N N N             B
                                   "t      t Pt C t     +    t Bt+1   = Tt ;

and the non-tradable pricing equation now is
                                             1          1
                              (1       !) (CtN )                        N    N
                                       1            1       = (1 + "t   t )Pt :
                                   !       (CtT )

In order to study this case, we proceed in two steps. We …rst design the optimal policy for
 N                                                                         B
 t conditional on the realization of "t and a given capital control tax      . We then optimize
      B                                                      N
over     taking into account that the optimal policy for t might not be always available.
   Similarly to what we found in proposition 2 in the paper, optimal policy for N    t can undo
the collateral constraint. Indeed, it is straightforward to see that regardless of the policy for




                                                        57
 B                                                                         N
     , the time-consistent optimal policy for                                  is
                                                8                          N;T C( B )
                                                                                                           9
                                                <        1; ^N     $
                                                                        Pt
                                                                                               1 ; "t = 1; =
                                        N                    t                 P^tN
                                        t   2
                                                :                                                          ;
                                                    any;                                           "t = 0:

                                                N;T C(   B)
Here we have denoted with Pt                                  the non-tradable price under any time-consistent policy
for B . Also                                                  8                                          9
                                                                                      B)
                                                              <             T C(
                                                                           Bt+1            +   1
                                                                                                   YtT   =
                                              P^tN = max          0;                                         ;
                                                              :                       1
                                                                                           YtN           ;

            T C(   B)
where Bt+1      denotes borrowing under the same time-consistent policy of B . Essentially,
under this policy for N , the government can remove the borrowing constraint.
   We then proceed with the second step and study the optimal policy for B taking into
account that the optimal policy for N
                                    t might not be always available. To do so, we transform
the optimization problem into an equivalent one in which there is only B , the budget
balancing lump-sum tax T , and a modi…ed version of the credit constraint:

                                                                    1
                                         (1     "t ) Bt+1 +                     (YtT + PtN YtN )         > 0:

This version of the borrowing constraint takes into account that, when exchange rate policy
is available, i.e. "t = 1, the constraint can be removed. A line of argument similar to the
one used in the proof of Proposition 1 in the paper can show that there exists the following
time-consistent optimal policy for B  t :


      B                 SP (")     SP (")                         SP (")       SP (")                                     SP (")   SP (")
      t   = (u0 (Ct              )CC T        ) 1 ((1      "t )   t            t               (1 + r)Et [(1     "t+1 )   t+1      t+1 ]);
                                    t



and it coincides with the Ramsey optimal policy. Here we denoted SP (") as a social planner
problem in which the credit constraint binds at time t only when "t = 0. And this optimal
policy B t achieves the allocation corresponding to SP ("). Thus, this shows that, with
imperfect credibility, prudential capital controls are part of the optimal policy design, like
in the case in which we have distortionary …nancing analyzed in the paper. Notice however
that, here, the optimal B t depends on the likelihood that "t = 0: the higher the probability
that exchange rate policy is not available, the higher the level of B
                                                                    t .




                                                                             58
A.7.2    Borrowing constraints with pre-tax income

Here we show that, when the borrowing constraint is expressed in terms of post-tax income,
and the policy tools available to the Ramsey planner is B with B  t Bt+1 = Tt ; the allocation
under optimal policy for this instrument is identical to the one in which the borrowing
constraint is de…ned in terms of pre-tax income and the instrument is N with N      N N
                                                                               t P t C t = Tt .
Rewrite the borrowing constraint as

                                             1         h                               i
                       Bt+1 >                           YtT + P~tN YtN               Tt =                       (64)
                                             1         h                                         i
                                =                       YtT + P~tN YtN                 B
                                                                                       t Bt+1


where                                                                           1
                                                                      1
                                                       (1        !)       CtN
                                        P~tN      =               1         1
                                                                ! (CtT )
                                                                                                         N N N
Now, if the borrowing constraint depends on pre-tax income and we have                                   t Pt C t   =
 B
 t Bt+1 , we can write the borrowing constraint as


                                        1
                     Bt+1 >                         YtT + PtN YtN =                                             (65)
                                                   "               #
                                        1                  P~N Y N
                            =                        YtT + t tN
                                                          (1 + t )
                                                   "                                                 #
                                                                                     N ~N N
                                        1                                            t Pt Y t
                            =                        YtT + P~tN YtN
                                                                                    (1 + Nt )


where                                                       1
                                         1
                           (1       !)           CtN
                                    1              1             = P~tN = PtN (1 +         N
                                                                                           t )
                                ! (CtT )
   Comparing (64) and (65) we can see that the two coincide since

                                 N ~N N
                                 t Pt Y t                       N N N           B
                                                       =        t P t Ct   =    t Bt+1 :
                                (1 + Nt )


A.8     Numerical solution methods
Here we describe how we compute the di¤erent equilibria numerically. We start by rewriting
the competitive equilibrium of the model with the borrowing constraint. We can summarize


                                                                 59
this equilibrium with the following set of nonlinear functional equations:

                       B; Y T ; Y N              =               (1 + r) E                     B 0 B; Y T ; Y N ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0
                                                                                                                   2
                                                             + max                    B; Y T ; Y N ; 0
                                                                         1   (1       )1        1     1                                      1
                       B; Y T ; Y N              =            C                                     ! C T B; Y T ; Y N
               C T B; Y T ; Y N                  = (1 + r) B + Y T                                  B 0 B; Y T ; Y N
                                                                                  1                                          1

                   N         T       N                           1      YN
                                                                         !
               P       B; Y ; Y                  =
                                                       !          C T (B; Y T ; Y N )
                                             2                         1
   max         B; Y T ; Y N ; 0                  = B 0 B; Y T ; Y N +          Y T + P N B; Y T ; Y N Y N );

where                            h                                                                                                   i
                         1               1                                                 1                   1                 1
                                                     T               T       N
                   C                 !           C       B; Y ; Y                              + (1       !)           YtN               :

 We then convert the complementary slackness conditions for the borrowing constraint in
these equations into a nonlinear equation, following Garcia and Zangwill (1981).

A.8.1    The constrained and unconstrained competitive equilibrium

Given an initial guess for the marginal utility of tradable consumption tomorrow 0 B 0 ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0 ,
the set of nonlinear functional equations above can be solved at each point in the state space
 B; Y T ; Y N to obtain an updated function 1 B; Y T ; Y N . This process is then iterated
to convergence. We use a cubic spline to approximate the 0 B 0 ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0 function at val-
ues of B 0 that are not on the grid for B. We obtain the lifetime utility in the competitive
equilibrium using the following Bellman equation:

                                                 1
          V CE B; Y T ; Y N =                            C1          + E V CE B 0 B; Y T ; Y N ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0                                   :
                                             1

    The allocation corresponding to the unconstrained competitive equilibrium is computed
in a similar fashion, except that the complementary slackness condition is omitted.

A.8.2    The social planning problem

The solution of the social planning problem solves the following standard dynamic program-
ming problem:

                                                             1
    V SP B; Y T ; Y N =          max                                 C1       + E V SP B 0 B; Y T ; Y N ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0
                             C T ;B 0 ;P N               1

                                                                             60
subject to

                                     C T + B0                        (1 + r) B + Y T
                                                                       1
                                                   B0                         Y T + PNY N
                                                                                         1          1

                                                   N                      1         !         YN
                                           P                 =                                          :
                                                                               !              CT

Again, we approximate the value function with a cubic spline and solve the constrained op-
timization problem using feasible sequential quadratic programming with analytical deriva-
tives.

A.8.3   Markov-Perfect optimal policy

To compute the Ramsey optimal control program with two instruments we exploit time-
consistent nature of the problem and use the method proposed by Benigno et al. (2012). That
method is related to Klein, Krusell, and Rios-Rull (2009): the main di¤erence being that the
algorithm that we use does not require that the policy functions are di¤erentiable (which in
general would not hold in our environment due to the occasionally-binding constraint) but
only that they are continuous.
   The optimal policy problem for N and B is also solved iteratively. The current govern-
ment solves the following problem

                                                                     1
V OP B; Y T ; Y N =                 max                                        C1       + E V OP B 0 B; Y T ; Y N ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0
                             N;
                                      T  N  0
                                  B ;C ;P ;B ; ;                 1

subject to

             (1 +   B)        =        (1 + r) E                         B 0 B; Y T ; Y N ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0    + max f ; 0g2
                                                                     1
                                               1    (1       )            1        1          1
                              =       C                                        !        CT
                     C T = (1 + r) B + Y T                                     B0
                                                         1                         1

                         N             1       !                 YN                       1
                    P         =
                                           !                     CT                     1+    N
                                               1
        max f       ; 0g2 = B 0 +                                Y T + PNY N
                                           N
                         0 =          NP           YN +              BB
                                                                           0
                                                                               B; Y T ; Y N :




                                                                               61
    We then guess both the continuation value function and the future marginal utility func-
tion, solve the optimization problem using feasible sequential quadratic programming with
analytical derivatives, and then update both functions to convergence.31 Both functions are
approximated with cubic splines.
    We set a large number of grid points in the B dimension (1550), with most of them
concentrated at the lower end of the debt range where the constraint may bind. The joint
process for Y T ; Y N is approximated as a Markov chain with 49 states (7 in each dimension)
using the method of Gospodinov and Lkhagvasuren (2013). Invariant distributions were
produced using the nonstochastic method from Young (2010), except for the frequency of
crises which are estimated using a simulated sample of 10; 000; 000 observations.

A.8.4     Welfare calculations

To compute the welfare equivalents, we solve the following functional equation:

                                         1           h                                             i
        Ve CE B; Y T ; Y N ;     =           C1   + E Ve CE B 0 B; Y T ; Y N ; Y T 0 ; Y N 0 ;         ;
                                     1

where is a proportional increment to tradable consumption, and the decision rules are
those from the competitive equilibrium. We use 200 grid points for , evenly-spaced. We
then solve the following nonlinear equations for B; Y T ; Y N :

                               V SP B; Y T ; Y N = Ve CE B; Y T ; Y N ;        ;

to obtain the welfare gain from moving to the SP allocation;

                               V OP B; Y T ; Y N = Ve CE B; Y T ; Y N ;        ;

to obtain the welfare gain from moving to the OP allocation; and

                               V U A B; Y T ; Y N = Ve CE B; Y T ; Y N ;

to obtain the welfare gain from moving to the unconstrained allocation. These equations are
solved using the Brent’s method, with linear interpolation between grid points for .
  31
     We use analytical derivatives, particularly for the continuation value function, as numerical derivatives
produce solutions that are "choppy" for the tax variables (but not the other endogenous variables).




                                                      62
References
[1] Gospodinov, Nikolay and Lkhagvasuren, Damba, (2013): "A moment-matching method
   for approximating vector autoregressive processes by …nite-state Markov chains," Federal
   Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2013-05.

[2] Klein, Paul, Per Krusell, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull 2008. “Time-consistent public pol-
   icy.”Review of Economic Studies 75(3), 789-808.

[3] Young, Eric R. (2010), "Solving the Incomplete Markets Model with Aggregate Uncer-
   tainty Using the Krusell-Smith Algorithm and Non-Stochastic Simulations," Journal of
   Economic Dynamics and Control 34(1), pp. 36-41.




                                            63
