NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPEN ACCESS AS A CRUDE SOLUTION TO A HOLD-UP PROBLEM IN THE
TWO-SIDED MARKET FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS
Mark J. McCabe
Christopher M. Snyder
Working Paper 22220
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22220

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

We thank Mark Armstrong, Sumit Joshi, Simon Loertscher, David Malueg, Lars Stole, and
seminar participants at American University, Dartmouth College, George Washington University,
MIT, New York University, Ruhr-Universitaet Bochum, Santa Clara University, Tulane
University, the University of Chicago, the University of Goettingen, Yale University, the
Cologne Summit on Open Access Publishing, the Emory University Symposium on Open Access
and Digital Preservation, the International Industrial Organization Conference (Chicago), and the
NBER Workshop on Scholarly Communication, Open Science, and Its Impact (Cambridge, MA)
for helpful comments. This paper grew out of an earlier project, "The Economics of Open-Access
Journals," conducted under grants from the Open Society Institute, NET Institute, and Stigler
Center for Study of Economy and State at the University of Chicago Graduate School of
Business. Funding for work on this paper was provided by the Sloan Foundation, grant
#G-2012-10-20, which the authors gratefully acknowledge. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Mark J. McCabe and Christopher M. Snyder. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Open Access as a Crude Solution to a Hold-up Problem in the Two-Sided Market for Academic
Journals
Mark J. McCabe and Christopher M. Snyder
NBER Working Paper No. 22220
May 2016
JEL No. D40,L14,L31,L82
ABSTRACT
The move from traditional to open-access journals—which charge no subscription fees, only
submission fees—is gaining support in academia. We analyze a two-sided-market model in
which journals cannot commit to subscription fees when authors (who prefer low subscription
fees because this boosts readership) make submission decisions. This leads to a hold-up problem,
manifested as excessive subscription fees. Open access is a crude attempt to avoid hold up by
eliminating subscription fees. We compare the efficiency and profitability of traditional versus
open access under various market structures (monopoly, Bertrand competition) and extensions
(non-profit journals, bundling, hybrid pricing), using our theoretical findings to understand the
evolution of the market for academic journals in the Internet age.

Mark J. McCabe
Questrom School of Business
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 48109
prof.mark.mccabe@gmail.com
Christopher M. Snyder
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
301 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
chris.snyder@dartmouth.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22220

1. Introduction
Dissatisfied with scholarly journals’ traditionally high subscription fees, which they claim drain library
budgets and restrict readership, a growing number of scholars and commentators support an alternative
business model for journals: open access. 1 An open-access journal allows all readers to freely access its
articles online, leveraging the Internet’s ability to distribute electronic media at near zero marginal cost.
Revenue to cover publication costs (and generate profits for commercial publishers) comes from author
fees.2
Open access made the headlines with the lawsuit filed by Elsevier, the largest journal publisher, against
Alexandra Elbakyan in June 2015, seeking an injunction against the operation of the Sci-Hub website she
created.3 Sci-Hub provides free access to pirated copies of a vast corpus of academic articles, nearly 50
million academic articles including Elsevier’s and JSTOR’s entire archives. 4 The injunction granted by
a U.S. federal judge failed to shut down Sci-Hub’s operations because the injunction is not enforceable in
Russia, where the website is hosted and Elbakyan remains in hiding. Earlier headlines reported the suicide of
M.I.T. undergraduate Aaron Swartz after being brought up on federal wire fraud charges for downloading the
entire JSTOR archive to a server. Turning from piracy, more formal policies such as open-access mandates
are the continued subject of debate among officials. The U.S. Senate is considering legislation (the Fair
Access to Science and Technology Research or FASTR Act) requiring that any federally funded research
must be openly accessible no more than six months after publication. A number of foundations including
Wellcome Trust and the Gates Foundation also mandate open access for research they fund.
The fee structure of journals has potentially important consequences for social welfare. Subscription
prices rose to the point where libraries began to cancel significant titles (Weiss 2003, Howard 2010). These
cancellations harm both readers and authors—readers because their access to past research is limited, and
authors because fewer readers will reduce their impact and citations at the margin. 5 Since journals are a
channel for dissemination of knowledge in the economy, frictions in this channel may have much broader
implications for the economy as a whole. Another reason for analyzing the journals market for an academic
audience is that it is one of the few markets that academics participate in as producers and consumers and
exercise some control over as journal founders and editors.
Many questions surround the economics of open-access journals. First, it is not obvious that profitmaximizing journals would ever voluntarily choose to have open access. If such examples exist, they may
depend on special conditions on market structure, demand, and costs. Second, it is not obvious that an openaccess journal could be competitively viable. If open access only leads to a slight increase in readership
and impact, authors may choose to stay with traditional journals and avoid the open-access journal’s higher
author fees. Third, it is not obvious that social welfare is enhanced by open access. True, it reduces any
1 For

journalistic accounts of the open-access movement, see Weiss (2003), Howard (2010) and Murphy (2016); for a policy
analysis, see Willinsky (2006).
2 We generally use “open access” to mean what librarians refer to as “gold” open access, i.e., free immediate access through the
journal’s website to all of its content. This is distinct from “green” open access, covering the case in which free access may be to a
pre-print version of the article on the author’s website or in which the free access on the journal’s website comes after an embargo
period. Armstrong (2014) discusses the varieties of open access and analyzes the efficiency of mandating certain forms.
3 The facts in this paragraph are from the recent New York Times article, “Should All Research Papers Be Free?” (Murphy 2016).
4 As a gauge of Sci-Hub’s comprehensiveness, we successfully used it to download every journal article in our reference list,
even coming across an earlier draft of the present paper. All downloads on March 22, 2016.
5 The possibility that open access will offer more citations to authors is suggested by Lawrence’s (2001) study of 1,500 computer
conference “venues” that publish some of their content as open-access articles and some only in print. Within venues, open-access
articles generated over three times the citations of print articles. Similarly huge effects of open access were found in other contexts
by Antelman (2004) and Harnad and Brody (2004). None of these studies fully accounts for the possible non-random selection of
articles for open access. Gaule and Maystre (2011) show that almost all of the measured increase in citations from open access is
a selection bias, which disappears when one instruments for open access. Other recent attempts to control for this selection bias
include Davis et al. (2008), Gargouri at al. (2010), and McCabe and Snyder (2014).

1

deadweight loss on the reader side. But if author fees need to be raised to pay for publication costs and to
provide a profit margin, it may increase deadweight loss on the author side, leading to the publication of less
research.
To address these and other related questions, we construct a simple model of journals as intermediaries
between authors and readers in a two-sided market. Each side of the market benefits from externalities
provided by the other: an author benefit from additional readers because this increases his impact and
citations; a reader benefits from additional articles because articles contain content which is valuable to
readers. Since authors are unable to compensate readers for these externalities and vice versa, how total fees
are divided between authors and readers will matter in equilibrium because fees cannot simply be passed
through.
The keystone of the model, laid out in Section 4, is a commitment assumption, which we argue captures
the crucial difference between traditional and open-access journals in practice and which turns out to deliver a wealth of interesting theoretical implications. We assume that a traditional journal cannot commit to
subscription fees when soliciting submissions from authors; it can only commit to the submission fee. This
assumption captures the empirical fact we will document that articles receives the bulk of their citations
well after the the year of publication, whereas no traditional journal quotes subscription fees beyond the
current year. Although these circumstances may not have posed a commitment problem in the print era—
anyone subscribing when the article was published possessed the print copy, affording permanent future
access—they do in the present digital era in which access is effectively rented each year. Under present circumstances, authors would prefer the journal to maintain low subscription fees, attracting a wide readership
for their articles. However, everyone correctly foresees that the journal will extract the monopoly rent for
access to the articles from subscribers in the future. One crude commitment mechanism is available to a
journal. While it cannot commit to a specific positive subscription fee, at the start of the game it can commit
not to charge readers at all, thus becoming an open-access journal. The commitment involves a tradeoff
for the journal: it is attractive to authors, especially those who value readership highly, and can boost profit
earned from authors but it sacrifices all the profit earned from readers.
In Sections 6–7, we analyze the equilibrium in a variety of market structures ranging from a monopoly
traditional journal, to a monopoly open-access journal, to competition among different combinations of
them. A number of interesting findings emerge from the analysis. Subscription fees for traditional journals
are high in a strong sense—not just the usual sense of being higher than a social planner would choose, but
higher even than the journal itself would choose if it could commit ex ante. The journal-author transaction
suffers from a classical hold-up problem (Grout 1984). Although it solves the hold-up problem, open access
is not guaranteed to increase social welfare. In general an open-access journal charges a higher submission
fee than a traditional journal, which for some parameters is more distortionary than a high subscription fee.
The model provides the logic for a paradoxical result that competing traditional journals may remain
quite profitable despite offering products which are perfect substitutes (from an ex ante perspective, different journals are just different names applied to a given collection of articles). The inability to commit to
subscription fees means that once a journal has assembled a volume of articles, it can earn monopoly rents
on the reader side ex post. These rents are not necessarily dissipated in the competition for authors ex ante
because submission fees cannot be negative. These two frictions—a floor on submission fees of zero and
an inability to commit to subscription fees—lead these perfectly substitutable journals to be imperfect competitors. Competition among open-access journals is in a sense more intense. Their commitment prevents
them from earning rents on the reader side. Competition for authors squeezes all the rents from that side as
well. The non-negativity constraint on submission fees does not bind for open-access journals because they
hit the non-negativity constraint on profits first. Thus there is a natural asymmetry in the competitiveness of
traditional and open-access journals.
If a single open-access journal competes against a single traditional one, both can earn profit. The
market resembles Shaked and Sutton’s (1982) model of vertical differentiation. Here the traditional journal
2

functions as the low-quality product because it provides authors with a narrower readership; the open-access
journal provides them with wider readership and thus higher quality. Authors who place a high value on
wide readership submit to the open-access journal, paying a higher submission fee; and lower-value authors
submit to the traditional journal.
To have any claim to workhorse status, a model should be readily extendable. In part as proof of
concept, in part because the extensions are of independent practical interest, Section 8 analyzes a series of
four extensions, allowing journals to be non-profits with objectives other than profit maximization, allowing
publishers to offer bundles of journals, allowing open access to reduce the cost of serving readers, and
allowing traditional journals to offer open access as an add-on for which they charge a premium. Section 9
reverses our key commitment assumption, allowing journals to commit to subscription fees at the outset.
Besides highlighting the importance of commitment, the comparison has practical implications for how the
move from print to digital journals should affect fees on both sides of the market, presuming that print
journals have more power to commit to subscription fees than digital journals. The last section concludes.

2. Related Literature
Our paper is most closely related to several previous papers analyzing the market for academic journals
using a two-sided-market model: our own previous work (McCabe and Snyder 2005, 2007), Jeon and Rochet
(2010), and contemporaneous work by Armstrong (2014). 6 The present paper introduces novel assumptions
about the timing of price setting and commitment that capture what we think is the key difference between
traditional and open-access journals that is new in the literature. There are differences between in the details
of the models as well. McCabe and Snyder (2005, 2007) are chiefly concerned with article and journal
quality, requiring significant compromises to maintain the tractability of the analysis. McCabe and Snyder
(2005) effectively transforms the two-sided-market model into a one-sided market one by assuming inelastic
author demand. The short paper only provides a few results and only for a monopoly journal. McCabe and
Snyder (2007) allow for one form of competition, that arising in a free-entry equilibrium, but to simplify
the analysis they assume per-article prices for readers and per-reader prices for authors. Not only is this
assumption counterfactual—submission and subscription fees are in fact lump-sum—allowing authors’ total
payment to increase with the number of readers effectively solves the hold-up problem between journals and
authors that is the substance of the present paper. 7 Solving for equilibrium in the more difficult case of lumpsum prices is a methodological contribution of the present paper. Jeon and Rochet (2010) restrict attention to
the monopoly case, abstract away from reader costs, and assume journals cannot charge both positive author
and reader prices, dimensions which are generalized in our model. Armstrong (2014) reduces a two-sided
model to a one-sided model by assuming that authors care about cites rather than readers. Under the further
assumption that all citers have open access to articles via some channel—“green” open access if not “gold”
using the definitions in footnote 2—cites become invariant to subscription prices.
Our paper is part of a much larger theoretical literature on two-sided markets as applied to such markets
as telecommunications, payment-card systems, and media. 8 Of these, the closest are Hagiu (2006, 2009), the
6 See McCabe, Snyder, and Fagin (2014) for a survey. Several other papers (McCabe 2004; Jeon and Menicucci 2006; Armstrong
2009) provide theoretical analyses of the market for academic journals using a one-sided-market model, which is not amenable to
analyzing open-access questions. The opposite tack is taken by Jeon and Menicucci (2011). In their bird’s-eye view of the market
for academic journals, the platform is a website serving bundles of journals. They study the conditions under which various
publishers’ websites interconnect, facilitating text-and-data-mining services and linking.
7 For a general analysis of so-called “insulating tariffs” that vary with the number of consumers on the other side, as well as a
discussion of applications where such pricing is practically relevant, see Weyl 2010 and White and Weyl (2012).
8 The literature on two-sided markets is too large to survey here. See Rochet and Tirole (2006) for references to the earlier
literature. More recent work on two-sided markets includes Ambrus and Argenziano (2009); Halaburda and Yehezkel (2013); and
Jullien (2011); as well as other papers referenced in more detail in this introduction (Armstrong 2006; Hagiu 2006, 2009; Rochet
and Tirole 2006; Weyl 2010; White and Weyl 2012). For theoretical work on media markets, see Anderson and Coate (2005).

3

first papers to focus on the role of price commitments in two-sided markets. The role of commitment is quite
different in Hagiu (2006) than our paper. In Hagiu (2006), price commitments have a drawback, stemming
from the fact that, although the platform can perfectly commit to prices, it cannot commit to quality because
buyers’ value for the platform depends on the variety of seller offerings, which is endogenously determined
by seller behavior. Sellers may coordinate on an outcome in which few of them participate, leading to the
self-fulfilling outcome in which few buyers end up purchasing at the committed price. The absence of a
price commitment breaks such inefficient coordination equilibria by letting the platform tailor the buyer
price to the number of sellers who participate. Inefficient coordination equilibria do not arise in our setting
because our authors are ex ante heterogeneous, not homogeneous as in Hagiu (2006). Thus a perfect price
commitment is always beneficial if it is possible. The journal’s problem is that its ability to commit to
subscription prices in the far future is limited by contractual incompleteness. It can only commit to a price
of zero, which may be such a crude commitment that it is less profitable than no commitment.
Hagiu (2009) assumes that the platform has no ability to commit to the price charged to later-arriving
consumers, and so the developers’ earlier decision to participate in the platform is subject to the same holdup problem as authors’ submission decision in our paper. The solution is different. In Hagiu (2009), the
two sides of the market transact directly (developers sell games to consumers) with the platform extracting
surplus via royalties. The platform can mitigate the hold-up problem by charging a high royalty fee because
this induces it later to charge a low platform fee to increase the quantity demanded by buyers (the tradeoff
is that the developers’ incentives to invest in non-contractible quality is reduced by a high royalty). In our
paper, the two sides do not transact directly, and so there are no royalty payments. The platform considers
mitigating hold up using the crude commitment to open access.
Our paper is related to recent work on network-neutrality regulation including Choi and Kim (2010)
and Economides and Hermalin (2011). Net neutrality can be thought of as a crude commitment by internet
service providers (ISPs) not to discriminate over the prices it charges upstream content providers, analogous
to the crude open-access commitment made by journals to authors in our setting. Choi and Kim (2010) show
that this commitment can help solve a standard hold-up problem, protecting content providers’ investments
from expropriation by ISPs. The nature of the hold-up problem and the commitment solution are less
standard in our setting. The open-access commitment is not meant to limit a potentially expropriating
author fee—the author fee is set ex ante so is not a source of hold up—but the fee charged to the other side
of the market, which feeds back to authors through a larger network of readers.
Our model is built on the foundation laid by the seminal work of Armstrong (2006) and Rochet and
Tirole (2006). These papers provide general analyses of platform competition for a variety of different
cases. Each has a section on the case relevant to our setting, that of singlehoming on one side of the market
and multihoming on the other side; with academic journals, authors can submit a single article only to
one journal (singlehoming) while readers can subscribe to multiple journals simultaneously (multihoming).
Again, our model is fundamentally different, involving new assumptions about the timing of price setting
and commitment. Our work differs in other details from Armstrong (2006) in that our specification of costs
is more general and our platforms (journals) are homogeneous rather than being differentiated on a Hotelling
line. Imperfect competition arises from a different source in our paper than horizontal differentiation; indeed
showing how imperfect competition can arise from homogeneous platforms is one of the main contributions
of our paper. Much of the formal analysis in Rochet and Tirole (2006) is directed to the monopoly case.
The Lerner-index formulas we derive in the monopoly case are qualitatively similar to theirs. Their analysis
of platform competition is less formal, focusing on general principles such as how moving from monopoly
to competition or from single to multihoming affects relative prices. Neither Rochet and Tirole (2006) nor
Armstrong (2006) analyze open access, the central issue in our paper.

4

Table 1: Fees for Top Economics Journals by Profit Status
Subscription fee
Journal

Submission fee

Gold open-access
publication fee
2016

1985

2001

2016

1985

2001

2016

American Economic Review
Econometrica
Journal of Political Economy
Quarterly Journal of Economics
Journal of Finance

33
87
50
48
40

45
241
175
198
207

105
550
559
738
445

50
0
40
0
20

150
0
50
0
140

200
193
125
0
250

—
—
2,500
2,800
—

Mean

52

173

479

22

68

154

2,650

Journal of Financial Economics
Journal of Economic Theory
Journal of Econometrics
Journal of Monetary Economics
Journal of Public Economics

175
410
463
146
398

1,429
1,800
2,020
1,078
1,546

4,274
4,347
4,089
3,336
3,975

150
0
25
75
0

400
0
50
175
50

750
0
75
250
100

1,800
1,800
1,800
1,800
1,800

Mean

199

1,575

4,134

50

135

235

1,800

Top five non-profit journals

Top five for-profit journals

Sources: Journal ranking and profit status from Tables 1 and 2 of Bergstrom (2001). Subscription fees for 1985 and 2001 from Tables 5 and 6 of
Bergstrom (2001). The 1985 fees are scaled down by Bergstrom’s (2001) inflation factor of 1.59 to express them in nominal terms. Subscription fee
for 2016 from Ulrich’s Periodicals Directory (website www.ulrichsweb.com/ulrichsweb). Submission fees for 1985 and 2001 hand collected from
journal front or back matter. Submission fee for 2016 and author fees for gold open access from individual journal websites. All downloads made
on March 22, 2016.
Notes: To maintain a balanced panel, we use Bergstrom’s (2001) list of top five journals of each profit status ranked by total cites to the journal
in 1998. Fees in nominal U.S. dollars. Dash indicates option for author to pay for gold open access not available. Means rounded to the nearest
dollar. Subscription fees for print and online access to a volume for a U.S. institutional subscriber. Subscription fee for American Economic Review
is its share of subscription fee for it and the other American Economic Association journals bundled with it at that time. Submission fees are for
non-members.

3. Background on Journal Market
Although this is chiefly a theoretical paper, we take a brief detour here to establish some empirical facts that
provide background and support the subsequent analysis. We touch on three issues. First, we examine the
fee structure of traditional journals in practice, documenting the high prices leading to concern among openaccess advocates. Second, we document the spread of open access in the journals market to date. Third,
we provide evidence in support of our key modeling assumption concerning journals’ inability to commit to
precise future subscription fees.

3.1. Journal Pricing Facts
Traditional scholarly journals earns most of their revenue from fees charged to subscribers. Table 1, updating
a study by Bergstrom (2001), shows that these subscription fees vary widely across journals and can be
quite high. The table focuses on the top-ranked economics journals, comparing yearly subscription fees
for journals published by non-profits—which Bergstrom (2001) takes as a proxy for journal costs—to those
published by for-profit firms. 9 The average for-profit subscription fee was $4,134 in 2016, over eight times
higher than the average non-profit fee of $479.
The advent of the Internet offered the prospect of nearly zero marginal cost distribution of journals in
9 See Bergstrom and Bergstrom (2004) and Dewatripont et al. (2006) for related, comprehensive studies of journal prices as a
function of profit status.

5

600

12,000

Number of journals

A. All subjects

B. Economics

10,000

500

8,000

400

Other
6,000

300

4,000

200

Solely
English

2,000

0
2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Other

Solely
English

100

0
2002

2016

Year

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Year

Figure 1: Entry of open-access journals. Source is authors’ compilation, described in online
Appendix C, of Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) data. Exits are not netted out. Panels
have different scales for the number of journals on the vertical axis.

electronic form, potentially much lower than the traditional method of mailing print copies. While such
technological advances might be expected to lower journal prices, the table suggests the opposite occurred.
Between 1985 and 2001, a period during which journals increasingly moved from print to Internet distribution, the ratio of the average for-profit to non-profit subscription fee more than doubled from 3.8 to 9.1 and
remained at about that ratio through 2016. 10
Several other facts about the fee structure are apparent from Table 1. The ratio of for-profit and nonprofit submission fees is much smaller than for subscription fees for all three time periods and declined
over time. By 2016, the average for-profit submission fee in the sample is only 50% more than the average
non-profit fee. All of the for-profit journals allow authors the option to buy open access for a premium of
$1,800. Two of the non-profits also offer this option but charge higher premiums, as much as $2,800.

3.2. Trends in Open Access
The Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) maintains the leading registry of open-access journals.
Figure 1 uses the DOAJ database to chart the entry of open-access journals across all fields and in economics
since 2003. Their number has been growing by over 25% annually, reaching over 10,000 by the end of 2015.
Biology and medicine accounted for 43% of these journals, followed the social sciences (26%), humanities
(15%), and other sciences and engineering (15%). The United States headquartered the largest share (12%),
followed by Brazil (9%), the United Kingdom (6%), and over 120 more countries headquartering at least
one.11
Open-access journals have extremely high impact in some subject areas. 12 The most widely publicized
open-access initiative is the Public Library of Science (PLoS), publishing the PLoS Biology, PLoS Medicine,
10 McCabe (2002) documents similar trends for biomedical journals, showing that average library subscription fees more than
doubled from the 1988–1994 period to the 1995–2001 period.
11 Online Appendix C details the construction of our entry data from DOAJ sources as well as providing the formal regressions
used to estimate the annual growth figures.
12 At the other extreme is a long tail of weak open-access journals. The marked decline in the growth of open-access journals
beginning in 2014 in Figure 1 corresponds to an initiative by the DOAJ to increase the rigor of its standards for registering following
Bohannon’s (2013) sting in which he submitted a bogus paper to open-access journals, many of which were drawn from DOAJ’s
registry. The paper was accepted at 45% of the sampled DOAJ journals. As part of the DOAJ’s initiative, it de-listed nearly 1,000
journals. Around half were found to be inactive; over a quarter were de-listed because of suspected editorial misconduct. Data

6

and PLoS One journals, founded by Nobel-prize-winning biologist Harold Varmus with a $9 million grant
from the Moore Foundation. PLoS Biology has the second highest 2014 impact factor among biology
journals and PLoS Medicine the ninth highest among medical journals. 13 PLoS One—a general science
journal which aims to referee papers papers based only on methodological rigor rather than importance or
impact—published over 30,000 articles in 2013, the largest journal in the world (Binfield 2013). Author
fees can be substantial: PLoS Biology and PLoS Medicine charge $2,900 and PLoS One $1,495 to authors
of accepted papers.
In our own subject area, economics, the number of open-access journals has been growing even faster
than the general rate, over 30% annually, totalling more than 500 journals by the end of 2016 (see Panel B
of Figure 1). Most of these are relatively low-impact. Only six of them are refereed journals in English
indexed by the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI). Of these, only the two published by the Econometric
Society rank among the top 200 economics journals according to the SSCI’s 2014 impact factor: Quantitative Economics, ranked 61, and Theoretical Economics, ranked 84. 14

3.3. Commitment to Future Subscription Fees
The key assumption in the model regards commitment: traditional journals cannot commit to maintain future subscription fees at some low, positive level when authors submit articles; the only feasible commitment
is the crude one to zero subscription fees associated with open access. This subsection provides empirical
support for this commitment assumption. Perhaps the strongest support is provided by an anecdote about the
Berkeley Electronic Press (bepress) journals. These for-profit journals were founded in 1999 on a number of
principles including “fast turnaround times . . . and a commitment to sustainable prices for libraries.” 15 Although these journals never declared themselves to be open access, they did allow free access to individuals
willing to fill out a form. After the sale of bepress journals to De Gruyter in 2011, individual access was
restricted, requiring a yearly subscription fee of $149 per title for individuals (or between $400–$600 per
title for institutional subscriptions). The commitment to “sustainable” prices was evidently not equivalent to
the commitment to open access. De Gruyter’s copyright agreement is different for its bepress journals than
for the open-access journals it also publishes: the agreement for its open-access journals allows the author
to freely share the article for non-commercial uses, whereas the agreement for its bepress journals restricts
the form, location, and timing of how the article is shared.
Figure 2 offers evidence that the relevant commitment period for this market is on the order of decades,
not years. If an article received most of its cites the year it is published, then the author might just be
concerned with the current number of readers, a function of the current subscription fee. In fact most cites
come many years after publication. The figure reports the survival function for cites for economics journal
volumes estimated using data from McCabe and Snyder (2015). Over 95% of cites come more than a year
after publication; nearly 80% come more than five years after publication. We are aware of no traditional
journal that has committed to a subscription fees beyond the current year, to say nothing of five years and
beyond. If subscription fees were flat over time, the current fee might provide some assurance about future
levels. However, subscription fees have not been flat. For example, the mean subscription fee for the forprofit journals listed in Table 1 grew by over 10% annually over the 30 years spanned by the table. 16 Nor has
this growth rate been stable, averaging 14% during the 1985–2001 period, falling to less than half that during
on de-listed journals downloaded on March 28, 2016, from https://doajournals.wordpress.com/2014/05/22/doaj-publishes-lists-ofjournals-removed-and-added.
13 The ranking is from Thomson Reuters Journal Citation Reports. Note that three of the five highest impact journals in biology
are open access: PLoS Biology, eLife, and BMC Biology.
14 The other four are Economics: Open-Access E-Journal, ranked 210; SERIEs–Journal of the Spanish Economic Association,
ranked 271; Econ Journal Watch, ranked 289; and South African Journal of Economics and Management Science, ranked 330.
15 Quote from the website, “The bepress mission,” www.bepress.com/aboutbepress.html, accessed April 6, 2015.
16 McCabe (2002) also found 10% annual subscription-fee increases for biomedical journals during his sample period.

7

Citation survival percentage

Volume age
Figure 2: Estimated survival function for economics citations. Measures the citations a volume
receives after a given age as a percentage of total citations in the 30 years after publication. Computed
from coefficients on fixed age effects from a regression using McCabe and Snyder’s (2015) data on
1980-2005 cites to all volumes published by 100 of the top economics journals during 1956-2005.
Uses Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood procedure (Wooldridge 1999) and includes citation-year
and journal fixed effects and digitization indicators. Outside lines bound 95% confidence interval
based on robust standard errors clustered by journal.

the 2001–16 period. For large commercial publishers, perhaps the greatest obstacle to commitment is that
they negotiate with individual institutions over subscription prices for their bundle of journals (discussed in
detail in Section 8.2); conducting thousands of individual, secret negotiations is simply incompatible with
commitment.
While committing to a finely calibrated path of positive future fees may be infeasible, open-access journals have several ways to maintain the cruder commitment to zero subscription fees in the future. First,
reneging on the open-access commitment could be construed as fraud, leading to court enforcement. Monitoring violations of this 0–1 policy, and thus enforcement on behalf of authors, would be relatively easy.
Even if courts did not directly involve themselves in enforcement, they could refrain from enforcing the
journal’s copyright, allowing authors and libraries to post the articles for free when the journal reneges on
its open-access commitment. The most direct commitment mechanism is for the journal to grant authors
rights to freely repost the article in the original publication agreement. 17

4. Model
The model has three types of economic agents: authors, readers, and journals. The representative author
writes a single article. Each time his or her article is read, the author obtains benefit v a , embodying the
pure psychic benefit from being read as well as the benefit of having the journal certify the quality of the
article. Journal certification improves the author’s chances of tenure, promotion, outside offers, and other
career prospects. The certification benefit is here taken to be proportional to the number of readers since
publication in a widely-read journal generates more cites and other measures of impact. On the other side
of the market, a representative reader obtains benefit v r from each article read. An individual’s value v i ,
17 Of the nearly 1,000 journals mentioned in footnote 12 as being de-listed by DOAJ, 50 of them switched from open to traditional
access. The sample of 10 we checked all maintained open access to the articles published before the access switch.

8

i ∈ {a, r}, is a continuous random variable having cumulative distribution function F i and density function
f i on support [0, v̄ i ]. The upper bound on the support, v̄ i , can be infinite; but the mean value, E(v i ), is finite.
The distribution of v i is common knowledge, but the specific value is private information for the individual.
Journals serve as intermediaries between authors and readers. Processing an article costs the journal
a
c , reflecting the effort involved in refereeing, copy editing, and typesetting—so-called “first copy” costs.
Distributing an article to a reader costs c r , reflecting printing and shipping costs as well as the cost of
servicing the reader’s account. In the case of Internet rather than print distribution, printing and shipping
costs are essentially zero, so servicing the reader’s account is the only significant component of c r . While
journals span a range of fields and quality levels, we will focus on a particular segment of the market within
which all journals are assumed to be homogeneous.
We assume, consistent with industry practice, that authors cannot make direct payments to readers and
vice versa, so that the benefits authors provide readers and vice versa are externalities. This feature makes
academic journals a classic example of a two-sided market (Rochet and Tirole 2006). In a two-sided market,
how total fees are divided across the two sides of the market will matter in equilibrium because their inability
to make direct payments to each other eliminates their ability to pass the fees through.
In the basic model, journals are assumed to be profit maximizers. Journal j charges submission fee
paj and subscription fee p rj . Following industry practice, these fees are taken to be fixed. For example,
paj is not conditioned on the number of subscribers the journal ends up having. Since all articles are of
equal quality, it makes no difference whether p aj is taken to be a submission fee or a publication fee since all
submitted articles are accepted for publication in equilibrium. Also following industry practice, we constrain
paj , prj ≥ 0. Journals may subsidize authors and readers in setting prices below marginal cost, but journals
cannot make explicit cash transfers to authors or readers. 18
The model has four stages. In the first stage, journals compete for authors by setting p aj . In the second
stage, authors make their submission decision. In the third stage, journals compete for readers by setting
prj . In the last stage, readers make their subscription decisions. We will solve for the subgame perfect
equilibrium of this sequential game using backward induction starting from the last (reader) stage.
The reader’s surplus from subscribing to a journal with a submission is v r − pr . Hence he subscribes if
r
v > pr and not if vr < pr , implying that reader demand is Q r (pr ) = 1 − F r (pr ). Let π r (pr ) = (pr − cr )Qr (pr )
be the profit from serving the reader side viewed in isolation. We will assume that max pr ≥0 π r (pr ) > 0 and
that π r (pr ) is quasiconcave in p r .19
Different types of journal differ in their ability to commit to prices they set in later stages. Traditional
journals cannot commit in the first stage to the reader price it will set in the fourth stage. Contractual
incompleteness prevents future subscription fees from being part of the contract journals sign with authors.
We will allow a limited amount of commitment to reader fees. A journal can declare itself to be open access,
committing to zero reader fees in the future. This crude commitment is the only available commitment
mechanism for journals. Traditional journals, which reserve the right to charge positive reader fees, cannot
commit to the exact level this positive fee takes.
Let T be the set of traditional journals and O the set of open access journals entering the market. Much
of the analysis treats the numbers of each type, |T | and |O|, as exogenous and examines equilibrium for
all whole-number combinations (|T |, |O|). Section 6 analyzes the case of a monopoly journal, taking each
subcase of a traditional and an open-access journal in turn. Section 7 analyzes the case of competing journals, first analyzing competition among just traditional journals, then among just open-access journals, then
among a combination of both types. Section 7.4 endogenizes |T | and |O| in an entry model. Before solving
18 The restriction of cash transfers appears to be nearly universal among scholarly journals.

We impose the constraint exogenously,
but it might be endogenized in a model in which the journal attempts to guard against corruption for example or to avoid an adversely
selected pool of submissions from authors motivated by profit rather than prestige.
19 Bagnoli and Bergstrom (2005, p. 463) prove that the the log-concavity of f r is sufficient for the quasiconcavity of π r (pr ). The
authors show that most distributions commonly used in economics are log-concave.

9

for equilibrium in these cases, we characterize the first-best benchmark.

5. First Best
The social welfare generated by arbitrary author price p a and reader price pr equals the expected value of
the net surplus of the representative author and reader at these prices less the cost of serving them:


 v̄a
 v̄r
a r
r r a
a
r
r
r r
(v − c )dF (v ) dF a (va ),
(1)
Q (p )v − c +
SW(p , p ) =
pa /Qr (pr )
pr
 v̄r

 v̄a
a
r
r
r r
a
=
(v + v − c )dF (v ) − c dF a (va ).
(2)
pa /Qr (pr )

pr

Taking the first-order conditions with respect to prices and rearranging gives the expressions for the first
best in the following proposition. Appendix A provides a formal proof.
Proposition 1. The first-best submission and subscription fees are


paf b = max 0, ca − E(vr − cr |vr > prf b ) Pr(vr > prf b )


prf b = max 0, cr − E(va |va > paf b /Qr (prf b)) .
These expressions reflect the non-negativity constraint on prices. Putting that constraint aside, first-best
prices have an intuitive structure. They are set to the cost of serving the side of the market in question,
adjusted downward by a term reflecting the net social benefit coming from the other side of the market.
Consider a digital environment in which there is no cost of serving readers under open access, i.e., c r = 0.
Then an immediate corollary of Proposition 1 is that the first best involves open access: i.e., p rf b = 0. This
corollary is our first suggestion of possible efficiencies associated with open access. This corollary does
not imply, however, that equilibrium with a profit-maximizing open-access journal is socially efficient. In
general, such a journal would distort the submission fees above author cost to provide a profit margin. Nor
does this corollary imply that equilibrium social welfare is higher with open-access than traditional journals.

6. Monopoly Journal
This section solves for the equilibrium with a monopoly journal. Section 6.1 solves for equilibrium with a
monopoly traditional journal, Section 6.2 with an monopoly open-access journal, and Section 6.3 compares
the equilibria.

6.1. Monopoly Traditional Journal
We use backward induction to solve for equilibrium starting with the representative reader’s subscription
decision in the last stage. Section 4 showed that reader demand is Q r (pr ) = 1 − F r (pr ). Folding the game
back to the third stage, if the journal has an article, it chooses p r to maximize the expected continuation
profit from the reader:
(3)
prmt ≡ argmax π r (pr ),
pr ≥0

recalling the definition π r (pr ) ≡ (pr − cr )Qr (pr ). The subscript on the optimal price identifies the journal
as traditional and the market structure as monopoly. Equation (3) is a standard monopoly pricing problem.
Given the assumed quasiconcavity of π r (pr ), the first-order condition will be sufficient for an optimum.
Rearranging the first-order condition from maximizing (3) yields the Lerner index formula
Lrmt ≡

prmt − cr
1
= r ,
prmt
|ηmt |
10

(4)

r
where ηmt
≡ Qr(prmt )prmt /qrmt is the elasticity of reader demand evaluated at the equilibrium subscription
price and where qrmt ≡ Qr (prmt ) denotes the expected number of readers in equilibrium. Equation (4) is the
standard inverse elasticity rule for monopoly markups.
Folding the game back to the second stage, the representative author obtains net surplus v a qrmt − pa from
submitting a paper and thus submits if v a > pa /qrmt . Letting Q a (y, z) ≡ 1 − F a (y/z), the probability the author
submits, also the expected number of articles in the journal, is Q a (pa , qrmt ).
Folding the game back to the first stage, the journal chooses p a to maximize profit from all stages:
r
)Qa (pa , qrmt ).
pamt ≡ argmax(pa − ca + πmt
pa ≥0

(5)

r ≡ π r (pr ) reflects the expected continuation profit from readers attracted by the article. RearThe term πmt
mt
ranging the first-order condition from maximizing (5) yields the Lerner index formula

Lamt ≡

πr
pamt − ca
1
= a − amt ,
a
pmt
|ηmt | pmt

(6)

a
where ηmt
≡ Qa1 (pamt , qrmt )pamt /qamt is the elasticity of author demand evaluated at the equilibrium submission
fee and where qamt ≡ Qa (pamt , qrmt ). The formula in (6) holds when (5) has an interior solution (i.e., p amt > 0).
Otherwise the solution is simply the corner p amt = 0.20 The Lerner index characterizing the author price in
r /pa , reflecting the extra
(6) is lower than the standard inverse elasticity rule for a monopolist by the term π mt
mt
profit earned from the reader side of the market from signing up an author. Indeed, this Lerner index can
be negative, in which case the author margin would be negative (i.e., p amt < ca ). The following proposition
summarizes this analysis.

Proposition 2. A monopoly traditional journal’s submission fee p amt satisfies the Lerner index condition
a
r
|) − (πmt
/pamt ) if pamt > 0; otherwise p amt = 0. Its subscription fee is positive (p rmt > 0), with
Lamt = (1/|ηmt
r |.
associated Lerner index satisfying an inverse elasticity rule: L rmt = 1/|ηmt

6.2. Monopoly Open-Access Journal
Next we turn to the case of a monopoly open-access journal, which commits ex ante to charge zero subscription fees ex post. We again solve for equilibrium using backward induction. The representative reader
ends up subscribing to the free journal carrying an article. Folding the game back to the second stage, the
representative author obtains net surplus v a − pa from submitting a paper because the article certainly gains
a reader. The author submits if v a > pa . The probability that the author submits, also the expected quantity
of articles in the journal, therefore is Q a (pa , 1) = 1 − F a (pa ).
Folding the game back to the first stage, the journal chooses p a to maximize total profit from all stages:
pamo ≡ argmax[pa − (ca + cr )]Qa (pa , 1).
pa ≥0

(7)

The expression reflects the cost of serving the reader as well as the author but no revenue from readers.
Rearranging the first-order condition from maximizing (7) yields the Lerner index formula
Lamo ≡

cr
pamo − ca
1
+
=
.
a |
pamo
|ηmo
pamo

(8)

20 A sufficient condition for the solution to be interior is that profit from the reader side not be so large that it overwhelms the
r < ca . Another sufficient condition is f a (0) = 0.
incentive to extract revenue from authors: i.e., π mt

11

a
where ηmo
≡ Qa1 (pamo , 1)pamo /qamo is the elasticity of author demand evaluated at the equilibrium submission
fee and where qamo ≡ Qa (pamo , 1).
Equation (8) implies that the open-access journal sets a higher price than implied by the inverse elasticity
rule for a standard monopolist. The journal recognizes that publishing an article invariably generates a
reader, who is costly to serve but provides no revenue. This ex post loss leads the journal to shade the
submission fee up. If c r = 0, then the journal’s markup is exactly given by the standard inverse elasticity
rule. A profitable open-access journal will necessarily have positive author margins: i.e., p amo > ca ; moreover
pamo > ca + cr . The following proposition summarizes this analysis.

Proposition 3. A monopoly open-access journal charges no subscription fee p rmo = 0. Its submission fee is
a
|) + (cr /pamo ).
positive (p amo > 0), satisfying Lerner index condition L amo = (1/|ηmo

6.3. Comparing Monopoly Journals
Next we turn to a comparison of traditional versus open-access journals, holding constant the monopoly
structure in both cases. We will compare prices, profits, and social welfare across the two types of journal.
Obviously, the equilibrium subscription fee is weakly lower for an open-access than for a traditional
journal, as the subscription fee under open access is the lowest possible non-negative price, 0. Regarding
submission fees, a comparison of the Lerner index formulae (6) with (8) seems to suggest that the submission fee is higher for the open-access than the traditional journal because the markup is above the inverse
elasticity for the open-access journal but below for the traditional journal. In fact, it is difficult to unambiguously rank the submission fees because the elasticities in the formulae are difficult to rank. The following
proposition, proved in Appendix A, shows that a log-concavity assumption is sufficient for the open-access
journal to charge a higher price than the traditional journal.
Proposition 4. A monopoly open-access journal has a weakly lower subscription fee than a monopoly
traditional journal: p rmo = 0 ≤ prmt . Assume f a is log-concave and that a monopoly journal of either type
makes positive profit. Then the open-access journal has a higher submission fee than the traditional journal:
pamo > pamt .
The proof provides a counterexample having non-log-concave f a in which the order of equilibrium submission fees is reversed, i.e., pamo < pamt .
Turning from a comparison of prices to profits, we will show in Proposition 5 that there are conditions
under which an open-access journal is more profitable than a traditional journal and other conditions under
which the opposite is true. At first glance one might think that the commitment to a low (indeed zero)
price involved in open access may reduce profit. However, if the author side of the market is a substantial
enough source of revenue relative to the reader side, the commitment to zero subscription fee and thus the
widest possible readership associated with open access may boost the revenue from the author side enough
to outweigh the profit sacrificed from the reader side. Conversely, if the reader side grows in importance as a
revenue source, the traditional journal eventually becomes more profitable because it profits from the reader
side, while the open-access journal does not. These insights are stated formally in the following proposition,
proved in Appendix A.
Proposition 5. Scaling the author benefit as θ a va while holding all other parameters constant, a monopoly
open-access journal is more profitable than a traditional one for sufficiently high θ a . Scaling the reader
benefit as θ r vr while holding all other parameters constant, a monopoly traditional journal is more profitable
than an open-access one for sufficiently high θ r .
Rather than taking the limit as the value on one side of the market increases, we can obtain a similar
(albeit slightly less clean) result in the limit as the value on the other side shrinks.
12

‫ݒ‬ҧ ௔

Socially efficient
open access
Socially
inefficient
traditional

Socially
inefficient
open access

Socially efficient
traditional

‫ݒ‬ҧ ௥
Figure 3: Numerical example illustrating welfare possibilities in monopoly case. Example involves c a = 1/3, cr = 0, va uniformly distributed on [0, v̄ a ], and vr uniformly distributed on [0, v̄ r ].
Above solid line, open access is more profitable than traditional pricing. Above dotted curve, open
access is socially more efficient than traditional pricing.

Proposition 6. Scaling the reader benefit as θ r vr while holding all other parameters constant, if v̄ a > ca + cr ,
then a monopoly open-access journal is more profitable than a traditional one for θ r sufficiently close to 0.
r
, then a
Scaling the author benefit as θ a va while holding all other parameters constant, if 0 < c a < πmt
a
monopoly traditional journal is more profitable than an open-access one for θ sufficiently close to 0.
The proof is similar to that of Proposition 5 and so has been relegated to an online appendix (Appendix B).
To illustrate Propositions 5 and 6, consider a numerical example with c a = 1/3, cr = 0, va uniformly
distributed on [0, v̄ a ], and vr uniformly distributed on [0, v̄ r ]. It can be shown that a monopoly journal would
choose open access if v̄ a > 1.2v̄r − 0.5 (rounded to one decimal) and traditional pricing otherwise.
Turning to a welfare comparison between traditional and open-access pricing, the picture is again inconclusive. Neither regime is unambiguously more efficient than the other. Equilibrium sometimes selects
traditional pricing when it is socially inefficient and sometimes open access when it is socially inefficient.
This possibility result is best illustrated with a concrete numerical example, shown in Figure 3, the same
numerical example used above to illustrate Proposition 6. All four possibilities arise in the figure. Holding
constant the distribution of reader benefits, if the distribution of author benefits is enlarged, open access
becomes efficient and is selected in equilibrium. The opposite happens if author benefits are held constant
and the distribution of reader benefits is enlarged: traditional access is efficient and is selected in equilibrium. Equilibrium selects an inefficient pricing model when the distributions of author and reader benefits
are more similar, with open access being inefficiently selected for smaller benefit distributions and with
traditional access inefficiently selected for larger distributions.
The conditions under which equilibrium selects the efficient pricing model generalize beyond the figure,
as stated in the following proposition, proved in Appendix A.
Proposition 7. Scaling the author benefit as θ a va while holding all other parameters constant, a monopoly
open-access journal is more profitable and more socially efficient than a traditional one for sufficiently high
r , then a monopoly traditional journal is more profitable and more socially efficient than
θa . If 0 < ca < πmt
13

an open-access one for θ a sufficiently close to 0.
Intuitively, if author values grow without bound, the journal earns all its profit from authors, so the gain
from committing via open access to a low reader price exceeds the loss from the fact that the commitment is
a crude one to a zero price. Indeed, the loss is vanishingly small because committing to free reader access is
optimal in this limit. If author values shrink to zero, then journals only source of profit is readers, and only
traditional access exploits this profit source. Hence traditional access is more profitable in this limit. All
social surplus also comes from reader side in this limit. Traditional access involves a lower author markup
than open-access, leading to more submissions, and indirectly to more surplus on the reader side. Hence
traditional access is socially more efficient in this limit as well.
The propositions contribute to an understanding of the recent rise of “megajournals,” open-access journals that publish huge numbers of articles according to a refereeing standard judging articles according to
methodological soundness rather than importance or impact. 21 This is the niche in which commercial publishers have shown the most activity in open-access publishing, including Nature, with its Scientific Reports
and Hindawi Publishing with its Scientific World Journal. The largest “megajournal”—the largest journal
in the world in fact—is PLoS One, its team of over 6,000 editors publishing over 30,000 articles in 2013.
PLoS One is published by a non-profit, the Public Library of Science (PLoS), although if critics are correct
in their claim that one of its objectives is to generate revenue to subsidize PLoS’s higher-impact journals
(Butler 2008), the for-profit model may have some relevance. 22 “megajournals” are dramatically lower
than the flagship journals at these same publishers: for example, PLoS One has an acceptance rate of 70%
(Curry 2012) compared to less than 10% at PLoS Biology (Varmus 2009, p. 264). Articles only meeting a
vanishingly low quality standard may not provide much reader benefit. This is exactly the case in which
Proposition 6 guarantees a commercial journal prefers open to traditional access (in the limiting result for θ r
approaching 0). Unable to earn much revenue from readers, the journal instead generates revenue from the
author side. Whether this privately profitable choice is socially optimal is unclear in this case. This can be
seen by looking at the vertical axis in Figure 3, corresponding to vanishingly small reader benefits. Along
the lower portion of the vertical axis (low values of v̄ a ), open access is socially inefficient; along the upper
portion (high values of v̄ a ), it is efficient. Thus the model explains the rise of the “megajournal,” it does not
offer unequivocal support for their efficiency, pointing to factors that would need to be quantified in order to
claim efficiency.

7. Competing Journals
In this section we move from an analysis of monopoly to competing journals. Section 7.1 analyzes competition among two or more traditional journals, Section 7.2 among two or more open-access journals,
and Section 7.3 among a set of journals including at least one of each type. Building on these results for
exogenous numbers and types of journal, Section 7.4 endogenizes the structure of the journal market by
considering a model of sunk entry costs.

7.1. Competing Traditional Journals
Suppose there are |T | ≥ 2 traditional journals in the market and no open-access journals. Using backward
induction to solve for equilibrium, the continuation equilibrium in the last two subscription stages is identical
to that for a monopoly traditional journal. Despite competition for authors in the first stage, whichever
21 See Binfield (2013), an article by the former general editor of PLoS One, for a discussion and for the source of the facts used
in this passage except number of editors, taken from the PLoS One website, www.plosone.org/static/edboard.action, accessed on
September 9, 2014.
22 PLoS’s 2013 Form 990 filing, highlighted in March 2016 series of Twitter posts by Rutgers biologist Andrew Kern, reveals
that the CEO received $870,000 and the top 10 PLoS executives over $3 million in annual compensation. In 2014, PLoS earned
$48.5 million in revenue, a surplus over expenses of $7.8 million.

14

journal signs the author up simply behaves as a static monopolist in its dealings with the reader. The author’s
submission strategy is also the same as in the previous section.
Competition for authors in the first stage drives p act all the way down to the zero-profit level unless this
violates the constraint p act ≥ 0, in which case p act = 0. As shown in the proof of the next proposition, the
r . Putting these facts together, p a = max(0, ca − π r ), that is, the
zero-profit submission fee equals c a − πmt
ct
mt
equilibrium submission fee is either a zero-profit or zero-price one, whichever is greater.
Proposition 8. Competition among |T | ≥ 2 traditional journals leads to submission fee p
r ). The equilibrium subscription fee is the same as for a monopoly traditional journal: p
πmt

a
ct
r
ct

= max(0, ca −
= prmt .

Proposition 8 allows us to make inferences about the profitability of competing traditional journals from
submission fees. If p act > 0, then zero profits rather than zero prices must be the binding constraint. Hence
journals must be earning zero profits in this market. Paradoxically, free submission is a necessary condition
r
,
for competing traditional journals to earn positive profit. Except for the knife-edged case in which c a = πmt
free submission is also a sufficient condition for positive profits in this market.
To emphasize, the journals market is a case in which competition among identical suppliers does not
r
inevitably lead to zero profits. Competing traditional journals earn positive profit if and only if c a = πmt
a
and pct = 0. In this case the journals are profitable in spite of the fact that they are competing suppliers of
identical products. Once the journal has articles, it becomes a monopoly provider access to those articles,
allowing positive continuation profit. First-stage competition for articles may not necessarily dissipate this
continuation profit completely if negative author fees would be required to do so.
Comparing Propositions 2 to 8, we can assess the comparative-static effect of the entry of a traditional
journal into a market with an existing monopoly one. Such entry has no effect on the subscription fee. The
only effect is a (weak) reduction in the submission fee. Profits fall (weakly) but not necessarily to zero.
Since Proposition 8 holds for any |T | ≥ 2, we can see that once the second journal has entered, further entry
has no effect on prices or market-wide profit. Per-journal profit would fall as any given expected profit for
the market as a whole is divided among more journals.

7.2. Competing Open-Access Journals
Next suppose there are |O| ≥ 2 open-access journals in the market and no traditional ones. To solve for the
equilibrium submission fee, we can use the same “Bertrand” logic as in the previous section. Competition
among the journals drives p aco down to the zero-profit level, which can be shown to be p aco = ca + cr . A
simplifying factor here is that costs are non-negative, so this fee is guaranteed to satisfy the zero-price
constraint.
Proposition 9. Competition among |O| ≥ 2 open-access journals leads to submission fee p aco = ca + cr . By
definition they charge no subscription fee (p rco = 0).
Even in a digital environment in which c r = 0, the submission fee is still positive as long as c a > 0.

7.3. Competition Among Both Types
This section analyzes competition with both traditional and open-access journals in the market. We begin
with the case of exactly one of each in the market, i.e., |T | = |O| = 1. Other market structures with different
numbers of these types can be derived as corollaries of this analysis.
The subscription stage is identical to what we have found before. If the traditional journal attracts the
article, it monopolizes this vis-a-vis readers; the open-access journal of course posts the article for free.
The remaining question regards the equilibrium submission fees arising from competition. The analysis is
similar to that for the standard model of vertical quality differentiation (see Shaked and Sutton 1982). The
author effectively obtains a higher quality good from the open-access journal in the sense that the entire mass
15

pta
va

T
O

C

Ɣ

ƔT

0
1

G

0
O t2

BRoa

H T
O

Ɣ

T 1
O t2 B
A
T t2
O t2

Ɣ
Ɣ

T
O
D

1
1

BRta

ƔF

Ɣ

T t2
O 0 E

Ɣ

T t2
O 1

1
0

poa

va

Figure 4: Best-response functions for competition between traditional and open-access journals. Drawn for numerical example with c a = 1/3, cr = 0, and v a and v r uniformly distributed on
[0,1]; but serves as schematic diagram for the general case. For reference, equilibria for all other
possible market structures have been identified and labels A–H applied. The coordinates of the orir )), reflecting the zero-profit constraint on prices. Price space is not
gin are (ca + cr ,max(0,c a − πmt
square because of this origin shift.

1 will read the article rather than just the q rmt who subscribe to the traditional journal. Thus an author with
benefit parameter va obtains gross benefit v a from the open-access journal but only v a qrmt from the traditional
journal. As is standard in vertical-quality models, the high-quality (i.e., open-access) journal sells at a high
price to an interval of the highest values v a . The low-quality (i.e., traditional) journal sells at a lower price to
authors with lower values of v a . With both journals operating in their niches, they are able to charge positive
markups.
Figure 4 provides a schematic diagram of competition between exactly one traditional and open-access
journal. Journals’ best-response functions are drawn as dark curves. Both are the standard solution to
respective first-order conditions except that, if the traditional journal’s price p ta is sufficiently high, the
open-access operates as a monopolist because its higher quality good no longer faces effective competition
from the traditional journal for authors. This accounts for the vertical portion of the open-access journal’s
best response function at its monopoly price. Equilibrium is given by the intersection of the best-response
functions BRta and BRao .
Equilibrium for industry configurations with other combinations of journal types can also be represented
in the figure. Consider the configuration with a single traditional and several open-access journals, i.e.,
|T | = 1 and |O| ≥ 2. Competition among the open-access journals forces their submission fee down to the

16

zero-profit level. The traditional journal best-responds to this submission fee. The axes in Figure 4 have
been scaled so that the origin reflects zero-profit prices. Hence equilibrium in this configuration is given
by the intersection of BR ta with the vertical axis. The traditional journal is not driven completely out of
the market because the profit earned on readers can be used to subsidize lower submission fees, attracting
authors with a low marginal rate of substitution between price and readership as indexed by v a . Still, the
stronger competition provided by the second open-access entrant induces the traditional journal to reduce
its submission fee and cuts into its profit. Once two open-access journals have entered, further open-access
entry has no effect on equilibrium prices or profits.
Analogously, equilibrium with several traditional journals and a single open-access journal—i.e., |T | ≥ 2
and |O| = 1—is given by the intersection of BR ao with the horizontal axis. Entry by a second traditional
journal induces the open-access journal to reduce its submission fee and cuts into its profit. Further entry
by traditional journals beyond the second has no effect on equilibrium prices or profit earned by the set of
journals of one type. 23
In the configuration with more than one of both traditional and open-access journals, the equilibrium
submission fee is driven down to the zero-profit level for both types of journal, corresponding to the origin
of the graph. Thus entry of a second traditional journal when there is existing competition from two or
more open-access journals has no effect on open-access journals’ prices but reduces the traditional journal’s
price. Entry of a second open-access journal when there is existing competition from two or more traditional
journals has the inverse effect.
Although we have already solved for equilibrium with a monopoly journal and equilibrium with competition involving just one type of journal, for completeness these configurations, too, can be represented in
the figure. Equilibrium with a monopoly traditional journal is indicated by the intersection of BR ta with the
dotted vertical line at the “choke price” v̄ a .24 Analogously, equilibrium with a monopoly open-access journal is indicated by the intersection of BR ao with the dotted horizontal line at v̄ a . Equilibrium with competing
traditional journals is indicated by the point at the lower right of the figure at which the horizontal axis (the
level to which Bertrand competition among traditional journals drives price down) meets the dotted vertical
line for the open-access “choke price.” Equilibrium with competing open-access journals is given by the
analogous point at the upper left of the figure.

7.4. Endogenous Entry and Types
This section endogenizes the structure of the journal market, building on the preceding results for exogenous
numbers and types of journals. We view the results for endogenous structure as complementing rather
than supplanting the results for exogenous structure. The exogenous structure could reflect historical entry
decisions made when the sunk cost was quite different from today’s or could reflect idiosyncratic subsidies
for entry from external sources. We will see that most of the exogenous structures can emerge in equilibrium
with an endogenous structure for some configuration of entry costs.
We will adapt the model from Section 4, adding an initial entry stage. Suppose there is a large number
of potential entrants which can choose to become a traditional journal, open-access journal, or not to enter.
Let kt > 0 be the sunk cost to set up a traditional journal and k o > 0 an open-access journal. The notation
allows the sunk cost to differ across journal types; even if these sunk costs are the same and instead profits
vary across journal types, allowing different subscript on k t and ko will be an equivalent way to capture
the arbitrary variation in profit that is possible across journal types, as the ratio of profits to sunk costs will
determine entry decisions. We will look for pure-strategy equilibria characterized by the set of entering
23 If the zero-price constraint binds, allowing traditional journals to earn positive profit, the total is divided among more participants as more of them enter.
24 The price for the absent journal is somewhat arbitrary, but setting it at or above the “choke price” is a straightforward way to
indicate it.

17

Panel A: ߨா௧ < ߨி௧

kt

Panel B: ߨி௧ < ߨா௧

kt

| O *| 1

| O *| 1

S Ht

S Ht

| O *| 1

| O *| 1

| T *| 1

S Ft

| T *| 1

S Et

| O *| 1

| T *| 1

or

| T *| | O *| 1

S Et

| T *| 2

S Ft

| T *| | O *| 1

| T *| | O *| 1
| T *| | O *| 1

or
|T | 2

S Dt

| T *| t 2

| T *| t 2

| T *| t 2
| O *| 1

| T *| t 2
| O *| 1

0

or
| T *| 2

*

S Dt

S Do

| T *| 1

or

or

S Fo

S Go

ko

0

S Do

S Fo

S Go

ko

Figure 5: Equilibria for endogenous numbers and types of journal. No journals of that type enter
if equilibrium number of that type not mentioned. Profits at tick marks along axes refer to profits
earned by that journal type in points A–H in the previous figure. Distance between any two tick
marks need not be equal. The ordering of profits along axes is a general result except for the relative
order of πEt and πFt , which can go either way, leading to the two cases shown in the two panels.
Multiple pure-strategy equilibria exist for all points in shaded regions.

journals of each type, (T ∗ , O∗ ).
The analysis draws heavily on Figure 4’s summary of possible market structures. For brevity, we will
refer to the structures by the labels A–H. Whether a particular structure emerges in an entry equilibrium
depends crucially on a journal’s profit in that structure. Let π At and πAo denote, respectively, a traditional
and open-access journal’s gross profit (not including entry cost) in outcome A. Denote gross profits in the
other outcomes B–H similarly. When the structure involves an ambiguous number of journals, we implicitly
take πAt , πAo , and the other profit variables to denote gross profits when the market contains the fewest
number of each type of journal consistent with that structure.
It is immediate that the structures with two or more open-access journals cannot be entry equilibria.
Competition between the open-access journals dissipates all of their gross profit, so for any positive k o ,
each would benefit from deviating to not entering, guaranteeing zero rather than negative net profit. Thus
structures A–C from Figure 4 are ruled out. All the remaining structures can emerge in a pure-strategy equilibrium. Figure 5 provides a formal characterization of pure-strategy entry equilibria for all combinations
of sunk costs, k o along the horizontal axis and k t along the vertical. The cut points along the horizontal axis
(πDo , πFo, and πGo ) are gross profits in structures from Figure 4 with at least one open-access journal and
along the vertical axis (π Dt , πEt , πFt , πHt ) in structures with at least one traditional journal. That profits are
ranked as shown along the axes is obvious and general (for example, it is obviously and generally true that
an open-access journal is more profitable as a monopoly than in competition with either type of journal)
except for the rank of πEt relative to π Ft . There exist parameter configurations for which π Et < πFt and
other configurations for which π Ft < πEt . The two possibilities are shown in the two panels.

18

To understand how the figure is derived, we will look at one case in detail. Take the case of low entry
costs for both types: k t < πDt and ko < πDo . Then an open-access journal earns positive net profit if |T | = 2,
and because entry of traditional journals beyond two does not bid prices down further, an open-access
journal earns positive net profit regardless of how many traditional journals enter. Thus |O ∗ | = 1. Given one
open-access journal enters, entry is profitable for at least two traditional journals because k t < πDt . A range
|T ∗ | ≥ 2 is specified for the equilibrium number of traditional journals to consolidate cases, but the exact
number for any point can be pinned down. 25 The equilibrium structure for other regions can be derived
using similar logic.
We can see from Figure 5 that, as expected, an increase in kt holding k o constant weakly reduces |T ∗ |.26
This reduction in the number of traditional competitors makes open-access entry more attractive, leading to
a weak increase in |O∗ |. Conversely, as expected, an increase in ko holding kt constant weakly reduces |O ∗ |
and weakly increases |T ∗ |. There exist multiple pure-strategy equilibria in the shaded rectangles; in those
rectangles the equilibrium structure can be like one or the other of the unshaded, abutting regions.

7.5. Welfare Analysis
Section 6.3 provided a preliminary welfare analysis, taking the entry of a monopoly journal as given, determining whether the type that maximizes monopoly profit also maximizes social welfare. Having endogenized the entry decision, we are now in a position to provide a more comprehensive welfare analysis,
determining the social efficiency of the equilibrium market structure.
A numerical example serves to illustrate the main insights from this section. The example is the same
used extensively so far, with c a = 1/3, cr = 0, and va and vr to uniformly distributed on [0, 1]. Echoing Figure 5, we take entry costs k o and kt to be the free parameters. Figure 6 depicts the equilibrium
market structure and the social optimum in separate panels. Before proceeding, it is worth noting how
the equilibrium market structure fits into the general classification in the previous figure. One can show
πEt = 0 < 0.028 = π Ft for the particular parameters in this numerical example, implying that the relevant
panel from the previous figure is A. Furthermore, π Dt = πEt = 0, implying that the lower regions of Panel A
from the previous figure—those with |T ∗ | ≥ 2—in effect have collapsed to the horizontal axis in this numerical example. Noting this, one can see that Panel A of Figure 6 is a simple special case of Panel A of
Figure 5. The shading has a different meaning in the two figures: rather than indicating multiple equilibria, the intensity of the shading in the latter figure indicates the number of journals involved in the relevant
structure for those entry costs. The equilibrium number of journals of each type is indicated by one star in
Panel A of Figure 6 and socially efficient by two stars.
Figure 6 highlights some obvious and expected results that hold in this numerical example as well as in
general. Moving out along the horizontal axis, the higher is k o , the lower are |O∗ | and |O∗∗ |, that is, the fewer
open-access journals enter in both equilibrium and the social optimum. Moving up the vertical axis, the
higher is kt , the lower are |T ∗ | and |T ∗∗ |, that is, the fewer traditional journals enter in both equilibrium and
the social optimum. Obviously, the higher are entry costs, the lower the private and social entry incentives
for that journal type.
A comparison of the two panels shows that there are at least as many journals in the social optimum as
in equilibrium, strictly more for almost the entire region of entry costs shown except for the extreme upper
right, where the social optimum eventually joins equilibrium in having no journals entering. The only other
exception are cases within the |O ∗ | = |T ∗ | = 1 rectangle in Panel A outside the polygons having three or
more journals near the origin in Panel B; however, this exception only constitutes a very thin shell of cases.
can show |T ∗ | = 2πDt /kt in the region under consideration. In the region above it, |T ∗ | = 2πEt /kt .
and |O∗ | are set-valued in the presence of multiple equilibria, we base our comparative-statics assertions on the
strong set order. Set X is as high as set Y in the strong set order if and only if each x ∈ X \ Y is greater than each y ∈ Y and each
y ∈ Y \ X is less than each x  ∈ X. Further, X is higher than Y in the strong set order if and only if X is as high as Y and Y is not as
high as X. For example, {1} is higher than {0,1} in the strong set order.
25 One

26 Because |T ∗ |

19

Panel A: Equilibrium

kt

kt

Panel B: Social optimum

| O **| 1

| O **| 2

| T **| 1

|O | 1
*

| O *| 1
or
| T *| 1

| T **| 2
| T *| 1

ko
| O *| | T *| 1

| O **| 2
**
| O **| 2 | T | 1
**
|T | 2

ko

Figure 6: Numerical example illustrating endogenous entry. Example involves c a = 1/3, cr = 0,
and v a ,vr uniformly distributed on [0,1]. Darker shading indicates entry of more journals.

Otherwise, there is too little entry in equilibrium compared to the social optimum, an obvious result due to
two well-understood forces: first, profit-maximizing journals do not appropriate the consumer surplus that
their entry creates; and, second, competitive entry benefits society by lowering prices but but reduces private
entry incentives by destroying journal profits.
More interesting are results related to whether equilibrium is biased toward a different journal type than
the social optimum. In the most of the area of Panel A in which the equilibrium involves some journal entry,
the equilibrium and socially optimal journal type agree: in most of the swath in which a single traditional
journal enters in equilibrium, two traditional journals enter in the social optimum; in most of the swath
in which a single open-access journal enters in equilibrium, two open-access journals enter in the social
optimum. Considerable insight on the divergence between the equilibrium and efficient journal types can
be gained by zooming in on the region of multiple equilibria from Panel A, which is done in Figure 7. This
region is near the margin between socially efficient open-access and traditional journals, which is where
much of the interesting “action” takes place in the example. The fact that it exhibits multiple equilibria
allows us to address the question of which of the restricted set of outcomes that might actually arise in
equilibrium is more efficient.
Figure 7 highlights the fundamental ambiguity of the welfare results that we saw in the preliminary
analysis in Figure 3, which we see again here. Open-access journals are not universally more efficient than
traditional but only for some parameters. For other parameters, in particular for relatively high values of k o
and low values of kt constituting over half of the area of Figure 7, the social optimum involves traditional
rather than open-access journals. Without knowing the empirical distribution of entry costs, it is difficult
to assess the likelihood that the social optimum takes one form or the other. One approach is to assume
that entry costs do not differ very much across access types in practice, i.e., k o ≈ kt , leading to a focus on
the 45-degree line. Focusing on the 45-degree line leads to clearer welfare results because it turns out that
the socially optimal structure is the same for all points along the 45-degree line in Figure 7, all involving
competing open-access journals.
The social optimum is not only, or even the most natural, benchmark to use to evaluate welfare in this

20

kt
450
«

S Ht

ܱ ‫ = כ‬1 efficient eq.
ܱ ‫ = ככ‬2 efficient struct.

ܶ ‫ = כ‬1 efficient eq.
ܱ = 2 efficient struct.
‫ככ‬

ܶ ‫ = כ‬1 efficient eq.
ܶ ‫ = ככ‬2 efficient struct.

«

S Ft

«

«

S Go

S Fo

ko

Figure 7: Zooming in on region of multiple equilibria in numerical example. Continuing numerical example from previous figure with c a = 1/3, cr = 0, and v a ,vr uniformly distributed on
[0,1].

figure, however. For all points in the shaded rectangle in Figure 7, the social optimum requires two of
the same type of journal to compete, which would dissipate all producer surplus, and thus would never be
observed in endogenous-entry equilibrium for any positive entry costs, no matter how small. A natural alternative benchmark available for this region of multiple equilibria is simply to determine which equilibrium is
most efficient. There are two pure-strategy equilibria for all points in the shaded rectangle: one with a single
open-access journal (|O ∗ | = 1) and another with a single traditional journal (|T ∗ | = 1). For a broad range
of cases in the shaded rectangle, including all cases along the 45-degree line, we see that |T ∗ | = 1 is more
efficient than |O∗ | = 1. The 45-degree line in Figure 7 is contained in a trapezoid of cases exhibiting an interesting dichotomy depending on which welfare benchmark is employed. Restricting attention to equilibrium
outcomes, involving the entry of a single journal, a traditional journal would be more efficient; but if two
journals are allowed to enter as in the social optimum, open-access journals would be more efficient. The
dichotomy stems from the disproportionate effect that competition has on welfare under open access. The
monopoly author fee is typically higher under open access (see Proposition 4), and reductions in a higher
fee disproportionately reduce deadweight loss because deadweight-loss triangles are quadratic functions of
price distortions.
Which welfare benchmark is appropriate depends to some extent on the public policy under consideration. For example, a growing number of funders, governments, and researcher’s home institutions have
proposed if not implemented open-access mandates. Such a mandate can be modeled as a shift from a
traditional to an open-access equilibrium. Figure 7 demonstrates that this shift can end up reducing social
welfare. Such a shift is more likely to increase social welfare if accompanied by a subsidy sufficient to fund
the entry of competing open-access journals, allowing the social optimum to be realized. Thus, to evaluate
the efficiency of an unfunded mandate, the most efficient of multiple equilibria may be the best benchmark,
while the social optimum may be the best benchmark to evaluate a funded mandate.
The welfare analysis in this section has so far focused on demonstrating possibilities using numerical
examples. The next proposition, proved in Appendix A, provides some general results. The proposition
provides the natural extension of all the welfare results in Proposition 7, which were stated for a monopoly
journal, now allowing for endogenous entry and journal types.

21

Proposition 10. Scaling the author benefit as θ a va while holding all other parameters constant, for sufficiently high θ a , there are some open-access journals in equilibrium and in the social optimum; formally,
r
|O∗ |, |O∗∗| ≥ 1. If ca > 0 and πmt
> ca + kt , for θa sufficiently close to 0, there are no open-access journals,
only traditional ones, in equilibrium and the social optimum; formally, |O ∗ | = |O∗∗ | = 0 and |T ∗ |, |T ∗∗ | ≥ 1.

8. Extensions
This section provides a series of brief extensions to cases of practical interest in the journals market.

8.1. Non-Profit Journals
The analysis so far has focused on for-profit journals. This section moves to an analysis of non-profits. This
is an important case to study because notable journals in a variety of subfields are in practice published
by societies, universities, and other non-profits. In economics, for example, the top five journals ranked as
noted in Table 1 are all non-profits. Five of the six indexed open-access journals in economics mentioned in
Section 3.2 are published by non-profits.
The complication in studying non-profits is that their objective function is not uniquely determined
unlike for-profits. It is still possible here to provide qualitative results that apply for a range of possible
non-profit objectives.
The case of a non-profit open-access journal is straightforward. The subscription fee is given by the
nature of the journal. Whatever the non-profit’s objectives, it is unlikely this would lead to a higher-thanmonopoly submission fee. Therefore, a non-profit open-access journal would typically charge a lower submission fee than a for-profit. How much lower depends on the specific objectives as well as the availability
of external funds from grants or lines of business to subsidize losses if such are experienced. 27
The case of a non-profit traditional journal raises additional economic considerations. Whereas a forprofit traditional journal cannot commit not to monopolize the reader side of the market with high subscription fees, non-profit status can end up functioning as a commitment to low subscription fees. In the simple
case in which the publisher has no other lines of business besides the journal, subscription fees above a
certain level would generate profit, violating the publisher’s non-profit status. It is theoretically possible that
a non-profit journal could generate the first best, if it could credibly establish this objective and had a source
of funds to subsidize losses if necessary.
Indeed, the traditional model may be a better model for some non-profit journals, allowing a balance
of low author and reader fees without constraining the reader fees to be exactly zero, which as shown in
Section 5 may not be efficient. This may explain why many non-profits have not gone the open-access
route. For example, none of the top non-profit economics journals in Table 1 have. However, under some
conditions, open-access can be optimal for the non-profit, consistent with the policies of the economics
journals discussed in footnote 27.

8.2. Bundling Journals
As documented by McCabe (2004) and Bergstrom et al. (2014), many major commercial publishers have
moved from posting list prices for individual journals to negotiating with subscribing institutions over a
27 In the example of the indexed open-access journals in economics mentioned in Section 3.2, only one, the South African Journal
of Economics and Management Science, charges a substantial author fee, in the form of page fees, ranging up to $470 for an article.
The two Econometric Society journals, Theoretical Economics and Quantitative Economics, only charge a $75 submission fee.
The fee is waived for members and reduced for authors from developing countries. The three remaining journals charge neither
submission nor subscription fees, so must use external sources to support their operation. One of these, SERIEs–Journal of the
Spanish Economic Association, is published by the for-profit, Springer. The affiliated association sponsors this journal’s author
fees.

22

bundled price (so-called “big deals”) for large portfolios of the publisher’s journals. Publishers continue
to offer subscriptions to individual journals at list prices on an a la carte basis (so the form of bundling
is technically mixed bundling), although the bundles involve a substantial discount compared to the sum
of individual subscription fees. For example, Bergstrom et al. (2014) found that the average Research I
University paid $1.2 million for the complete bundle of Elsevier’s nearly 3,000 journals, a 40% discount on
the $3.1 million combined list price. Bundling was enabled by the move to digital journals, which reduced
the cost of supplying extra digital journals to an institution almost to zero (more analysis of endogenous
costs is provided in the next section). Bergstrom et al. (2014) note that publishers had good information
about an institution’s willingness to pay when setting the bundle price: in addition to demographic factors
such as number of faculty, students, endowment, etc., the publisher knew the journals to which institution
previously subscribed at the posted prices.
We capture the essence of bundling in our model by assuming that bundling allows the publisher to
extract all the reader’s surplus, in essence enabling first-degree price discrimination. While this undoubtedly
overstates the quantitative impact of bundling, it is directionally correct regarding two important effects of
bundling: bundling allowed the publisher to extract more revenue from rich institutions while continuing to
serve lower-tier institutions at lower prices. Bergstrom et al. (2014) find that per-citation subscription fees
for the bundles offered by Elsevier, Springer, and Wiley were multiples of the fees charged by non-profits
to Research I and II universities but about equal to the non-profit fees for the next tier, Masters-granting
institutions.
According to this model, a monopoly publisher that can bundle charges the reader p rmb = vr , whom it
serves if vr ≥ cr . As discussed in the next section, it is reasonable to have in mind thecase in which c r is
r
r = v̄ vr dF r (vr ) > π r .
close to 0, so that most readers are served. Expected profit from the reader side is π mb
mt
cr
Folding the game back to the first stage, the publisher chooses p a to maximize profit from all stages:
r
)Qa (pa , qrmb ).
pamb ≡ argmax(pa − ca + πmb
pa ≥0

(9)

This is identical to (5) except that the profit earned from the reader side is higher under bundling than for the
traditional journal (first-degree price discrimination is more profitable than linear pricing by a monopolist);
r < π r . Quantity is also higher under bundling, i.e., q r = Qr (pr ) < Qr (cr ) = qr . Rearranging the
i.e., πmt
mt
mt
mb
mb
first-order condition from maximizing (9) yields the Lerner index formula
Lamb ≡

r
pamb − ca
πmb
1
−
=
.
a |
pamb
|ηmb
pamb

(10)

a ≡ Qa (pa , qr )pa /qa . The monopoly submission fee is shaded down even lower with bundling
where ηmb
1 mb mb mb mb
on the reader side because a submission generates even more reader profit. With lower submission fees, the
constraint p amb ≥ 0 is even more likely to bind, leading to free submission.
In the presence of bundling, the inability to commit to reader prices is much less of a problem for
the monopoly publisher. The bundling publisher serves as many readers as it would under marginal-cost
pricing.28 Thus the publisher credibly serves a wide readership even without commitment power.
The equilibrium with competing publishers that bundle is similar to the monopoly bundling case. The
outcome on the reader side is the same: whichever publisher secures the submission charges the reader
prcb = prmb = vr . Competition for authors drives the submission fee p acb all the way down to the zeror , unless this violates the non-negativity constraint, in which case p a = 0. Because
profit level ca − πmb
cb
r
r
r
πmb > πmt = πct , we have pacb ≤ pact .
28 It is not correct to say that bundling eliminates deadweight loss on the reader side because the first best involves belowmarginal-cost pricing, as Proposition 1 states.

23

8.3. Endogenous Reader Cost
Thus far, we have assumed that the marginal cost of serving a reader, c r , can take on any non-negative value
and is the same across traditional and open-access journals. This allows for a general analysis of the journals
market applicable to the earlier print era, when the cost of delivering a hard copy to each reader certainly
entailed cr > 0 as well as the Internet era, in which delivery costs are effectively reduced to near zero.
In this section, we analyze an alternative assumption about costs that is increasingly relevant as the
journal market moves further away from print toward digital access. Assume that articles are delivered to
readers over the Internet at no cost. The only remaining cost of serving a reader is the cost of processing the
reader’s account. This may differ across kinds of journals. Hence we introduce new notation to distinguish
between the reader cost for traditional journals (c tr ) and open-access journals (c ro ). An open-access journal
does not need to keep track of reader accounts because articles are freely posted. Hence we assume c ro = 0.
Traditional journals may face a cost of processing reader accounts, so c tr ≥ 0.
The possibility that c ro < ctr provides an additional advantage to open over traditional access. The analysis
behind Proposition 4 could be used to prove that the submission fee for a monopoly open-access is lower
after imposing the new cost assumption, but it would still charge a weakly higher submission fee than a
monopoly traditional journal. Of course, the reduction in an open-access journal’s costs would mean that
it is more profitable than a traditional journal under a broader range of parameters (see Proposition 5 for
a comparison of profits). Regarding competition, a reduction in the reader cost only for an open-access
journal would show up as a (weak) leftward shift in the best-response function BR ao of an open-access
journal. Effectively, this increase in the competitiveness of open-access journals would lead to weakly lower
author fees in any configuration involving some of this kind of journal.
Traditional journals would have a natural response to the existence of high costs of processing reader
accounts. By bundling journals together, a publisher can spread the fixed cost of negotiating with a reader
and servicing the reader’s account over the number of journals in the bundle. For the largest publishers, this
can result in substantial savings on reader costs per journal. For example, Elsevier, which publishes nearly
3,000 journals, spreads this reader cost over enough journals that it is effectively zero for any single journal.

8.4. Hybrid Pricing Strategy
This section we analyze the hybrid strategy of allowing authors the option of traditional access at one fee or
open access for an additional premium. Major publishers have instituted this pricing strategy. For example,
Elsevier charges $1,800 and Springer $3,000 for this option for most of their journals; Wiley charges a
variable fee ranging as high as $4,500. 29
A hybrid journal can be modeled as follows. Continue to assume (as we had with traditional and openaccess journals) that the journal’s pricing strategy is exogenous at the start of the game and known to all
players. A journal’s first move is to set author prices. The hybrid journal sets a menu of two prices. We
will continue to let p a represent the basic submission fee and introduce x a as the premium which the author
can choose to pay for open access. Thus, for an author who submits an article that will receive traditional
access, the total price is p a ; for an article that will receive open access, the total price is p a + xa .
A rigorous analysis of the equilibrium hybrid strategy in either a monopoly or competitive setting becomes quite involved. For space considerations we relegate the full analysis to online Appendix D. Here,
we just highlight some of the results, which turn out to have intuitive appeal. A monopoly hybrid journal
charges the same basic submission fee as a monopoly traditional journal. The open-access premium is set
according to the principles of the Efficient Components Pricing Rule (ECPR) (Baumol and Sidak, 1994),
reflecting a markup over standard marginal costs (here the cost of processing an article and delivering it
29 The

last column of Table 1 shows the fees charged by top economics journals for this option. A minority of the non-profit
journals in the table offer the option; the mean fee is $2,650. All of the for-profits are Elsevier journals, which offer the option at
its standard $1,800 rate.

24

to all readers) and an additional opportunity cost of lost revenue from readers. The markup effectively
monopolizes the segment of the author market with high values v a of readership.
Moving from monopoly to competition, adding a hybrid journal to a market with other journals has the
same effect on the equilibrium outcome as adding two individual journals, one traditional and one openaccess. Thus, competition between a hybrid and one or more traditional journals yields the same outcome
as point D in Figure 4 with |T | ≥ 2, |O| = 1. Competition between a hybrid and one or more open-access
journals yields the same outcome as point B in the figure with |T | = 1, |O| ≥ 2. Competition among two or
more hybrid journals (as well as any number of other types of journal) yields the same outcome as point A
with |T | ≥ 2, |O| ≥ 2. Hence our earlier results for monopoly and competition can be immediately leveraged
to characterize the outcome with hybrid journals.

9. Full Commitment
So far we have assumed that journals have at best a crude commitment to subscription fees. In this section
we explore the alternative assumption that journals can commit to the full vector (p a , pr ) at the outset
of the game. This exploration serves two purposes. First, while journals may not have full commitment
power in the current era of digital journals, an analysis of full commitment provides a counterfactual to
help understand how a lack of commitment contributes to the current situation. Second, journals may have
had power to commit to subscription fees in practice during the previous era of print journals. Rather
than renting access via a journal’s website, in that era libraries acquired the physical copy of a volume,
affording its patrons permanent access. The subscription fee charged when an article was submitted thus
provided some indication of the article’s future accessibility. Analyzing the commitment case will provide
predictions about the effect of the move from print to digital that we can match to market facts. We have
placed this section toward the end of the paper because the material is more technical than the rest of the
paper.

9.1. Monopoly Journal with Full Commitment
The journal with full commitment is able to set the level of both fees to maximize profit:
(pam f , prm f ) = argmax [pa − ca + (pr − cr )Qr (pr )] Qa (pa , Qr (pr )),
pa ,pr ≥0

(11)

where subscript f indicates the full-commitment case. The optimal fees solve the system of two first-order
conditions. Rearranging the first-order condition with respect to p a yields the Lerner index formula for the
submission fee,
πmr f
pam f − ca
1
−
=
,
(12)
Lam f =
pam f
|ηma f | pam f
where ηma f ≡ Qa1 (pam f , qrm f )pam f /qam f is the elasticity of author demand and where q rm f ≡ Qr (prm f ), qam f ≡
Qa (pam f , qrm f ), and πmr f = π r (prm f ). The Lerner index formula in (12) holds for an interior solution (p am f > 0)
to (11). Otherwise, we simply have the corner solution p am f = 0.
This Lerner index formula has exactly the same form as for a traditional journal in (6). The only difference is that it is evaluated at potentially different reader prices and quantities. Whereas p rmt maximized
stand-alone reader profits, here p rm f also takes into account the effect on profits from the author side. Taking
the first-order condition of (11) with respect to p r , substituting from the first-order condition behind (12),
and rearranging yields the Lerner index formula for the subscription fee,
Lrm f =

pam f am f
prm f − cr
1
−
=
,
prm f
|ηmr f | |ηma f |prm f qrm f
25

(13)

where ηmr f = Qr (prm f )prm f /qrm f is the elasticity of reader demand with respect to price and where  am f ≡
Qa2 (pam f , qrm f )qrm f /qam f is the elasticity of author demand with respect to the number of readers rather than
price. The Lerner index has an additional negative term not appearing for the traditional journal in (4)
reflecting the effect on author demand of an expansion in the number of readers, which commitment allows
the journal to internalize.
Proposition 11. A monopoly journal with full commitment sets a submission fee satisfying the Lerner index
condition L am f = (1/|ηma f |) − (πmr f /pam f ) if pam f > 0; otherwise p am f = 0. Its subscription fee satisfies the
Lerner index condition in (13).
We conclude the subsection with a proposition comparing monopoly prices of a journal with full commitment to a journal that cannot commit. The proof is provided in Appendix A.
Proposition 12. Consider the comparative-statics exercise of a change from a journal that can commit
to subscription fees to a traditional journal that cannot. If the journal initially offered free submission
(pam f = 0), then fees and profits remain unchanged. If the journal initially charges for submission (p am f > 0)
and both forms of journal are strictly profitable, then its subscription fee strictly increases (p rm f < prmt ). If
in addition f a is log-concave, then its submission fee strictly decreases (p am f > pamt ).

9.2. Competing Journals with Full Commitment
Now suppose two or more journals with full commitment simultaneously set price vectors (p a , pr ) at the
outset of the game. We will restrict attention to equilibria in symmetric, pure strategies. It is obvious
that the main comparative-static result of interest—the effect of removing commitment on subscription fees
charged by competing journals—does not depend on this restriction. We saw that competing traditional
journals without commitment set monopoly subscription fees p rmt ; given that equilibrium subscription fees
will never exceed this, it must be that removing commitment weakly increases competing journals’ subscription fees in any equilibrium. Restricting attention to symmetric, pure strategies allows us to derive a
fuller characterization of equilibria, as we do in the next proposition.
Proposition 13. Consider competition among two or more journals with full commitment. The unique
equilibrium among those involving symmetric, pure strategies—if it exists—has free submission (i.e., p ac f =
0) and a subscription fee that is the lowest generating zero profit (i.e., p rc f satisfies π r (prc f ) = ca ). This
equilibrium exists for sufficiently low values of both c a and v̄a .
The proof in Appendix A provides necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of the specified
equilibrium. The fact that journals earn zero profit in the equilibrium follows from standard Bertrand logic:
if equilibrium profits were positive, a firm earning a fraction of market profit could capture essentially
all of the profit for itself by undercutting whichever of the fees is positive by an infinitesimal amount,
attracting all rival submissions. The zero-profit condition does not by itself ensure an equilibrium. If the
submission fee were positive, a deviating journal could attract a positive measure of author types just below
the marginal type using a different configuration of zero-profit prices involving a lower submission fee and
higher subscription fee. By continuity, some of this measure of authors would continue to be attracted if the
deviation involved infinitesimally higher subscription fees generating positive deviation profits. Submission
fee pac f = 0 is immune to this sort of deviation because it cannot be feasibly undercut. There is still the
prospect of an alternative sort of deviation, raising the submission fee and reducing the subscription fee
to attract a measure of authors with types near v̄ a . This deviation is not attractive to such authors if v̄ a is
sufficiently low because then even the highest value authors prefer low submission fees even if this means
high subscription fees and thus low readership.

26

It is straightforward to understand how removing commitment—which could capture the move from
print to digital journals—affects competitive prices. Able to commit, journals compete aggressively on
both prices, reducing the subscription fee all the way to the zero-profit level. If commitment is removed,
competition is relaxed among traditional journals. Unable to commit to subscription fees, they are unable to
compete on this dimension, and so subscription fees jump to the monopoly level, as Proposition 8 indicates.
The effect on submission fees is more complicated because Proposition 8 does not pin down a unique
submission fee charged by competing traditional journals. It is easy to show that if the parameters are
such that a symmetric, pure-strategy equilibrium exists for competing journals with commitment, then the
submission fee for competing traditional journals is pinned down: p act = 0. This is the same submission
fee as for competing journals with commitment: p ac f = 0. The prediction is that if the equilibrium among
competing journals with commitment (say during the print era) involves free submission, then after the loss
of commitment (say after the transition to digital journals), the submission fee should remain at 0 but the
subscription fee should jump.
Looking at Table 1, this is exactly what happened among top economics journals. In the print era
corresponding to the column for 1985, the mean for-profit submission fee was $50, 2.3 times that for the
non-profits. The relative submission fee hardly changed after the move to digital journals; indeed, the ratio
of mean for-profit to non-profit submission fee fell to 2.0 in 2001. By contrast, subscription fees soared, the
ratio of the for-profit to non-profit mean more than doubling from 3.8 in 1985 to 9.1 in 2001. We would
not argue that journals were perfect Bertrand competitors in 1985—the mean subscription fee for the listed
for-profits was almost four times that of the listed non-profits even then–but journals must have felt some
competitive pressure to attract the best submissions in their segment. That point aside, our model provides
a new explanation for the striking pattern in journal fees during the transition from print to digital journals.

10. Conclusion
In discussions of the market for academic journals, attention has focused on the issue of open access. This
attention raises a puzzle for economists versed in two-sided-market models. With the ability to set any nonnegative fee on both the author and reader side, why isn’t some interior solution with positive prices on both
sides preferable to one with a zero price on the reader side? To be sure, a range of plausible parameters could
render a corner solution optimal (either in terms of a journal’s private optimum or the social optimum). In
this paper we identify a potentially broader role for open access. The transition from print to digital journals
meant that institutions no longer retain permanent access to content on library shelves but effectively rent
access through a journal’s portal. A journal may like to promise that it will maintain low subscription fees
to attract submissions from authors who value wide readership into the future (with attendant increases in
cites and prestige). However, the journal may be unable to commit to a particular sequence of positive
subscription fees in the future, leading to a potential hold-up problem, whereby the journal monopolizes the
reader side once it attracts submissions rather than expanding readership as the authors would prefer. In
this paper, we identify the fundamental role of open access as a crude solution to this hold-up problem, a
commitment to zero subscription fees into the future, which can be credible even if some nuanced sequence
of positive fees would not be.
The comparison between traditional and open-access journals—which we undertake under various assumptions about market structure ranging from monopoly to Bertrand competition—raises a non-trivial
tradeoff, that between unbridled hold-up and a crude solution to it. The analysis raised some surprising theoretical possibilities. First, open access can be profitable for a commercial journal. The loss of revenue on
the reader side may be more than compensated by solving the hold-up problem on the author side, especially
if author values v a are quite high relative to other parameters. Second, there can be excessive open access in
the market, with, for example, a monopoly journal choosing open access when traditional access would be
socially more efficient. We provided concrete illustrations of this possibility in an example with low author
27

and reader benefits relative to the cost of processing articles c a . Third, traditional journals can earn substantial profits even if they are homogeneous and engage in Bertrand competition. This possibility is in part due
to their inability to commit to subscription fees making them unable to compete on this dimension. They
would still dissipate all profits through competition on the submission fee, but this competition is limited by
a constraint on the non-negativity of fees.
These results and others are not theoretical niceties but can contribute to an understanding of many of
the major developments in the market for academic journals. The jump in subscription fees from 1985 to
2001 documented in Table 1 is consistent with the loss of commitment power associated with the move from
print to digital journals. Focus on the variant of the model with competing journals and parameters such that
the submission fee is zero. Putting Propositions 8 and 13 together, we see that the removal of commitment,
corresponding to the move from print to digital journals, by itself can lead to a huge increase the subscription
fee, from the zero-profit level to the monopoly level, leaving submission fees at zero throughout. We would
not contend that journals were perfectly competitive in the print era and earned zero profits. Still, if journals
faced any competitive pressure, this would have moderated subscription fees resulting in a jump to the
monopoly level following the removal of commitment with the advent of digital access. Introducing a holdup problem would seem to be damaging for journals—indeed this is so for a monopoly journal—but with
competing journals, reducing commitment power weakens competition, increasing industry profits.
The model can also contribute to an understanding of the recent rise of “megajournals,” open-access
journals with low rejection rates that publish vast numbers of articles. This is the niche in which commercial
publishers have undertaken the most open-access activity. Proposition 6 captures the case of vanishing
journal quality controls, leading to vanishing reader benefits, in the limiting result θ r → 0. The proposition
guarantees that open access is more profitable than traditional access in this case.
The extension to bundling clarifies why this strategy has been such a powerful force in the market.
Institution-specific prices for the whole bundle of a publisher’s journal can extract most of the surplus from
the reader side while keeping readership high. Bergstrom et al. find that lower-tier universities in some
cases pay less per citation for for-profit bundles than they do for non-profit journals. Reaching most readers
this way, authors have little reason not to submit to journals published by large commercial bundlers as
long as submission there is cheap (which the bundler has every incentive to ensure). The model predicts
powerful incentives for commercial publishers to bundle and consolidate but, once complete, there are no
natural market forces to disrupt bundlers’ dominance. The only effect of competition among them would be
to reduce submission fees to zero; subscription revenues would be unchanged, essentially reaching the level
from first-degree price discrimination.
The extension to hybrid pricing helps explains developments regarding that pricing strategy in the market. Section 8.4 indicates that journals have at least a weak (and often strict) unilateral incentive to adopt
this strategy whether in a monopoly or competitive market. It just adds another pricing instrument allowing
more surplus to be extracted. We see that all the Elsevier journals in Table 1 adopted hybrid pricing, as have
most Springer and Wiley journals as well. While the option is pervasively offered, to date, it has only rarely
been taken up: in the five for-profit journals in Table 1 only 3% of articles published in 2015 paid for open
access. The model would predict this outcome in an environment in which hybrid pricing overlays bundling.
Authors already reach most of their target audience if they publish in a bundled journal, so few would pay
as much as, for example, Elsevier’s open-access premium of $1,800 to expand readership further.
The model points to a hierarchy of strategic effects. The advent of digital journals can lead to welfare
losses through the loss of commitment, resulting in monopoly subscription prices. Some of these losses can
be undone if the effect of hybrid pricing is layered in. The effect of hybrid pricing is largest with competing
journals, as two Bertrand competitors would compete their hybrid price structure down to the zero-profit
level. But if bundling is layered in as well, the lack of commitment and hybrid pricing would become
moot. Bundling would be regarded as quite efficient using a social-welfare standard as most authors are
served by low submission fees and most readers also served by the individualized pricing. A consumer28

surplus standard would produce a different picture, as most reader surplus is extracted by the publisher. This
is certainly one of the complaints about the current market, that libraries are effectively transferring their
budgets to large commercial publishers.
Our model could help one move beyond current events, speculating on future developments in the journals market. The Introduction mentioned the recent court injunction against Sci-Hub, a comprehensive
archive of pirated scholarly articles. If injunctions fail to curtail readers’ growing acceptance, Sci-Hub
could limit journals’ ability to charge positive subscription fees, all but destroying the traditional journal as
a business model. Our analysis could be used to predict the effect on welfare from the external imposition of
open access, whether the result of Sci-Hub’s operation or mandates coming from governments or funders.
We leave a full analysis of these speculative developments to future work. Our analysis suggests that welfare could go up or down, the direction depending on key variables such as the substitutability of existing
journals, the need for new investment to provide outlets for emerging areas of scholarship, and the relative
contribution of these new areas to knowledge.

29

Appendix A: Proofs of Propositions
This appendix provides proofs of the propositions stated in the text.
Proof of Proposition 1: Differentiating (2) with respect to p r gives
 a r r
 v̄r 
pa
p f (p )
cr − r r − vr dF r (vr ) + ca
r
Q
(p
)
Qr (pr )2
p
 v̄a

+

pa /Qr (pr )

(cr − va − pr ) f r (pr )dF a (pa ).

Differentiating (2) with respect to p a gives
 v̄r 
cr −
pr

pa
− vr dF r (vr ) + ca .
Qr (pr )

(A1)
(A2)

(A3)

If pas is an interior solution, then (A3) equals 0 by the first-order condition, implying that the first factor in
(A1) equals 0. If pas = 0, then the second factor in (A1) equals 0. In either case, only the term (A2) remains.
Setting (A2) equal to 0 and solving the resulting first-order condition for p r gives
 v̄a

cr −

a
a a
pa /Qr (pr ) v dF (v )
1 − F a (pa /Qr (pr )

= cr − E(va |va > pa /Qr (pr )).

The first-best subscription fee p rf b equals (A4) or 0, whichever is greater. Setting (A3) equal to 0 and solving
the resulting first-order condition for p a gives
ca −

 v̄r
pr

(vr − cr )dF r (vr ) = cr − E(vr − cr |vr > pr ) Pr(vr > pr ).

(A4)

The first-best submission fee p af b equals (A4) or 0, whichever is greater.2
Proof of Proposition 4: We prove the result by nesting the objective functions of the two types of journal
together using the parameter θ and then applying Edlin and Shannon’s (1998) Strict Monotonicity Theorem
1 to provide the necessary comparative statics result with respect to θ.
Nesting the ex-ante expected profit function for a traditional journal, (5), with that for an open-access
journal, (7), yields



pa
a
a
r
r
a
(A5)
πm = [p − c + (1 − θ)πmt − θc ] 1 − F
(1 − θ)qrmt + θ

 a 
p
a
a
,
(A6)
= A(p , θ) 1 − F
B(θ)
where θ = 0 for a traditional journal and θ = 1 for an open-access journal. A few remarks about this objective
function are in order. First, the reader can verify that (A5) is a total (ex-ante) profit function because it
includes the continuation profits from ex post stages. Note second that this is a single-dimensional choice
r and qr are independent of p a . For
problem. Only p a is an endogenous variable; the rest including π mt
mt
r
− θcr and B(θ) ≡ (1 − θ)qrmt + θ for those recurring
brevity, we substituted A(p a , θ) ≡ pa − ca + (1 − θ)πmt
expressions in (A6).

30

The first-order condition associated with (A6) is
a
a
∂πm
a A(p , θ) f
,
=
1
−
F
−
∂ pa
B(θ)

(A7)

suppressing the argument of F a , shown in (A5), as well as of f a . Differentiating this condition again,
 r


(1 − qrmt ) f a πmt
+ cr pa + A(pa , θ) A(pa , θ)pa f a
∂ 2 πm
=
+
+
.
(A8)
∂ pa ∂θ
B(θ)
1 − qrmt
B(θ)
B(θ)2
fa
To determine the sign of (A8), we now impose the condition that f a is log-concave. By Corollary 2 of
Bagnoli and Bergstrom (2005), the failure rate r a = f a /(1 − F a ) is nondecreasing. Thus
f a
−fa
−B(θ)
.
≥
=
a
a
f
1−F
A(pa , θ)

(A9)

The first step in (A9) follows from r a ≥ 0. The second step follows from setting the first-order condition
(A7) equal to 0 and rearranging. Substituting (A9) into (A8) and collecting terms yields
 r

∂ 2 πm
(1 − qrmt ) f a πmt
+ cr A(pa , θ)
≥
.
(A10)
+
∂ pa ∂θ
B(θ)
1 − qrmt
B(θ)
The right-hand side is positive because all the factors are. To see this, the fact that the monopoly journal
r
− θcr = A(pa , θ) is positive. It is obvious that
earns positive profit implies the unit margin p a − ca + (1 − θ)πmt
B(θ) and the other factors are also positive.
We have thus shown that (A5) has strictly increasing marginal returns. Proposition 3 states that p amo is
an interior solution. Strict Monotonicity Theorem 1 then implies p amo > pamt .
The text following the proposition promises a counterexample having non-log-concave f a in which
pamo < pamt . This counterexample is provided in online Appendix B. 2
Proof of Proposition 5: To prove the first statement of the proposition, let random variable ω a = θa va
denote the scaled author value, with distribution function Φ a , density φa , and support [0, ω̄ a ]. Total profit for
a monopoly traditional journal is

 a 
p
a
a
r
a
−
c
+
π
)
1
−
Φ
(p
(A11)
πmt = max
mt
pa ≥0
qrmt

 a

p
a
a
r
a
(p − c + πmt ) 1 − F
(A12)
= max
pa ≥0
θa qrmt

r
a
r a πmt − c
z
+
(A13)
q
[1 − F a (za )]
= θa max
mt
za ≥0
θa

π r − ca
a
(A14)
[1 − F a (zamt )],
= θ qrmt zamt + mt a
θ
where zamt is the maximizer of (A13). Equation (A12) follows from the formula for the distribution function
r
, and (A14) from the
of a transformed random variable, (A13) from the change of variables z a = pa /θa qtm
a
definition of z mt as a maximizer. Applying similar steps to the total profit for a monopoly open-access
journal,
{(pa − ca − cr )[1 − Φa (pa )]}
πmo = max
a
p ≥0

31

(A15)


ca + cr
= θa zamo − a
θ

[1 − F a (zamo )],

(A16)

where zamo maximizes (A16).
Before proceeding, we prove two useful equalities. First,
zamo ,
lim zamt = argmax{za [1 − F a (za )]} = lim
a

θa →∞

θ →∞

za ≥0

(A17)

where the first equality holds because z amt maximizes (A13) and the second because z amo maximizes (A16).
But (A17) implies
{zamt [1 − F a (zamt )]} = lim
{zamo [1 − F a (zamo )]}.
(A18)
lim
a
a
θ →∞

θ →∞

Returning to the proof, substituting from (A14) and (A16) and simplifying yields

Thus

[qr za + (π r − ca )/θa ][1 − F a (zamt )]
πmt
.
= mta mt a mt r a
πmo
[zmo − (c + c )/θ ][1 − F a (zamo )]

(A19)

qr limθa →∞ {zamt [1 − F a (zamt )]
πmt
= qrmt ,
= mt
→∞ πmo
limθa →∞ {zamo [1 − F a (zamo )]}

(A20)

lim
a

θ

where the first equality follows from taking limits in (A19) and the second follows from (A18). Our desired
result follows if q rmt < 1. To see this, note that p rmt > 0 by Proposition 2. Furthermore, the support of v r
begins at 0. Hence the interval [0, p rmt ] has positive measure. Therefore q rmt < 1. Substituting back into
(A20) implies π mt < πmo for sufficiently high θ a .
The second statement is proved similarly. The proof is provided in online Appendix B. 2
Proof of Proposition 7: To prove the first statement of the proposition, let random variable ω a = θa va
denote the scaled reader value, with distribution function, density, and support as given in the proof of
Proposition 5. Equilibrium social welfare with a monopoly traditional journal is
 v̄r

 ω̄a
(ω a + vr − cr )dF r (vr ) − ca φa (ω a )dω a
(A21)
SWmt =
pamt /qrmt
prmt
 v̄r
  a
 ω̄a
ω
a
r
r
r r
a
(ω + v − c )dF (v ) − c f a
(A22)
dω a
=
θa
pamt /qrmt
prmt
 v̄r

 v̄a
a a
r
r
r r
a
(θ v + v − c )dF (v ) − c dF a (va )
(A23)
=
pamt /θa qrmt
prmt


 v̄a
 v̄r
1
(vr − cr )dF r (vr ) − ca dF a (va ),
(A24)
qrmt va + a
= θa
θ
zamt
prmt
where (A21) follows from (2), (A22) from the formula for the density of a transformed random variable,
(A23) by the change of variables ω a = θa va in the integral, and (A24) by substituting the maximizer z amt of
(A13) and rearranging. Similar steps show that equilibrium social welfare with a monopoly open-access
journal is

 ω̄a  v̄r
a
r
r
r r
a
(ω + v − c )dF (v ) − c φa (ω a )dω a
(A25)
SWmo =
pamo

= θa

 v̄a
zamo

0

va +

1
[E(vr ) − ca − cr ] dF a (va ),
θa

32

(A26)

where zamo maximizes (A16). Dividing,
 v̄a

SWmt
=
SWmo

zamt

1
qrmt va + a
θ
 v̄a
zamo



prmt

va +

Taking limits,
qrmt

SWmt
= 
lim
θa →∞ SWmo

v̄r


(v − c )dF (v ) − c
a

r

r

r

a

dF a (va )

1
[E(vr ) − ca − cr ] dF a (va )
θa
 v̄a
limθ a →∞ zamt

v̄a

(A27)

va dF a (va )
= qrmt .

(A28)

v dF (v )
a

limθ a →∞ zamo

.

a

a

The first equality follows from substituting limits. The second follows from lim θa →∞ zamt = limθa →∞ zam0 by
(A17). The proof of Proposition 5 showed q rmt < 1. The first statement of the proposition then follows.
The results for profits and social welfare in the limit as θ a → 0 in the second statement of the proposition
either follow from the statement of Proposition 6 or its proof. See online Appendix B for the full details. 2
Proof of Proposition 8: Suppose a traditional journal charging p a receives a submission. Its continuation
r
, i.e., the margin earned on the author plus the expected continuation profit earned from
profit is p a − ca + πmt
r . Standard
the reader. Setting this continuation profit equal to zero yields zero-profit submission fee c a − πmt
a
a
r
a
r
r
< 0,
arguments used in the Bertrand game apply here to show that p ct = c − πmt if c − πmt ≥ 0. If ca − πmt
the zero-profit submission fee violates the non-negativity constraint on prices. The equilibrium submission
fee is then determined by the binding constraint: p act = 0. 2
Proof of Proposition 10: To prove the first statement of the proposition, let random variable ω a = θa va
denote the scaled reader value, with distribution function, density, and support as given in the proof of
Proposition 5. We will first compute the profit of an open-access journal entering into an existing market
with some traditional journals, i.e., |T | ≥ 1, and no open-access journals, i.e., |O| = 0. The open-access
journal serves author types ω a satisfying ω a − pa > qrmt ω a − pta given it charges p a and the traditional journals
charge pta . Thus its demand is
 a a
a p − pt
,
1−Φ
1 − qrmt
and its producer surplus (profit not including entry cost k o ) is


 a a 


pa
a
a
r
a p − pt
a
a
r
a
[p − (c + c )] 1 − Φ
[p − (c + c )] 1 − Φ
≥ max
max
pa ≥0
pa ≥0
1 − qrmt
1 − qrmt


a
r
r
a c +c
)z
−
(1
−
q
[1 − F a (za )].
= θa max
mt
za ≥0
θa

(A29)
(A30)

Equation (A29) follows from p ta ≥ 0 and (A30) from steps similar to (A11)–(A14) here using the change of
variables za = pa /(1 − qrmt )θa . The limit of (A30) as θ a → ∞ equals
θa ,
(1 − qrmt )zaco [1 − F a (zaco)] lim
a
θ →∞

(A31)

where zaco = argmaxza ≥0 za [1 − F a (za )].
The producer surplus in equation (A31) is infinite, thus exceeding any finite entry cost k o for sufficiently
high θ a . The profit from entering a market with no traditional journals is no lower than that with some
33

traditional journals. This proves that equilibrium involves at least one open-access journal for sufficiently
high θ a .
We next consider the gain in social welfare from adding two competing open-access journals to a market
with at least one traditional journal. It may be more efficient to add just one, but if the gain from adding two
is positive, this suffices to show that adding some open-access journals is efficient. The gain from adding
open-access journals is even greater if the market starts with no traditional journals, so our demonstration
suffices to show that the socially efficient market structure involves some open access.
Adding competing open-access journals has two beneficial effects on social welfare. As Figure 4 shows,
it causes at least a weak decline in traditional journals’ equilibrium submission fee, leading more authors to
be served. We will put aside this benefit, holding constant traditional journals’ subscription fee at at the preentry level, denoted pta . The second benefit is that the authors who now submit to the open-access journal
pick up the readers who did not subscribe at the monopoly price. Just accounting for this benefit, the gain
in social welfare equals
 pr

 ω̄a
mt
a
r
r
r r
a
(ω + v − c )dF (v ) − c φa (ω a )dω a .
(A32)
ca +cr −pa
1−qrmt

t

0

To derive the lower limit on the outer integral, note that the open-access journals serve author types ω a
satisfying ω a − (ca + cr ) > qrmt ω a − pta given they charge p aco = ca + cr by Proposition 9 and given journals are
assumed to maintain submission fee p ta . This leads to the expression for the marginal type served by the
open-access journals appearing in the lower limit of the outer integral. Because p ta ≥ 0 and vr ≥ 0 and (A32)
is nondecreasing in those variables, (A32) weakly exceeds

 ω̄a  pr
mt
a
r
r r
a
(ω − c ) dF (v ) − c φa (ω a )dω a
(A33)
ca +cr
0

1−qrmt



 v̄a

=



=

ca +cr
θ a (1−qrmt )
v̄a
ca +cr
θ a (1−qrmt )

0

≥ F

(prmt )


(θa va − cr ) dF r (vr ) − ca dF a (va )

(A34)

[(θa va − cr )F r (prmt ) − ca ] dF a (va )

≥ θa F r (prmt )
r

prmt

 v̄a
ca +cr
θ a (1−qrmt )

(A35)

va dF a (va ) − (ca + cr )


 a r
c +c
a
a
θ E(v ) −
1 − qrmt


F

a

ca + cr
θa (1 − qrmt )

(A36)

− (ca + cr ).

(A37)

Equation (A34) follows from steps similar to (A21)–(A24) and (A35) by integration. Equation (A36) holds
because ca and cr are integrated over the values’ partial supports in (A35) but their whole supports in (A37).
Equation (A37) follows from noting
E(v ) =
a

≤

 v̄a


v dF (v ) +
a

ca +cr
θ a (1−qrmt )
v̄a
ca +cr
θ a (1−qrmt

a



ca +cr
θ a (1−qrmt )

a

0

va dF a (va )



 a r
ca + cr
c +c
a
F
v dF (v ) + a
r
a
θ (1 − qmt )
θ (1 − qrmt )
)
a

a

a

and rearranging. The limit of (A37) as θ a → ∞ equals
θa − (ca + cr ),
F r (prmt )E(va ) lim
a
θ →∞

34

(A38)

which is infinite, exceeding the 2k o social cost associated with the entry of the two open-access journals for
any finite ko .
We have thus proved the first statement of the proposition regarding the limit θ a → ∞. Turn to the second
statement regarding the limit θ a → 0. An open-access journal charges a submission fee of at least c a + cr ,
which is positive by the maintained assumption c a > 0. In the limit, therefore, it serves no authors, generating
neither sufficient producer or social surplus to cover the entry cost k o . Hence there is no open-access entry
in equilibrium or in the socially optimal market structure.
If a traditional journal enters and charges a submission fee of 0, it serves all authors, earning profit (net
r − k , which is positive under the maintained assumption π a > ca + k . 2
of entry cost) 0 − c a + πmt
t
t
mt
Proof of Proposition 12: Suppose p am f = 0. Substituting into (11), the journal’s profit under full commitment is max pr ≥0 [(pr − cr )Qr (pr ) − ca ] because its quantity is Q a (0, qrm f ) = 1. The price maximizing this
commitment profit also maximizes (3): p rm f = prmt . The traditional journal can attain the full-commitment
profit bound by setting p amt = pam f = 0, which must be an optimum for the traditional journal.
Suppose for the remainder of the proof that p am f > 0 and that the journal is strictly profitable whether it
is traditional or has full commitment.
r
≤ 0, violating the
We will first show p rm f < prmt . We know prmt > 0. If instead prmt = 0, then πmt
r
r
r
r
r
r
maintained assumption max pr ≥0 π (p ) > 0 because max pr ≥0 π (p ) = πmt . If pm f = 0, we are done showing
prm f < prmt . We will proceed with the comparison of subscription fees by assuming p rm f > 0.
By Proposition 11, the fees for the journal with full commitment satisfy the first-order condition found
by differentiating (11) with respect to p r :
(pam f − ca + πmr f )Qa2 (pam f , qrm f )Qr(prm f ) + qam f Qr (prm f ) + (prm f − cr )Qr(prm f ) = 0.

(A39)

We will proceed by signing the factors in (A39). Given the journal is strictly profitable under full commitment, (pam f − ca + πmr f )qam f > 0, implying p am f − ca + πmr f > 0 and qam f > 0. But 0 < qam f = Qa (pam f , qrm f ) =
1 − F a (pam f /qrm f ) implies p am f /qrm f < v̄a . Further, pam f > 0 and qrm f ≥ 0 imply p am f /qrm f > 0. Combining these facts, p am f /qrm f ∈ (0, v̄a ), implying f a (pam f /qrm f ) > 0. The fact that pam f /qrm f < v̄a also implies
qrm f > 0. We have Qa2 (pam f , qrm f ) = pam f (qrm f )−2 f a (pam f /qrm f ) > 0 because all three factors are positive. The
fact that qrm f > 0 implies p rm f < v̄r . Together with the maintained assumption p rm f > 0, we have prm f ∈ (0, v̄r ),
implying f r (prm f ) > 0, implying Q r (prm f ) = − f r (prm f ) < 0. Substituting the inequalities p am f − ca + πmr f > 0,
Qa2 (pam f , qrm f ) > 0,
Now prm f < v̄r ; otherwise q rm f = 0. Combined with the maintained assumption p rm f > 0, Qr (prm f ) < 0,
and qam f > 0 into (A39) yields
(A40)
Qr (prm f ) + (prm f − cr )Qr (prm f ) > 0,
implying p rm f < prmt because prmt satisfies a condition analogous to (A40) with equality. This completes the
comparison of subscription fees.
Turn to the comparison of submission fees. The proof that p am f > pamt , which uses the log-concavity of
f a , is similar to the proof of Proposition 4. We relegate it to online Appendix B for space considerations. 2
Proof of Proposition 13: Define prices p ac f = 0 and
prc f = inf{pr ≥ 0|π r (pr ) ≥ ca }.

(A41)

In words, prc f is the lowest subscription fee generating zero profit for a journal with free submissions. If
infimum in (A41) is taken over an empty set, then by definition of an infimum, p rc f = ∞.

35

Consider the following conditions, which we will go on to show are necessary and sufficient for the
existence of the equilibrium in the statement of the proposition:

v̄a ≤

sup

r
ca ≤ πmt


π r (prc f ) − π r (pr )

pr ∈[0,prc f )

Qr (pr ) − Qr (prc f )

(A42)
.

(A43)

To understand the role of these conditions, (A42) ensures that the cost of serving authors is not so high that
the journal cannot cover its costs with profit from the reader side alone (which it must do when it charges
no submission fee). Condition (A43) ensures that authors prefer (p ac f , prc f ) to subsidizing an expanded
readership through higher submission fees.
The proof proceeds in three steps. Step 1 will show that if (A42) and (A43) hold, then all journals
charging (pac f , prc f ) is an equilibrium. Step 2 will show that if these conditions hold, there is no other
symmetric, pure-strategy equilibrium. Step 3 will show that if either (A42) or (A43) is violated, there exists
no equilibrium in symmetric, pure strategies.
Step 1: Assume (A42) and (A43) hold. We will show no journal has a profitable deviation from
(pac f , prc f ). By (A42), the set over which the infimum in (A41) is taken is nonempty, implying p rc f is the
lowest price satisfying π r (prc f ) = ca . Total journal profit in the market is [p ac f − ca + π r (prc f )]qac f = 0 because
pac f = 0 and π r (pr ) = ca . Hence each journal earns zero expected profit. For a deviation ( p̃ a , p̃r ) to be
profitable, it must attract some author types, which requires either that p̃ a < pac f or p̃r < prc f . The former
inequality is infeasible as it would lead to p̃ a < 0. So suppose p̃ r < prc f . If the deviation attracts a positive measure of author types, there must exist type v a ∈ (0, v̄a ) obtaining at least as much surplus from the
deviating journal as non-deviating ones: v a Qr ( p̃r ) − p̃a ≥ va Qr (prc f ) − pac f . Rearranging and noting p ac f = 0,
p̃a ≤ va [Qr ( p̃r ) − Qr (prc f )]

(A44)

(prc f )]
r

(A45)

< v̄ [Q ( p̃ ) − Q
a

r

r

r

π (prc f ) − π r ( p̃
a
r r

≤
= c − π ( p̃ ).
r

)

(A46)
(A47)

Condition (A45) follows from v a < v̄a and p̃r < prc f , which implies Q r ( p̃r ) > Qr (prc f ). Condition (A46)
follows from a rearrangement of (A43). Condition (A47) follows from π r (prc f ) = ca . The deviating journal’s
profit is [ p̃a − ca + π r ( p̃r )]Qa ( p̃a , Qr ( p̃r )). This is non-positive because p̃ a − ca + π r ( p̃r ) < 0 by (A44)–(A47).
Hence there is no strictly profitable deviation.
Step 2: Assume (A42) and (A43) hold. Suppose journals set prices ( p̃ a , p̃r ) with either p̃ a = pac f or
r
p̃ = prc f . We will show that a journal has a profitable deviation. If any journal earns negative expected
profit, it would gain from deviating to infinite prices, effectively exiting the market. So journals all earn
non-negative expected profit, implying total market profit is non-negative. Suppose total market profit,
[ p̃a − ca + π r ( p̃r )]Qa ( p̃a , Qr ( p̃r )),

(A48)

is positive. One of the competing journals must only be earning a fraction of this. Applying standard
Bertrand logic, this journal can undercut whichever of the prices ( p̃ a , p̃r ) is positive by an infinitesimal
amount, capturing essentially all the profit (A48) for itself. So assume that (A48) equals 0. If the outcome
is non-trivial, some authors must be served: i.e., Q a ( p̃a , Qr ( p̃r )) > 0. But then for (A48) to equal 0, the
margin on each author must equal 0: i.e., p̃ a − ca + π r ( p̃r ) = 0. It can be shown that if p̃ a = 0, then a journal
has an incentive to deviate unless p̃ r = prc f . But this is the equilibrium in the statement of the proposition.
So suppose p̃ a > 0. Let ṽa be the marginal author type served: i.e., ṽ a = p̃a /Qr ( p̃r ). Consider a deviation
36

from ( p̃a , p̃r ) to ( p̃˜a , p̃˜r ), where p̃˜a = 0 and p̃˜r = prmt . All author types v a ∈ (0, ṽa ) obtain negative surplus
va Qr ( p̃r ) − p̃a < 0 from the original prices but positive surplus v a Qr (prmt ) from the deviating prices, so would
be attracted by the deviating prices, generating demand of at least F a (ṽa ). Deviating profit is at least
r
− ca )F a (ṽa ) > 0.
[ p̃˜a − ca + π r ( p̃˜ r )]F a (ṽa ) = (πmt

We have shown that no price vector ( p̃ a , p̃r ) is immune to deviations except for the one stated in the proposition.
Step 3: Consider an outcome in which all journals set the price vector ( p̃ a , p̃r ). The arguments in the
previous step show more general that a journal has an incentive to deviate unless p̃ a − ca + π r ( p̃r ) = 0 and
p̃a = 0. The only such candidate equilibrium is the one in the statement of the proposition: (p ac f , prc f ). We
will show this is not an equilibrium (at least a non-trivial one with customers on both sides) if either (A42)
or (A43) is violated. Suppose (A42) is violated. Then the set over which the infimum in (A41) is taken is
empty, implying p rc f = ∞, implying no readers are served. Suppose instead that (A42) holds but (A43) is
violated. Given (A43) is violated, there exists p̃˜r ∈ [0, prc f ) such that
v̄a [Qr ( p̃˜r ) − Qr (prc f )] > π r (prc f ) − π r ( p̃˜r ) = ca − π r ( p̃˜r ).

(A49)

Consider a deviation to the subscription fee p̃˜r and submission fee

1  a r ˜r
v̄ [Q ( p̃ ) − Qr (prc f )] + ca − π r ( p̃˜a ) .
p̃˜a =
2

(A50)

It is easy to verify that these deviating prices are feasible. We will show the deviation is profitable. The
deviation attracts author type v̄ a :
v̄a Qr ( p̃˜r ) − p̃˜a =


1 a r r
v̄ [Q ( p̃˜ ) − Qr (prc f )] − [ca − π r ( p̃˜r )] > v̄a Qr (prc f ),
2

(A51)

where the equality follows from substituting for p̃˜a from (A50) and the inequality follows from replacing
ca − π r ( p̃˜ r ) with the left-hand side of (A49). By continuity, a measure of types below v̄ a are also attracted,
so the deviating journal obtains positive author demand. The profit per author is

1  a r ˜r
v̄ [Q ( p̃ ) − Qr (prc f )] − [ca − π r ( p̃˜r )] ,
p̃˜a − ca + π r ( p̃˜r ) =
2

(A52)

substituting for p̃˜a from (A50). Replacing ca − π r ( p̃˜r ) by the left-hand side of (A49) shows that (A52) is
positive, implying the deviation is profitable, implying ( p̃ a , p̃r ) cannot be an equilibrium. 2

37

References
Ambrus, Atilla and Rossella Argenziano. (2009) “Asymmetric Networks in Two-Sided Markets,” American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics 1: 17–52.
Anderson, Simon P. and Stephen Coate. (2005) “Market Provision of Broadcasting: A Welfare Analysis,”
Review of Economic Studies 72: 947–972.
Antelman, Kristin. (2004) “Do Open-Access Articles Have a Greater Research Impact?” College and Research Libraries 65: 372–382.
Armstrong, Mark. (2006) “Competition in Two-Sided Markets,” Rand Journal of Economics 37: 668–691.
Armstrong, Mark. (2009) “Collection Sales: Good or Bad for Journals?” Economic Inquiry 48: 163–176.
Armstrong, Mark. (2014) “Opening Access to Research,” University of Oxford working paper.
Bagnoli, Mark and Theodore C. Bergstrom. (2005) “Log-concave Probability and its Applications,” Economic Theory 26: 445–469.
Baumol, William J. and J. Gregory Sidak. (1994) “The Pricing of Inputs Sold to Competitors,” Yale Journal
on Regulation 11: 171–202.
Bergstrom, Theodore C. (2001) “Free Labor for Costly Journals?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15:
183–198.
Bergstrom, Theodore C. and Carl T. Bergstrom. (2004) “The Costs and Benefits of Library Site Licenses
to Academic Journals,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101: 897–902.
Bergstrom, Theodore C., Paul N. Courant, R. Preston McAfee, and Michael A. Williams. (2014) “Evaluating Big Deal Journal Bundles,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111: 9425–9430.
Binfield, Peter. (2013) “Open Access MegaJournals: Have They Changed Everything?” Creative Commons, October 23. Accessed on September 9, 2014 from http://creativecommons.org.nz/2013/10/open-access-megajournals-have-they-changed-everything.
Bohannon, John. (2013) “Who’s Afraid of Peer Review,” Science 342: 60–65.
Choi, Jay Pil and Byung-Cheol Kim. (2010) “Net Neutrality and Investment Incentives,” Rand Journal of
Economics 41: 446–471.
Curry, Stephen. (2012) “PLoS ONE: From the Public Library of Sloppiness?” Occam’s Typewriter April 1.
Accessed September 9, 2014 from http://occamstypewriter.org/scurry/2012/04/01/plos1-public-libraryof-sloppiness.
Davis, Philip M., et al. (2008) “Open Access Publishing, Article Downloads, and Citations: Randomized
Controlled Trial,” British Medical Journal 337: 331–345.
Dewatripont, Mathias, et al. (2006) Study on the Economic and Technical Evolution of the Scientific Publication Markets in Europe. Brussels: European Commission Directorate General for Research.
Economides, Nicholas and Benjamin E. Hermalin. (2011) “The Economics of Network Neutrality,” Rand
Journal of Economics 43: 602–629.

38

Edlin, Aaron S. and Chris Shannon. (1998) “Strict Monotonicity in Comparative Statics,” Journal of Economic Theory 81: 201–219.
Gargouri, Yassine, et al. (2010) “Self-Selected or Mandated, Open Access Increases Citation Impact for
Higher Quality Research,” PLoS One 5: e13636.
Gaule, Patrick and Nicolas Maystre. (2011) “Getting Cited: Does Open Access Help?” Research Policy 40:
1332–1338.
Grout, Paul A. (1984) “Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash Bargaining
Approach,” Econometrica 52: 449–460.
Hagiu, Andrei. (2006) “Pricing and Commitment by Two-Sided Platforms,” Rand Journal of Economics
37: 720–737.
Hagiu, Andrei. (2009) “Two-Sided Platforms: Product Variety and Pricing Structures,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 18: 1011–1043.
Halaburda, Hanna and Yaron Yehezkel. (2013) “Platform Competition under Asymmetric Information,”
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5: 22–68.
Harnad, Steven and Tim Brody. (2004) “Comparing the Impact of Open Access (OA) vs. Non-OA Articles in the Same Journals,” D-Lib Magazine, vol. 10, June. Accessed on October 15, 2004 from
http://www.dlib.org.
Howard, Jennifer. (2010) “U. of California Tries Just Saying No to Rising Journal Costs,” Chronicle of
Higher Education, June 8.
Jeon, Doh-Shin and Domenico Menicucci. (2006) “Bundling Electronic Journals and Competition among
Publishers,” Journal of the European Economic Association 4: 1038–1083.
Jeon, Doh-Shin and Domenico Menicucci. (2011) “Interconnection among Academic Journal Websites:
Multilateral Versus Bilateral Interconnection,” Rand Journal of Economics 42: 363–386.
Jeon, Doh-Shin and Jean-Charles Rochet. (2010) “The Pricing of Academic Journals: A Two-Sided Market
Perspective,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2: 222–255.
Jullien, Bruno. (2011) “Competition in Multi-Sided Markets: Divide and Conquer,” American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics 3: 186–219.
Larsen, Peder Olesen and Markus von Ins. (2010) “The Rate of Growth in Scientific Publication and the
Decline in Coverage Provided by Science Citation Index,” Scientometrics 84: 575–603.
Lawrence, Steve. (2001) “Free Online Availability Substantially Increases a Paper’s Impact,” Nature (correspondence) 411: 521.
McCabe, Mark. (2002) “Journal Pricing and Mergers: A Portfolio Approach,” American Economic Review
92: 259–269.
McCabe, Mark. (2004) “Information Goods and Endogenous Pricing Strategies: The Case of Academic
Journals,” Economics Bulletin 12 (issue 10): 1–11.
McCabe, Mark and Christopher M. Snyder. (2005) “Open Access and Academic Journal Quality,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 95: 453–458.
39

McCabe, Mark and Christopher M. Snyder. (2007) “Academic Journal Pricing in a Digital Age: A TwoSided-Market Model,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy (Contributions) vol. 7, no. 1,
article 2.
McCabe, Mark and Christopher M. Snyder. (2014) “Identifying the Effect of Open Access on Citations
Using a Panel of Science Journals,” Economic Inquiry 52: 1284–1300.
McCabe, Mark and Christopher M. Snyder. (2015) “Does Online Availability Increase Citations? Theory
and Evidence from a Panel of Economics and Business Journals,” Review of Economics and Statistics
97: 144–165.
McCabe, Mark, Christopher M. Snyder, and Anna Fagin. (2013) “Open Access Versus Traditional Journal Pricing: Using a Simple ‘Platform Market’ Model to Understand Which Will Win (and Which
Should),” Journal of Academic Librarianship 39: 11–19.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts. (1982) “Limit Pricing and Entry Under Incomplete Information: An
Equilibrium Analysis,” Econometrica 50: 443–460.
Murphy, Kate. (2016) “Should All Research Papers Be Free?” New York Times, March 13, p. SR6.
Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole. (2006) “Two-Sided Markets: A Progress Report,” Rand Journal of
Economics 37: 645–667.
Shaked, Avner and John Sutton. (1982) “Relaxing Price Competition through Product Differentiation,”
Review of Economic Studies 49: 3–13.
Varmus, Harold. (2009) The Art and Politics of Science. New York: Norton.
Weiss, Rick. (2003) “A Fight for Free Access to Medical Research: Online Plan Challenges Publishers’
Dominance,” Washington Post, August 5, page A1.
Weyl, E. Glen. (2010) “A Price Theory of Multi-Sided Platforms,” American Economic Review 100: 1642–
1672.
White, Alexander and E. Glen Weyl. (2012) “Insulated Platform Competition,” NET Institute Working
Paper No. 10–17.
Willinsky, John. (2006) The Access Principle: The Case for Open Access to Research and Scholarship.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (1999) “Distribution-Free Estimation of Some Nonlinear Panel Data Models,”
Journal of Econometrics 90: 77–97.

40

