                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DIGITAL CURRENCIES, DECENTRALIZED LEDGERS, AND THE FUTURE OF
                           CENTRAL BANKING

                                         Max Raskin
                                        David Yermack

                                      Working Paper 22238
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22238


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2016




The authors thank Daniel Alter, Michael McConnell and Geoffrey Miller for helpful comments.
Part of this research was completed while Yermack was a visiting professor at Erasmus
University Rotterdam. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Max Raskin and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Digital Currencies, Decentralized Ledgers, and the Future of Central Banking
Max Raskin and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 22238
May 2016
JEL No. E42,E51,E52,E58,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

Central banking in an age of digital currencies is a fast-developing topic in monetary economics.
Algorithmic digital currencies such as bitcoin appear to be viable competitors to central bank fiat
currency, and their presence in the marketplace may pressure central banks to pursue tighter
monetary policy. More interestingly, the blockchain technology behind digital currencies has the
potential to improve central banks’ payment and clearing operations, and possibly to serve as a
platform from which central banks might launch their own digital currencies. A sovereign digital
currency could have profound implications for the banking system, narrowing the relationship
between citizens and central banks and removing the need for the public to keep deposits in
fractional reserve commercial banks. Debates over the wisdom of these policies have led to a
revival of interest in classical monetary economics.


Max Raskin
New York University School of Law
New York, NY 10012
maxraskin@nyu.edu

David Yermack
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
                Digital currencies, decentralized ledgers,
                      and the future of central banking




I.     Introduction
       Digital currencies were created to compete with central banks.
       Nakamoto’s (2008) design of bitcoin, as a “Peer to Peer Electronic Cash System,” was
intended to allow network members to transfer value directly between each other without any
role for a trusted third party, such as a central bank. Few people noticed the launch of bitcoin in
early 2009, but its creator, still unknown today, had a clear political agenda. The first block of
bitcoins was accompanied by the encoded text, “The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of
second bailout for banks.” Appearing near the lowest depths of the global financial crisis, this
headline from The Times provided an implicit commentary on the fragility of the world banking
system and the inability of central banks to do anything about it. Bitcoin’s anonymous creators
symbolically hard-coded this message into the “genesis block” of their main innovation, the
blockchain. They could hardly have expected that within five years, their blockchain and its
shared ledger would be viewed as major breakthroughs in financial record-keeping, with central
banks, stock exchanges, and numerous other financial markets beginning to co-opt the disruptive
technology in order to modernize their own operations.
       This chapter evaluates the challenges and opportunities for central banks in a world that
appears to have been irreversibly changed by the arrival of algorithmic digital currencies. The
world economy had been moving away from hard currency in favor of electronic payment
systems for many years before the arrival of bitcoin. Such an innovation was not unexpected,
with prominent economists of past generations such as John Nash (2002) and Milton Friedman
speaking openly of the opportunities for an algorithmic currency, issued according to a
mathematically fixed policy rule, to usurp the role of central banks and discretionary monetary




                                                 1
policy.1 Yet bitcoin represented a radical departure from past schemes, with a novel focus on
decentralized governance and record-keeping that placed control of money in the hands of its
users, rather than a committee of elected politicians or a circle of enlightened experts. The
equations underlying bitcoin stipulated a predetermined and transparent rate of monetary growth,
pre-empting the use of discretionary monetary policy that might debase the currency in response
to an economic slump.
         At the time of this writing, bitcoin faces a significant governance issue, as its community
of users has been unable to reach consensus about how to scale its network to accommodate
rapid growth in transaction volume. Ironically, the lack of political leadership that seemed so
important in the design of bitcoin is an obstacle in settling on a strategy for the currency to grow.
Even as the bitcoin network struggles with delays and bottlenecks, blockchains and distributed
ledger innovations have been incorporated by hundreds of knock-off imitator digital currencies.
These innovations have also inspired financiers, regulators, and academics to reconsider the first
principles of central banking, including whether central banks should reinvent their national
currencies in algorithmic form, residing on national blockchains and shared ledgers overseen by
the very institutions that bitcoin’s creators wished to do away with.
         Central banking in an age of digital currencies is a fast-developing topic in monetary
economics. Algorithmic digital currencies such as bitcoin appear to be viable competitors to
central bank fiat currency, and their presence in the marketplace may pressure central banks to
pursue tighter monetary policy. However, the technology behind digital currencies may be co-
opted by central banks themselves, giving them more power and greater control over monetary
policy than ever before. This chapter provides a brief introduction to these topics, with the
caveat that the field is changing so quickly that new issues and opportunities seem likely to re-
shape the research agenda frequently. Section II provides a brief overview of the structure of
bitcoin and alternative digital currencies. Section III considers how central banks have reacted to
competition from alternative currencies, outside the official national monetary base. Section IV
discusses implications of the possibility that central banks may issue their own digital currencies

1
  See Babbage (2011), which provides a concise introduction to the structure of bitcoin and begins by recounting
Friedman’s oft-repeated calls for replacing the U.S. Federal Reserve System with an automated rule for money
creation. In a videotaped 1999 interview that has been widely shared on the Internet, Friedman seemed to anticipate
the arrival of bitcoin ten years later when he stated, “I think that the Internet is going to be one of the major forces
for reducing the role of government . . . The one thing that’s missing, but that will soon be developed, is a reliable e-
cash, a method whereby on the Internet you can transfer funds from A to B, without A knowing B or B knowing A.”

                                                           2
with blockchain and distributed ledger architecture. Section V provides an overview of
operational benefits that may accrue to central banks from incorporating the new technology into
their processing systems, even if they choose not to issue digital currency. Section VI concludes
the chapter.


II.      Emergence of digital currencies
         Digital currencies that circulate today confound some members of the public who
question the value of an asset that exists only in computer memory. However, the idea of virtual
money is not new, as electronic payment systems have steadily grown with advances in
computer memory and communications technology, inexorably supplanting hard currency and
paper checks in advanced economies. The distinguishing features of digital currencies really
come from their independence from any political authority or commercial sponsor as well as
their decentralized governance and record-keeping.
         Various forms of electronic money have circulated for decades. Twenty years ago, both
the Office of the U.S. Comptroller of the Currency (1996) and the Bank for International
Settlements (1996) published reports noting the proliferation of “electronic cash” stored on
“smart” debit cards that consumers could use at a point of sale. These devices differed in two
important ways from the digital currencies circulating today: they were always denominated in
units of a sovereign currency, such as the U.S. dollar, and their stored value was created via a
transfer of value from a third party, typically a credit card issuer such as MasterCard or Visa.
Early concerns about the growth of electronic cash focused on computer security issues and the
solvency of the third party guarantors.
         Online fantasy games provided a platform for issuing virtual currencies beginning in the
late 1980s, and today many regard these as predecessors of bitcoin and other autonomous digital
currencies. These massively multiplayer online role-playing games, or MMORPGs, have
internal economies in which players earn rewards in the fantasy currency and spend them to
acquire in-game powers or objects from other players. Some of these currency markets have
become deep enough that they have migrated to external platforms, where they trade on a
speculative basis against real-world currencies (Kim, 2015). Promoters of these games need to
consider issues such as seignorage and inflation of the monetary base much like a central bank
would.


                                                 3
       To some observers, the first private digital currency to establish itself as a medium of
exchange in the real economy was M-Pesa, a currency denominated in mobile phone minutes
that was launched in Kenya by Safaricom in 2007. M-Pesa could be acquired by anyone with a
mobile phone and could be transferred over great distances at extremely low cost. Within two
years, it had been used by more than half the population of Kenya (Jack and Suri, 2011).
Kaminska (2015) observes that M-Pesa appears to have succeeded because Safaricom, which is
40% owned by the multinational giant Vodaphone, is trusted by the public more than the Kenyan
banking system, but she argues that M-Pesa really resembles a money transmission service more
than a standalone currency, since its sponsor collateralizes units of M-Pesa with Kenyan hard
currency deposits in escrow accounts. The reach of M-Pesa does not appear to have extended
beyond the Kenyan economy, although parallel mobile phone based currency systems have been
introduced in other developing nations.
       Bitcoin, proposed in an Internet posting by Nakamoto (2008) and introduced into
circulation in 2009, probably has a more clear-cut claim to being the first successful private
digital currency, as it is used in countries all around the world and is not tied to any established
banking system as is the case with M-Pesa. Bitcoins are circulated over an open computer
network that can be joined by anyone with an Internet connection. Users of the network store
bitcoins in computer memory banks colloquially known as digital wallets, and transfers occur via
an encryption system described in Babbage (2011) and numerous other sources. Bitcoins can be
acquired in the stream of commerce (by exchanging goods and services for bitcoins) or as a
reward for participating in “mining,” the activity by which users update the network’s
“blockchain,” or archive of previous bitcoin transactions. Bitcoins paid out as mining fees
represent the seigniorage of new currency, which occurs at a fixed rate that periodically ratchets
downward until it is scheduled to asymptotically approach no new money creation in 2140.
       Bitcoin features a number of innovations in security, seigniorage, and transparency that
appear to have contributed to its success. Its archival blockchain links together all previous
transfers of a given unit of currency as a method of authentication. The blockchain is known as a
“shared ledger” or “distributed ledger,” because it is available to all members of the network, any
one of whom can see all previous transactions into or out of other digital wallets. Perhaps most
importantly, the process of reaching “consensus” to validate transactions on a bitcoin network
requires no trusted third party, such as a central bank, credit card issuer, or mobile phone


                                                  4
company, to play the role of authenticator. Instead, authentication relies upon an algorithmic
proof-of-work process that enables users to trust one another with very high levels of confidence,
removing the need for sponsor to play the role of enforcer or gatekeeper on the network. This
feature reduces the central bank to a set of equations in the bitcoin economy.
         Bitcoin’s success has spawned hundreds of imitator digital currencies, which are
generally distinguished from one another by differences in their protocols for mining and proof
of work. Although bitcoin continues to have by far the largest market capitalization, successful
competitor digital currencies have included litecoin, ripple, and most recently, the ether currency
that ciculates on the Ethereum platform.2


III.     Central banks and competition from digital currencies
         When an autonomous digital currency circulates in an economy, it competes with the
official currency issued by the country’s central bank. Competition between official currency
and private money is nothing new, and in various societies alternative money has included
commodities like gold and silver as well as other goods that have served as stores of value and
media of exchange. However, in most countries the local currency faces its greatest competition
from foreign governments’ currencies, especially the U.S. dollar. For a central bank, the
challenges posed by a digital currency are basically the same as those posed by the presence of a
competing foreign currency.
         For an economy, competition among currencies causes suppliers to drive price and
quality to an appropriate equilibrium that reflects utility (Hayek, 1976). Historically, most of
these suppliers have been central banks, although there are numerous and well-documented
examples of non-central bank currency used both idiosyncratically and generally (Radford,
1945). One benefit from competition between different monies is the stability produced by the
flexibility of contracting parties to choose settlement terms. Private creditors and debtors, if
given a free choice, will tend to use the currency that is neutral as between them. Debtors would
not want to contract in currencies that would appreciate after contracting, and creditors would
not want to contract in currencies that would depreciate. Thus, from the point of view of
consumers of money, having competitors in the provision of money is a check on the unilateral

2
 More than 700 digital currencies have been launched since the inception of bitcoin, and a list with current market
values is maintained at http://coinmarketcap.com/all/views/all/.



                                                         5
behavior of the supplier. Put into concrete terms, digital currencies could offer a country
struggling with a mismanaged money supply a way of creating stability.
           Argentina provides an instructive recent example of how digital currencies, like foreign
currencies, have the ability to provide a check against a central bank’s policy rules that are
detrimental to a country. According to the World Bank, Argentina has experienced double-digit
inflation every year except one since 2002.3 Such a situation wrecks havoc on a country’s
economy by adding unwanted risk to capital allocation decisions. Before the 2015 election of
President Mauricio Macri, The New York Times reported on the use of bitcoin in evading the
country’s currency controls amid an atmosphere of financial instability (Popper, 2015). When
the Argentine peso and the country’s central bank were unable to provide individuals with the
qualities they demanded of their money, they were relatively free to switch to other options,
which included not only digital currencies but also the U.S. dollar and other foreign currencies.
A country which risks its participation in global financial markets if its currency is too unstable
will be more likely to tolerate the use of black and grey market options.4 Prior to becoming
president, Macri served as mayor of Buenos Aires, where he helped organize a bitcoin forum.
After being inaugurated, one of his first actions was to lift the country’s currency controls.
           A slightly different approach was adopted by Ecuador, which officially banned bitcoin in
2014, but introduced its own digital currency project called Sistema de Dinero Electrónico
(electronic money system) (Rosenfeld, 2015). Modeled on private providers of mobile money,
the system gives individuals access to mobile credit accounts denominated in currency approved
by the central bank. Ecuador’s official currency is the U.S. dollar, which it adopted after years of
monetary instability. As articulated by the Ecuadorian government, the new digital system is not
designed to replace the dollar, but to save money on replacing deteriorating physical bills. Some,
however, have seen the project as a move towards de-dollarization and an attempt by the
government to assert more control over the economy (White, 2014).5 Certainly the banning of


3
    http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.DEFL.KD.ZG/countries/AR?display=default.

4
    Iran provides another recent example. See Raskin (2012).
5
  As White writes, “In sum, there is no plausibly efficient or honorable reason for the Ecuadoran government to go
into the business of providing an exclusive medium for mobile payments. Consequently it is hard to make any sense
of the project other than as fiscal maneuver that paves the way toward official de-dollarization. I gather that
President Correa does not like the way that dollarization limits his government’s power to manage the economy.”



                                                          6
bitcoin and other digital currencies demonstrates that the advantages of competition are not what
the Banco Central del Ecuador envisioned in establishing the new system.
        With the above benefits in mind, we now turn to the costs of competing digital
currencies, which primarily consist in undermining a central bank’s ability to conduct monetary
policy as a monopolist. In a world where central banks are forced to compete with other central
banks and private actors, supply and demand alone will drive which money is used as the
generally accepted medium of exchange. However, central banks operate under regimes that
have enacted legal tender laws whose function is to compel acceptance of their notes.6 Such
laws do not require parties to contract in the currency of the central bank, but they deny legal
recourse to a party who refuses to accept the legal tender of the country as payment for debts
contracted in some other medium of exchange. This gives rise to Gresham’s Law, namely that
bad money drives out the good.7 At the same exchange rate, a debtor is less likely, ceterus
paribus, to pay in appreciated currency if he has the option to pay in depreciated currency.
        Legal tender laws therefore confer a monopoly privilege on the government, allowing it
to operate its printing press. Without such laws, central banks would simply be banks. If
consumers were allowed to refuse acceptance of central bank currency for public and private
debts, a regime of free banking would exist and the central bank would be forced to operate
monetary policy in accord with the demands of its consumers and not according to political or
policy goals untethered from the market. Whether the central bank’s monopoly power is
desirable is beyond the scope of this chapter and is part of an enduring “rules vs. discretion”
debate in macroeconomics.
        The history of American monetary policy provides an important example. Until the
1861-65 U.S. Civil War, currency in the United States was issued by private banks, including the
First Bank of the United States, which, though chartered by Congress was still a private
institution. In order to fund the Civil War without raising taxes, Congress passed the Legal
Tender Act in 1862, which authorized the issuance of $150 million in United States notes, which
were declared to be “lawful money and legal tender in payment of all debts, public and private,
within the United States, except duties on imports and interest on the public debt.” This
6
 See, e.g., 31 U.S.C §5103 (United States); Coinage Act 1971 §2 (United Kingdom); Reserve Bank Act 1959
§36(1) (Australia); Bank of Israel Law 1954 §30 (Israel).
7
  Mundell (1998) states that “The correct expression of Gresham's Law law is: ‘cheap money drives out dear, if they
exchange for the same price.’ That proposition is neither trivial nor obvious.”

                                                        7
legislation was politically controversial and was at first declared unconstitutional by the U.S.
Supreme Court. Writing for the Court on behalf of a 4-3 majority in Hepburn v. Griswold, Chief
Justice Salmon P. Chase held that forcing parties to accept depreciated currency violated the
Constitution’s prohibition against governmental taking of property without due process of law.
The Chief Justice found no distinction between the Legal Tender Act “and an act compelling all
citizens to accept, in satisfaction of all contracts for money, half or three-quarters or any other
proportion less than the whole of the value actually due, according to their terms. It is difficult to
conceive what act would take private property without process of law if such an act would not.”8
           The Hepburn decision was reversed the next year in a pair of 5-4 decisions that were
supported by two new Justices who, coincidentally, were appointed by President Grant on the
same day that Hepburn was decided. 9 Together these two decisions are known as the Legal
Tender Cases, and few in the American legal scene today advocate their reversal.10 The U.S. has
reached a political consensus that the federal government should not operate without a legal
safety net that privileges its currency.
           These events in 19th century United States history provide an interesting context for
understanding the 2014 political debate in Iceland. That country confronted an alternative to its
króna in the form of a private, autonomous digital currency called auroracoin that was targeted
squarely at the Icelandic market. Introduced by the pseudonymous Baldur Friggjar Óðinsson,
auroracoin entered circulation in March 2014 by way of an “airdrop” in which 50% of
auroracoins were distributed evenly to holders of Iceland’s Kennitala national identification.
These events occurred when Iceland was operating under strict capital controls in the aftermath
of the global financial crisis, which had decimated the country’s banking system. The


8
 Hepburn v. Griswold, 75 U.S. 603 (1870). Ironically, Chase had served as President Lincoln’s Secretary of the
Treasury and had played a role in enacting the Legal Tender Act in 1862.

9
    Knox v. Lee and Parker v. Davis, 79 U.S. 457 (1871).
10
  See Bork (1987) who at his Supreme Court confirmation hearings testified, “I cite to you the legal tender cases.
Scholarship suggests - these are extreme examples, admittedly - scholarship suggests that the framers intended to
prohibit paper money. Any judge who today thought he would go back to the original intent really ought to be
accompanied by a guardian rather than be sitting on a bench.” But see Epstein (2014), who writes, “As a matter of
constitutional principle, therefore, Legal Tender laws should fall by the wayside, thereby preserving both the rule of
law and the stability of private expectations…One way to counteract this risk [of arbitrary power to inflate or
deflate] is to let the government print whatever (cheap) currency it will, but to discipline its behavior by allowing
other banks to issue their own currency (whether or not backed by gold) in competition with the federal
government.”

                                                           8
introduction of auroracoin prompted the government to hold a parliamentary meeting of the
Economic Affairs and Trade Committee. Frosti Sigurjónsson, chairman of the committee, wrote,
“There is evidence however that this is a case of [a money] scam and illegal,” but the
government ultimately took no action against it (Cawrey, 2014). By all accounts, auroracoin has
been a failure and has not supplanted the Icelandic króna in any meaningful way.
         Along with legal tender laws, governments can use licensing requirements for money
transmission to regulate indirectly the threat from competing currencies. These laws make it
easier for governments to combat tax evasion and money laundering, which have been widely
reported uses of digital currencies such as bitcoin.
         Countries have taken different attitudes towards digital currencies, ranging from
equivocating or hostile to laissez-faire and encouraging. Often an overlap exists between these
attitudes and how the country treats foreign currencies generally. For instance, in China the
government imposes capital controls, combined with active market intervention by the central
bank, to affect the value of the renminbi, demonstrating a policy choice that disfavors private
actors setting the values of foreign exchange rates. Similarly, the country’s attitude towards
bitcoin and other digital currencies also ties the hands of private actors. Although it is legal for
individuals to own bitcoin in China, banks and financial institutions are prohibited from doing
so. In April of 2014, the People’s Bank of China ordered commercial banks and trading
companies to shut down accounts that dealt in bitcoin. In addition to concern about the financial
well-being of their citizenry, the Chinese government may see bitcoin and other digital
currencies as a threat to the country’s capital controls, given the ease of transmitting bitcoin
across international borders.
         The United Kingdom, on the other hand, allows the private use of bitcoin as well as the
opening of businesses that transact in the currency. Many officials in the United States
government have expressed a similar attitude of benign neglect toward digital currencies
(Raskin, 2013).11 Although anti-money laundering laws apply in both countries, neither has
attempted to ban bitcoin or prevent its proliferation. Indeed, Andrew Haldane, the Bank of

11
  While the U.S. has tolerated the circulation of private digital currencies and other instruments such as the Ithaca
Hour (which takes its value from the price of an hour of labor), the government’s forebearance does not extend to
private coinage incorporating precious metals. The United States in 2009 prosecuted the issuer of Liberty Dollars, a
private currency pegged to the market prices of gold and silver. Liberty Dollars had shapes and denominations
similar to the official U.S. coinage but featured portraits of Congressman Ron Paul, a political libertarian.



                                                          9
England’s Chief Economist, has suggested that digital currencies might be a solution to the
supposed zero lower bound problem of monetary policy, as we discuss in Section IV below. The
U.S. Library of Congress provides a comprehensive analysis of bitcoin’s treatment in various
jurisdictions.12


IV.        Should central banks issue their own digital currencies?
           Although bitcoin and other digital currencies were created to bypass the control of central
banks, the possibility of a central bank withdrawing its bills and notes from circulation and
replacing them with its own digital currency has become an appealing topic of debate among
monetary economists. This would result in omnipotent uber-banks such as the U.S. Federal
Reserve co-opting the very technology that was created to compete against them.
           Koning (2014), in a blog post titled “Fedcoin,” has advanced the most trenchant and
widely discussed proposal for a central bank digital currency, although his work draws on a
number of earlier, similar proposals by others. The Fedcoin ideas have been taken up and
discussed by two top officials of the Bank of England, Haldane (2015) and Broadbent (2016), in
recent public speeches, leading to some speculation that the U.K. might be the first country to
launch a national digital currency. If a digital pound did enter the marketplace, it would almost
certainly have to circulate alongside traditional coins and banknotes, at least for a time, to
accommodate citizens who were uncomfortable with modern technology as well as those who
were unable to afford ordinary consumer devices such as mobile phones.
           Under the Fedcoin proposal, citizens and businesses would be permitted to open accounts
at the central bank itself, rather than depositing their funds in commercial banks as is done today.
Central banks historically have not taken deposits from the public, because the sheer volume of
required record-keeping and customer contact would be overwhelming (Winkler, 2015). Digital
technology overcomes these concerns, since cloud-based servers and storage could easily
accommodate very large volumes of financial transactions, and bank branches and ATMs would
not have to be maintained if currency could be accessed via mobile phones and other hand-held
electronics. Central bank digital accounts could initially be funded by permitting depositors to
convert existing currency, presumably at a 1-to-1 rate, and the new digital currency would reside
on a blockchain operated by the central bank. When depositors wished to spend their digital

12
     See http://www.loc.gov/law/help/bitcoin-survey/


                                                       10
currency, they would transfer it over the blockchain to the account of a counterparty, with the
central bank coding each transaction into its blockchain. Rather than being updated by miners in
competition with one another, the blockchain would instead be overseen by a trusted third party
– the central bank – which would have the exclusive right to add or modify entries. In addition,
a central bank’s blockchain would almost certainly be kept hidden, at least to an extent, in order
to preserve the privacy of citizens and the competitive secrets of businesses. Because of these
two differences, a central bank’s blockchain would be markedly different than the open, shared
ledger that is characteristic of digital currencies that operate by consensus of the network
members and do not rely on a powerful gatekeeper. It has led some to question whether a central
bank blockchain would be a blockchain at all. Such centralization would also represent a single
point of failure that could make the entire financial system vulnerable to hacking or sabotage.
       By concentrating deposits in the central bank, Fedcoin schemes would implicitly end the
practice of fractional reserve banking, thereby “narrowing” the banking system so that depositors
dealt directly with the central bank rather than with intermediary private banks. In many ways,
Fedcoin represents a revival of the 1933 “Chicago Plan,” a widely discussed academic proposal
to end fractional reserve banking in order to restore public confidence during the Great
Depression.
       Monetary policy would become much easier for the central bank to implement under a
digital currency system. The bank could commit to an algorithmic rate of money creation and
control it precisely via interest on customer deposits. In principle, this interest rate could be
negative. Such a policy could be modified by contingent smart contracts that could change the
rate of money creation if the economy followed certain future paths. Alternatively, the central
bank could retain discretion to adjust the money supply on a tactical basis as part of a
stabilization policy. In either case, the concept of open market operations would by superseded
by direct manipulation of customer balances, which could be targeted finely toward certain
geographical regions or distinct demographic or economic clienteles of depositors. Broadly
speaking, this narrowing of the banking system to a direct relationship between citizens and the
central bank would represent financial socialism. The implications of this innovation would be
vast, and below we sketch some of its potential benefits and costs.
       Allowing private accounts at the central bank would solve many problems inherent in the
current fractional reserve banking system. The central bank would not be vulnerable to bank


                                                  11
runs, and governments could exit the business of providing deposit insurance and occasional
bailouts as the lender of last resort to inadequately funded commercial banks. Commercial banks
would no longer have to engage in “maturity transformation,” under which they raise funds from
short-term demand deposits and lend them out in long-term mortgages and other loans. Risk-
shifting and other moral hazard problems on the part of banks, which now receive free deposit
insurance from the government, might be eliminated.
        In macroeconomics, the main advantages to a central bank of having its own digital
currency would come from giving the government more control and understanding of the
financial system. Such control would permit better intervention in response to the business cycle
while also ensuring better individual compliance with tax collection and anti-money laundering
statutes.
        As articulated by Haldane (2015), a central bank digital currency could solve the “zero
lower bound” problem by permitting the central bank to reduce interest rates below zero as a
strategy to encourage spending and investment. When money circulates in the form of bills and
notes, negative interest rates can be difficult to implement because citizens can hoard hard
currency, obtaining an interest rate of zero, and refuse to deposit it into banks which would
confiscate some fraction of it under a negative interest rate regime. Haldane notes that for much
of the 20th century, relatively high real interest rates around the world made the zero lower bound
problem all but irrelevant. However, a sustained drop in real interest rates in recent years has
made the problem potentially important again. This has occurred for a variety of reasons,
including the economic slump during the global financial crisis and changing demographic
patterns that affect savings patterns in advanced economies.
        If the main innovation of digital currency is to permit the central bank to force interest
rates below zero, the public might come to resent the technology or even prevent its introduction.
In 2013, the “bail-in” recapitalization of banks in Cyprus proved politically controversial and
difficult to implement, after the government proposed that banks increase their equity by
reducing the balances in certain customer accounts. A negative interest payment by a bank to its
depositors would mean much the same thing, and citizens might have difficulty seeing the broad
public benefits of an interest rate policy that led the government to erase some of their cash from
computer memory. The Cypriot Financial Crisis fueled a massive increase in the price of
bitcoin, seeing the currency rise to its current all-time high of $1216.73 per bitcoin.


                                                 12
       If a central bank digital currency did narrow the banking system by transferring the
deposit-taking function away from commercial banks and into the hands of the central bank, the
dangers to the commercial banking sector could be severe. Commercial banks would lose access
to their main source of funds and would either have to cut back on lending or raise new capital
by issuing securities to investors. The new financing would probably be far more costly and less
stable than demand deposits. As a result, commercial banks might greatly reduce their lending
activity to both businesses and private citizens, such as for mortgage loans or commercial lines
of credit. It is not clear how the economy might compensate to offset the effects of this likely
credit contraction. Perhaps, however, the abolition of mandatory fractional reserve banking
would smooth out the business cycle if done through private reforms. See von Mises (1912).
       A related problem would likely arise in the regulatory sphere. A central bank that took
deposits from the public would end up competing head to head with commercial banks, even as
it served as the regulatory overseer of the same institutions.
       Such a socialization of banking is not without its critics. A central bank controlling and
tracking a national digital currency would have immense power to observe and potentially to
control an individual’s finances. The government could determine how much currency each
individual owned and on what and where he spent his money, without the need for any
independent judiciary to subpoena the information. Many people prefer to hold hard currency
for precisely this reason. If governments issued digital currency, a political clientele would very
likely emerge out of concern that digital currency would create a dangerous temptation for abuse.
Additionally, although the cost of creating physical currency is not a total check on the
government’s ability to devalue a currency, without having to print dollars or mint coins, a
central bank would be able to hyperinflate in a costless manner simply by adding more zeros to
accounts.
       Though free banking, like a free economy, is more difficult to control and understand
than a centrally planned economy, modern economics has come to the conclusion that through
the channeling of incentives, well-defined property rights, and profit calculation, such
disorganization produces a more robust and productive system.




                                                 13
V.         Central bank operations using blockchains
           Central banks may never elect to narrow the banking system and issue digital currency
along the lines of the Fedcoin model. However, like other financial institutions central banks
may see great appeal in the blockchain technology that lies at the foundation of bitcoin and other
algorithmic currencies, and central banks may choose to adapt blockchains for use in their
payments processing and transaction clearing functions. Even though the original goal of digital
currency blockchains was to facilitate peer-to-peer value transfers that could bypass the
interbank clearing process, the technology may ironically find its widest use in allowing central
banks to move money more reliably and more cheaply between their depositors. The central
bank currency would be a settlement currency, akin to the function served by gold in the past.
           Banks perform these bookkeeping and settlement tasks not only for themselves, but also
on behalf of commercial banks. Although blockchain technology remains in its infancy,
estimates of its potential savings in processing and bookkeeping costs often fall in the range of
50% to 80%. For a central bank processing enormous volumes of transactions,13 the possible
size of these savings is substantial.
           When central banks oversee payment and settlement functions on behalf of the entire
financial system, they seek to provide a system that is both safe and efficient in order to create a
high level of public confidence in the health of the banking system. See Bank for International
Settlements (2005). Central banks process transactions on behalf of businesses, consumers,
banks, and international counterparts, and even small gains in efficiency can save vast amounts
of money. Despite the potential to achieve efficiencies through economies of scale, certain
segments of the money transfer market such as international remittances remain extraordinarily
costly for users. According to the World Bank, at the end of 2015 the average cost of an
international money transfer was 7.37% worldwide, and it was only modestly lower, at 6.89%,
for sending funds overseas from one of the G8 countries.14 Such transfers typically take several




13
  As an example, The U.S. Federal Reserve’s FedWire electronic transfer service has handled an average daily
volume of $3 trillion since November 2013, and the Fed operates several other payment and clearing services such
as the Automated Clearinghouse (ACH) system. Fedwire statistics are available at
https://www.frbservices.org/operations/fedwire/fedwire_funds_services_statistics.html.
14
     See https://remittanceprices.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/rpw_report_december_2015.pdf.



                                                          14
days to complete due to many layers of checking and verification in the clearing process.15 In
addition, fraud and theft remain problems, even when the parties involved are government
central banks.16 While the international money transfer market involves numerous
intermediaries in addition to central banks, blockchain technology could make many of them
unnecessary. It would have the beneficial side effect of allowing central banks to monitor the
behavior of their depositors more directly, helping to defeat problems such as money laundering
and tax evasion.


VI.     Conclusions
        Digital currencies present central banks with challenges and opportunities. In some
economies, bitcoin has emerged as viable competition for fiat currencies during periods when the
central bank is perceived as weak or untrustworthy, although to date these cases remain limited
to troubled economies with capital controls. More interestingly, the blockchain technology
behind digital currencies has the potential to improve central banks’ payment and clearing
operations, and possibly to serve as a platform from which central banks might launch their own
digital currencies. A sovereign digital currency could have profound implications for the
banking system, narrowing the relationship between citizens and central banks and removing the
need for the public to keep deposits in fractional reserve commercial banks. This could lead to a
serious de-funding of the commercial banking sector and have spillover effects into credit
creation and monetary policy. Debates over the wisdom of these policies have led to a revival of
interest in classical monetary economics. Competition among fiat currency and private digital
currency evokes the 19th century “free banking” era, while the possibility for central banks to
issue digital currency recalls the 1930s Chicago Plan for narrowing the financial system by
eliminating fractional reserve banking.
        As a disruptive new technology, digital currency forces governments and central banks to
choose between banning, tolerating, or co-opting its innovations. In most mature economies,
central banks have taken the middle course, with a few openly examining the possibility of

15
  Perhaps, however, both the monetary and time cost of international remittance is a designed feature of the system
to ensure compliance with national policies designed to combat ills like terrorism and sex trafficking.
16
  In a widely reported recent case, the government of Bangladesh lost $81 million in March 2016 when thieves
operating through Philippine banks obtained access codes that enabled them to purloin the funds from Bangladesh’s
account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (Whaley and Gough, 2016).

                                                        15
incorporating sovereign digital currencies into their operations. With so much still to be learned
about the possibilities of digital currencies and blockchains, a central bank digital currency still
appears to be a radical proposition that carries significant risks for the rest of the financial
system. Moreover, a mandatory central bank digital currency with the protection of legal tender
laws would stand athwart the vision of competition, decentralization, and openness that the
creators of modern digital currencies envisioned.




                                                  16
       References
       Babbage, 2011, “Virtual Currency: Bits and Bob,” The Economist, June 13.
       Bank for International Settlements, 1996, “Implications for Central Banks of the
Development of Electronic Money,” available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bisp01.pdf.
       Bank for International Settlements, 2005, “Central Bank Oversight of Payment and
Settlement Systems,” available at http://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d68.htm.
       Bork, Robert H., 1987, “Excerpts From Questioning of Judge Bork by Senate Committee
Chairman,” The New York Times, September 16.
       Broadbent, Ben, 2016, “Central Banks and Digital Currencies,” available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech886.pdf.
       Cawrey, Daniel, 2014, “Icelandic Parliament Committee Holds Closed Session to
Discuss Auroracoin,” Coindesk, March 14, available at
http://www.coindesk.com/icelandic-parliament-committee-holds-closed-session-discuss-
auroracoin/.
       Epstein, Richard A., 2014, The Classical Liberal Constitution: The Uncertain Quest for
Limited Government, Harvard University Press.
       Haldane, Andrew G., 2015, “How Low Can You Go?” available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech840.pdf.
       Hayek, Friedrich A., 1976, Denationalisation of Money: The Argument Refined, Institute
of Economic Affairs.
       Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri, 2011, “Mobile Money: The Economics of M-Pesa,”
National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 16721.
       Kaminska, Izabella, 2015, “Mpesa: The Costs of Evolving an Independent Central
Bank,” Financial Times, July 15.
       Kim, Thomas, 2015, “The Predecessors of Bitcoin and Their Implications for the
Prospect of Virtual Currencies,” PLoS ONE 10(4): e0123071.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123071.
       Konig, J.P., 2014, “Fedcoin,” available at
http://jpkoning.blogspot.com/2014/10/fedcoin.html.
       Mundell, Robert , 1998, “Uses and Abuses of Gresham’s Law in the History of Money,”
Zagreb Journal of Economics 2, no. 2, 3-38.


                                               17
       Nakamoto, Satoshi, 2008, “Bitcoin: A Peer to Peer Electronic Cash System,” available at
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
       Nash, John F. Jr., 2002, "Ideal Money," Southern Economic Journal 69, 4-11.
       Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 1996, “An Introduction to Electronic Money
Issues,” unpublished manuscript, available at
http://www.occ.gov/topics/bank-operations/bit/intro-to-electronic-money-issues.pdf.
       Popper, Nathaniel, 2015, “Can Bitcoin Conquer Argentina?” The New York Times, April
29.
       Radford, Robert A., 1945, “The Economic Organisation of a P.O.W. Camp,” Economica,
New Series 12, no. 48, 189-201.
       Raskin, Max, 2012, “Dollar-Less Iranians Discover Virtual Currency,” Bloomberg News,
November 29.
       Raskin, Max, 2013, “U.S. Agencies to Say Bitcoins Offer Legitimate Benefits,”
Bloomberg News, November 18.
       Rosenfeld, Everett, 2015, “Ecuador becomes the first country to roll out its own digital
cash,” CNBC, February 9.
       von Mises, Ludwig, 1912, The Theory of Money and Credit.
       Whaley Floyd, and Neil Gough, 2016, “Brazen Heist of Millions Puts Focus on
Philippines,” The New York Times, March 16.
       White, Lawrence H., 2014, “Dollarization and Free Choice in Currency,” George Mason
University Department of Economics Working Paper, No. 14-44.
       Winkler, Robin, 2015, “Fedcoin: How Banks Can Survive Blockchains,” Konzept 6, 6-7.




                                                18
