COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN ASYMMETRIC WORLD

Cuicui Chen
Richard J. Zeckhauser
WORKING PAPER 22240

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN ASYMMETRIC WORLD
Cuicui Chen
Richard J. Zeckhauser
Working Paper 22240
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22240

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

We thank Joe Aldy, Scott Barrett, Wolfgang Buchholz, Keith Dougherty, Jim Roumasset, Rob
Stavins, and the participants at the Harvard Environmental Economics lunch, the 53rd Annual
Meetings of the Public Choice Society, the Harvard Seminar in Environmental Economics and
Policy, and the 3rd China Meeting of the Econometric Society for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Cuicui Chen and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Collective Action in an Asymmetric World
Cuicui Chen and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 22240
May 2016, Revised August 2016
JEL No. C72,F53,H87
ABSTRACT
A central authority possessing tax and expenditure responsibilities can readily provide an
efficient level of a public good. Absent a central authority, voluntary arrangements must replace
coercive ones. Significant under-provision must be expected. International public goods are
particularly challenging because of the strong asymmetries among nations. We identify a
solution, the Cheap-Riding Efficient Equilibrium, that defines the relative contributions of players
in differing size (or preference intensity) to reflect cheap riding incentives, yet still achieves
Pareto optimality. Players start by establishing the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium as a base point.
From that point they apply either the principles of the Nash Bargaining Solution or the Lindahl
Equilibrium to proceed to the Pareto frontier. We apply our theory to climate change mitigation, a
critical international public good. Having examined the Nordhaus Climate Club proposal, we test
the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium model using individual nations' Intended Nationally Determined
Contributions pledged at the Paris Climate Change Conference. As hypothesized, larger nations
made much larger pledges in proportion to their Gross National Incomes.

Cuicui Chen
Harvard University
79 JFK St
CAMBRIDGE, MA 02138
cuicuichen@fas.harvard.edu
Richard J. Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

I

Introduction
Samuelson’s famed condition for the efficient provision of a public good is that the sum of

agents’ marginal rates of substitution of private goods for the public good equal the marginal
cost of the good. To identify the efficient level requires that costs and individuals’ preferences
be known or readily inferred. To achieve that level is a bigger challenge. The challenge can be
met given three conditions: (1) the good is centrally provided; (2) the center has a coercive
mechanism for financing any level of expenditure; and (3) the political system operates to
promote efficiency. These three conditions are most likely to be met if there is a benevolent
government with taxing authority providing the good.
Unfortunately, for many critical public goods no government unit is responsible for provision. We refer to such goods as having No Central Authority (NCA). This often implies that
“financing” must come from voluntary contributions by agents. The contributions may be
set through a negotiation, formal or informal, or the agents may just decide independently
how much to contribute. Contributions are possibly of money, but possibly also of factors of
production, such as volunteer services, that help produce the good. Sometimes the agents
make direct in-kind contributions of the good itself.
The great challenge for NCA goods is that the potential contributors have strong incentives not to contribute, since they get as much from provision by others as they do from
provision themselves. While the term “free riding” is typically used to describe such situations, in many cases we see less extreme behavior, which we term as cheap riding. If the
potential contributor gets a substantial portion of the benefits from a public good, or if he
or she enjoys separate benefits from the action of contributing that are quite apart from the
public good,1 then he or she will likely contribute a positive amount, although that amount
1

An example of this separate benefit in the climate-change-mitigation context is that a nation may have
incentive to cut back some emissions if there are opportunities to link trade negotiations or club membership
to the strength climate effort. McLean and Stone (2012) find that most nations that ratified the Kyoto
Protocol or that imposed restrictions on their carbon emissions were either part of the European Union or
nations that hoped to establish ties to or become part of EU.

2

would still be lower than what efficiency would require. Indeed, as Mancur Olson famously
showed in The Logic of Collective Action, in the absence of a central authority, self-interested
entities will provide for the public good only if they are incentivized by private benefits, such
as prestige or networking, that are quite distinct from advancing the group interest (Olson,
1965).
The cheap-riding problem is likely reinforced if, in addition, some players are little and
some are big. The little players, having little ability or incentive to boost the overall level of
the public good, will pursue their self-interest and ride very cheaply. At the Nash Equilibrium, what in this context is the Alliance Equilibrium (Olson and Zeckhauser, 1966), overall
provision will be woefully inefficient.
We thus focus on the provision of NCA goods by asymmetrical players. The provision
of international public goods, such as battling ISIS, fighting against antibiotic resistance,
and confronting climate change, falls under this category. Our descriptive model shows
that voluntary contributions from small nations relative to their national incomes will be
well below those of large nations. We also show that efforts to get nations to contribute
proportionally, such as a uniform carbon tax, will founder because they do not recognize the
incentive of small nations to ride cheaply.
Recognizing this, we develop a prescriptive model that takes the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium as the starting point. From there, we consider two Pareto-improving paths to the
Pareto frontier. One adapts the Nash Bargaining solution; the other relies on the principle
of the Lindahl Equilibrium. In our illustrative numerical example, the two outcomes are
remarkably similar.
In our penultimate section, we consider the implications of our model for international
climate agreements. We first discuss the Nordhaus Climate Club proposal, and indicate
ways his proposals might be adjusted to recognize the extreme cheap riding incentives for
small nations. An empirical section then focuses on individual nations’ Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) to the 2015 Paris Climate Change Conference. As

3

hypothesized, small nations made much smaller pledges than large nations relative to their
national incomes. Neither vulnerability to climate change nor per capita income affects this
pattern.
Following Olson (1965) and Olson and Zeckhauser (1966), numerous papers have examined the under-provision of public goods with no central authority, including the effect of
group size (for example, Isaac and Walker [1998]), the implications of individual heterogeneity (for example, Boadway and Hayashi [1999]; Callander and Harstad [2015]), the role of
uncertainty (see Kolstad [2007] and the literature reviewed therein), and the validity of the
Nash assumption (for example, Cornes and Sandler [1983]; Sudgen [1985]).
Given that NCA goods are typically under provided, a number of solutions have been
proposed. Arce M. and Sandler (2001) propose setting up a super-national organization that
sends signals to nations in order to induce correlated equilibria that are Pareto superior to
Nash equilibria. Gerber and Wichardt (2009) study a two-stage mechanism where players
commit to the public good by paying a deposit prior to the contribution stage. They show
that properly designed deposits support prior commitment and full ex post contributions as
a sub-game perfect Nash Equilibrium. Barrett (1994) represents public good provision in
a repeated prisoners’ dilemma game and shows that cooperation can be both individually
and collectively rational. Similarly, Heitzig, Lessmann and Zou (2011) cast the public good
provision game in a repeated game setting and argue that dynamic concerns can enforce
efficiency. Abul Naga and Jones (2012) discuss the role of other-regarding preferences such
as altruism in bringing about efficient provision. One strand of literature studies matching
schemes (for example, Barrett [1990], Falkinger, Hackl and Bruckner [1996]; Boadway, Song
and Tremblay [2011]; Buchholz, Cornes and Rubbelke [2011, 2014]), in which players decide
on the unconditional and conditional (matching) contributions to the public good. This
process can lead to interior matching equilibria at which all agents make strictly positive
unconditional contributions. However, all those solutions either assume away or do not
sufficiently address the asymmetry inherent in players’ situations.

4

We proceed as follows. Section II discusses international public goods and the challenges
to providing them in efficient quantities. Section III sets up the model. Section IV demonstrates cheap riding in the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium. Section V then shows a shortcoming
of the Lindahl Equilibrium, a famed prior attempt to deal with efficient provision in an asymmetric situation: it does not recognize the disparate incentives of players to ride cheaply. A
potential solution, the Cheap-Riding Efficient Equilibrium (CREE), is presented in Section
VI. Section VII applies the central theories of the paper to the climate-change-mitigation
context; Subsection VII.I discusses the Nordhaus Climate Club approach, and Subsection
VII.II presents empirical evidence demonstrating cheap riding in the INDCs that nations
pledged at the Paris Climate Change Conference. Section VIII concludes.

II

Alliance and International Public Good
The provision of international public goods is challenging for two reasons. First, forces

that at times motivate contributions by individuals - such as warm glow, prestige or self
interest – will rarely be sufficient to motivate nearly sufficient contributions by nations.
Second, and more importantly, the potential providers are very differently situated. Some
are rich, some poor; and some are big, some little; on any level of the public good, some
will secure much greater benefits from its provision than will others. Thus, China with a
population of 1.3 billion, the world’s second largest economy, a significant pollution problem,
and the intention and ability to lead in the production of green energy technologies, will
benefit greatly from the effective control of greenhouse gases. Landlocked Laos, with fewer
than 7 million citizens, would benefit little.
The theory of alliances (Olson and Zeckhauser, 1966) was developed to address just
such a situation. Its principal lesson is that those who benefit more from the good will
contribute disproportionately more to its provision. Thus, in a world with two nations that
are otherwise alike but with one nation twice as big as the other, the big nation will end

5

up contributing significantly more than twice as much as the little nation. Precisely this
pattern is observed where the US provides vastly disproportionately in combatting ISIS,2
or where Saudi Arabia cut its oil production far more below its optimum than did other
OPEC nations when OPEC was still hanging together to cut production.3 The Alliance
Equilibrium, as discussed by Olson and Zeckhauser (1966), is a Nash Equilibrium, where
each player takes as given the strategies of all other players.
The question then arises as to why the alliance members do not get together and bargain
their way to an efficient equilibrium. Such an approach might have potential if the members
were all similarly situated, and the number of members were not too large. In a negotiation, a
natural focal point in the sense of Schelling (1960)4 would be that each member contributes
the same; none could expect to pay less than the others. In such a symmetric situation,
with only a few players, they could merely identify and agree to the optimal per capita
contribution. Positing that contributions could be monitored, efficiency would be achieved.
In the situation that prevails in real life across nations, however, matters are far from
symmetric. Even if the individuals within the nations were identical, for example in income,
the little nations could expect the bigger nations to contribute more, arguing correctly that
given proportional contributions big nations benefit much more at the margin. However,
determining the appropriate ratio of big to little contributions would present a challenge. Big
and little nations would respectively advance arguments as to why the ratio should be smaller
or larger. As a result, agreement is unlikely. With each nation following its own principles,
under provision is to be expected. Prior to the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) to
2

Pentagon officials complained that some of the 64 partner nations and regional groups, mostly the Arab
allies which are smaller nations, are not doing enough. See the news coverage at: http://www.latimes.
com/world/middleeast/la-na-isis-coalition-20160201-story.html.
3
Griffin and Xiong (1997) find that small producers (such as Gabon, Qatar, Algeria, Libya, Indonesia
and Nigeria) were subsidized at the expense of large producers (especially Saudi Arabia) in the OPEC
arrangement, a phenomenon they call the “small producer bias”.
4
Schelling (1960) proposes focal points as an intuitive and practical way to coordinate behavior; in many
cases a player has “expectation of what the other expects him to expect to be expected to do”. He suggested
that focal points “may depend on imagination more than on logic; it may depend on analogy, precedent,
accidental arrangement, symmetry, aesthetic or geometric configuration, casuistic reasoning, and who the
parties are and what they know about each other”.

6

the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change that took place in Paris in
December 2015, individual nations, big and little, had submitted the Intended Nationally
Determined Contributions (INDCs) that were later included in the new international climate
agreement. Following the arguments above, since a nation’s pledges were voluntarily made,
the sum of pledged reductions was woefully below what will be required to hold the warming
by 2100 below 1.5-2 degrees Celsius compared to pre-industrial times. That is the value that
most climate scientists think is probably the maximum level the Earth can sustain without
incurring devastating damages from climate change.5
We fully recognize such asymmetry, and develop a simple and intuitive solution. It defines
the relative contributions of players of differing size in a manner that both caters to the strong
incentive of little players to ride cheaply, yet still achieves Pareto optimality. The analysis
recognizes that such mechanisms are not currently in place, and that most alliance efforts
lead to total outputs that are well below what would be optimal. In other words, there are
agreements requiring greater contributions from all that would represent substantial Pareto
improvements. We seek a principles-based approach to defining such an agreement.

III

Model Setup

Index the players in the model by i ∈ N = {1, . . . , n}, and let the contribution of each
player to the public good be mi ≥ 0. For simplicity, side payments are ruled out.6 The
P
public good is simply the sum of all individual contributions, M = i mi (we discuss the
imperfect substitutability case in the Appendix). Denote the sum of contributions by players
P
other than i by M−i = j6=i mj . Player i gets benefit Vi (M ) from the public good.
Since we are considering in-kind contributions, as is the norm with international public
5

Indeed, Hohne et al. (2015) finds that the unconditional reduction pledges in INDCs would lead to a
median warming of around 2.7 degrees Celsius by 2100 with the full range of 2.2 to 3.4 degrees Celsius. The
European Commission also states that “[the INDCs] are not yet enough to keep global warming below 2 degrees celsius” on its Climate Action web page at http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/
negotiations/paris/index_en.htm.
6
In the real world, direct side payments between nations are likely politically infeasible. Indirect side
payments are sometimes used. See our further discussion in Subsection VII.I and Footnote 19.

7

goods, we allow players to receive private benefits from their own contributions, quite apart
from the public good. Thus, for example, a nation’s armed forces contribute to the deterrent
level of a military alliance. However, they are also available to assist in the case of a
natural disaster. A nation’s efforts to curb GHGs by developing clean energy technologies
would simultaneously advance its high tech capabilities. In addition, a nation may value the
respect that other nations pay to it when it contributes to the public good. Represent this
private benefit as Bi (mi ).
The cost to player i of providing mi is Ki (mi ). Note, because we are dealing with a
situation where contributions are in kind, we might expect the marginal cost of contribution
to increase sharply as one contributes more; that is, K 00 can be not only positive, but
significantly so.7 Player i’s net payoff is thus Ui (M, mi ) = Vi (M ) − Ki (mi ) + Bi (mi ).
For notational simplicity, in what follows we will just use Ci (mi ) to represent the net
private cost, Ki (mi ) − Bi (mi ), so that the utility functions can be written as Ui (M, mi ) =
Vi (M ) − Ci (mi ). Throughout the paper we assume that utility functions are common knowledge.

IV

Alliance Equilibrium, Nash Equilibrium

To demonstrate cheap riding, we first present the Alliance Equilibrium (Olson and Zeckhauser, 1966). It is essentially a Nash Equilibrium, an allocation (mN
i )i∈N (where the superscript N stands for Nash) such that each player’s choice is a best respond to what the others
do. That is, for each i ∈ N :

N
mN
i ∈ arg max Ui (mi + M−i , mi ),
mi ≥0

N
=
where M−i

P

j6=i

(N ash)

mN
j .

7

If the players were only providing money, as opposed to in-kind contributions, the increasing marginal
cost feature would be solely due to income effects.

8

Proposition IV.1. An Alliance/Nash Equilibrium exists if for each i, Vi0 > 0, Ci0 > 0, and
at least one of the following inequalities is strict: Vi00 ≤ 0, Ci00 ≥ 0. It is unique if also Ci00 > 0.

Proof. We prove it in three steps. First, we show that the the best response function gi∗ (M−i )
exists, is unique, continuous, and non-increasing. Then we use the Brouwer fixed point
theorem8 to show the existence of a Nash Equilibrium. Finally, we show uniqueness if also
Ci00 > 0.
Step 1. There are two cases. If Vi0 (0) > Ci0 (0), then under the conditions given, there is
a unique intersection of Vi0 (·), the marginal benefit curve, and Ci0 (·), the marginal
cost curve, which represents the best response. If Vi0 (0) < Ci0 (0), then under the
conditions given, Vi0 (mi ) < Ci0 (mi ) for any mi > 0, and hence the best response
is 0. Figure I provides a straightforward graphical proof. To show that the best
response function is non-increasing, in the first case, increasing M−i weakly lowers
the marginal benefit curve and thus shifts the intersection weakly to the left along
the horizontal axis, making the best response weakly smaller. In the second case, an
increase in M−i weakly lowers the marginal benefit curve, so that the best response
stays at 0. That the best response function is continuous is obvious.
Step 2. A Nash Equilibrium is a fixed point of (mi )i∈N = g((mi )i∈N ), where the i-th element
of the vector g((mi )i∈N ) is i’s best response function evaluated at the sum of others’
contributions, gi∗ (M−i ). To use the Brouwer fixed point theorem to establish the
existence of a fixed point, it suffices to show that the domain of g is a convex
compact set, and that the range of g is contained in its domain. Indeed, without
loss of generality we can restrict the domain of mi for each i to [0, maxi gi∗ (0)],
because no player will ever want to contribute more than what he or she would
as the sole contributor. As a result, the domain of g is a closed rectangle, and it
8

The Brouwer fixed point theorem says that every continuous function from a convex compact subset of
a Euclidean space to itself has a fixed point.

9

Ci'

Net benefit
Vi'
0

mi

mi*

Ci'

Net benefit = 0
Vi'
mi

mi*=0

Figure I: Optimal Private Contribution When Vi0 > Ci0 (0) (Upper) or Otherwise (Lower)

10

is thus convex and compact. The range of g is contained in the domain because
gi∗ (M−i ) ∈ [0, gi∗ (0)] for any M−i ≥ 0 and for any i as gi∗ (·) is non-increasing.
Step 3. To use Corollary 1 in Folmer and Mouche (2004), take individual player’s action
P
xi = mi , a function of the action profile y = ϕ(x) = i xi = M , and individual
player’s utility function π i (xi , ϕ(x)) = π i (mi , M ) = Ui (M, mi ) = Vi (M ) − Ci (mi ).
Then, the conditions in Corollary 1 hold. In particular,
∂π i i
∂π i i
(x , y) = −Ci0 (mi ) + Vi0 (M )
(x
,
y)
+
∂xi
∂y
is strictly decreasing in mi and decreasing in M , if Ci00 > 0 and Vi00 ≤ 0. Thus, by
Corollary 1, there exists at most one Nash Equilibrium. With the existence result
we establish in Step 2, there is a unique Nash Equilibrium.

We now discuss one important property of the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium, first proposed
in Olson and Zeckhauser (1966). Positing that nations differ only in size (a parameter in
the utility functions, more below),9 big nations will contribute more than in proportion to
their size in the Alliance Equilibrium. Taking GNP as the measure of nation size, Olson and
Zeckhauser (1966) provide an intuitive proof as follows: suppose by way of contradiction
that the big nation, which has twice the GNP of the little nation, contributes twice as much
in the Alliance Equilibrium. The Alliance Equilibrium requires that the marginal rate of
substitution of the private good for the public good (MRS) equal the marginal cost, which,
in our setup, means that V10 (M )/C10 (m1 ) = V20 (M )/C20 (m2 ) = 1. This requirement is not
met if the big nation contributes twice as much, because by their definition of nation size,
V10 (M ) = 2V20 (M ) and C10 (m1 ) = C20 (m2 ) at m1 = 2m2 , so that the MRS of the big nation
9

This is a simplification of the reality, in which nations differ along many dimensions. For example, in
confronting climate change, Southern nations get more benefits than Northern nations, low lying coastal
nations much more than inland nations, developing nations have more room (and thus lower marginal cost)
to abate than developed nations, and much more.

11

is twice that of the little. This implies that the big nation would want to contribute even
more and/or the little nation even less, until they reach the equilibrium requirement.
We generalize their insights with a more general definition of nation “size”. Size is
defined here as a variable such that for two nations with a given ratio of the values of that
variable, the MRS, or the “bang for its additional contribution”, of the big nation is strictly
higher than that of the little when contributions are at that ratio. That is, if the size
ratio s1 /s2 > 1, then V10 (M )/C10 (m1 ) > V20 (M )/C20 (m2 ) for m1 /m2 = s1 /s2 . This is a more
general definition than that in Olson and Zeckhauser (1966), because while the case where
V10 (M ) = 2V20 (M ) and C10 (m1 ) = C20 (m2 ) at m1 = 2m2 satisfies the definition, so does one
where V10 (M ) = V20 (M ) and C10 (m1 ) < C20 (m2 ) at m1 = 2m2 .
An example of the first case would be using population as a size measure for two otherwise
identical nations in the context of GHG emissions reduction; the big nation has twice as many
people to benefit from an additional unit of global reduction, and achieves twice as much
reduction by simply making everyone to copy the abatement behavior from their counterparts
in the little nation. An example of the second case is using Gross National Income (GNI) as
the size measure for two nations that also differ in vulnerability and technology. The US may
have the same marginal benefit from global GHG reduction as does Japan given that the US
is less vulnerable albeit it has more wealth at stake. Contributing at the wealth ratio, the US
may still find it cheaper to abate on the margin than Japan given that Japan is already very
carbon-lean. The Alliance Equilibrium will thus have the US contribute disproportionally
more than Japan.10
As a numerical example, we posit that Vi (ai , M ) = ai λ log M , Ci (ai , mi ) = m2i /ai , where
λ is a known scaler. Suppose there are only two nations, with the big nation being four times
as large as the little nation, that is, a1 = 1, a2 = 1/4. Let λ = 4. Thus, the big nation’s MRS
is four times as big as the little’s at a four-to-one contribution; it has four times as large a
10

Those examples might seem quite stylized. Indeed, as we have already recognized above, in the climatechange-mitigation context, nations differ along many more dimensions. Nevertheless, in Subsection VII.II,
our empirical section, we show empirical evidence that GNI is a valid measure of nation size despite the
real-world complexities.

12

marginal benefit and the same marginal cost as the little. Our calculation shows that the
big nation contributes 1.372 at the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium, which is sixteen times the
little nation’s contribution of 0.086, although the former is only four times the size of the
latter.
This Alliance/Nash Equilibrium outcome is also far from Pareto optimal. The big nation
gets a net payoff of -0.375 and the little nation a net payoff of 0.347. But if the big nation
contributed 20% more and the little nation gave twice its original contribution, those net
payoffs would rise to -0.319 and 0.480, a major Pareto improvement, though this outcome
also is far from Pareto optimal.
We will now take a brief excursion to discuss a famed prior attempt to deal with efficient
provision of public goods with players of disparate preference intensities.

V

Lindahl Equilibrium, Supply-Demand Arrangement
Lindahl (1958) conceived of a provision scheme where each player reported how much

of the public good he or she wants depending on the share he or she would be required to
pay.11 The cost shares would be determined such that each player desires the same amount
of the public good. Formally, a Lindahl Equilibrium consists of individualized public good
prices (or cost shares) (pLi )i∈N (where the superscript L stands for Lindahl), a private good
price which we normalize to 1, and an allocation (M L , (mLi )i∈N ) such that for each i ∈ N :
(mLi , M L ) ∈ arg max Ui (M, mi ),
mi ,M ≥0

subject to:

pLi M ≤ mi ,

11

(Lindahl)

Contrary to the view that the Lindahl Equilibrium is of purely theoretical interest, Lindahl actually
intended it to be potentially useful in practice. In Lindahl (1958), he framed the Lindahl Equilibrium as a
“positive solution” to the problem of determining “just” tax burdens on asymmetric taxpayers, and discusses
extensively the potential challenges and the corresponding solutions in applying the Lindahl Equilibrium to
the real world.

13

and the market clears:
ML =

X

mLi .

i

The next proposition shows that the Lindahl Equilibrium exists and is unique in our
context.
Proposition V.1. There exists a unique Lindahl Equilibrium if for each i, Vi0 > 0, Ci0 >
0, Vi00 < 0, Ci00 > 0.
Proof. Buchholz, Cornes, and Peters (2008) establishes the existence and uniqueness of the
Lindahl Equilibrium in an economy where the utility function is formulated in terms of
the public good and the private consumption good xi , and the production cost function h
maps the amount of public good to the total contribution of the private good, under three
assumptions:
Assumption 1. Each utility function is twice continuously differentiable, strictly monotone
increasing in both variables and strictly quasi-concave.
Assumption 2. The public good is not a Giffen good for any agent.
Assumption 3. The cost function is twice continuously differentiable, h(0) = 0, h0 > 0,
h00 ≥ 0.
Adapted to our case, xi = yi −mi , where yi is the endowment of the private good. The utility
function can thus be written as ŪM,xi = Vi (M ) − Ci (yi − xi ), which satisfies Assumption
1.12 The production cost function is h(M ) = M , which satisfies Assumption 3. Buchholz,
Cornes, and Peters (2008) shows that Assumption 2 is satisfied if the utility functions are
strictly quasi-concave, and
∂ 2 Ūi (M, xi ) ∂ Ūi ∂ Ūi ∂ 2 Ūi (M, xi )
/
−
≤ 0,
∂x2i
∂M ∂xi
∂xi ∂M
12

Indeed, each utility function is strictly concave because the Hessian, a diagonal matrix with negative
diagonal entries, is negative definite.

14

C0

both of which are true in our case, the latter being −Ci00 V i0 < 0.
i

Despite its achievement of Pareto optimality in the NCA problem,13 the Lindahl Equilibrium suffers a grave defect: it does not recognize the incentive to ride cheaply. Thus, in our
numerical example, the Lindahl Equilibrium has the nations contributing 1.414 and 0.354
respectively, which gives them net payoffs of 0.279 and 0.070 respectively. Here, however,
the little nation has a simple threat to make to the big nation: ‘I will not participate in
the Lindahl Equilibrium. You can do so, or if you choose we can revert to the Nash Equilibrium.’ The threat is credible, since the little nation is better off at the Alliance/Nash
Equilibrium than at the Lindahl Equilibrium. In many asymmetric situations, of course, no
nation will be worse off at the Lindahl Equilibrium than at the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium.14
Nevertheless, the fact that the Lindahl Equilibrium simply ignores the fact that little nations
do relatively much better at the Nash than at the Lindahl Equilibrium is critical. To get
agreement, any solution must recognize this bargaining advantage of little nations, for the
Nash Equilibrium is the fallback solution if an agreement is not reached. This implies that
little nations are likely to balk at the Lindahl Equilibrium. For some parameter values, as we
just showed, there will be a player who is strictly worse off at the Lindahl Equilibrium, who
would simply hold out for the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium. It is this player who would be in a
favored bargaining position just because it was much smaller. It could be otherwise identical
to the other players in terms of per capita income, exposure to threats due to insufficient
provision of the public good, and costs of provision.15

13

More precisely, a Lindahl Equilibrium allocation is Pareto optimal if the preferences are locally nonsatiated (Bergstrom, not dated).
14
This would typically be the case if nations were perfectly symmetric. Shitovitz and Spiegel (1998) and
Buchholz, Cornes and Peters (2006) study the conditions on the income distribution that makes all prefer
the Lindahl Equilibrium to the Nash Equilibrium.
15
In Subsection VII.II, we show empirically in the climate-change-mitigation context that controlling for
a large set of conceivable confounders, big nations in terms of GNI contribute disproportionally more than
little nations; the little nation that cheap rides could even be richer on a per capita basis, more vulnerable,
or face higher provision costs. Indeed, in many cases, the intuitive measure of size such as the GNI swamps
the confounding variables in terms of their effects on the MRS. For example, in Griffin and Xiong (1997)’s
finding on the small producer bias, Qatar, the little nation, cheap rides on Saudi Arabia, the big nation,
even though Qatar has a higher per capital GDP.

15

Let us now briefly step away from solving the NCA problem to propose another way of
thinking about the Lindahl Equilibrium. Each player is in a position where he or she would
like the other players to contribute more. He or she would be willing to contribute more at
the margin if the other players were also willing to do so. We define the Supply-Demand
Arrangement, or SDA, as one that starts by asking each player to define his supply curve
as a function of the per-unit contributions from others. The Supply-Demand Arrangement
just solves for the equilibrium where supply equals demand for each player.
Formally, a Supply-Demand Arrangement consists of individualized prices for the public
SD
good provided by others, (pSD
−i )i∈N (e.g., p−1 is the price that Player 1 pays for a unit

that other players provide in total; the superscript SD stands for Supply-Demand), a private
good price which we normalize to 1, and an allocation (mSD
i )i∈N , such that for each i ∈ N :
SD
(mSD
i , M−i ) ∈ arg max Ui (mi + M−i , mi ),
mi ,M−i

subject to:

pSD
−i M−i ≤ mi ,

(SD)

and the market clears:
SD
M−i
=

X

mSD
j , for each i.

j6=i

Interestingly, and ultimately not surprisingly, the SDA has the nations contributing 1.414
and 0.354 respectively. This is precisely the outcome with the Lindahl Equilibrium. Indeed,
this will always be the case; the two solutions are identical.
Proposition V.2. A Supply-Demand Arrangement allocation is identical to a Lindahl Equilibrium allocation.
SD
Proof. Given a supply-demand arrangement ((pSD
i )i∈N , (mi )i∈N ), for each i, let

M=

mSD
i

+

SD
M−i
,

pSD
−i
pi =
.
1 + pSD
−i

Then for each i, (mSD
i , M ) solves i’s Problem (Lindahl) with price pi . The other direction
16

can be similarly established.

The Supply-Demand Arrangement, being identical to the Lindahl Equilibrium, suffers
from the same defect as the Lindahl Equilibrium: it neglects the incentive of players to ride
cheaply. In solving any real-world NCA problem, as we have argued above, we must cater
to the incentive of little nations to ride cheaply.
We now propose a mechanism that achieves our initial goal of solving the NCA problem
despite cheap riding.

VI

Efficient Provision Despite Cheap Riding

There are, of course, an infinite number of Pareto optimal outcomes. Our approach employs a method that takes account of differential incentives to ride cheaply, and at the same
time is intuitively appealing, to get to some Pareto optimal outcomes. Our proposed mechanism, which we call a Cheap-Riding Efficient Equilibrium (CREE), starts by establishing the
Alliance/Nash Equilibrium as a base point. The question then is how to proceed from there
in an intuitively appealing manner that leaves no player worse off (so that players will not
have the incentive to fall back to the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium), while achieving efficiency.
Here too, there are an infinite number of possibilities. The basic question is how the players
should share the surplus above the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium on the path to the Pareto
frontier.
We propose two alternative approaches to sharing the surplus over the Alliance/Nash
Equilibrium. A CREE with the first approach, called CREE-Nash Bargaining, maximizes the
product of each player’s surplus over the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium. The Nash Bargaining
Solution is the most widely applied bargaining solution. It is also axiomatically justified. We
emphasize the necessity of taking the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium as the disagreement point
for the Nash Bargaining formulation to apply to our NCA goods provision problem. A CREE

17

with our second approach, called CREE-Lindahl, uses the thinking of Lindahl Equilibrium,
or the Supply-Demand Arrangement (which in effect are identical by Proposition V.2), to
define the further path from the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium to the Pareto frontier. We
believe that the prominence of the Lindahl Equilibrium in the public goods context, combined
with its coincidence with the natural Supply-Demand Arrangement, gives CREE-Lindahl a
particularly strong claim as a focal point.
It is worth noting that while a CREE is not a Nash Equilibrium in individual contributions,16 it is in individual participation. Consider the following game. Countries are deciding
whether to join the CREE agreement, inc which the individual contributions are specified. If
at least one of them does not join, there will be no CREE agreement and countries will revert
to the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium. Otherwise, the CREE agreement is effective. Then, for
each country it is a dominant strategy to join the CREE agreement, and thus CREE is a
Nash Equilibrium in individual participation. To our best knowledge, CREE is probably
the simplest Pareto efficient mechanism in NCA goods provision games that achieves full
participation, without the need to distinguish between signatories and non-signatories as is
requested in many other mechanisms in the literature.

VI.I

CREE-Nash Bargaining

The Nash Bargaining Solution provides an intuitively appealing way to proceed from the
Alliance/Nash Equilibrium to the Pareto frontier while respecting cheap riding incentives.
Proposed in Nash (1950), this formulation enjoys strong axiomatic support. Loosely speaking, a Nash Bargaining Solution is a vector of payoffs that maximizes the product across all
players of the gains over some disagreement point. In our context, the disagreement point
is necessarily the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium.17
16

In practice, as with many international agreements, reputational concerns or fear of sanctions will likely
incentivize nations to adhere to the CREE arrangement after they are part of it.
17
From the literature, it does not appear (at least to us) that the disagreement point in a Nash Bargaining
formulation should automatically be a Nash Equilibrium, whether in our context specifically or in general.
Nash (1950) does not make this point. In teaching Nash Bargaining, the disagreement value is typically

18

Formally, a CREE-Nash Bargaining is an allocation (mCRE
+ mN
i
i )i∈N such that:
X
N
N
)i∈N ∈ arg max Πi [Ui (
(mCRE
mi + M N , mi + mN
i
i ) − Ui (M , mi )],
(mi )i∈N

subject to:

i

X
N
N
Ui (
mi + M N , mi + mN
i ) ≥ Ui (M , mi ),

∀i ∈ N ,

i

N
where (mN
=
i )i∈N is a Nash Equilibrium allocation and M

P

i∈N

mN
i .

It is obvious that the CREE-Nash Bargaining is unique, Pareto optimal, and individually
rational, under the conditions in Proposition V.1.
In our numerical example, the (unique) CREE-Nash Bargaining has the nations contribute (0.251, 0.123) in addition to Nash contributions, resulting in the total contributions
(1.623, 0.209), and net payoffs (−0.213, 0.431), respectively.

VI.II

CREE-Lindahl

In a CREE-Lindahl, the cost sharing scheme is such that each player will want the same
additional amount of the public good on top of the Alliance/Nash amount. Formally,
)i∈N
A CREE-Lindahl consists of individualized public good prices (or cost shares) (pCRE
i
(where the superscript CRE stands for Cheap-Riding Efficient, a private good price which
we normalize to 1, and an allocation (M CRE + M N , (mCRE
+ mN
i
i )i∈N ) such that for each
i ∈ N:

(mCRE
, M CRE ) ∈ arg max Ui (M + M N , mi + mN
i
i ),
mi ,M ≥0

subject to:

pCRE
M ≤ mi ,
i

(CRE)

taken to be zero or left unspecified. In applied work, the choice of the disagreement point depends on
specific contexts. (See, for example, Horn and Wolinsky [1988].) We emphasize that the Nash Equilibrium
(rather than zero payoffs or any other consequence of disagreement) is necessarily the disagreement point in
our NCA goods provision context. This is because the Nash Equilibrium, importantly, recognizes the cheap
riding incentive of little players, the focus of this paper.

19

and the market clears:
M CRE =

X

mCRE
,
i

i
N
=
where (mN
i )i∈N is a Nash Equilibrium allocation and M

P

i∈N

mN
i .

The following proposition establishes the existence and uniqueness of the Cheap-Riding
Efficient Equilibrium.
Proposition VI.1. There exists a unique CREE-Lindahl if for each i, Vi0 > 0, Ci0 > 0, Vi00 <
0, Ci00 > 0.
Proof. First, by Proposition IV.1, there exists a unique Nash Equilibrium. Take the total
contribution from that Nash Equilibrium. as M N and individual contributions mN
i . Then,
we can re-write the utility functions as Ūi (·, ·) = Ui (· + M N , · + mN
i ), so that Problem (CRE)
is in effect the same as Problem (Lindahl) with utility functions Ūi (·, ·). By Proposition
V.1, there exists a unique Lindahl Equilibrium. Therefore, there exists a unique CREELindahl.
In our numerical example, the (unique) CREE-Lindahl has the nations contribute
(0.252, 0.123) in addition to Nash contributions, resulting in the total contributions
(1.624, 0.209), and net payoffs (−0.215, 0.432), respectively. This outcome is Pareto optimal. The next proposition shows that it generally achieves Pareto optimality.
Proposition VI.2. Under the conditions in Proposition VI.1, the CREE-Lindahl allocation
is Pareto optimal.
Proof. Bergstrom (not dated) establishes Pareto optimality of the Lindahl Equilibrium.18
We adapt that proof here. Suppose by way of contradiction that there is a CREE-Lindahl
where the allocation (M CRE + M N , (mCRE
+ mN
i
i )i∈N ) is not Pareto optimal. Then there is
an alternative allocation (M̃ CRE + M N , (m̃CRE
+ mN
i
i )i∈N ) such that Player i does strictly
better and the other players do weakly better. Because the utility functions are strictly
18

He requires local-non-satiation for the public good, as is guaranteed in our context.

20

monotone, they represent locally non-satiated preferences. Hence, Player i’s constraint must
be violated and the other players’ constraints weakly violated at the alternative allocation,
P
that is pCRE
M̃ > m̃i , and pCRE
M̃ ≥ m̃j for j 6= i. Adding them up gives M̃ > i∈N m̃i , a
i
j
contradiction.
We show in the next proposition that the CREE-Lindahl takes care of the cheap riding
incentives, in the sense that each player prefers the CREE-Lindahl allocation to the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium allocation, and often strictly so. Intuitively, when asked how much
of the public good above the Alliance/Nash outcome is desired at a given cost-sharing rule,
any individual player can always choose to desire nothing (and thus to contribute nothing) on
top of the Alliance/Nash outcome. Hence, they cannot be worse off at CREE-Lindahl than
at the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium. Furthermore, for a player who would contribute a positive
amount at the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium and partially contribute in CREE-Lindahl, he or
she would strictly prefer to participate in CREE-Lindahl. Indeed, since such a player would
already have equated marginal benefit with marginal cost in Alliance/Nash Equilibrium,
contributing a little bit more as specified in CREE-Lindahl would only be marginally more
expensive, but would bring non-marginal benefit due to the non-marginal increase in the
‘bang’ in terms of the level of the public good.
Proposition VI.3. Under the conditions in Proposition VI.1, each player prefers the CREELindahl allocation to the Nash Equilibrium allocation, and strictly so for any player i with
CRE
mN
< M CRE .
i > 0 and mi

Proof. That each player (weakly) prefers the CREE-Lindahl allocation is obvious by noting
that for each player i, the Nash bundle (M N , mN
i ) corresponds to setting M = 0, mi = 0
in the individual maximization problem in Problem (CRE), which trivially satisfies the
constraints therein. In other words, M = 0, mi = 0 is a candidate solution to the individual
maximization problem, and therefore the value of the objective function at that candidate
solution, or the utility at the Nash Equilibrium, is no greater than the optimized value at
21

M = M CRE , mi = mCRE
.
i
Now we show that player i strictly prefers the CREE-Lindahl allocation whenever mN
i >
< M CRE , by establishing the impossibility of (0, 0) as the solution to the
0 and mCRE
i
individual maximization problem in Problem (CRE). First, note that mN
i > 0 means that the
individual maximization problem in Problem (Nash) has an interior solution, which implies
that the first order condition holds. That is, Vi0 (M N ) = Ci0 (mN
i ). Now, in the individual
maximization problem in Problem (CRE), since the individual constraint obviously binds,
we substitute mi /pCRE
for M in the objective function and effectively make the problem an
i
unconstraint maximization problem. That problem will have a corner solution if and only if
the first order derivative of the objective function with respect to mi is no greater than zero
CR
0
+ M N ) − Ci0 (mi + mN
at M = 0, mi = 0. The first order derivative is 1/pCR
i ).
i Vi (mi /pi
CRE
− 1)Vi0 (M N ) >
Vi0 (M N ) − Ci0 (mN
Evaluating that at M = 0, mi = 0 gives 1/pCRE
i ) = (1/pi
i

/M CRE < 1.
= mCRE
0, because of the Nash first order condition and the fact that pCRE
i
i
Interestingly, in our numerical example, though the parameter values were not chosen for
this purpose, the CREE-Lindahl allocation is remarkably close to the CREE-Nash Bargaining
allocation. In fact, they differ by less than 0.4%. Future work should determine what degree
of closeness applies for other utility functions and other parameter values.
Table I and Figure II summarize our results. To recap, the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium
reflects the incentive to ride cheaply, but it is not Pareto optimal. The Lindahl Equilibrium,
which is identical to the Supply-Demand Arrangement, achieve one of the Pareto optimal
allocations, but it does not reflect the cheap-riding incentive; thus, little players are likely to
balk at this solution. Indeed, for some parameter values, there will be a player who is strictly
worse off at the Lindahl Equilibrium and the Supply-Demand Arrangement. Such a player
would simply hold out for the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium. The CREE-Nash Bargaining and
the CREE-Lindahl, however, both achieve Pareto optimality and both respect the cheapriding incentive, while enjoying intuitive appeal.

22

Table I: Allocations at Various Solutions in Our Example
Big’s
contribution
1.372
1.414
1.623
1.624

Alliance/Nash Equilibrium
Lindahl Equilibrium/SDA
CREE-Nash Bargaining
CREE-Lindahl

Little’s
contribution
0.086
0.354
0.209
0.209

Total
contribution
1.458
1.768
1.832
1.833

Big’s
payoff
-0.375
0.279
-0.213
-0.215

Little’s
payoff
0.347
0.070
0.431
0.432

Notes. The big nation is four times as large as the little nation; the utility functions are U1 =
4 log(M ) − m21 and U2 = log(M ) − 4m22 , respectively.

Little Nation's contribution

0.5
0.4

Big's
reaction
curve

Big's
indifference
curve

Lindahl
Equilibrium

Little's
indifference
curve

0.3
CREEs
0.2

Little's
reaction
curve

0.1
Alliance/Nash
Equilibrium
0
0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

Big Nation's contribution
Figure II: Allocations at Various Solutions in Our Example
Notes. The CREEs include the CREE-Nash Bargaining and the CREE-Lindahl, which differ by less than
0.4% in our example. The big nation is four times as large as the little nation; the utility functions are
U1 = 4 log(M ) − m21 and U2 = log(M ) − 4m22 , respectively.

23

VII

Application to International Climate Agreements

VII.I

Nordhaus Climate Club Proposal

We have proposed a mechanism, CREE, that 1) respects the cheap riding incentive (that
is, no player is worse off than at the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium); 2) achieves Pareto efficiency
(that is, no player can be made better off without making some player worse off); and 3) is
intuitively appealing. In this section we evaluate the Nordhaus (2015) Climate Club proposal,
an alternative solution to the climate agreement stalemate, along these dimensions. We will
show that the key element of the proposal, a universal carbon price (UCP) arrangement,
generally satisfies 2) and 3), but most importantly, fails 1).
In his seminal work on Climate Clubs, Nordhaus (2015) illustrates how the Climate Club
would work where all members of the Club would agree to impose a minimum domestic
carbon tax of $25/ton. Carbon taxes, along with tradable permits, are the economist’s
preferred regulatory tool for environmental externalities. A UCP arrangement, assuming
that all or virtually all major emitters join the club, would achieve Pareto efficiency if the
tax rate exactly reflects the social marginal cost of carbon emissions.19
However, like the Lindahl Equilibrium, the UCP does not respect the cheap riding incentive. Thus, little nations are likely to find it individually irrational to participate in the
UCP scheme. The likely result would either be that many nations would simply not join the
Club, or that to get them to join the UCP would have to be set far below what is desirable.
Nordhaus (2015) deals with the non-joiners’ strategy by having members impose tariffs on
the cheap-riding non-joiners. Whether such an arrangement could work in practice, given
concerns about retaliation from the non-joiners, violation of existing trade agreements and
other challenges, has been carefully considered by Nordhaus and hotly debated by others.
Addressing that debate would take us well beyond the concerns of this paper. But it is
19

Indeed, setting the tax at the social marginal cost of carbon emissions maximizes the sum of payoffs
across all nations, which corresponds to a Pareto optimal outcome with the utility weights all being 1.

24

appropriate for us to point out that a UCP would simply ignore the bargaining power that
little beneficiaries have when it comes to the provision of a public good.
Thus, major beneficiary nations, like the United States and China, which have by far
the largest GNIs of any nations, would find a uniform carbon tax strongly in their interest.
However, nations with much smaller GNIs or populations, or lower per capita incomes, or
nations much less affected by climate change, are nations that benefit much less at the
margin. Little nations would correctly point out that the strategic situation tilts in their
favor. They could feel entitled to impose a much lower carbon tax than the United States
and China, the type of result to be expected in an Alliance/Nash Equilibrium.
Is it possible to amend the UCP to respect the cheap-riding incentive while compromising
neither efficiency nor intuitive appeal? Some may propose having the smaller nations have
a lower tax on carbon as a means to have a better chance of getting a significant tax, but
that sacrifices Pareto efficiency.20 An alternative solution would be to have everyone pay the
same tax, thus achieving efficiency, but to have the big nations remit some of their own tax
revenues to little nations. However, we doubt that this remedy would be politically feasible;
nations, or more accurately the citizens of nations, do not like to transfer major financial
resources to directly benefit other countries.21 Yet another approach, in similar spirit, would
have big nations remit some of their tax revenue to some international or global fund, which
would then be deployed to benefit all. But this too might be politically unattractive. Such
concerns highlight the relevant strengths of our CREE solutions.

VII.II

Testing the Alliance Equilibrium Model

We test the Alliance Equilibrium model (Olson and Zeckhauser, 1966) presented in Section IV utilizing the emissions-reduction pledges made by individual nations for the Paris
Climate Change Conference as the measure of the nation’s contributions. In particular, we
20

Nordhaus (2015) allows individual nations to impose a higher tax.
That being said, the Paris Agreement’s Article 6 has provisions for “internationally transferred mitigation outcomes”, or ITMOs, which provide parties with the mechanism to trade emission reduction credits
for funds.
21

25

focus on the important implication of the Alliance Equilibrium model that big nations pledge
disproportionately more relative to the size of their economies than little nations.
Olson and Zeckhauser (1966) tested, among other things, whether big nations contributed
disproportionally more to defense than did little nations in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).22 They collected data on the GNP and the defense budget as a percentage
of GNP for each member in NATO in 1964. They then calculated the Spearman rank correlation coefficient and the Kendall partial rank correlation coefficient for those two variables.
They found them to be statistically significant. This indicates that big nations contributed
disproportionally more than little nations. For example, the United States devoted 9% of
its GNP to defense, whereas Luxembourg, the smallest nation, contributed only 1.7%.
Would GNP be the proper size measure in the climate-change-mitigation context? Some
might argue that while GNP seems an obvious measure of size that matters in the defense
context, it should matter much less in the context of climate change mitigation. The Maldives, a minuscule nation relative to the United States is often cited in this context. Its very
existence would be at risk given sea level rise. Thus, the argument goes, it should contribute
a lot in proportion to its GNP to the mitigation cause.
We believe, by contrast, that there are clear parallels between the defense and the climatechange-mitigation contexts. The aggregate wealth at stake is still the dominant measure of
size for either problem. If the counterargument is based on vulnerability (as with the Maldives argument) in the climate-change-mitigation context, then in the 1960s NATO context
Germany and France should have contributed much more relative to the United States. After
all, they were much more vulnerable to aggression by the Soviet Union. The big nation in
NATO contributed significantly more disproportionately despite having an ocean of protection.23 If an alternative counterargument is based on per capita income, then Luxembourg,
22

Sandler and Murdoch (1990) use systems of demand equations to distinguish between Nash and Lindahl
behavior. They find support for Nash behavior for five of the ten sample NATO allies, while no evidence of
Lindahl behavior is found.
23
That being said, vulnerable nations might have incentive to appear to contribute a lot for role-modeling
purposes. They might say: “Look, if we do not contribute much, others will ask if we are really crying wolf,
if we really care.”

26

having a very high per capita income, contributed vastly less than the United States. Moreover, with NATO in the 1960s, there was an established organization that had some ability
to get little cheap riders to contribute more. Maybe Germany, France, and Luxembourg
would have contributed relatively even less had this overarching organization not existed.
Despite our beliefs, our empirical analysis also controls for the confounders in the climatechange-mitigation context when calculating the rank correlation across nations between the
amount of reduction per unit of Gross National Income (GNI) and GNI. In particular, we
attend to vulnerability using three measures: 1) vulnerability measures including the percentages of urban and rural population living in coastal areas where elevation is below 10
meters (CIESIN/Columbia University, 2013), historical annual average temperature, and the
percentage of population subject to drought, flood, and extreme temperature events; 2) per
capita GNI; 3) pollution measures, including energy use from fossil fuels, NOx emission, and
PM 2.5 concentration. These data, except for the first vulnerability measure, are all from
the World Bank (2015). We also include 4) environmental concern measures including the
percentage of World Values Survey (2016) subjects who respond positively to environmentrelated questions on active membership in environmental organizations, importance of looking after the environment, protection of environment over economic growth, participation
in environmental demonstration for the past two years, and confidence in environmental
organizations.
Our context differs from Olson and Zeckhauser (1966) in one important respect: the
contributions made by individual nations in the climate-change-mitigation context are harder
to measure than are defense expenditures. Although individual nations submitted mitigation
pledges, which were later attached to the Paris Agreement, additional work is required to
convert the pledges to the absolute amount of reduction entailed, which is the measure of
contribution in our model. Of 158 pledges submitted as of December 6, 2015,24 23% are
percentage reductions from historical emissions levels, 44% are percentage reductions from
24

We downloaded the pledges from the submission portal at http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/
indc/Submission%20Pages/submissions.aspx.

27

future Business-As-Usual (BAU) emission forecasts, a couple involve reductions on a per
capita or per dollar of GDP basis, and the rest do not include any specific numbers in their
submitted pledge.25 Moreover, dozens of nations did not submit any pledge.
To convert these pledges to an absolute amount of reduction, we need to estimate the
BAU emissions. For the three big emitters, there are existing analyses that take care of the
fine details of the emission determinants. These three are China,26 the United States,27 and
EU-28.28 For them, we take their BAU emission forecasts from those reports. For the rest,
we use nation-wise autoregression models to forecast their BAU emissions in 2030, drawing
upon Aldy, Chen, and Pizer (2016).29 Specifically, we regress the current log per capita
carbon emission on the previous-year log per capita carbon emission, log population density,
log per capita GDP, and a linear time trend, using data up to 2012, the last year for which
the carbon emissions data are available from the CAIT Climate Data Explorer (2015). We
employ the estimated coefficients to forecast each nation’s 2030 carbon emission by relying
on the population and GDP forecasts by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (2015), and by
iteratively using the prior year’s carbon emission forecasts. We then calculate the absolute
amount of reduction from the 2030 BAU emissions for the pledges.30 For nations that
25

We focus on unconditional reductions, as opposed to conditional reductions, to be consistent with our
Alliance/Nash Equilibrium formulation.
26
Energy Research Institute (2009) of China predicts that the BAU emissions will be around 12,500
million tons in 2030. For readers concerned about strategic over-reporting by the Chinese government, that
forecast is within the range of 8,000-18,000 million tons of energy-related BAU emissions generated by 12
engineering or general-equilibrium modeling platforms reviewed in Grubb et al. (2015). It is also below what
our autoregression model would have predicted.
27
The U.S. Department of State (2015) synthesizes multiple data sources and predicts the BAU carbon
emissions to be 5,705 million tons in 2025.
28
European Environment Agency (2015) predicts that EU-28’s BAU GHG emissions in 2030 will be 27%
lower than the 1990 level. We assume a proportional reduction in the BAU carbon emissions in our analysis.
29
We choose nation-wise autoregression models because we find that they achieve a much smaller mean
squared forecasting error of the aggregate carbon emissions on the last five years of available data, than
other major carbon forecasting models, including Holtz-Eakin and Seldes (1995), Schmalensee, Stoker, and
Judson (1998), and Auffhammer and Steinhauser (2012).
30
We use carbon emissions despite the fact that many pledges are in terms of GHG emissions. The reason
is that the historical data on individual nations’ GHG emissions are very limited. We hence trade off the
match with the pledges for the accuracy of forecasts, and assume that the reduction in carbon emissions
will be proportional to that in GHG emissions. The carbon emissions that we use do not include land use,
land-use change, and forestry activities emissions, which is consistent with the practice of most pledges.
Calculations available from the authors.

28

submitted pledges with reduction goals, the reduction is calculated by taking the difference
between our BAU emission estimates and the emission target indicated or implied in each
individual INDC.
To nations that submitted pledges without a reduction goal, we assign a more negative
normalized reduction (hence are less likely to bind) than that of the most non-binding pledge
we have estimated; we treat those nations as less generous than those which state explicit
reduction goals in their INDCs. For nations that did not submit a pledge at all, we assign
an even more negative normalized reduction; we treat them as the least willing to abate.
We report the Pearson rank correlation test results in Table II. The rank correlation coefficient between the reduction per dollar of GNI and GNI is positive and highly significant.
This means that nations with larger GNI’s pledge disproportionally greater reductions relative to their GNI’s. This is consistent with our hypothesis that GNI is a dominant measure
of nation size in the climate-change-mitigation context. Per capita GNI produces a positive
rank order correlation as well. This is due in part to the fact that nations with smaller per
capita incomes are little developing nations with small GNIs. The vulnerability measures, as
we expected, are not valid measures of nation size in terms of producing big contributions.
Indeed, they point in the other direction. We believe once again that the negative rank order
correlation in this context comes about because most highly vulnerable nations have small
GNIs.
Table II: Pearson Rank Correlation Test Results
Correlation between the variable
and reduction/variable

Coefficient

p-value

# of obs

GNI
Per capita GNI
% vulnerable rural population
% vulnerable urban population
% population exposed to disaster
Annual temperature

0.3433
0.2547
-0.1854
-0.0641
-0.1759
-0.1143

0.000
0.008
0.038
0.478
0.045
0.189

106
106
126
125
130
134

To investigate whether GNI and per capita GNI remain valid measures of nation size after
29

controlling for the aforementioned potentially confounding factors, we conduct the Kendall
partial rank correlation test. Table III shows that GNI persists as a robust measure of size in
the climate-change-mitigation context after controlling for per capita wealth, vulnerability,
pollution and citizens’ environmental concern, while per capita GNI has no relationship.
This is the prime implication of the Alliance Model that we conjectured above.
Table III: Kendall Partial Rank Correlation Test Results
Partial correlation between the variable
and reduction/variable

GNI

GNI

Per capita
GNI

Per capita
GNI

Coefficient
p-value

0.1125
0.063

0.1685
0.040

0.0459
0.481

-0.0020
0.987

Environmental concern variables
All other controls
# of obs

N
Y
66

Y
Y
30

N
Y
66

Y
Y
30

Notes. “All other controls” include (among others) per capita GNI if the outcome variable
normalizer is GNI, and vice versa.

VIII

Conclusion

This analysis starts by observing that for many important public goods, including those
provided by nonprofit organizations and collections of nations, there is no central authority to
both provide the good and levy the exactions to pay for it. While negotiating to efficiency is
conceivable when players are symmetrically situated, achieving an efficient level of provision
with players whose circumstances differ substantially, as is the case with international public
goods, encounters the challenge of nations’ differential incentives to ride cheaply.
We propose the Cheap-Riding Efficient Equilibrium, which recognizes the incentives of
players, particularly little players, to ride cheaply. It starts with the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium, and then employs the principles of either the Lindahl Equilibrium or the Nash
Bargaining Solution to progress to the Pareto frontier.
The mechanism respects the cheap-riding incentive, yet still achieves Pareto optimality.31
31

The solution is Pareto optimal given the constraint that contributions must be in kind. Thus, in the

30

To be sure, there are other ways to advance beyond the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium. Our
proposal, we believe, capitalizes on a well known, and axiomatically justified, bargaining
solution (for CREE-Nash Bargaining), or has important advantages as a focal point (for
CREE-Lindahl).
We then apply our theory to climate change mitigation, probably the most famed international public good. We discuss the Climate Club approach proposed in Nordhaus (2015),
and point out that it ignores the bargaining power that little nations have when it comes
to the provision of a public good. We then empirically test the Alliance/Nash Equilibrium
model against against the emissions reduction pledges made by individual nations for the
Paris Climate Change Conference held in December, 2016. The results show that GNI is a
robust and valid measure of nation size in the climate mitigation context, as in the NATO
context studied by Olson and Zeckhauser (1966). Big nations in terms of GNI contribute
disproportionally more to the public good than do little nations.
As citizens of the two nations that lead the world in size-of-economy and GHG emissions,
we recognize that our work here (inadvertently) reveals the weak bargaining positions of our
homelands. It seems inevitable that they will have to bear a disproportionate share of the
burden if there is to be an effective agreement to arrest climate change through significant
reductions in GHG emissions. The leaders of our homelands seem to have grasped this
when, as early as in November 2014 and then again months before the Paris Conference,
they issued two US-China Joint Announcements on Climate Change outlining their ambitions
and commitments. Implicitly, these announcements simultaneously recognized the inevitable
inadequacies of any agreement that might result should they, the biggest players, insist
on proportional burden sharing; and hinted at the ultimate potential for “agreed riding”,
a forceful, albeit unbalanced, agreement that respects the bargaining strength of smaller
nations.
climate-change-mitigation context, each nation cuts its own emissions. It would obviously be beneficial
to relax this constraint, and allow big nations to pay smaller nations, or expensive-cut nations to pay
inexpensive-cut nations, to assume some of their reduction burdens. Footnote 21 provides such an example
from the Paris Agreement.

31

A

Appendix: Imperfect Substitutability
Most of our analysis carries over obviously to cases where individuals’ contributions may

not be perfectly substitutable but still count positively towards the public good: M =
M (m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ) where

∂M
∂mi

> 0 for all i. While direct GHG reduction from anywhere

on the Earth is perfectly substitutable, since the atmosphere mixes, other efforts that could
could lead to GHG reductions may not be. For example, 1 unit of research time spent by a
technologically advanced company is likely more productive than the same amount of time
by a company that is behind the research frontier.
Our analysis above will be readily carried over to the imperfect substitutability cases
where we can establish the uniqueness of Nash Equilibrium for those cases. Below we provide
a sufficient condition.
Proposition A.1. Suppose M = M (m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ). There is a unique Nash Equilibrium
if:
1. for each i, Vi0 > 0, Vi00 ≤ 0, Ci0 > 0, Ci00 > 0; and
2. M = h1 (m1 ) + h2 (m2 ) + . . . hn (mn ) where each h0i ≥ 0, at least one i has h0i > 0, and
each h00i < Ci00 /V 0 .
Proof. We apply Theorem 1 in Folmer and Mouche (2004). Let f i (m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ) =
Vi (M (m1 , m2 , . . . , mn )) − Ci (mi )), and ϕi (m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ) = M (m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ) for all i.
By Definition 1 in Folmer and Mouche (2004), the triple (ϕ, y i , y i ) is a marginal reduction
of f i , where y i (mi , M ) =

∂f i
∂mi

= Vi0 (M )h0i (mi ) − Ci0 (mi ).

We now verify conditions 1, 2’ and 3 in Theorem 1 of Folmer and Mouche (2004). First,
since Φ = (ϕ1 , ϕ2 , . . . , ϕn ) = (M, M, . . . , M ), it is ordered. Second, y i (mi , M ) is decreasing in
the second variable (because Vi00 (M )h0i (mi ) ≤ 0) and strictly decreasing in the first (because
Vi0 (M )h00i (mi ) − Ci00 (mi ) < 0). Third, Φ is strictly increasing in (m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ). Hence,

32

there is at most one Nash Equilibrium. The existence part of Proposition IV.1 shows that
an Nash Equilibrium exists.

33

References
Abul Naga, Ramses H., and Philip Jones, “Better to Give Than to Receive? Altruistic
Provision of a Global Public Good,” Economics Letters, 115 (2012), 480-483.
Aldy, Joe E., Cuicui Chen, and William A. Pizer, “Evaluating the Paris Agreement Mitigation Pledges with Statistical Forecasting Models,” Harvard Kennedy School Working Paper,
2016.
Arce M., Daniel G., and Todd Sandler, “Transnational Public Goods: Strategies and Institutions,” European Journal of Political Economy, 17 (2001), 493-516.
Auffhammer, Maximillian, and Ralf Steinhauser, “Forecasting the Path of U.S. CO2 Emissions Using State-Level Information,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 94 (2012),
172-185.
Barrett, Scott, “The Problem of Global Environmental Protection,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 6 (1990), 68-79.
Barrett, Scott, “Self-enforcing International Environmental Agreements,” Oxford Economic
Papers, 46 (1994), 878-894.
Bergstrom, Theodore, Theory of Public Goods and Externalities Lecture Notes (http://
www.econ.ucsb.edu/~tedb/PubFin/pfweb.pdf).
Boadway, Robin, and Masayoshi Hayashi, “Country Size and the Voluntary Provision of
International Public Goods,” European Journal of Political Economy, 15 (1999), 619-638.
Boadway, Robin, Zhen Song, and Jean Franois Tremblay, “The Efficiency of Voluntary Pollution Abatement When Countries Can Commit,” European Journal of Political Economy,
27 (2011), 352-368.

34

Buchholz, Wolfgang, Richard Cornes, and Wolfgang Peters, “Lindahl vs. Cournot Nash: The
Rold of the Income Distribution,” Public Finance Analysis, 62 (2006), 28-49.
Buchholz, Wolfgang, Richard Cornes, and Wolfgang Peters, “Existence, Uniqueness and
Some Comparative Statics for Ratio and Lindahl Equilibria,” Journal of Economics, 95
(2008), 167-177.
Buchholz, Wolfgang, Richard Cornes, and Dirk Rubbelke, “Interior Matching Equilibria in
a Public Good Economy: An Aggregative Game Approach,” Journal of Public Economics,
95 (2011): 639-645.
Buchholz, Wolfgang, Richard Cornes, and Dirk Rubbelke, “Potentially Harmful International
Cooperation on Global Public Good Provision,” Economica, 81 (2014), 205-223.
CAIT Climate Data Explorer (Washington, DC: World Resources Institute, http://cait.
wri.org, 2015).
Callander, Steven, and Bard Harstad, “Experimentation in Federal Systems,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 130 (2015), 951-1002.
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN)/Columbia
University,
Area

”Low Elevation Coastal Zone:

Estimates”,

Applications

Version

Center

2

(Palisades,

(SEDAC),

Urban-Rural Population and Land
NY:

NASA

Socioeconomic

Data

and

http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/

lecz-urban-rural-population-land-area-estimates-v2, 2013).
Cornes, Richard, and Todd Sandler, “The Theory of Public Goods: Non-Nash Behaviour,”
Journal of Public Economics, 23 (1984), 367-379.
Energy Research Institute, “2050 China Energy and CO2 Emissions Report (CEACER)”
(Beijing: Science Press, 2009).

35

European Environment Agency, “Trends and Projections in Europe 2015: Tracking Progress
towards Europe’s Climate and Energy Targets,” EEA Report No 4/2015, 2015.
Falkinger, Josef, Franz Hackl, and Gerald J. Bruckner, “A Fair Mechanism for Efficient
Reduction of Global CO2 -emissions,” Public Finance Analysis, 53 (1996): 308-331.
Folmer, Henk, and Pierre von Mouche, “On a Less Known Nash Equilibrium Uniqueness
Result,” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 28 (2004), 67-80.
Gerber, Anke, and Philipp C. Wichardt, “Providing Public Goods in the Absence of Strong
Institutions,” Journal of Public Economics, 93 (2009), 429-439.
Griffin, James M, and Weiwen Xiong, “The Incentive to Cheat: An Empirical Analysis of
OPEC,” Journal of Law and Economics, 40 (1997), 289-316.
Grubb, Michael, Fu Sha, Thomas Spencer, Nick Hughes, Zhongxiang Zhang, and Paolo
Agnolucci, “A Review of Chinese CO2 Emission Projections to 2030: The role of Economic
Structure and Policy,” Climate Policy, 15 (2015), 7-39.
Heitzig, Jobst, Kai Lessmann, and Yong Zou, “Self-Enforcing Strategies to Deter FreeRiding in the Climate Change Mitigation Game and Other Repeated Public Good Games,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (2011), 15739-15744.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, and Thomas M. Selden, “Stoking the Fires? CO2 Emissions and
Economic Growth,” Journal of Public Economics, 57 (1995), 85-101.
Hohne, Niklas, Kornelis Blok, Louise Jeffery, and Marcia Rocha, “Paris Agreement: NearTerm Actions Do Not Match Long Term Purpose, But State Is Set to Ramp up Climate Action,” (Climate Action Tracker Statement, http://climateactiontracker.org/assets/
publications/briefing_papers/CAT_COP21_Paris_Agreement_statement.pdf, 2015).
Horn, Henrick, and Asher Wolinsky. “Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for Merger,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 19(1988): 408-419.
36

Isaac, R. Mark, and James M. Walker, “Group Size Effects in Public Good Provision: The
Voluntary Contributions Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103 (1988), 179-199.
Kolstad, Charles D, “Systematic Uncertainty in Self-Enforcing International Environmental
Agreements,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 53 (2007), 68-79.
Lindahl, Erik, “Just Taxation: A Positive Solution,” in Classics in the Theory of Public
Finance, Richard Musgrave, and Alan T. Peacock, ed. (Macmillan, London, 1958).
McLean, Elena V., and Randall W. Stone, “The Kyoto Protocol: Two-Level Bargaining and
European Integration,” International Studies Quarterly, 56 (2012), 99-113.
Nash, John F., “The Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica, 18 (1950): 155-162.
Nordhaus, William, “Climate Clubs: Overcoming Free-Riding in International Climate Policy,” The American Economic Review, 105 (2015), 1339-1370.
Olson, Mansur, The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups
(Schocken Books, New York, 1965).
Olson, Mansur, and Richard Zeckhauser, “An Economic Theory of Alliances,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 48 (1966), 266-279.
Sandler, Todd, and James C. Murdoch, “Nash-Cournot or Lindahl Behavior? An Empirical
Test for the NATO Allies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105 (1990), 875-894.
Schelling, Thomas, The Strategy of Conflict (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1960).
Schmalensee, Richard, Thomas M. Stoker, and Ruth A. Judson, “World Carbon Dioxide
Emissions: 1950-2050,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80 (1998), 15-27.
Shitovitz, Benyamin, and Menahem Spiegel, “Cournot-Nash and Lindahl Equilibria in Pure
Public Good Economies,” Journal of Economic Theory, 83 (1998), 3-18.

37

Sugden, Robert, “Consistent Conjectures and Voluntary Contributions to Public Goods:
Why the Conventional Theory Does Not Work,” Journal of Public Economics, 27 (1985),
117-124.
United States Department of Agriculture, The International Macroeconomic Data Set (http:
//www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-macroeconomic-data-set.aspx,
2015).
United States Department of State, “The United States Climate Action Report 2014” (Washington, D.C., http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/219038.pdf, 2015).
World Bank. World Development Indicators (http://databank.worldbank.org/data/
reports.aspx?source=world-development-indicators, 2016).
World Values Survey Association. World Values Survey Wave 6 (2010-2014), Official Aggregate v.20150418. (Aggregate File Producer: Asep/JDS, Madrid Spain, 2016).

38

