NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GENDER BASED OCCUPATIONAL SEGREGATION AND SEX DIFFERENCES
IN SENSORY, MOTOR AND SPATIAL APTITUDES
Michael Baker
Kirsten Cornelson
Working Paper 22248
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22248

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016, Revised February 2018

We gratefully acknowledge the research support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council (#410-2011-0724) and a Canada Research Chair at the University of Toronto. Fran Blau
kindly provided the occupational crosswalk for the 2000 Census occupational coding. We thank
Dwayne Benjamin for helpful discussions, and Diane Halpern and Gary Solon for their input on
an early draft. We also thank seminar participants at UBC-Kelowna and UBC-Vancouver. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Michael Baker and Kirsten Cornelson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Gender Based Occupational Segregation and Sex Differences in Sensory, Motor and Spatial
Aptitudes
Michael Baker and Kirsten Cornelson
NBER Working Paper No. 22248
May 2016, Revised February 2018
JEL No. J16,J24,J62,J71
ABSTRACT
Research on sex differences in humans documents gender differences in sensory, motor and
spatial aptitudes. These aptitudes, as captured by Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) codes,
predict the occupational choices of men and women in the directions indicated by this research.
We simulate that eliminating selection on these skills reduces the Duncan index of gender based
occupational segregation by 20-23 percent in 1970 and 2012. Eliminating selection on DOT
variables capturing other accounts of this segregation has a smaller impact.

Michael Baker
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca
Kirsten Cornelson
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
kirsten.cornelson@utoronto.ca

Introduction
The male/female gap in labor market compensation has declined significantly over the
past three decades in many developed countries. In the U.S., the female/male ratio of median
annual earnings for full time workers has increased from 0.62 in 1979 to 0.83 in 2014 (Bureau of
Labor Statistics 2015). In countries that measure the gender gap in hourly earnings the
female/male ratio is even higher—for example, in 2014 it was 0.88 in Canada (CANSIM) and in
2015 it was 0.91 in the UK (Office for National Statistics 2015). In comparison, the pace of
change in the gender segregation of employment in recent decades has been glacial. In an early
study of gender occupational segregation, Gross (1968) reported that the Duncan index 1 of
segregation was steady at roughly 0.67 from 1900-1960. In the five decades since then, it has
fallen by just 25%, to just over 0.50 in 2012. Most of this convergence was in the 1970’s and
1980’s; Blau et al. (2013) report that while the Duncan index declined by over 10 percentage
points in the 1970s and 1980s, it declined by just over 3 percentage points in the following two
decades. The index tells us that the overall segregation of males and females remains
substantial: in recent years over half of men (or women) would need to change occupations for
the occupational distributions of male and female employment to be the same.
It is important to understand why gender occupational segregation persists. It accounts
for part of the remaining gap between male and female compensation—the within-occupation
wage gap fell by nearly 50% from 1970 to 2012, while the between-occupation component of the
wage gap (the part related to gender occupational segregation) rose slightly. Persistent
segregation of the genders across occupations implies that sectoral change that accompanies
economic growth is likely to have important effects on the relative compensation of men and
1

The Duncan index, which is defined below, ranges between 0 and 1 and is interpreted to indicate the proportion of
women or men who would need to change occupations to produce a similar occupational distribution of men and
women.
2

women. Finally, if occupational segregation is of intrinsic policy interest, an effective response
must be rooted in an understanding of its sources.
A large literature that attempts to explain occupational segregation has focused on three
classes of explanations: gender differences in skills and human capital, gender differences in
preferences for job characteristics, and gender based discrimination. In this paper, we extend the
literature relating gender differences in skills to occupational choice by examining the potential
importance of sex differences in a set of labor market aptitudes and skills that, to our knowledge,
have not been systematically highlighted in research on gender based occupational segregation.
Our focus is gender differences in sensory, motor and spatial aptitudes—for example, the sense
of touch, fingering abilities and depth perception. There is extensive research documenting
differences between males and females in these skills, many starting at very young ages. While
these skill differences have received less attention than gender differences in other traits, they are
nevertheless clearly relevant to job skills in many occupations.
We map the evidence of sex differences in these aptitudes into occupational aptitudes,
physical requirements, working conditions and temperaments as captured by the Dictionary of
Occupational Titles (DOT, see for example, U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training
Administration 1991) . We next relate these codes to different patterns of occupational selection
by men and women. With few exceptions, females and males select into occupations on the DOT
occupational attributes in accordance with the predictions of the research on gender differences
in motor, sensory and spatial skills, suggesting that the “lab” evidence has some implications for
economic life. These relationships largely remain once we control for other explanations of
gender occupational segregation, including measures of math and verbal demands, physical
strength, people/things orientation, “occupational risk” (risk of death, competition and prestige),

3

and time flexibility.
The relationships between these skills and job selection are quantitatively important.
Using simulations, we show that eliminating the observed correlation between these skill
demands and male/female selection would reduce occupational segregation by about 20% in
1970 and 23% in 2012. This is relatively larger than the combined effect of variables
representing more traditional explanations of gender segregation.
A qualification to these conclusions is that it is difficult to identify the effect of specific
job characteristics on occupational selection or wages because they may be correlated with other
important characteristics that are unobserved. Gender differences in these unobserved
characteristics, rather than our measures of physical, motor and spatial skills, could potentially be
driving the differential male and female selection that we observe in our data. Also unobserved
is any demand side employer discrimination that drives occupational segregation. For example,
to use a better known gender difference, it may be that males are found disproportionately in jobs
requiring physical strength, not because they are stronger on average, but because employers in
these occupations are more discriminatory towards females.
To some extent, these concerns are mitigated by the fact that we are jointly testing for the
effect of multiple skills. It is highly unlikely that we would observe the precise pattern of
selection predicted by the extensive literature on these gender differences along a large number
of skill measures if this selection was not in some way related to these skills. Additionally, we
control for variables capturing many of the competing explanations of differential male and
female occupational selection. Our results tell us that among jobs with similar physical, social,
cognitive, risk and time demands, men and women select differentially into jobs that require
different levels of visual, auditory and tactile perceptiveness, dexterity with the hands and

4

fingers, and ability to visualize objects in space. Given the fact that neither employers nor
employees may even be aware of male-female differences in these dimensions, we find it
difficult to interpret these findings as being unrelated to differential job performance.
We attempt to push further on this issue for the gender difference in the sense of touch.
As explained below, the female advantage in the sense of touch has been attributed to their
smaller average hand/finger size—males and females with similar hand size have been found to
have similar senses of touch. This suggests that shorter males should select into “touch jobs”,
which we identify with the DOT measure of feeling, as females do. Using measures of height as
a proxy of hand/finger size, we cannot reject the hypothesis that this is true. This helps address
the criticism that a female specific demand factor (e.g., employer discrimination) accounts for
the relationship between feeling and sex differentiated occupational selection. We should also
expect the relationship between sex differences in occupational selection and our feeling variable
to be diminished once we directly control for occupational height differences. Again we show
that controlling for males’ average height across occupations reduces the estimated relevance of
the DOT measure of feeling to occupational segregation. This suggests that any unobserved
supply side variable confounding the results for this attribute must be correlated with height
(hand size) rather than gender.
II Previous Literature on Occupational Segregation
A large literature has documented the existence of gender based occupational segregation,
and examined its trends over time (e.g., Blau Weiskoff 1972, Blau et al 2013 and the overview in
Blau and Kahn 2000). Attempts to explain this segregation have focused on three classes of
explanations. The first examines the role of differences in human capital or skills. A recent
emphasis here is on the role of social skills. Bacolod and Blum (2010), Black and Spitz-Oener

5

(2010) and Borghans et al. (2014) all argue that women's advantage in people skills (see also
Gilligan, 2001), combined with an increasing return to social tasks, have contributed to the
decline in the gender earnings gap over the past several decades. Levanon and Grusky (2016)
also emphasize the contribution of sociability to segregation as well as physical factors. 2 More
comparable to our focus here is Bielby and Baron’s (1986) investigation of the relationship
between occupational segregation in a sample of firms in California in the 1960s and 70s and
DOT skill measures. 3 They conclude that neither the skills examined nor measures of turnover
costs can account for the observed segregation.
A second class of explanations argues that occupational segregation is related to gender
differences in preferences for job attributes. A major emphasis is on women’s hypothesized
preference for jobs that provide flexibility to accommodate family responsibilities. Polachek
(1981) argued that women have an incentive to choose jobs in which they are penalized less for
extended family leaves. More recently, Goldin (2014) has highlighted the linearity of the wage
schedule with respect to hours worked as a measure of family-friendly professions. Another set
of preference-based explanations emphasizes gender differences in preferences for risk,
competition and prestige. 4 Buser et al. (2014) show that men select into more prestigious
academic tracks, conditional on ability. Several papers argue that a male preference for prestige
and social comfort leads them to abandon occupations rapidly once they “tip” to being
predominantly female (Akerlof and Kranton 2000, Goldin 2013, Pan 2015). Finally other signals

2

Levanon and Grusky (2016) examine a number of the occupational characteristics examined here aggregated into
composite measures.
3
The basis for the hypothesized skill differences across genders is a contemporaneous summary of research on sex
differences, primarily from psychology (Maccoby and Jacklin 1974).
4
There is evidence showing that men seem to be less risk-averse (see reviews in Croson and Gneezy 2009 and Eckel
and Grossman 2008), and are more responsive to competitive environments (Gneezy et al., 2003; Niederle and
Vesterlund, 2007; see Cotton, McIntyre and Price, 2013 for a rebuttal of this evidence.), and a number of papers
show that men are differentially likely to select into jobs that have higher earnings or mortality risk (Deleire and
Levy, 2004; Leeth and Ruser, 2006; Bonin, 2007; Grazier and Sloane, 2008.).
6

of gender differences in job/career preferences include that women are less likely than men to
receive college degrees in STEM fields even conditional on math test scores (Weinberger 1999)
and females’ job satisfaction declines in the proportion of men in their occupation, conditional
on other occupational attributes (Lordan and Pischke 2016).
A third class of explanations of occupational segregation explores the role of
discrimination. Several papers using matched pairs of applicants or randomized resumes have
found discrimination against female applicants in male-dominated jobs and against male
applicants in female-dominated jobs (e.g., Riach and Reich, 2006; Riach and Reich, 2002 for a
review of other papers with similar results.)
Our contribution relative to this literature is twofold. First, we extend research looking at
the role of skills to gender differences in sensory, motor and spatial skills and explicitly consider
our evidence in light of the research supporting these differences. Secondly, we simultaneously
examine the contributions of a number of explanations of occupational segregation suggested in
the literature together with our new skill measures. To the extent that we successfully capture the
competing explanations with our choice of variables from the DOT and O*NET databases, this
tells us something about the relative importance of different types of explanations.
Of course, the distinction between “skills”, “preferences” and “discrimination” is
somewhat artificial. If discrimination or social norms affect skill and preference formation, our
results will also pick up the effect of these processes. While we consider this less likely for some
of the sensory, motor and spatial skills that have stronger biological origins (for example, feeling
or color discrimination), or are evident at very young ages, we do not rule out the possibility that
discrimination contributes our results. Our analysis speaks to the potential role of realized skill
differences between men and women in explaining occupational segregation; it does not tell us

7

anything about the sources of these skill differences. It does, however, provide direction for
future research in this area by identifying the skills that have the largest correlation
quantitatively.
III Gender Differences in the Skills and Abilities
Investigation of gender differences in skills and abilities is very active in many fields.
This research has spawned popular debate through books that both support and condemn a
biological interpretation of the differences between males and females (e.g., Brizendine 2007,
Fine 2010; McCarthy and Ball 2011).
While not our main concern here, explanations of gender differences fall into three
general classes. The leading biological explanation, which is currently the focus of research in
many fields, is prenatal exposure to hormones, and in particular androgens (see, for example
Halpern 2012). Males have greater prenatal exposure to androgens, most significantly
testosterone, and have higher levels of circulating testosterone post birth. The higher prenatal
and postnatal exposure to androgens is hypothesized to have organizational impacts on the
developing brain. For example, it is thought to accentuate functions that are controlled by parts
of the brain that have relatively high numbers of androgen receptors. 5 A second class of
explanations is founded on evolutionary principles of natural selection and the traditional gender
roles in hunter/gatherer societies. The hypothesis is that natural selection has favoured the
reproduction of males with “hunting skills” and females with “gathering skills”. 6
The third class of explanations is that any gender differences are environmentally
5

Evidence in favor of these theories is constructed by relating levels of prenatal androgens to specific skills. There
are also investigations of the relative abilities of children who are exposed to greater levels of prenatal androgens
than the norm—for example different sex dizygotic twins and children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)—
and variation in abilities according to natural or synthetic variation in hormones (e.g., menstrual cycles and hormone
replacement therapy).
6
The support for this explanation is through interpretation of gender differences through this lens. For example, a
male advantage in targeting distant objects reflects a hunter past, while a female advantage in fine motor skills
echoes a foraging background.
8

determined. Girls and boys are viewed as equally endowed, but they are subsequently exposed
to different circumstances as a result of cultural norms and/or differential access to power. For
example, males’ affinity for things and females’ affinity for people might be traced through a
lifetime of dichotomous stimuli, perhaps starting with the truck/doll divide in childhood. 7
While not strictly speaking an explanation, it is also important to note that another
participant in this debate is the argument that the evidence does not support any gender
differences in traits. The “gender similarities hypothesis”, associated with Hyde (2005),
maintains that based on meta analyses most effect sizes—the standardized difference in means—
of male/female differences are either close to zero or small (in general less than 0.35). 8
Currently biological explanations attract much of the research and much of the
controversy. Our analysis does not shine any new light on the origins of sex differences in skills
and aptitudes. For our purposes, the more important consideration is whether any differences are
present before occupational choices are made so they are not the result of learned occupational
experience.
Finally, much of the criticism of the use of research on sex differences to explain
everyday life is rooted in speculation of what the differences might mean versus speculation that
effect sizes of certain magnitudes must not mean anything. We instead ask the empirical
question of how occupational selection lines up with the researched sex differences, conditional
on our mapping of the sex differences into DOT codes.
Gender Differences in Sensory Functions
7

Unfortunately, simple documentation of gender differences in these environments does not provide much leverage
to test this explanation. For example, Dickens and Flynn (2001) argue genes and environment are matched in ways
to amplify what might initially be a modest genetic based difference. Absent controlled experiments, the primary
leverage to test the environmental explanation is to discover whether gender differences in traits are present at very
young ages before the effects of social environments can have much effect.
8
Our focus is on sensory, motor and visiospatial gender differences that are mostly not covered in Hyde’s evidence
and/or are more generally regarded as areas in which gender differences do exist.

9

Gender differences in some sensory functions have long been reported (Velle 1987).
Certain differences have an explicit genetic origin, such as colour blindness. For others, the
exact source is still under investigation, although they are well documented (see also Halpern
2012, 105-107 for an overview).
Vision—One dimension of gender differences in vision has a clear genetic source. The incidence
of colour blindness is much higher in males than in females because the most prevalent forms
(red/green) are a result of gene deletion or damage on the X chromosome. Because females have
two X chromosomes and males have one, and color blindness is a recessive trait, this result of
genetic abnormalities of this chromosome is more likely to be inherited by males.
While there is a large gender difference in the incidence of color blindness, the overall
incidence is small enough that color blind individuals may be easily able to match with jobs that
do not require color discrimination skills. Recent research, however, suggests that, within a
sample of college students, females exhibit greater sensitivity to colour than males in populations
with normal vision (Handa and McGivern 2015; Abramov et al. 2012b, Murray et al. 2012),
while in a sample of 16-23 month old infants a higher proportion of females could distinguish
colors (Mercer et al. 2014).
Research into gender differences in vision other than color blindness is relatively recent,
and a proposed explanation is males’ higher levels of androgen exposure. For example, adult
males exhibit better visual acuity—sensitivity to fine detail and rapidly moving stimuli (Velle
1987, Abramov et al. 2012a). A suspected cause is the high number of testosterone receptors in
the cerebral cortex. Environmental factors may also play a role, as there is evidence that vision
acuity can be improved through training (Ward et al. 2008; also see Halpern, 2012). Finally,
evolutionary explanations have also been forwarded based on the distinct gender roles in

10

hunter/gatherer societies (Abramov et al. 2012a).
This same evolutionary hypothesis has led researchers to look for sex differences in the
visual perception of near and far space. Recent research has provided evidence of the better
accuracy of females in near space and of males in far space in a sample of young adults (Stancy
and Turner 2010), and similar gender differences in puzzle solving (Sanders et al. 2007b).
Hearing—Females have been observed to have a higher degree of auditory sensitivity than males
(detecting weak sounds in quiet), especially at higher frequencies, starting in childhood (Halpern
2012, McFadden 1998, Velle 1987). Conversely, males have been observed to have a higher
tolerance of noise, again starting in childhood (Velle 1987). Roughly speaking females have
been found to experience a given noise level twice as strongly as males. Males are observed to
have better abilities in sound localization, have a larger right ear advantage and be better at
distinguishing signal sounds through masking sounds (McFadden 1998).
Among older populations environmental factors are thought to contribute to sex
differences in hearing. However, these are less likely factors for differences found among
children. One branch of current research is on the impact of androgens on the development of
auditory function. For example, the higher exposure of males to androgens in the prenatal period
is thought to weaken cochlear amplifiers. Males have weaker otoacoustic emissions than
females, even at very young ages (McFadden 2002, McFadden 2008, Halpern 2012).
Taste and Smell—Females have been observed to have a better sense of smell and taste. The
documentation of sex differences in the sense of smell has a long history and is widely believed
(see Brand and Millot 2001 for a survey). While sex differences have not been observed for the
sensitivity to, or ability to, discriminate all smells, where they are detected they always indicate
greater ability for females—Halpern (2012, p.106) reports that the advantage “extends across the

11

entire lifespan”. Environmental explanations have been offered for these differences—females
may have a larger learned experience with odours. However, evidence of sex differences at early
ages and female superiority at identifying “male” odours suggests there are other factors at play.
Candidates for explaining this difference are sex differences in anatomy, brain structure and/or
function, evolutionary functions and gender differences in verbal ability. The evidence on sex
differences in taste recognition and perception are more mixed suggesting females perceive some
tastes better, but others not as well (Halpern 2012 107).
Touch—Finally, females have been observed to have a better sense of touch, a finding for both
blind and sighted subjects and so distinct from sex differences in visual acuity (Halpern 2012).
At least one dimension of this difference appears to be biological. Perception of textures is
hypothesized to be related to the density of sense perceptors—Merkel cells—in the hand.
Smaller fingers have a higher density of these cells. Therefore female’s smaller stature and
smaller finger size, on average, leads to their better perception of textures (Peters et al. 2009).
Touch sensitivity has been found to be similar between men and women with similar finger size.
Gender Differences in Perceptual Motor Tasks
Motor Abilities—There is evidence of sex differences in some motor and visual coordination
tasks. Tests of abilities for aiming at moving or stationary targets appear to favour males by a
relatively large margin (Hall and Kimura 1995, Watson and Kimura 1991, but also see Auyeung
et al 2011), while females demonstrate an advantage in fine motor dexterity (Nicholson and
Kimura 1996). Tests of both these abilities find similar sex differences among young children
(Sanders and Kadam 2001).
Common tests of these abilities have been criticised for conflating any sex differences in
perceptions of near and far space with any sex differences in specific motor skills. Controlling

12

for sex differences in space, Sanders et al. (2007a) present evidence that females perform better
in finger tasks while males perform better in arm tasks.
Recent research takes up this distinction between a gross motor movement advantage for
males and a fine motor movement advantage for females (see Sanders 2013 for an overview).
For example, females have an advantage in movements of the wrist and fingers (Sanders and
Walsh 2007, Sanders and Perez 2007). Finally, a male advantage has also been observed for
tests of reaction time and finger tapping (Roivainen 2011).
The origins of these differences have not been isolated but evolutionary and (because this
skill can improve with practice) environmental sources are possibilities. Prenatal testosterone
exposure may also play a role as the 2D:4D digit ratio appears to predict targeting performance
(Falter et al. 2006). Sanders (2013) cites recent evidence that hand and arm muscle
manipulation are controlled by the brain’s primary motor cortex via different “tracts” and there is
recent evidence of sex differences in the regions of the brain associated with motor control.
Perceptual Motor Tasks—Sex differences in some perceptual motor tasks, especially those
involving digits and alphabets, appear to favour females (e.g., Roivainen 2011). These include
perceptual speed, fine motor manipulations and tactile skills. For example, females have an
advantage in the “Digit Symbol” task (formerly part of the Wechsler Scales) but not the
“Inspection Time” task (Halpern 2012, Burns and Nettelbeck 2005). A female advantage in the
Processing Speed Index of the Wechsler scales has been reliably found in a sample of primary
and secondary school aged children (Longman et al. 2007).
Some of these differences are again attributed to females' smaller stature, on average—
females’ smaller hand size on average might contribute to their advantage in fine motor tasks
(Peters et al. 1990 and Peters and Compagnaro 1996).

13

Gender Differences in Visiospatial Abilities
Sex differences in visiospatial abilities have been widely documented and in general
favour males. The advantage is not uniform, however. Halpern (2012) in her review reports a
male advantage in spatial perception, mental rotation, spatiotemporal ability, and to a lesser
extent, spatial visualization. The evidence for abilities related to the generation and maintenance
of a spatial image are mixed. Females have an advantage in remembering the spatial location of
objects in an array (Sanders 2013). 9 There is evidence that the gender difference in some of
these abilities emerges at very young ages (e.g., Moore and Johnson 2008, Quinn and Liben
2008). Among high school seniors, Baker and Cornelson (2016) report a gender gap in a test of
three dimensional mental rotation favouring males of 0.388 of standard deviation in 1960 and
0.253 of a standard deviation in 1980. 10
Recent research emphasizes that in summarising this literature it is important to consider
variation in the difficulty of the skill test across studies and the possible conflation of different
skills within a single test. For example, Sanders (2013) argues that the evidence indicates a
strong male advantage in coincidence-anticipation timing (CAT—for example, the ability to
predict when a projectile weapon will reach a moving target), in children and adults,
predominately in easier rather than harder CAT tasks. CAT skills are useful for activities such as
sports and driving. Also, as noted above common tests of targeting and motor abilities
potentially conflate sex differences in motor functions and sex differences in perceptions of near
and far space. Sanders (2013) reports that there is good evidence of a male advantage in the
processing of far space and a female advantage in the processing of near space, although there
are also some anomalous studies.
9

Newcombe (2010) provides the evidence against this claimed female advantage.
For 1960 they report a gender gap, controlling for age, of 0.275 standard deviations for high school freshman and
0.415 for high school seniors.
10

14

An androgen based explanation of male advantage in visual spatial skills has been
forwarded based, for example, on higher spatial performance of females with congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (Miller and Halpern 2014). Sanders (2013) notes that near and far space are
processed by different mechanisms in the brain, setting the stage for sex differences in the
development of these mechanisms to be important. However, there is also evidence that
measures of the gender difference in spatial abilities vary across countries according to some
measures of socio-economic development, although not always in expected ways (e.g., Lippa et
al. 2008). In addition, there is evidence that mastery of spatial skills is responsive to training
(e.g., Miller and Halpern 2013, Hyde 2014). Finally, because there is no explicit training in
visual spatial skills in schools, the sex difference may reflect gender differences in extracurricular activities such as participation in sports and computer use (e.g., Cherney and Voyer
2010).
IV Data and Empirical Framework
Occupational Characteristics Data
To link the sex differences documented in the last section to occupational segregation, we
use information on occupational skill requirements taken from the 1977 and 1991 editions of the
DOT. The DOT, first published in 1939, was originally intended to help match workers with
appropriate jobs. It rates each of several thousand occupations along a number of dimensions
such as aptitudes, temperaments, interests and physical demands. In Table AI of the appendix,
we describe the DOT measures that we believe are most closely linked to the sensory, motor and
spatial aptitudes that consistently show sex differences, as outlined in the previous section.
The DOT measures were not derived with the intent to measure the same skills and
aptitudes in which researchers have documented sex differences. Our mapping, as summarized

15

by our hypotheses of expected signs of any male/female sex difference, is necessarily rough.
A couple of comments are warranted before proceeding.

First, the evidence for sex

differences in the senses of taste and smell are at best mixed, and the explanations include
corresponding sex differences in lived experience. This leads to the possibility that the sex
segregation in occupations due to some other factor leads to the measured sex differences in the
senses of taste and smell.
Second, as noted above, a way to organize the sex differences in motor skills is in the
categories of fine and gross motor skills. Many of the skills and aptitudes with a documented
female advantage are considered fine motor skills and, as Halpern (2012) observes, many studies
support such a generalization. The DOT categories of fingering, finger dexterity, handling and
motor coordination—the ability to coordinate eyes and hands or fingers with speed and
accuracy—are more clearly associated with this category. Eye-hand-foot coordination—the
coordination of hands and feet with visual stimulae—we view to involve arm and leg
coordination which are gross motor abilities. Clerical perception—the ability to perceive details
in tabular or verbal input—has been long associated with the female advantage in perceptual
motor skills, but also, controversially, has been used to argue females are better suited for
clerical jobs. Finally, we are agnostic about the coding of manual dexterity, which involves
working with both arms (a male advantage) and hands (a female advantage). 11
To assess the importance of sensory, motor and spatial skills relative to other
explanations of occupational gender segregation, we also attempt to capture an occupation’s i)
overall physical demands, ii) math and verbal skill requirements, iii) people/things orientation,

11

We do not make use of the DOT physical demand codes kneeling, climbing, balancing, stooping, crouching,
crawling, talking and reaching. We also exclude the aptitude form perception (the ability to perceive pertinent detail
in pictures and graphs) and the physical demands accommodation (the adjustment of the eye to bring things into
focus), and field of vision.
16

iv) degree of risk and competitiveness and v) time flexibility. As outlined above, all of these
factors may be related to men and women’s occupational choices.
We capture an occupation’s physical demands using the DOT variable “physical
strength”. Physical strength represents a relatively uncontroversial and well-understood gender
skill difference; as such, this variable provides a useful benchmark for evaluating the impact of
other skills. For math and verbal demands, we use the DOT General Educational Development
scales for math and language, respectively. We note females are widely viewed as having an
advantage in verbal skills, while a hypothesized male advantage in math skills attracts much
debate. Our measures of people/things orientation are the DOT variables “Temperament –
dealing with people” and “Interests – working with things”. 12
To capture an occupation’s degree of risk and competitiveness, we use three measures.
For risk, we include an occupation’s mortality rate, derived from the Bureau of Labor Statistic’s
Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries. 13 To measure competition, we use the work context
variable “level of competition” from the O*NET database. O*NET, produced by the U.S.
Department of Labor, has supplanted the DOT in recent years, and provides many similar
measures of occupational requirements as well as some additional characteristics. Finally, to
capture the fact that competitiveness may lead men to be more sensitive to prestige, we also
include the occupational prestige score proposed by Nakao and Treas (1994). This is based on
data from the 1989 General Social Survey, in which respondents were asked to rank occupations
on scale of social standing from 1 to 9. 14

12

As shown in the robustness table in the Appendix, alternative measures of social demands produce similar results.
We use information on the number of fatalities for each occupation in 2012, and convert this to a mortality rate
using employment information. The earliest fatalities data are from 1992. Because these data are provided for
different occupational codes, however, we can only match them to 431 Census 2000 occupations (as opposed to the
468 used in our main analysis.) The results are similar if we use the 1992 fatalities information for our 1970
analysis.
14
While the initial scores were based on the 1990 Census occupational coding, we obtain the measures for the 2000
13

17

For measures of time flexibility, we use Goldin’s (2014) proposed measures from
O*NET. Goldin (2014) argues that non-linearity of wage/work locus helps explain the scarcity of
females in high work, high wage jobs. This non-linearity in turn is affected by an occupation’s
time demands, the degree to which it requires structured versus unstructured work, the freedom
its employees have to make decisions, and the extent to which it requires contact with others and
the maintenance of interpersonal relationships. Because we use other measures of an
occupation’s interpersonal demands, we use only the first three suggested O*NET measures (the
O*NET characteristics “time pressure”, “structured vs. unstructured work” and “freedom to
make decisions”) as our measures of time flexibility. The coefficients on all three variables are
expected to be positive. 15
Occupations
We link the DOT measures and the other occupational characteristics to occupations in
the decennial Censuses from 1970-2000, and the 2012 3-year American Community Survey
(denoted as 2012). We use the crosswalk developed by Blau et al. (2013) to convert occupations
in the earlier Census years and the ACS to the 2000 Census occupational coding (see details in
the Data appendix.)
The DOT uses an internal coding system, but the 1977 data are also linked to a CPS file
that provides 1970 Census occupational codes. We use these to match both 1991 and 1977 DOT
codes to 2000 Census occupations. In this way, we were able to link DOT ratings to 476 of the
505 Census occupational codes. (See the Data appendix for a further description of this process.)
Because the DOT contains more detail than the Census occupation coding scheme (so that each
Census code contains a number of DOT occupations), we average the ratings across all DOT
Census occupational coding using data from IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2010).
15
Note that the “structure” variable is reverse-coded in the O*NET, with higher values indicating more freedom for
the worker to determine tasks, priorities and goals.
18

occupations within a Census code, with weights corresponding to that occupation's share of
employment. This means that, although most of our DOT measures are categorical, they are
continuous within our data. When possible, we assign occupations their 1977 DOT measures for
the 1970 and 1980 Censuses, and the 1991 DOT measures thereafter. This is not possible with
the physical demands 16 and certain environmental conditions, however, which are only available
in 1991; for these measures, we use the 1991 measures for all years.
Both the O*NET measures and the fatality information from the Census of Fatal Injuries
are provided at the SOC occupation level. To convert these measures to Census 2000
occupational codes, we use a crosswalk provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. We were able to
link O*NET measures to 468 Census occupations (all of which also have fatalities information),
which provide the final sample of occupations for our analysis. These occupations account for
98.4% of the U.S. workforce in 2012, and have a Duncan index that is nearly identical to the
Duncan index for the U.S. workforce as a whole.
Empirical Framework
Our objective is to estimate Duncan indices of gender occupational segregation net of any
gender occupational selection on occupational differences in the DOT sensory, motor and spatial
attributes. The Duncan index is defined as

where

is the fraction of all employed women who work in occupation j and

is the fraction

of all employed men who work in occupation j. The index, which ranges between 0 and 1, is
commonly interpreted to indicate the proportion of women or men who would need to change
occupations if the occupational distribution of men and women were to be the same.

16

Excepting physical strength, which is available in both years.
19

We start by estimating the relationship between our occupational attribute measures and
the relative probability that men and women select into an occupation. Specifically, we regress
the log odds of male to female employment in an occupation

(1)

on our measures of occupational characteristics. The term

represents the odds that a

randomly selected, employed female works in occupation j. The ratio of these odds for men and
women tells us about the relative likelihood that men and women select into occupation j. 17
Our main regression equation is:
(2)

𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗 = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑗 + 𝜀𝜀𝑗𝑗

where Sj are measures of the characteristics of occupation j.
We use the results of estimating (2) to simulate the effect of removing any differential
selection on skills across occupations. We first predict the log odds for each occupation that
would occur if a particular set of occupational characteristics did not differentially affect the
occupation choices of men and women. Let Sk denote a subset of occupational characteristics,
and S-k denote all of the remaining occupational characteristics. The predicted log odds for
occupation j, eliminating differential gender selection on the characteristic set k are:
(3)

𝑙𝑙̂𝑗𝑗 = 𝛼𝛼� + 𝛽𝛽̂−𝑘𝑘 𝑆𝑆−𝑘𝑘 + 𝜀𝜀̂𝑗𝑗

Next, we find the unique occupational shares,

and

, that solve these log odds and also keep

each occupation's total share of employment at its actual level (this yields 936 equations in 936
17

Alternatively, we can write the odds ratio as the male-to-female ratio in occupation j over the male-to-female ratio
in all other occupations. If j is small relative to the labor market, this denominator of this equation is approximately
equal to the male-to-female ratio of total employment. The odds ratio therefore tells us about how far the sex ratio in
an occupation deviates from the norm for the labor market.
20

unknowns). 18 Finally, we construct Duncan indices from these predicted shares.
In order to evaluate whether these predicted indices are significantly different from the
actual Duncan index in each year, we compare them to a distribution of Duncan indices
constructed from 500 rounds of resampling from the actual data. They tell us the probability of
observing the given level of the Duncan index in an economy that actually had the same
underlying selection behaviour as the actual economy. Because the sample size is large, this
procedure produces bounds that are quite narrow: the resampled Duncan indices vary from the
actual Duncan index only at the fourth decimal point. As a result, all of our estimated Duncan
indices are significantly different from the actual Duncan index at the 1 percent level. We
therefore omit the standard indications of significance from the tables showing the simulated
Duncan indices.
V Regression Results
An Overview of Gender Occupational Segregation
In table 1 we report estimates of the Duncan index of occupational gender by census year
and for 2012 based on ACS data. While the estimates differ slightly in magnitudes from those in
Blau et al. (2013), they tell the same story. The change in the Duncan index between 1970 and
1990 is more than 10 percentage points, while in the next 22 years it is less than 4 percentage
points. In 2012 just over half of men or women would need to change occupations for the
occupational distribution of males and females to be the same.
In the next five next rows we list the five occupations that make the largest contributions
to the Duncan index in each year. They are very stable over time—secretaries and administrative

18

This procedure produces occupation shares mj and fj that do not add up to one, which is a problem for the
interpretation of the Duncan index. We solve this problem by rescaling so that the shares do add up to one, i.e. by
allowing the total number of men and women in the labor market to change. In practice, the changes in the total size
of the labor force are fairly small – about 3% for men and 1% for women.
21

assistants make the largest contribution in every year. Registered nurses and bookkeeping clerks
appear in four of the five years. In the seventh row we report the proportion of the Duncan index
contributed by these top five occupations. It declines gradually from 21 percent to around 17
percent over the period. This is an initial indication that quantitatively the Duncan index is
relatively concentrated in few occupations, as there are 505 occupational categories in each
year. 19
A recent focus of economic research on occupational segregation is STEM occupations.
While there are many reasons to focus on these occupations, their contribution to overall gender
employment segregation is not one of them. In the next row we report for each year the
proportion of the Duncan index represented by segregation in these occupations. It is quite
steady averaging ranges from about 4% at the beginning of the sample to 5% in 2012. 20
In the final rows of table 1, we report the total number of occupational categories with
positive employment in each year, and indicators of the importance of the occupations making
the largest contributions to the Duncan index to overall gender segregation. For example, just
25-30 occupations in each year, or just 6 percent of the total number, can account for 50 percent
of the Duncan index. There are no STEM occupations in this group, and in 2012 they
represented over 29 percent of male employment and 45 percent of female employment. In each
year roughly 170 of 505 occupations can account for 90 percent of the Duncan. These results
amplify the message of the top 5 occupations. Gender occupational segregation is a story that is
concentrated in a relatively small number of occupations.
Gender occupational selection on aptitudes
19
In Table 1, we report results for all 505 Census occupation categories. Once we move to the analysis of skills, we
will be restricted to the 468 occupations that can be matched to DOT codes. This makes very little difference: the
Duncan index for our 468 occupations is 0.644 in 1970 (the same as when we use the full set of occupations) and
0.508 in 2012 (versus 0.506 for all occupations.)
20
Our definition of STEM jobs is from the U.S. Department of Commerce (2011).

22

In Table 2, we present the results of univariate regressions individually relating the
variables capturing more traditional explanations of gender segregation to the log odds of male
employment. The first row shows a coefficient from a regression of the log odds of male
employment on the DOT variable for physical strength. All occupational attributes are
normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation one, so the estimates are interpreted as the
change in the log odds associated with a one standard deviation increase in a skill. As expected,
occupations with higher demands for physical strength have higher log odds, indicating that there
are more men in these occupations. This effect is substantial: a one standard deviation increase in
the physical strength measure is associated with a 0.723 increase in the log odds of male
employment in 1970 and a 0.996 increase in 2012. In 2012 the odds ratio is just over 2.7 in an
occupation one standard deviation above the mean in physical strength. The DOT physical
strength variable alone accounts for 14% of the variation in the log odds in 1970, and 32% in
2012.
In the next row, we show corresponding results for “GED – language” and “GED –
math”, which are intended to capture men’s hypothesized disadvantage in verbal skills and
advantage in math. The math variable significantly predicts a higher male share in 1970, but a
lower male share in 2012, while the language variable predicts a higher female share in 2012.
However, these variables account for a smaller proportion of the variation in the data with R2s of
1.5%-8.0%. In the next two rows, we examine the effect of variables corresponding to the
people/things dichotomy. These variables have a strong and significant relationship to the log
odds, in the expected directions: occupations requiring a temperament for dealing with people
have more females, while occupations requiring an interest in working with things have more
men. The variables relating to mortality risk, competitiveness and prestige are all strongly related

23

to the log odds in the expected direction, with the R2 ranging from 2-11%. In the final rows are
the time flexibility measures proposed by Goldin (2014). As hypothesized, occupations with high
time pressures and more freedom to make decisions tend to have relatively more males in them
(although the second relationship is significant only in 1970.) However, occupations that are
relatively less structured have significantly fewer men in 2012. The R2s for each these variables
are relatively small. 21
In Table 3, are the corresponding univariate results for the sensory, motor and spatial
aptitudes. In the first panel are the estimates for the sensory skills—color vision, visual acuity,
auditory sensitivity, the sense of taste and smell and feeling. The results for color vision and
color discrimination are not of the expected sign, while the estimates for the remaining skills are.
Larger estimates are observed for far acuity and the two measures of auditory sensitivity. The
noise attribute alone can account for 44% of the variation in the data in 2012, and the estimated
association with the log odds ratio for this attribute in each year is larger than the estimate for
physical strength.
Estimates for the motor skills are presented in the next panel. Here most of the estimates
are of the expected sign, with the exception of motor coordination and handling in 2012. As
noted above, the manual dexterity attribute involves both arms and hands and thus we do not
have a definitive prediction of a sign for the effect. The result here indicates a positive
association with male employment.
In the final panel are the results for spatial attributes. For both measures of spatial
perception, the estimates are right signed and very large –in fact, typically larger than the

21

Note however that a variable may have a high R2 in predicting the log odds across occupations, but very little
aggregate effect on the Duncan index if either the skill does not vary substantially across occupations, or if its
variation is primarily concentrated in very small occupations (which are weighted equally with large occupations in
the log odds regressions.)
24

estimated coefficient on physical strength. The estimate for spatial skills falls by about 1/4 from
1970 to 2012; the coefficient on depth perception, however, increases slightly over this time
period. By 2012, this single skill measure can account for 42% of the variation in log odds ratio.
The fact that a few of the estimated coefficients are of the wrong sign in Tables 2 and 3
might be explained by the fact that occupational characteristics are not independent of one
another. Men may work in jobs that are more reliant on color vision, for example, because these
jobs also demand aptitudes for which they are relatively advantaged, or because these jobs have
other characteristics that men tend to value more than women. To understand the relationship
between occupational characteristics and the log odds, conditional on overall occupational
characteristics, we next present results based on a full model in which all attributes are included
simultaneously.
The results of these regressions are shown in Table 4. The statistically significant
estimates from these regressions are now all of the expected sign, with one exception (eye-handfoot coordination, although this is relatively unimportant quantitatively.) Among the sensory
attributes, noise and feeling are the strongest and most significant predictors of the log odds. The
role of the individual motor skill is less in this specification, especially in 2012. Both of the
spatial measures are strongly and significantly related to the log odds of male employment in
both years. Among the variables capturing competing hypotheses, the significant predictors of
the log odds are physical strength, GED – math, interest in working with things, the level of
competition and freedom to make decisions. Comparing the partial R2s of these variables
indicates that spatial aptitude is the strongest predictor of the log odds in 1970, followed closely
by things orientation. Physical strength and GED – math are also strongly related to the log odds.
In 2012, the strongest predictor is competition, following by feeling, noise and physical strength.

25

The spatial variables also have a strong relationship to the log odds.
In the appendix we report how the results change in a series of robustness checks. These
include adding the ratio of male to female wages and average weekly hours 22 at the occupational
level as additional occupational attributes, omitting nominally duplicate skill measures (e.g.,
color vision and color discrimination) and investigating alternative DOT measures of people
skills. Each of these modifications has little impact on the inference. We also estimate models
that use either only the 1970 or 1991 DOT definitions for both the 1970 and 2012 data, which
lead to minor changes in inference for one or two attributes. Finally, we have calculated the log
odds ratio separately for the age groups 18-24, 25-34 and 35-64 and estimated the pooled
regression testing for interaction effects between dummy variables for the younger age groups
and the DOT aptitude measures. The estimates of these interactions for both age groups and in
both years are uniformly statistically insignificant.
The message of this analysis is that estimated relationships between the male to female
log odds ratio and the DOT measures of sensory, motor and spatial aptitudes are largely the sign
predicted by the cited research on sex differences. In the more comprehensive specification,
multicollinearity is a challenge to isolating the relationships for individual skills. 23 The estimates
for the attributes/skills of noise, feeling, spatial and depth perception stand out as making an
empirically unique contribution to the log odds employment ratio, on a similar scale to the
contributions of physical strength, GED—math, interest in things and competition. The

22

Weekly hours are provided in intervals in the 1970 Census data; we use the midpoint of each interval to impute
weekly hours.
23
We have estimated the models reported in table 4 using the shrinkage estimator Least Absolute Shrinkage and
Selection Operator (LASSO). For 1970, the estimates from this method are zero for color vision, manual
dexterity and motor coordination. For 2012 the estimates are zero for color vision, near acuity, hearing,
manual dexterity, motor coordination and eye-hand-foot coordination. For both years, the estimates for
noise, feeling, handling and the spatial measures are mostly modestly smaller that in table 4. These results
are available from the authors on request.
26

analogues of these DOT skills in the research literature—hearing, touch and spatial perception—
are among the least controversial and widely acknowledged sex differences, and ones that have
been documented at young ages.
VI Omitted Variables: The Case of Feeling
As noted in the introduction, omitted variables potentially confound our inference. On
one hand, our DOT variables predicting, say, female employment may instead be proxies for
demand side factors such as employer discrimination that segregate females into certain
occupations. On the other, unobserved supply side factors correlated with our DOT measures
may be the true determinants of female or male employment. Similar challenges are faced in the
growing literature on the hypothesized social skills of females (and things orientation of males)
and are ultimately not resolved absent some random variation in the aptitude of interest.
Furthermore, even with random design it is uncertain whether the resulting variation has external
validity for the empirical difference in a given aptitude across the sexes.
The sex differences we focus on are founded on a substantial body of academic research.
Furthermore, in general the sign pattern in our estimates match the predictions of whether certain
skills should correlate with relative male of female employment from this literature. This
provides some confidence that the regularities we identify are legitimate (or perhaps as
legitimate as the relationships of gender based occupational segregation to social skills, physical
strength etc.).
This said, because the gender difference in the sense of touch is thought to be a function
of finger size (which in turn is correlated with gender) rather than a function of gender per se,
this aptitude provides an opportunity to make some progress on this issue. First, if the sense of
touch is a function of finger size and not gender, then finger size should predict the occupational

27

choices of males as it does females. This “test” therefore helps us rule out a hypothesis that a
measure of touch is a proxy for some gender specific demand side factor, for example employer
discrimination, which instead determines occupational choice. Second, a measure of hand size
should substantively diminish the correlation of touch with occupational segregation. Such
evidence again helps address a gender specific supply side confounding unobserved variable.
Our measure of touch is the DOT variable “feeling”. As documented in table 4 this
aptitude is a significant correlate of relative female employment. We are not aware of a
representative data set that provides measures of finger or hand size. However, the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS) provides measures of respondents’ heights and of their
occupational choices. A number of studies document that finger size and hand size and height
are positively correlated (e.g., Garrett 1971, Guerra et al. 2014, Suseelamma 2014).
Our first approach to evaluating whether our feeling variable is actually picking a sex
difference in touch rather than some other effect is to directly add a measure of height to the log
odds regressions. To do this we calculate average height by occupation using the 1990-1994
NHIS. 24 Because males are taller on average than females, using both males and females to
calculate the averages would produce a variable that would capture both any shorter stature of
workers in a particular occupation but also the greater presence of females. Since it is the former
effect we which to isolate we use only the male sample to calculate the averages. Therefore, we
will capture any tendency of males to sort into certain occupations on their height. We view this
choice as providing a lower bound of any effect of height on the choice of occupations where
small stature is an advantage because males may be limited in their ability to sort into these
occupations due to their larger heights throughout the distribution. Also, to the extent that this

24

The 1994 NHIS is the latest NHIS sample that contains information on height and has sufficiently detailed
occupational coding to be useful for our analysis.
28

measure of height has traction it demonstrates that our feeling variable is unlikely to be picking
up a gender specific demand effect.
We note that height may proxy for other attributes in addition to smaller hands. Perhaps
best known is its demonstrated correlation with cognition and non-cognitive skills (e.g., Persico
et al. 2004, Case and Paxson 2008, Lundborg et al. 2014). We directly control for the cognitive
demands of occupations through the DOT GED variables, and for non-cognitive skills to the
extent that they are related with working with people, and so it is of interest how our measure of
height impacts the estimates for these variables.
The results of adding this measure of average male height by occupation to our log odds
regressions for 1970 and 20012 are reported in the first two panels of table 5. We report three
specifications: 1) a univariate regression in which the DOT feeling measure is the only control
(comparable to table 3), 2) a specification where we add the DOT/O*NET variables for the
competing accounts of occupational segregation (physical strength, people/things, etc.) but not
the other DOT variables for sensory, motor and spatial skills, and 3) a specification in which all
skills are added (comparable to table 4). In 1970, adding the control for male heights has a
substantive impact on the magnitude of the estimate for feeling. It falls in magnitude by 20 to 65
percent, depending on the specification. In 2012 the impact is more muted as the reduction in the
estimate for feeling is between 6 and 19 percent. In the final panel we report results using the
1990 census to facilitate the next part for of the analysis. They more closely match the results
for 2012.
It is interesting to note that the control for height has little impact on the estimates for
GED math, GED language or dealing with people. Using the most complete specification (3) as a
reference, the estimates for GED language are more often statistically insignificant than not. For

29

GED math the estimate increases after conditioning on height, by 4 percent in 1970, by 7 percent
in 2012 and by 8.5 percent for 1990. For the temperament working with people, the estimates
are always statistically insignificant, and the change is roughly 1 percent in each year. Therefore,
height appears to have minimal impact on our controls for cognitive and non cognitive skills.
The preceding analysis shows that male average height helps account for the negative
relationship between feeling demands and relative male to female selection into a job. We next
show directly that i) tall individuals select differently into jobs on the basis of feeling demands,
and that ii) this selection process is similar for men and women. Using the same NHIS sample,
we run a logit regression of the probability that individual i is observed in occupation j on the
height of individual i, the skill demands of job j, the interaction between height and all skill
demands, and a set of individual-level controls (age, race and education.) An observation in this
regression is an individual by job interaction, with the dependent variable equal to 1 for the job
that the individual actually occupies, and 0 for all other occupations. In principle, this requires
approximately 472 x 250,000 observations (472 occupations times the number of individuals in
the NHIS.) For computational ease, we instead take a random sample of 5 occupations that the
individual does not work in, and add them to the occupation that the individual does work in, for
a total of 6 observations per person. McFadden (1978) outlines the conditions in which this
sampling of the “option set” results in consistent estimates. The coefficient on the interaction
between “height” and “feeling” in this regression tells us whether taller individuals are more or
less likely to select into jobs with a higher feeling rating. We perform this exercise separately for
men and women.
The results of this exercise are reported in table 6 for males and females separately. They
indicate that both males and females select into feeling occupations on height and in a very

30

similar way. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the male and female estimates are the same.
The estimates for interactions of height with many of the other aptitudes and skills are
statistically insignificant. Exceptions include clerical dexterity, which as noted above has a
stature dimension, the spatial measures, which recent research has documented some association
with height (Zhou et al. 2016), and the time structure variables and competition, which may
reflect non cognitive skills.
In the next step, we use the estimates from the logit equations to predict the male
occupational distribution that would occur if males had the same height distribution as females,
but selected on the basis of height and job skill demands in the way they do currently.
Specifically, we adjust the number of men in each occupation by the amount

(4)

where h represents an individual’s height and x represents the vector of individual covariates,
and the summation sign is over all values of height observed for women. The first term
represents the predicted number of men in each occupation, based on the logit model’s results;
the second term represents the number of men that would be predicted to be in each occupation if
men selected on the basis of height the way they currently do, but had the female height
distribution. The difference between the two represents the change that would occur if we shifted
men to the same height distribution as women. We use the predicted number of men (the actual
number plus

from (4)) and the actual number of women to calculate predicted log odds, and

then substitute them as the dependent variable in (2).
In the first column of table 7 are estimates of the multivariate version of (2) using the

31

1990 census. 25 This is the census that temporally matches our NHIS data. The estimates are
largely consistent with the multivariate estimates for 2012 in table 4. In the second column are
the results of estimating a similar regression using the 1990-94 NHIS data. These results are
largely consistent with those in the first column demonstrating that our inference is not affected
by using the NHIS. In the third column we present estimates for a restricted set of occupations
using the NHIS. This is because our predicted log odds procedure results in negative predicted
values of men in some occupations, and we drop these occupations from our analysis. As can be
seen, there are no major changes in the estimates from focusing on this smaller set of
occupations.
Finally in the last column of the table are the estimates using the predicted log odds. For
DOT feeling variable the result is a substantively diminished correlation with relative female
employment. This suggests that the estimates for feeling in columns 1 through 3 are
substantially picking up an effect of being shorter rather than an effect of some other attribute of
being female.
On balance we interpret the results in tables 5-7 as casting doubt that some gender
specific demand side factor, such as employer discrimination, lies between the relationship
between feeling and the log odds of employment. They also suggest that any unobserved supply
side variable that accounts for a significant part of the feeling impact must be correlated with a
worker’s height rather than their gender.
VII The Association of Gender Occupational Selection on Aptitudes with Gender
Occupational Segregation
The preceding evidence indicates that males and females select into occupations in ways

25

For these regressions, we switch to the 1990 Census occupational codes, which is the coding available in the
NHIS. There are 472 occupations with non missing log odds in the NHIS data; as a result, we limit analysis to these
occupations
32

consistent with research on sex differences in sensory, motor and spatial abilities. We next ask
whether this selection has any quantitatively meaningful implication for the occupational
segregation we observe in the labor market?
In tables 8 and 9, we provide estimates of adjusted Duncan indices following equation
(3). These estimates remove the impact of any sex difference in occupational selection on the
indicated attribute, all else equal. Table 8 shows the Duncan indices constructed in this way from
univariate regressions (tables 2 and 3), while Table 9 shows the effect of eliminating different
groups of occupational attributes based on the multivariate regressions (table 4). Because of the
possibility of omitted variables bias in the underlying regressions we view the results as telling
us more about the relative importance of various attributes than their absolute importance.
From an economic standpoint, the changes induced by individually removing the
influence of many of the skills is quite small. For 1970 over the sensory and motor attributes the
predicted Duncan indices range from 0.610 to 0.651, representing changes of no more than 5.5%
from the actual Duncan index in that year. In 2012, some of these attributes have a larger effect:
eliminating selection on hearing, noise, eye-hand-foot coordination or clerical perception would
reduce the Duncan index by 7-12%.
The spatial attributes have more traction. The predicted Duncan removing the gender
differential in selection on depth perception (which has the more significant effect) is 10.4%
lower than the actual Duncan in 1970, and 16.1% lower than the actual in 2012.
Among variables capturing the competing accounts, physical strength and competition
have the largest effect on the Duncan index in 1970, each reducing the index by around 5%. In
2012, physical strength, the temperament for dealing with people and mortality risk have the
largest effect, in the 4-6% range.

33

Table 9 shows the results from eliminating the impact of selection on different groups of
skills based on the regressions in table 4. The impact of eliminating skill selection in groups is
much larger than in the univariate results. In 1970, the effect of eliminating selection on sensory
and motor skills is to reduce the Duncan by 4.2% and 5.1% respectively; the effect of eliminating
selection on spatial skills is higher, at 10.9%. In 2012, eliminating selection on sensory skills
would reduce the Duncan by 7.1%, while eliminating selection on motor skills is 3.3%. Again,
spatial skills are quantitatively more important, with a predicted reduction of around 10.4%. In
total, eliminating selection on sensory, motor and spatial skills would reduce the Duncan by
20.8% in 1970, and 22.6% in 2012.
The effect of eliminating selection on the variables representing the alternative
hypotheses is generally smaller in 1970, ranging from 1.9-3.4%. In total, eliminating selection on
these variables controls would reduce the Duncan index by 14.4%. In 2012, the impacts of the
different groups ranges from 0-6.3%, with a combined effect of 18.3%.
Eliminating selection on all of the occupational attribute measures reduces the Duncan
index to 0.420 in 1970 (a 34.8% reduction) and 0.299 in 2012 (a 41.1% reduction.) Selection on
observable occupation attributes therefore accounts for a large portion of occupational
segregation, although the majority of the Duncan index remains “unexplained”. 26 27

26
The association between the aptitudes we consider and gender based occupational segregation appears fairly
constant over time. Estimating adjusted Duncan indices by the age groups 15-24, 25-34 and 35-64 (using the 388
occupations with positive employment for both males and females among all cohorts), we find the relative
importance of the sensory, motor and spatial skills remains relatively constant with age, ranging from 16-20% in
1970 and 19-25% in 2012. The effect of the variable representing the alternative accounts, in contrast, diminishes
substantially with age. Eliminating selection on these variables reduces the Duncan index by 22% and 28% for the
youngest age group in 1970 and 2012, respectively; for the oldest age group, these effects are 11.4% and 15.5% (all
underlying results are available from the authors on request). The actual Duncan index rises with age, modestly in
1970 and by around 14% percent in 2012.
27
We have also examined the implications of selection on these skills for the gender wage gap. Holding wages and
overall employment in an occupation fixed, we examine the effect on male and female average wages of eliminating
differential gender selection on observable occupational attributes. This exercise highlights a somewhat surprising
feature of skill-based occupational segregation: in many cases, it favors women in terms of compensation.
Eliminating selection on physical strength or people/things orientation substantially increases the gender wage gap

34

VIII Conclusions
Research from a number of fields indicates that males and female differ, on average, in a
number of sensory, motor and spatial aptitudes that are potentially important for occupational
choice. We bring these findings to the puzzle of persistent gender based occupational
segregation in the US labor market. Our results suggest that males and females select into
occupations in ways predicted by this research. For example, males have been found to have a
higher tolerance of noise and are found disproportionately in noisy occupations. We simulate that
occupational segregation is higher than it would otherwise be as a result of this selection.
Conditional on our mapping of the research on sex differences in aptitudes into DOT
occupational attributes, in both 1970 and 2012, absent this selection the Duncan index of
occupational segregation would be, all else equal, 20-23 percent lower than its observed level.
We also compare the quantitative importance of these variables to a set of variables
intended to capture competing hypotheses of the sources of gender segregation. While we find
that some of these alternative hypotheses do account for gender segregation, they are generally
less important quantitatively than our measures of sensory, motor and spatial skills. Gender
differences in spatial skills in particular appear to have an important relative impact on gender
segregation.
We should note that these comparisons are contingent on the ability of the DOT data to
capture the different explanations of gender based occupational segregation, and any bias from
important factors omitted from our regressions. One might argue that the inability of the DOT

in both years, while eliminating selection on sensory or motor skills increases the wage gap in 2012 (but decreases it
in 1970). This suggests that women’s skill/preference profile on these measures is relatively beneficial. In contrast,
eliminating selection on cognitive skills (particularly math), spatial skills and measures of occupational risk lead to a
lower gender wage gap in both years, but particularly in 2012. These results also underline that the significance of
the segregation of males and females in employment for the gender gap in pay is dependent on the relative prices of
these skills at a particular time and place. These results are available from the authors on request.

35

variables to perfectly capture different aspects of occupations biases our results against finding
an impact of a given explanation. The DOT variables were not developed with the specific aim
of evaluating any of the explanations we consider, although they clearly capture some salient
dimensions of each. We argue that the first message of the analysis is the relative importance of
gender differences in sensory, motor and especially spatial aptitudes for occupational
segregation, all skills that typically have not been highlighted in much of the research in this
area.
The findings also highlight a lesson from the literature on these sex differences for
research on the task content of jobs. The choice of specific DOT or O*NET skills to represent
specific tasks may not be innocuous, particularly if differences across genders are to be
compared or contrasted. 28
In their recent study of gender occupational segregation Blau et al. (2013) observe that
for significant desegregation in the future, “women would need to begin to make significant
inroads into areas where they have not so far, especially predominantly male blue-collar jobs,
and continue to build on their gains in STEM fields; and/or men would need to enter
predominantly female occupations in much larger numbers than they have in the past” (p. 490).
Our results point to some hypotheses of why these inroads are yet to be made.

28

For example the DOT aptitudes Finger Dexterity (a fine motor skill) and Eye-Hand-Foot coordination (a gross
motor skill) are used to represent routine and non routine manual skills respectively in the Autor et al. (2003)
taxonomy of tasks. These skills are shown in tables 2-4 to have strong relationships with the log odds of male
employment, particularly when used in isolation. Correspondingly, Autor and Price (2013) report persistent gender
gaps between 1960 and 2010 in both routine and non routine manual skills employment using this taxonomy. In
contrast Black and Spitz-Oener (2010) report large changes in the gender differences between 1979 and 1999 in
routine and non routine manual tasks for West Germany using broader definitions of the associated aptitudes and
activities.
36

References
Abramov, Israel, Gordon, James, Feldman, Olga and Alla Chavarga, (2012a) “Sex & Vision I:
Spatio-temporal Resolution” Biology of Sex Differences, 3(1) 20
Abramov, Israel, Gordon, James, Feldman, Olga and Alla Chavarga, (2012b) “Sex and Vision II:
Color Appearance of Monochromatic Lights” Biology of Sex
Differences, 3(1) 21.
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. (2000) “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics. August, 105: 3, pp. 715–53.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. (2003) “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4) 1279-1333.
Autor, David H and Breden Pruice, (2013) “The Changing Task Composition of the US Labor
Market: An Update of Autor, Levy and Murname (2003)”, mimeo MIT.
Auyeung Bonnie, Knickmeyer, Rebecca, Ashwin, Emma, Taylor, Kevin, Hackett, Gerald and
Simon Baron-Cohen et al. (2011) “Effects of Fetal Testosterone on Visuospatial Ability”,
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41 (2012), 571–581.
Bacolod, Marigee and Bernardo S. Blum (2010). “Two Sides of the Same Soin: U.S. “Residual”
Inequality and the Gender Gap.” Journal of Human Resources 45(1): 197-242.
Baker, Michael and Kirsten Cornelson, (2016), “Title IX and the Spatial Content of Female
Employment—Out of the Lab and into the Labor Market” NBER Working Paper no.
22641.
Bielby, William T. and James N. Barron (1986). “Men and Women at Work: Sex Segregation
and Statistical Discrimination.” American Journal of Sociology, 91(4) 759-799.
Black, Sandra and Alexandra Spitz-Oener, (2010.) “Explaining Women's Success: Technological
Change and the Skill Content of Women's Work.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 92(1) 187-194.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (2000), “Gender Differences in Pay”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 14(4) 75–99.
Blau, Francine D., Brummund, Peter and Albert Yung-Hsu Liu (2013), “Trends in Occupational
Segregation by Gender 1970–2009: Adjusting for the Impact of Changes in the
Occupational Coding System”, Demography 50, 471–492
Blau Weiskoff, Francine, (1972) “‘Women's Place’ in the Labor Market”, American Economic
Review, 62(1/2) 161-166.

37

Bonin, Holger, Thomas Dohman, Armin Falk, David Huffman and Uwe Sunde (2007). “Crosssectional Earnings Risk and Occupational Sorting: the Role of Risk Attitudes.” Labour
Economics 14: 926-937.
Borghans, Lex, Ter Weel, Bas and Bruce A. Weinberg, (2014) “People Skills and the LaborMarket Outcomes ‘of’ Underrepresented Groups”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review
67(2) 287-334.
Brand, Gérard and Jean-Louis Millot (2001) “Sex Differences in Human Olfaction: Between
Evidence and Enigma”, The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section B:
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 54(3), 259-270
Brizendine, Louann, (2007) The Female Brain New York: Bantam.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2015). “Highlights of Women’s Earnings in 2014, November.”
Report 1058.
Burns, Nicholas R, and T Nettelbeck, (2005) “Inspection Time and Speed of Processing: Sex
Differences on Perceptual Speed but not IT” Personality and Individual Differences 39
(2), 439-446.
Buser, Thomas, Muriel Niederle and Hessel Oosterbeek (2014). “Gender, Competitiveness and
Career Choices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3): 1409-1447.
CANSIM, Statistics Canada, Ottawa, accessed December 3, 2015.
Case A. and C Paxson, (2008) “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market Outcomes”
Journal of Political Economy 116(3) 499-532.
Cherney Isabelle D. and Daniel Voyer (2010) “Development of a Spatial Activity Questionnaire
I: Items Identification” Sex Roles 62 89-99.
Cotton, Christopher, Frank McIntyre and Joseph Price (2013). “Gender Differences in Repeated
Competition: Evidence from School Math Contests.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 86: 52-66.
Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy (2009). “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal of
Economic Literature 47(2): 448-474.
DeLeire, Thomas and Helen Levy (2004). “Worker Sorting and Risk of Death on the Job.”
Journal of Labor Economics 22(4): 925-953.
Dickens, W.T, and J.R. Flynn (2001), “Heritability Estimates Versus Large Environmental
Effects: The IQ Paradox Resolved,” Psychological Review, Vol. 108, No. 2, pp. 346-369.
Eckel, Catherine C., and Philip J., Grossman (2008) “Differences in the Economic Decisions of
Men and Women: Experimental Evidence.” In: Plott, Charles, Smith, Vernon (Eds.),
38

Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, vol. 1. Elsevier, New York.
Falter, C.M., Arroyo, M., and G.J Davis, (2006) “Testosterone: Activation or Organization of
Spatial Cognition?”, Biological Psychology 73, 132-140.
Fine, Cordelia (2010) Delusions of Gender: How Our Minds, Society and Neurosexism Create a
Difference. New York: W.W. Norton Company; 2010.
Garrett, John W (1971) “The Adult Human Hand: Some Anthropometric and Biomechanical
Considerations” Human Factors, 13(2)117-131
Gilligan, Carol (2001). In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gneezy, Uri, Niederle, Muriel, Rustichini, Aldo, 2003. “Performance in Competitive
Environments: Gender Differences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118, 1049–1074.
Goldin, Claudia (2013) “A Pollution Theory of Discrimination: Male and Female Differences in
Occupations and Earnings”, Harvard University.
Goldin, Claudia (2014), “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter”, American
Economic Review, 104(4) 1091-1119.
Grazier, S. and P.J. Sloane (2008). “Accident Risk, Gender, Family Status and Occupational
Choice in the UK.” Labour Economics 15(5): 938-957.
Guerra, R.S., Fonseca, I, Pichel, F, Restivo M.T. and T F Amaral (2014) “Hand length as an
alternative measurement of height” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 68, 229–233.
Gross, Edward (1968). “Plus Ça Change,,,? The Sexual Structure of Occupations Over Time.”
Social Problems 16 (2): 198-208.
Hall, J.A.Y. and D Kimura (1995) “Sexual Orientation and Performance on Sexually Dimorphic
Motor Tasks”, Archives of Sexual Behavior 24(4) 395-407.
Halpern, Diane F. (2012), Sex Differences in Cognitive Abilities: 4th Edition, New York, NY:
Psychology Press.
Handa, Robert J. and Robert F. McGivern (2015) Steroid Hormones, Receptors, and Perceptual
and Cognitive Sex Differences in the Visual System, Current Eye Research, 40:2, 110127
Hyde, Jane Shibley, (2014) “Gender Similarities and Differences” Annual Review of Psychology,
65(3) 373-398.
Leeth, John D. and John Ruser (2006). “Safety Segregation: the Importance of Gender, Race,
and Ethnicity on Workplace Risk.” Journal of Economic Inequality 4(2): 123-152.
39

Levanon, Asaf and David B. Grusky, (2016) “The Persistence of Extreme Gender Segregation in
the Twenty-first Century” American Journal of Sociology, 122(2) 573-619.
Lippa, Richard A., Collaer, Marcia L. Michael Peters (2008) “Sex Differences in Mental
Rotation and Line Angle Judgments Are Positively Associated with Gender Equality and
Economic Development Across 53 Nations”, Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 990–997.
Longman, R.S., Saklofske, D.H. and T.S. Fung, (2007) “WAIS-III percentile scores by education
and sex for U.S. and Canadian populations” Assessment 14(4) 426-32.
Lordan, Grace and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (2016) “Does Rosie Like Riveting? Male and Female
Occupational Choices”, NBER Working Paper #22495
Lundborg P., Nystedt P. and D-O Rooth (2014) “Height and Earnings: The Role of
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills” Journal of Human Resources, 49(1) 141-166
Maccoby, Eleanor G., and Carol N. Jacklin. 1974. The Psychology of Sex Differences. Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Mercer, Michele E., Suzanne C. Drodge, Mary L. Courage and Russell J. Adams (2014), “A
Pseudoisochromatic Test of Color Vision for Human Infants”, Vision research, 100, 7277.
McCarthy, Margaret N. and Gregory F. Ball, (2011) “Tempests and Tales: Challenges to the
Study of Sex Differences in the Brain”, Biology of Sex Differences, 2(4)
McFadden, Daniel (1978). “Modelling the choice of residential location.” In Spatial Interaction
Theory and Planning Models, ed. Anders Karlqvist, Lars Lundqvist, Folke Snickars and
Jorgen W. Weibull, Amsterdam, Netherlands: North Holland, 75-96.
McFadden, Dennis, (1998) “Sex Differences in the Auditory System”, Developmental
Neuropsychology, 14(2/3) 261-298.
McFadden, Dennis, (2002) “Masculinization Effects in the Auditory System”, Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 31(1) 99–111.
McFadden, Dennis, (2008) “Masculinization of Mammalian Cochlea”, Hearing Research, 252,
37-48.
Miller, David I. and Diane F. Halpern, (2013), “Can Spatial Training Improve Long-term
Outcomes for Gifted STEM Undergraduates?”, Learning and Individual Differences, 26
141-152.
Miller, David I. and Diane F. Halpern, (2014), “The New Science of Cognitive Sex Differences.”
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18(1), 37-45
40

Murray IJ, Parry NR, McKeefry DJ, and A. Panorgias (2012), “Sex-Related Differences in
Peripheral Human Color Vision: a Color Matching Study” Journal of Vision 12(1)
Moore DS, Johnson SP. (2008) “Mental Rotation in Human Infants” Psychological Science
19:1063–66.
Nakao, Keiko, and Judith Treas. (1994) “Updating Occupational Prestige and Socioeconomic
Scores: How the New Measures Measure Up.” In Marsden, Peter V. (ed.) Sociological
Methodology 1994, Cambridge: Blackwell Publishers 1–72.
Newcombe, Nora S, (2010), “On Tending to our Scientific Knitting: Thinking about Gender in
the Context of Evolution”. In J. Chrisler and D. McCreary (Eds.), Handbook of gender
research in psychology, Springer, 259-274.
Nicholson KG, and D. Kimura (1996) “Sex Differences for Speech and Manual Skill”
Perceptual and Motor Skills 82, 3–13.
Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund (2007). “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do
Men Compete too Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1067-1101.
Office for National Statistics, (2015) “Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings, 2015 Provisional
Results, November 18, 2015
Pan, Jessica (2015), “Gender Segregation in Occupations: The Role of Tipping and Social
Interactions”, Journal of Labor Economics, 33(2), 365-408.
Persico, N., Postlewaite, A. and D Silverman, 2004) “The Effect of Adolescent Experience on
Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height” Journal of Political Economy, 112(5)
1019-1053.
Peters, M., Servos, P., & Day, R. (1990). “Marked Sex Differences on a Fine Motor Skill Task
Disappear when Finger Size is used as a Covariate” Journal of Applied Psychology,
75(1), 87–90.
Peters, M., & Campagnaro, P. (1996). “Do Women Really Excel over Men in Manual
Dexterity?” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
22(5), 1107–1112.
Peters, Ryan M., Hackeman, Erik and Daniel Goldreich (2009) “Diminutive Digits Discern
Delicate Details: Fingertip Size and the Sex Difference in Tactile Spatial Acuity”, The
Journal of Neuroscience, 29(50),15756 –15761
Polachek, Solomon William, (1981) “Occupational Self-Selection: A Human Capital Approach
to Sex Differences in Occupational Structure”, The Review of Economics and Statistics,
63(1) 60-69.
41

Quinn PC, and LS. Liben (2008). “A Sex Difference in Mental Rotation in Young Infants.”
Psychological Science 19: 1067–70
Roivainen, Eka (2011) “Gender Differences in Processing Speed: A Review of Recent
Research.” Learning and Individual Differences 21: 145–149
Riach, Peter A. and Judith Rich (2002). “Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market
Place.” Economic Journal 112(483): F480-F518.
Riach, Peter A. and Judith Rich (2006). “An Experimental Investigation of Sexual
Discrimination in Hiring in the English Labor Market.” B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis and Policy: Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 6(2): 1-20.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 2015.
Sanders, Geoff (2013) “Sex Differences in Motor and Cognitive Abilities Predicted from Human
Evolutionary History with Some Implications for Models of the Visual System”, The
Journal of Sex Research, 50:3-4, 353-366.
Sanders, Geoff., and Kadam, A. (2001), “Prepubescent Children Show the Adult Relationship
between Dermatoglyphic Asymmetry and Performance on Sexually Dimorphic Tasks”.
Cortex, 37, 91-100.
Sanders, Geoff., and Perez, M. (2007). Sex differences in performance with the hand and arm in
near and far space: A possible effect of tool use. Evolutionary Psychology, 5, 786-800.
Sanders, Geoff., and Walsh, T. (2007). Testing predictions from the hunter-gatherer hypothesis –
1: Sex differences in the motor control of hand and arm. Evolutionary Psychology, 5,
653-665.
Sanders, Geoff, Kamila Sinclair, and Tom Walsh, (2007a) “Testing Predictions from the HunterGatherer Hypothesis – 1: Sex Differences in the Motor Control of hand and Arm”,
Evolutionary Psychology, 5(3): 653-665.
Sanders, Geoff, Kamila Sinclair, and Tom Walsh, (2007b) “Testing Predictions from the HunterGatherer Hypothesis – 2: Sex Differences in the Visual Processing of Near and Far
Space”, Evolutionary Psychology, 5(3): 666-679.
Stancy, Helen and Mark Turner, (2010), “Close Women, Distant Men: Line Bisection reveals
Sex-Dimorphic Patterns of Visuomotor Performance in Near and Far Space”, British
Journal of Psychology, 101(2), 293–309.
Suseelamma, D. (2014) “Study of Correlation between Stature and Length of Fingers” Scholars
Journal of Applied Medical Sciences 2(2D):773-784
42

U.S. Department of Commerce (2011) “Women in STEM: A Gender Gap to Innovation”, ESA
Issue Brief #04-11, August.
U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration (1991), The Revised
Handbook for Analyzing Jobs, Washington D.C.
Velle, Weiert, (1987), “Sex Differences in Sensory Functions”, Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine, 30(4), 490-522.
Ward, P., Farrow, D., Harris, K.R., Williams, A.M., Eccles, D.W. and, K.A. Ericsson, (2008),
“Training Perceptual-Cognitive Skills: Can Sport Psychology Research Inform Military
Decision Training?” Military Psychology 20, S71-S102.
Watson, N.V., and Kimura, D. (1991). “Non-Trivial Sex Differences in Throwing and
Intercepting: Relation to Psychometrically-Defined Spatial Functions”. Personality and
Individual Differences, 12, 375-385.
Weinberger, Catherine J. (1999). ”Mathematics Test Scores, Gender, Race, Ethnicity and
the Science and Engineering Workforce.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of
California, Santa Barbara.
Zhou, Liu, Ooi, Teng Leng and Zijiang J. He, (2016), “Intrinsic spatial knowledge about
terrestrial ecology favors the tall for judging distance”, Science Advances 2(8)

43

Appendix
Table A1 – DOT and O*NET measures of sensory, motor and spatial skills and aptitudes
DOT measure(s)
(type)

Scale

Expected
coefficient on
“male”

Description**

Occupations with highest/lowest rating

Color
discrimination
(aptitude)

1 to 5*

-

“The ability to match or discriminate between
colors in terms of hue, saturation, and brilliance.
Ability to identify a particular color combination
from memory and to perceive contrasting color
combinations.”

Misc. personal appearance workers/
boilermakers

Color vision
(physical demand)

0 to 3

-

“Ability to identify and distinguish colors”

Near visual acuity
(physical demand)

0 to 3

-

“Clarity of vision at 20 inches or less.”

Far visual acuity
(physical demand)

0 to 3

+

“Clarity of vision at 20 feet or more”

Hearing
(physical demand)

0 to 3

-

“Perceiving the nature of sounds by ear.”

Lawyers/
dancers and choreographers

Noise
(environmental
condition)

1 to 5

+

“The noise intensity level to which the worker is
exposed in the job environment”

Misc. construction operators/
chiropractors

Taste/smell
(physical demand)

0 to 3

-

“Distinguishing, with a degree of accuracy,
differences or similarities in intensity or quality
of flavors or odors, or recognizing particular
flavors or odors, using tongue or nose.”

Meter readers, utilities/
plasterers and stucco masons

Feeling
(physical demand)

0 to 3

-

“Perceiving attributes of objects, such as size,
shape, temperature, or texture, by touching with
skin, particularly that of fingertips.”

Chiropractors/
actuaries

Motion picture projectionists/
mathematicians
Tellers/
dancers and choreographers
Bus drivers/
lawyers

44

Finger dexterity
(aptitude)

1 to 5*

-

“The ability to move the fingers and manipulate
small objects with the fingers rapidly or
accurately.”

Dentists/
clergy

Fingering
(physical demand)

0 to 3

-

“Picking, pinching, or otherwise working
primarily with fingers rather than with the whole
hand or arm as in handling.”

Tellers/
dancers and choreographers

Motor
coordination
(aptitude)

1 to 5*

_

“The ability to coordinate eyes and hands or
fingers rapidly and accurately in making precise
movements with speed. Ability to make a
movement response accurately and swiftly”

Dancers and choreographers/
meter readers, utilities

Eye-hand-foot
coordination
(aptitude)

1 to 5*

+

“The ability to move the hand and foot
coordinately with each other in accordance with
visual stimuli.”

Dancers and choreographers/
boilermakers

Clerical perception
(aptitude)

1 to 5*

-

“The ability to perceive pertinent detail in verbal
or tabular material. Ability to observe
differences in copy, to proofread words and
numbers, and to avoid perceptual errors in
arithmetic computation. A measure of speed of
perception is required in many industrial jobs
even when the job does not have verbal or
numerical content.”

Computer programmers/
pressers, textile, garment and related materials

Manual dexterity
(aptitude)

1 to 5*

?

“The ability to move the hands easily and
skillfully. Ability to work with the hands in
placing and turning motions…manual dexterity
involves working with the arms and
hands…Finger movements may or may not
accompany the exercise of manual dexterity.”

Veterinarians/
meter readers, utilities

Handling
(physical demand)

0 to 3

-

“Seizing, holding, grasping, turning, or
otherwise working with hand or hands.”

Optometrists/
dancers and choreographers

45

Spatial
(aptitude)

1 to 5*

+

“The ability to think visually of geometric forms
and to comprehend the two-dimensional
representation of three-dimensional objects. The
ability to recognize the relationships resulting
from the movement of objects in space.”

Depth perception
(physical demand)

0 to 3

+

“Three-dimensional vision. Ability to judge
distances and spatial relationships so as to see
objects where and as they actually are.”

Optometrists/
insurance sales agents

Bus drivers/
sociologists

Other Aptitudes and Attributes
GED language

1 to 5

“…though language courses follow a…pattern of
progression in primary and secondary school,
particularly in learning and applying the
principles of grammar, this pattern changes at the
college level. The diversity of language courses
offered at the college level precludes the
establishment of distinct levels of language
progression for these four years. Consequently,
language development is limited to five defined
levels of GED.”

Clergy/
parking lot attendants

GED math

1 to 6

“The description of the various levels of
language and mathematical development are
based on the curricula taught in schools
throughout the United States. An analysis of
mathematics courses in school curricula reveals
distinct levels of progression in the primary and
secondary grades and in college. These levels of
progression facilitated the selection and
assignment of six levels of GED for the
mathematical development scale.”

Mathematicians/
parking lot attendants

Temperament –
dealing with
people

0 to 1

“…interpersonal relationships in job situations
beyond receiving work instructions.”

Recreational therapists/
dancers and choreographers

46

Interests - things

0 to 1

“Things Functions can be divided into
relationships based upon the worker’s
involvement with either machine and equipment
(machine related) or with tools and work aids
(non-machine related)...Things Functions also
represent levels of complexity based on the
worker’s decisions or judgements.”

Parking lot attendants/
audiologists

Physical strength

1 to 5

“This factor is expressed by one of five terms:
Sedentary, Light, Medium, Heavy and Very
Heavy"

Therapists, all other / statisticians

Level of
competition

1 to 5

To what extent does this job require the worker
to compete or to be aware of competitive
pressures?

Photographers/Crossing Guards

Time pressure

1 to 5

How often does this job require the worker to
meet strict deadlines?

Plating and Coating Machine Setters, Operators,
and Tenders, Metal and Plastic/Bartenders

Structured vs.
unstructured work

1 to 5

To what extent is this job structured for the
worker, rather than allowing the worker to
determine tasks, priorities, and goals? (Note:
higher values imply more freedom for the
worker)

Chiropractors/Telephone operators

Freedom to make
decisions

1 to 5

How much decision making freedom, without
supervision, does the job offer?

Gaming managers/Graders and Sorters,
Agricultural Products

* Reverse coded in original data; re-labelled to be in increasing order of skill. ** Source—US Department of Labor (1991).

47

Data Methods
Converting Census data into 2000 Census occupation codes
In our analysis, we use the 1% Census samples provided by the IPUMS website, as well
as the 2012 three-year ACS. We restrict the sample to 18-64 year olds who are employed in the
civilian labor force, with non-allocated occupation codes.
To ensure comparability with previous work on occupational segregation, we use the
2000 Census occupation codes throughout our analysis. To convert the 1970 Census data to the
year 2000 codes, we follow the procedure outlined in Blau et al. (2013). We start by converting
the 1970 data to 1980 codes using the gender-specific crosswalk provided by the Census Bureau
(available on IPUMS at https://usa.ipums.org/usa/resources/chapter4/occ_70-80.pdf). There were
minimal changes between the 1980 and 1990 coding systems. For 1980 occupations that were
combined into a single 1990 occupation (six pairs), we simply add the number of men/women in
each 1980 occupation to arrive at the 1990 total. For the 1980 occupations that were split in the
1990 coding system, we redistribute the number of 1980 incumbents into the 1990 codes based
on the distribution of employment in 1990. Finally, we use the crosswalk developed by Blau et
al. (2013) to convert the data into the 2000 Census codes.
The 2012 ACS occupation codes are similar to those used in the 2000 Census. For the
occupations that did experience changes from the 2000 Census to the ACS, we follow a
procedure that is similar to that used in converting the 1980 data to 1990 codes.
Converting DOT data to 2000 Census occupation codes
The DOT77 data was obtained from a 1971 CPS file, augmented with DOT ratings,
which is available from the ICPSR website. This file contains both the DOT occupational coding
and the 1970 census occupational coding. Because each 1970 occupation contains several DOT

48

occupations, we calculate the DOT rating for each 1970 occupation using an employmentweighted mean. We use procedures similar to that described in the Census data to convert the
ratings to the 2000 Census occupation coding, taking employment-weighted means at each step.
Note that the crosswalks used in this process are not gender specific; each 2000 Census
occupation is given a single DOT rating, not a separate rating for men and women.
The DOT91 data was also obtained from the ICPSR website. DOT91 ratings are only
available for the 1991 DOT occupational coding. Most occupations had the same coding in 1977
and 1991. A list of exceptions was available in the ICPSR documentation, which was used to
convert the remaining occupations (do-files available upon request.) Once the data was
consistent with the 1977 coding system, the 1991 data was merged onto the 1971 CPS file, and
was then converted to the 2000 Census codes in the same was as the 1977 data.
There are 505 occupations in the 2000 occupation coding system. Of these, 478 had nonzero employment for both men and women, in both 1970 and 2012. Another 2 occupations could
not be matched to the DOT data, resulting in a sample of 476 occupations that could be matched
to the DOT data.
Converting O*NET and fatalities data to 2000 Census occupation codes
The O*NET and Census of Fatal Injuries data are provided at the SOC occupation level.
To convert these to Census Occupational Coding, we use the crosswalk provided by IPUMS. 494
Census occupations could be linked to the O*NET data; of these, 468 overlap with the DOT data
and have non-zero employment for both men and women in both years. These 468 occupations
represent our final sample.

49

Table A2- Sensitivity Analysis- Changes in the specification occupational skills and
attributes
Alternative specification
Controlling for the ratio of wages and hours
worked
Using only one of color discrimination or color
vision
Using only one of fingering or finger dexterity
Using only one of finger dexterity or motor
control
Using only one of manual dexterity or motor
control.
Controlling for alternative measures of the
social skill of employment—DOT interests
“activities involving contact with people”, and
O*NET work context “contact with others”
Alternative specification

Switching to 1991 DOT definitions for both
years

Switching to 1977 DOT definitions for both
years

Results (Based on the full specification with all
variables.)
The results are similar. Adding these to the
controls, the predicted Duncan indices (negating
selection on all attributes) are 0.410 and 0.292,
compared to 0.420 and 0.299 in our main analysis.
The results are similar if we drop either of these
variables. The predicted Duncan index ranges from
0.418-0.424 in 1970 and from 0.297-0.299 in 2012,
depending on the combination used.
The results are similar if we drop either of these
variables. The predicted Duncan index ranges from
0.419-0.422 in 1970 and from 0.299-0.304 in 2012,
depending on the combination used
The results are similar if we drop either of these
variables. The predicted Duncan index ranges from
0.418-0.422 in 1970 and from 0.299-0.304 in 2012,
depending on the combination used.
The results are similar if we drop either of these
variables. The predicted Duncan index ranges from
0.418-0.422 in 1970 and from 0.298-0.299 in 2012,
depending on the combination used.
Using the “interests – activities involving contact
with people” measure results in a Duncan index of
0.420 in 1970 and 0.300 in 2012. Using the O*NET
work context “contact with others” results in a
Duncan index of 0.420 in 1970 and 0.300 in 2012.
Results (Based on the full specification with all
variables.)
The only variable that changes significance is
tasting-smelling, which would not have been
significant in 1970 if the 1991 definitions had been
used. If 1991 definitions are used, the predicted
Duncan index (negating selection on all
occupational attributes) becomes 0.414 in 1970, as
opposed to 0.420 in our main analysis.
The coefficient on clerical perception becomes
larger and significant at the 5% level in 2012 if the
1977 definitions are used; the coefficient on eyehand-foot coordination becomes smaller and
insignificant. All other coefficients remain of similar
magnitudes. If 1977 definitions are used, the
predicted Duncan index (negating selection on all
occupational attributes) becomes 0.295 in 2012, as
opposed to 0.299 in our main analysis.
50

Table 1: Gender based occupational segregation in the US labor market

Duncan Index
Top 5 Occupations

% of Duncan Accounted
by top 5 Occupations
% of Duncan Accounted
by STEM Occupations
Total Number of
Occupations
Number of Occupations
that account for 50% of
the Duncan
Number of Occupations
that account for 90% of
the Duncan

1970

1980

1990

2000

2012

0.644
Secretaries
and
administrative
assistants

0.586
Secretaries
and
administrative
assistants

0.540
Secretaries
and
administrative
assistants

0.519
Secretaries
and
administrative
assistants

0.506
Secretaries
and
administrative
assistants

Driver/sales
workers and
truck drivers

Driver/sales
workers and
truck drivers

Driver/sales
workers and
truck drivers

Driver/sales
workers and
truck drivers

Registered
nurses

Elementary
and middle
school
teachers

Bookkeeping,
accounting
and auditing
clerks

Elementary
and middle
school
teachers

Registered
nurses

Driver/sales
workers and
truck drivers

Bookkeeping,
accounting
and auditing
clerks

Elementary
and middle
school
teachers

Registered
nurses

Elementary
and middle
school
teachers

Elementary
and middle
school
teachers

Maids and
housekeeping
cleaners

Registered
nurses

20.7

21.3

Bookkeeping,
accounting
and auditing
clerks
21.3

Bookkeeping,
accounting
and auditing
clerks
17.9

Nursing,
psychiatric
and home
health aids
17.4

3.9

3.9

4.6

5.2

5.1

505

505

505

505

505

25

26

28

31

31

166

172

177

176

172

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1970-2000 censuses and 2012 American Community Survey.

51

Table 2: The relationship between the log odds ratio of male to female employment and measures of physical
strength, language and math, people and things, occupational prestige, mortality risk and competitiveness,
and time pressure, work structure and decision structure; univariate regressions
1970

2012

Sign

Coefficient

R2

Coefficient

R2

Physical strength

+

0.728***
(0.084)

0.137

0.996***
(0.067)

0.319

GED - language

-

-0.091
(0.091)

0.002

-0.505***
(0.078)

0.082

GED – math

+

0.226**
(0.090)

0.013

-0.171**
(0.081)

0.009

Temperament - people

-

-0.714***

0.132

-0.946***

0.287

(0.084)
Interest - things

+

0.747***

(0.069)
0.145

(0.084)

0.863***

0.239

(0.071)

Occupational prestige

+

0.127
(0.091)

0.004

-0.238***
(0.081)

0.018

Mortality risk

+

0.560***

0.081

0.602***

0.116

(0.087)

(0.079)

Competition

+

0.457***
(0.089)

0.054

0.321***
(0.080)

0.033

Time pressure

+

0.253***
(0.090)

0.017

0.228***
(0.081)

0.017

Structured/unstructured
work

+

0.044
(0.091)

0.001

-0.240***
(0.081)

0.019

Freedom to make decisions

+

0.213**
(0.091)

0.012

0.064
(0.082)

0.001

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1970 census and 2012 American Community Survey. Each estimate is from a
separate regression of the log odds ratio of male to female employment at the occupational level on the indicated
skill or aptitude. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.

52

Table 3: The relationship between the log odds ratio of male to female employment and measures of sensory,
motor and spatial skills; univariate regressions
1970

Sensory

Motor

Spatial

2012

Sign

Coefficient

R2

Coefficient

R2

Color discrimination

-

0.157*
(0.091)

0.007

0.180**
(0.081)

0.010

Color vision

-

0.450***
(0.089)

0.052

0.349***
(0.080)

0.040

Near acuity

-

-0.173*
(0.091)

0.008

-0.230***
(0.082)

0.017

Far acuity

+

0.594***
(0.087)

0.091

0.471***
(0.078)

0.071

Hearing

-

-0.542***
(0.088)

0.077

-0.800***
(0.073)

0.205

Noise

+

0.951***
(0.080)

0.234

1.170***
(0.061)

0.440

Tasting-smelling

-

-0.070
(0.091)

0.001

-0.037
(0.081)

0.000

Feeling

-

-0.154*
(0.091)

0.006

-0.132
(0.081)

0.006

Fingering

-

-0.404***
(0.090)

0.042

-0.244***
(0.081)

0.019

Finger Dexterity

-

-0.148
(0.091)

0.006

-0.064
(0.081)

0.001

Handling

-

-0.020
(0.091)

0.000

0.277***
(0.081)

0.025

Manual dexterity

?

0.452***
(0.089)

0.053

0.672***
(0.076)

0.145

Motor Co-ordination

-

0.153*
(0.091)

0.006

0.336***
(0.080)

0.036

Eye-Hand-Foot

+

0.659***
(0.086)

0.113

0.736***
(0.074)

0.174

Clerical Perception

-

-0.543***
(0.088)

0.076

-0.855***
(0.072)

0.235

Spatial skills

+

0.908***
(0.081)

0.214

0.685***
(0.075)

0.150

Depth perception

+

1.052***
(0.077)

0.286

1.138***
(0.062)

0.416

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1970 census and 2012 American Community Survey. Each estimate is from a
separate regression of the log odds ratio of male to female employment at the occupational level on the DOT
measure of the indicated skill or aptitude. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
levels respectively.

53

Table 4: The relationship between the log odds ratio of male to female employment and occupational skills,
aptitudes and attributes; multivariate regressions
1970

Sensory

Motor

Spatial

Other
Attributes

2012

Sign

Coefficient

Partial R2

Coefficient

Partial R2

Color discrimination

-

-0.084
(0.095)

0.002

-0.298***
(0.102)

0.019

Color vision

-

-0.016
(0.112)

0.000

0.015
(0.103)

0.000

Near Acuity

-

0.016
(0.088)

0.000

-0.075
(0.070)

0.003

Far Acuity

+

0.290***
(0.101)

0.019

0.140*
(0.080)

0.007

Hearing

-

0.091
(0.138)

0.001

-0.003
(0.110)

0.000

Noise

+

0.316***
(0.103)

0.021

0.367***
(0.081)

0.045

Tasting-smelling

-

-0.135**
(0.064)

0.010

-0.004
(0.050)

0.000

Feeling

-

-0.306***
(0.081)

0.031

-0.319***
(0.066)

0.051

Fingering

-

0.013
(0.099)

0.000

0.109
(0.080)

0.004

Finger Dexterity

-

-0.316**
(0.128)

0.014

-0.184*
(0.101)

0.008

Handling

-

-0.183**
(0.090)

0.009

-0.092
(0.070)

0.004

Manual dexterity

?

0.033
(0.123)

0.000

0.185
(0.126)

0.005

Motor Co-ordination

-

0.024
(0.108)

0.000

-0.078
(0.096)

0.002

Eye-Hand-Foot

+

-0.221**
(0.088)

0.014

-0.144*
(0.077)

0.008

Clerical Perception

-

-0.196*
(0.114)

0.007

-0.141
(0.107)

0.004

Spatial skills

+

0.586***
(0.107)

0.065

0.296***
(0.100)

0.020

Depth perception

+

0.306**
(0.123)

0.014

0.413***
(0.099)

0.039

Physical strength

+

0.466***
(0.115)

0.036

0.481***
(0.108)

0.043

GED – language

-

-0.085
(0.178)

0.001

-0.243
(0.174)

0.004

GED – math

+

0.484***
(0.148)

0.024

0.552***
(0.137)

0.036

54

R2

Temperament – people

-

-0.057
(0.143)

0.000

-0.114
(0.112)

0.002

Interest - things

+

0.458***
(0.087)

0.060

0.239***
(0.068)

0.027

Occupational prestige

+

0.184*
(0.109)

0.007

0.132
(0.087)

0.005

Mortality risk

+

0.118*
(0.064)

0.008

0.110**
(0.050)

0.011

Competition

+

0.217***
(0.067)

0.023

0.285***
(0.053)

0.061

Time pressure

+

0.089
(0.070)

0.004

0.056
(0.054)

0.003

Structured/.
unstructured work

+

0.033
(0.073)

0.001

-0.079
(0.057)

0.004

Freedom to make
decisions

+

0.209***
(0.074)

0.018

0.142**
(0.058)

0.014

0.630

0.720

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1970 census and 2012 American Community Survey. The estimates for each
year are from a regression of the log odds ratio of male to female employment at the occupational level on the
indicated measures of occupational skills or aptitudes in the indicated year. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.

55

Table 5: The relationship between the log odds ratio of male to female employment and the occupational
aptitude “feeling”, controlling for males’ average height by occupation and other controls
1970
Feeling
Height

2012
Feeling
Height

1990
Feeling
Height
Controls
Other
Attributes
S/M/S
Aptitudes

-0.154*
(0.091)

-0.132
(0.082)

-0.134
(0.081)

-0.054
(0.090)

-0.425***
(0.071)

-0.268***
(0.069)

-0.306***
(0.081)

-0.242***
(0.078)

-0.124
(0.083)

-0.457***
(0.057)

-0.369***
(0.058)

-0.319***
(0.066)

-0.283***
(0.065)

-0.091
(0.083)

-0.474***
(0.060)

-0.361***
(0.060)

-0.325***
(0.069)

-0.282***
(0.067)

X

X

X

X

0.910***
(0.167)

0.077
(0.154)

0.391**
(0.153)

1.273***
(0.157)

0.672***
(0.130)

0.862***
(0.134)

X

0.998***
(0.150)

0.567***
(0.120)

0.681***
(0.124)

X

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1970, 1990 census and 2012 American Community Survey. This table shows the
results from regressions of the log odds of male to female employment in the indicated year on the DOT attribute
“feeling”, measures of males’ average occupational height, and DOT code capturing competing hypotheses of
gender based occupational segregation and sensory, perceptual motor and spatial (S/M/S) from the 1991 DOT. The
height variable is constructed from the sample of men in the NHIS from 1990-1995. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.

56

Table 6: The interaction of height and job skill demands in predicting occupational selection (logit
regressions)

Interaction with “height”:
Sensory
Color discrimination
Color vision
Near acuity
Far acuity
Hearing
Noise
Tasting/smelling
Feeling

Dependent variable: indicator for “individual i in occupation j”
Men
Women
Difference
0.007**
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.011***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.005***
(0.002)

0.005
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.008***
(0.003)
0.007*
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.004***
(0.001)
-0.008***
(0.002)

0.002
(0.004)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.007**
(0.003)
0.004
(0.005)
0.000
(0.003)
0.003
(0.002)
0.003
(0.003)

-0.000
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.003**
(0.002)
-0.010***
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.003)
-0.011**
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.002)
0.006
(0.004)
0.005
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)
0.015***
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.004)
0.009**
(0.005)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.016***
(0.005)
-0.009**
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.005)

0.005*
(0.005)
0.012***
(0.003)

0.014***
(0.004)
0.002
(0.004)

-0.009*
(0.005)
0.010**
(0.004)

-0.007***
(0.003)
0.012**
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.004)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.003)
0.001
(0.005)
0.000
(0.005)
0.007*
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.002)

-0.006
(0.004)
0.012
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.007)
-0.007
(0.005)
0.000
(0.003)

Motor
Fingering
Finger dexterity
Handling
Manual dexterity
Motor coordination
Eye-hand-foot coordination
Clerical perception
Spatial
Spatial aptitude
Depth perception
Other Attributes
Physical strength
GED – language
GED – math
Temperament – people
Interest – things

57

Occupational prestige
Mortality risk
Competition

Time pressure

Structured/. unstructured
work
Freedom to make decisions
N

0.007**
(0.002)
0.017**
(0.003)
0.008***
(0.002)
-0.003**
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.016***
(0.002)

0.004
(0.004)
-0.010
(0.010)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.005***
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
0.010***
(0.002)

0.002
(0.005)
0.017
(0.010)
0.005**
(0.002)
-0.008***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.006*
(0.003)

773,862

704,766

1,478,628

Notes: Authors’ calculations from the 1990-1994 NHIS. The sample for this table is the set of respondents in the
NHIS who are aged 18-64, are employed in one of the 472 occupations that contain both men and women, and have
non-missing height information. The table shows the results from a logit regression of an indicator for individual “i”
being in occupation “j” on characteristics of the individual (3 race, 5 education and 8 age categories), occupational
skill demands, height, and height interacted with all of the other individual and occupation level controls. The
reported estimates are for the interaction of height with the indicated aptitude. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.

58

Table 7: Actual and simulated log odds regressions, controlling for the interaction between height and skill
demands in job selection

Actual – 1990
Census

Actual – NHIS, all
occupations

Sensory

Color discrimination
Color vision
Near acuity
Far acuity
Hearing
Noise

Tasting/smelling
Feeling
Motor

Fingering

Finger dexterity
Handling

Manual dexterity

Motor coordination
Eye-hand-foot
coordination
Clerical perception
Spatial

Spatial aptitude

Depth perception
Other Attributes

Physical strength
GED – language

-0.040
(0.115)
-0.120
(0.114)
-0.015
(0.072)
0.241***
(0.083)
-0.006
(0.117)
0.250***
(0.081)
-0.070
(0.054)
-0.325***
(0.068)

-0.065
(0.122)
-0.055
(0.121)
0.004
(0.076)
0.185**
(0.088)
0.011
(0.125)
0.239***
(0.086)
-0.045
(0.057)
-0.342***
(0.073)

0.481***
(0.104)
0.309***
(0.104)

0.513***
(0.110)
0.351**
(0.110)

0.096
(0.089)
-0.248**
(0.108)
-0.092
(0.081)
0.027
(0.131)
0.002
(0.105)
-0.206**
(0.081)
-0.185
(0.113)

0.502***
(0.105)
-0.258

Actual – NHIS,
restricted
occupations
-0.020
(0.127)
-0.128
(0.123)
-0.032
(0.078)
0.065
(0.092)
-0.016
(0.132)
0.251***
(0.093)
-0.046
(0.056)
-0.307***
(0.074)

0.148
(0.095)
-0.323**
(0.114)
-0.123
(0.086)
-0.041
(0.140)
0.051
(0.112)
-0.218**
(0.086)
-0.208*
(0.120)

0.151
(0.098)
-0.346***
(0.119)
-0.239**
(0.096)
-0.026
(0.141)
0.127
(0.118)
-0.075
(0.096)
-0.129
(0.129)

0.496***
(0.111)
-0.322

0.504***
(0.114)
-0.314

0.610***
(0.121)
0.319***
(0.114)

Predicted –NHIS,
shifting men to
female height
distribution
-0.176
(0.131)
0.006
(0.128)
-0.045
(0.081)
0.120
(0.095)
-0.095
(0.137)
0.197**
(0.096)
0.072
(0.058)
-0.170**
(0.077)

0.133
(0.101)
-0.168
(0.123)
-0.272**
(0.099)
-0.022
(0.147)
0.038
(0.123)
-0.108
(0.100)
-0.318**
(0.134)

0.414***
(0.125)
0.283**
(0.119)

0.331***
(0.118)
-0.381*

59

GED – math

Temperament –
people
Interest – things

Occupational prestige
Mortality risk
Competition

Time pressure

Structured/.
unstructured work
Freedom to make
decisions
N
R^2

(0.188)
0.576***
(0.160)
-0.153
(0.117)
0.259***
(0.072)
0.081
(0.109)
0.124**
(0.056)
0.275***
(0.061)
0.016
(0.061)
-0.134*
(0.072)
0.336***
(0.062)
472
0.666

(0.199)
0.600***
(0.169)
-0.110
(0.125)
0.260***
(0.076)
0.097
(0.115)
0.114*
(0.059)
0.284***
(0.065)
-0.014
(0.065)
-0.121
(0.077)
0.300***
(0.066)
472
0.630

(0.214)
0.435**
(0.183)
-0.027
(0.136)
0.254***
(0.075)
0.200
(0.125)
0.082
(0.058)
0.303***
(0.067)
-0.008
(0.065)
-0.172**
(0.080)
0.288***
(0.069)
415
0.659

(0.222)
0.440***
(0.190)
-0.202
(0.141)
0.273***
(0.078)
0.079
(0.130)
0.057
(0.060)
0.250***
(0.070)
-0.067
(0.068)
-0.206**
(0.083)
0.196**
(0.072)
415
0.621

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1990 census and 1990-1994 NHIS. This table shows the results from regressions
of the log odds of male to female employment on DOT and O*NET skill demand measures. The results in column
(1) through (3) are from regressions using the actual log odds in the indicated surveys/samples. The results in
column (4) are for the log odds that would be predicted if men had the same height distribution as women based on
the regression results in Table 3. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels
respectively.

60

Table 8: Predicted Duncan indices negating occupational selection on occupational skills, aptitudes and
attributes; univariate results
1970
Duncan
Actual
Sensory

0.644

2012
% ∆ from
Actual

Duncan
0.508

% ∆ from
Actual

Color discrimination

0.646

0.3

0.502

-1.2

Color vision

0.648

0.6

0.500

-1.6

Near Acuity

0.636

-1.2

0.489

-3.7

Far Acuity

0.636

-1.2

0.498

-2.0

Hearing

0.625

-3.0

0.473

-6.9

Noise

0.619

-3.9

0.445

-12.4

Tasting-smelling

0.643

-0.2

0.510

0.4

Feeling

0.641

-0.5

0.504

-0.8

Fingering

0.610

-5.3

0.494

-2.8

Finger Dexterity

0.633

-1.7

0.505

-0.6

Handling

0.644

0.0

0.509

0.2

Manual dexterity

0.648

0.6

0.518

2.0

Motor Co-ordination

0.651

1.1

0.519

2.2

Eye-Hand-Foot

0.627

-2.6

0.470

-7.5

Clerical Perception

0.620

-3.7

0.454

-10.6

Spatial skills

0.580

-9.9

0.475

-6.5

Depth perception

0.577

-10.4

0.426

-16.1

Other

Physical strength

0.607

-5.7

0.476

-6.3

Attributes

GED - language

0.645

0.2

0.507

-0.2

GED - math

0.635

-1.4

0.509

0.2

Temperament – people

0.628

-2.5

0.481

-5.3

Interest - things

0.623

-3.3

0.495

-2.6

Occupational prestige

0.640

-0.6

0.511

0.6

Mortality rate

0.627

-2.6

0.487

-4.1

Competition

0.612

-5.0

0.497

-2.2

Time pressure

0.629

-2.3

0.490

-3.5

Structured/unstructured work

0.643

-0.2

0.508

0.0

Freedom to make decisions

0.633

-1.7

0.507

-0.2

Motor

Spatial

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1970 census and 2012 American Community Survey. The predicted Duncan
indices are constructed as per equation (3) in the text based on the estimates in Table 3. All predicted indices are
statistically significantly different from the actual Duncan index in the indicated year at the 1 percent level.

61

Table 9: Predicted Duncan indices negating occupational selection on occupational skills, aptitudes and
attributes; multivariate results

Actual

Sensory
Motor

Spatial

Combined: sensory,
motor and spatial
Physical strength
Cognitive

People/things

Occupational risk
Flexibility

Combined – Other
Attributes
All

Duncan

1970

2012

% ∆ from
Actual

Duncan

0.617

-4.2

0.472

-7.1

0.574

-10.9

0.455

-10.4

0.622

-3.4

0.476

-6.3

0.644
0.611
0.510
0.632
0.627
0.623
0.627

-5.1

-20.8
-1.9
-2.6
-3.3
-2.6

0.551

-14.4

0.420

-34.8

0.508
0.491
0.393
0.508

% ∆ from
Actual

-3.3

-22.6
0

0.486

-4.3

0.502

-1.2

0.498

-2.0

0.415

-18.3

0.299

-41.1

Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1970 census and 2012 American Community Survey. “Cognitive includes
GED—language and GED—math. “People/Things” includes temperament—people and interest—things.
“Occupational risk” includes occupational prestige, mortality risk and competition. “Flexibility” includes time
pressure, structured/unstructured work and freedom to make decisions. The predicted Duncan indices are
constructed as per equation (3) in the text based on the estimates in Table 4. All predicted indices are statistically
significantly different from the actual Duncan index in the indicated year at the 1 percent level.

62

