                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE DIVISION OF LABOR IN TEAMS:
A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND APPLICATION TO COLLABORATIONS IN SCIENCE

                                        Carolin Haeussler
                                        Henry Sauermann

                                      Working Paper 22241
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22241


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2016




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Carolin Haeussler and Henry Sauermann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Division of Labor in Teams: A Conceptual Framework and Application to Collaborations
in Science
Carolin Haeussler and Henry Sauermann
NBER Working Paper No. 22241
May 2016
JEL No. J24,O31,O32

                                          ABSTRACT

Even though teams have become the dominant mode of knowledge production, little is known
regarding how they divide work among their members. Conceptualizing knowledge production as
a process involving a number of functional activities, we first develop a conceptual framework to
study the division of labor in teams. This framework highlights three complementary
perspectives: (1) individual level (the degree to which team members specialize vs. work as
generalists), (2) activity level (the degree to which activities are concentrated among few team
members vs. distributed among many) and (3) the intersection between the two (e.g., which
activities are performed jointly by the same individual). We then employ this framework to
explore team-based knowledge production using a newly available type of data – the disclosures
of author contributions on scientific papers. Using data from over 12,000 articles, we provide
unique descriptive insights into patterns of division of labor, demonstrating the value of the three
complementary perspectives. We also apply the framework to uncover differences in the division
of labor in teams of different size, working in novel vs. established fields, and on single vs.
interdisciplinary projects. Finally, we show how division of labor is related to the quality of
teams’ research output. We discuss opportunities for extending and applying our framework as
well as implications for scientists and policy makers.


Carolin Haeussler
Chair of Organisation
Technology Management and Entrepreneurship
University of Passau
Innstr. 27
D-94032 Passau
Germany
Carolin.Haeussler@Uni-Passau.De

Henry Sauermann
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
and NBER
henry.sauermann@scheller.gatech.edu
1    Introduction

        A growing body of research examines the organization of knowledge production and the role of
collaboration in teams. One stream of work conceptualizes innovation as the recombination of prior
pieces of knowledge (Gruber et al., 2013; Simonton, 2003), suggesting that the collaboration of
specialized researchers with knowledge in different domains may allow teams to push deeper towards the
knowledge frontier and to create more novel combinations of knowledge (Bercovitz & Feldman, 2011;
Jones, 2009; Singh & Fleming, 2010; Teodoridis, 2013). A complementary view emphasizes that the
research process involves a number of different functional activities, ranging from the generation of
research hypotheses and the design of experiments to the codification of research results in a scientific
paper (Hagstrom, 1964; Knorr-Cetina, 1999; Latour & Woolgar, 1979; Owen-Smith, 2001). In this view,
collaboration in teams can provide efficiency gains from functional specialization and the sharing of
resources. In a similar vein, observers have likened contemporary research labs to “firms” that rely on the
efficient division of labor among specialized individuals (Freeman et al., 2001; Hackett, 1990; Stephan,
2012). Despite rich qualitative studies, however, we have a limited understanding of the division of labor
in teams. For one, prior work has discussed the organization of teams from different angles, yet we lack a
common framework that clarifies how division of labor can be conceptualized and measured. Just as
importantly, the internal organization of teams often remains hidden from outsiders and there is little
large-scale empirical evidence on how team members divide and allocate work in collaborative
knowledge production (Shibayama et al., 2015; Stephan, 2012).
        Adopting a process-based view of knowledge production, this paper makes two main
contributions. First, we develop a conceptual framework that highlights three complementary aspects of
division of labor in teams: Focusing on individuals and looking across activities, the first perspective
informs us about the degree to which members specialize in a small number of activities vs. perform a
broader range of activities. Focusing on activities and looking across team members, the second
perspective informs us about the degree to which an activity is concentrated among few team members
vs. distributed across many. Looking across both individuals and activities, the third perspective informs
us about the relationships among activities, e.g., which activities tend to be performed jointly by the same
individual. While prior research focuses on selected aspects of division of labor, our framework integrates
multiple perspectives and highlights their complementarities. As such, it provides a useful basis for
understanding and mapping the division of labor in teams and may stimulate future theoretical and
empirical work.
        Second, we apply our framework to analyze novel data on the division of labor in scientific
teams. While information on individual team members’ activities is typically difficult to obtain, an

                                                                                                             1
increasing number of journals require that articles disclose which authors made which contributions.
Using data from over 12,000 such articles, we make a number of observations. First, while division of
labor can be summarized using team level measures, measures at the level of individual scientists or
activities provide important complementary insights. Even in a given team, some individuals are much
more specialized than others and activities differ in the degree to which they are distributed among
members. Similarly, while some activities – such as data analysis and writing – are commonly performed
jointly with other activities, experimental work or the supply of materials are often performed in isolation.
Consistent with prior theory, we also find that division of labor increases with team size. However, there
is significant heterogeneity across activities. While larger teams involve a correspondingly larger number
of individuals in empirical activities, the number of members engaged in conceptual activities or in
writing grows much more slowly with team size. In addition to mapping these basic patterns of division
of labor, we examine how division of labor differs across types of projects. We find that teams in novel
fields use higher division of labor than those working in established fields, and the division of labor is
lower in interdisciplinary projects. Applying our framework, we further clarify the nature of these
differences by exploring individual versus activity level aspects. Finally, we examine how different
aspects of division of labor in a team relate to the quality and impact of the resulting paper, as measured
by citations.
          Our work contributes to a number of literatures. First, we contribute to a growing literature on the
production of knowledge and the economics of science (Dasgupta & David, 1994; Jones & Weinberg,
2011; Singh & Fleming, 2010; Stephan, 2012; Wuchty et al., 2007). Complementing the common focus
on collaborators as contributors of different pieces of knowledge, we examine their role in performing
different types of functional activities.1 Using our conceptual framework and exploiting a newly available
data source, we then provide descriptive insights into the process of knowledge production in teams. Our
analyses exploring division of labor in different types of projects and its relationship with the quality of
scientific output also point towards promising avenues for future research on the drivers of division of
labor and on its role in shaping innovative performance.
          We also contribute to the more general organizational literature by developing a conceptual
framework of different aspects of division of labor in teams and by suggesting a number of related
measures at different levels of analysis. This framework may be useful for future efforts to study the
organization of teams across a broad range of contexts. Empirically, much of the prior work has focused
implicitly or explicitly on the production of physical goods (Hamilton et al., 2003; Smith, 1776). We
consider how some of the fundamental concepts from that literature translate into the increasingly

1
 While activities clearly draw on knowledge, the division of labor can differ significantly from the partitioning of knowledge
(Postrel, 2002; Takeishi, 2002). For example, different sets of knowledge may be employed to perform a given activity.
Similarly, some team members may not perform certain activities even though they possess the required knowledge.

                                                                                                                                 2
important context of team-based knowledge production and introduce a novel data source that should
prove useful for future research.
          Our conceptual framework and empirical results may also be useful for scientists, research
administrators, and policy makers. For example, insights regarding the degree to which scientists
specialize in certain activities may inform current debates concerning the content and process of science
education (Freeman et al., 2001; Fuhrmann et al., 2011; National Academies, 2014). Similarly, thinking
about factors that enable or constrain division of labor may help scientists as they consider the benefits or
costs of forming larger teams (Gans & Murray, 2013) or as they explore new forms of organizing science
such as the crowdsourcing of certain parts of the research process (Franzoni & Sauermann, 2014; Nielsen,
2011).

2     Conceptual Framework

2.1      Conceptualizing division of labor in teams

          Scholars have examined the division of labor at different levels of analysis (e.g., Arora et al.,
2016; Becker & Murphy, 1992; Gibbs & Poston, 1975; Hagstrom, 1964; Puranam et al., 2014; Smith,
1776). We draw on these discussions to develop a conceptual framework that allows us to characterize the
division of labor in teams. This framework highlights several complementary perspectives and also points
towards ways to operationalize and analyze division of labor empirically.
          We start from the premise that the production of a certain output (e.g., a piece of new knowledge)
requires the completion of a number of (j=1…K) distinct activities or tasks. These activities can be
distributed among a number of (i=1…N) team members. To conceptualize division of labor, it is useful to
represent team members and activities in a matrix structure. For illustration, consider the stylized example
of two teams in Figure 1. For each team, the columns refer to a set of functional activities that need to be
performed to produce the output. The rows refer to team members who collaborate by performing these
activities. The indicator aij in each of the resulting cells indicates whether a particular member i performs
activity j (aij=1) or not (aij=0).2 Figure 1 shows that division of labor can be examined using three
complementary perspectives: the degree to which team members specialize in one activity vs. perform a
range of activities (within individual, across activities), the degree to which activities are performed by
one person vs. multiple persons (within activity, across individuals), and the degree to which activities
tend to be performed together by the same individuals (across individuals and activities). We will discuss
each in turn.



2
 Our main discussion abstracts from the amount of time spent on an activity. The Appendix extends this framework to include
different shares and levels of effort devoted to different activities, which allows us to compute Herfindahl-based measures.

                                                                                                                               3
          From the perspective of individual team members, we can examine how many of the activities a
                                                                                 %
                                                                                 $&' "#$
member is engaged in. In particular, we can compute the measure Gi=                        , which describes the degree
                                                                                  (

to which individual i performs a large share of the activities (“generalist”) or performs only a small share

of activities (“specialist”). Gi ranges from 1 in the extreme case that a team member performs all of the K

activities to Gi=1/K if the individual performs only one activity. To illustrate using Figure 1, individual 1

in team A performs 1 out of 4 activities and is thus highly specialized (Gi=0.25) while individual 5 in

team A performs 2 out of 4 activities and is thus less specialized (Gi=0.50). We can average all N team
                                                             *
                                                             #&' )#
members’ scores and use this team level measure, Gt=                  , to compare the average degree of
                                                              +

specialization across teams. Using the example in Figure 1, we see that team A is more specialized than

team B: The average member performs only 30% of all activities compared to 70% in team B.

          Complementing the individual level perspective, an activity level perspective examines by how

many of the N team members a particular activity is performed. More specifically, the measure
       *
       #&' "#$
D j=             captures the share of team members who perform activity j. We will term activities that are
        +

performed by a large share of team members (in the extreme all team members such that Dj=1) as highly

distributed. Activities that are performed by only a small share of team members are more concentrated,

with a minimum score of Dj=1/N. To illustrate, activity 1 in team A is performed by one individual

(Dj=0.2) and is thus highly concentrated, while activity 2 is performed by two individuals (Dj=0.4) and is
                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                            $&' ,$
less concentrated. Averaging across all K activities results in the team level measure Dt=                           . In our
                                                                                                             (

example, the average activity in Team A is performed by 30% of all team members, while the average

activity in Team B is performed by 70% of the team members.

                                                                                   *             %
                                                                                   #&' )#        $&' ,$
          Note that the team level measures Gt and Dt are equivalent (i.e.,                  =            ), such that a
                                                                                      +           (

higher degree of specialization of team members also implies a higher concentration of activities and vice

versa. However, de-aggregating these measures allows us to better understand heterogeneity within the

team: The individual perspective allows us to distinguish specialist vs. generalist members, while the

                                                                                                                                4
      activity level perspective allows us to distinguish activities that are distributed among many members vs.

      concentrated among a few.

                                                    Figure 1: Conceptualizing division of labor in teams
                                        TEAM&A                                                                                       TEAM&B

                                     Activity             Count&of               Share&of                                            Activity          Count&of               Share&of
                               1       2      3         4 activities        activities&(Gi)                                 1          2      3      4 activities        activities&(Gi)
                       1       1       0        0       0              1               25%                          1       1         1       0      1              3               75%
                       2       0       1        0       0              1               25%                          2       1         1       0      1              3               75%
          Member       3       0       0        0       1              1               25%             Member       3       0         0       1      0              1               25%
                       4       0       0        0       1              1               25%                          4       1         1       0      1              3               75%
                       5       0       1        1       0              2               50%                          5       1         1       1      1              4             100%
                                                                           Avg.&(Gt ):&30%                                                                              Avg.&(Gt ):&70%
Count&of&members              1       2       1        2                                      Count&of&members             4       4        2       4
Share&of&members&(D j)      20%     40%     20%      40% Avg.&(Dt ):&30%                      Share&of&members&(D j)     80%     80%      40%     80% Avg.&(Dt ):&70%

                             Correlations&(ρjl )                                                                          Correlations&(ρjl )
                             Act.61 Act.2 Act.3 Act.4                                                                     Act.61 Act.2 Act.3 Act.4
                  Act.1               70.41 70.25 70.41                                                        Act.1               1.00 70.61 1.00
                  Act.2                         0.61 70.67                                                     Act.2                        70.61 1.00
                  Act.3                              70.41                                                     Act.3                              70.61
             Avg.&ρjl &(Ij) 70.36 70.15 70.02 70.49                                                       Avg.&ρjl &(Ij) 0.46 0.46 70.61 0.46
              Avg.&Ij&(I t )                         K0.25                                                 Avg.&Ij&(I t )                          0.19




                     Finally, a third perspective looks across both individuals and activities. This perspective provides

      insights into the relationships among activities, i.e., which activities tend to be performed together by the

      same individuals and which activities are performed separately from each other. For example, in team B,

      all individuals who perform activity 1 also perform activity 2, resulting in a positive correlation between

      these two activities. In contrast, individuals who perform activity 1 tend not to be involved in activity 3,

      resulting in a negative correlation. Denoting the correlation between activity j and another activity l

      (l=1…K, with l j) as ./0 , the average correlation of activity j with other activities can be computed as

              %
              2&' 1$2
      I j=              . Activities that tend to be positively correlated with others could be called interdependent,
               (34

      while those that tend to have negative relationships with other activities are more independent. Averaging
                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                         $&' 5$ 3
      all correlations between activities results in the team level measure It=                                                  .
                                                                                                                           (




      3
        One could also examine correlations between team members, i.e., which team members tend to work together on the same
      activities and which team members tend to work on different activities. We focus on correlations among activities since these
      relationships are more relevant from an organizational perspective (see section 2.2). Also, while our illustrative examples use
      Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients, one could use other measures of association.

                                                                                                                                                                                   5
2.2   Potential efficiency gains from division of labor

        The conceptual framework allows us to describe division of labor in teams using three
perspectives. We now briefly discuss mechanisms that have been proposed to explain each of the three
aspects of division of labor. In doing so, we focus on arguments made by economists and organizational
theorists, who emphasize potential efficiency gains from division of labor (Becker & Murphy, 1992;
Hagstrom, 1964; Smith, 1776). The objective of our discussion is not to derive testable hypotheses but to
connect the framework more explicitly to relevant prior literature. We will also return to this discussion in
considering the degree to which empirical patterns of division of labor observed in the second part of the
paper are consistent with mechanisms suggested in the prior literature.
        A first argument is that specializing and repeatedly engaging in a particular activity can allow
individuals to learn how to perform this activity more efficiently (“learning by doing”). Moreover,
learning may become increasingly easy as an individual’s stock of knowledge about an activity increases
(Postrel, 2002). To the extent that such learning benefits can be realized, a worker should focus on one
activity rather than splitting her time across multiple different activities, implying a higher degree of
specialization (i.e., a lower score on the measure Gi from Section 2.1) and more division of labor.
        Second, if an activity requires worker-specific investments such as tools, instruments, or stocks of
knowledge, having one person focus on this activity avoids the duplication of investments and allows the
existing capital to be utilized more efficiently. Thus, to the extent that workers have to incur fixed costs to
perform an activity, the number of individuals working on that activity should be minimized, implying a
higher degree of concentration of activities (i.e., a lower score on Dj) and more division of labor.
        Potential benefits from specialization and concentration, however, may be offset by higher costs
of coordination. One driver of these costs are interdependencies between activities (Becker & Murphy,
1992; Cummings & Kiesler, 2014; Puranam et al., 2014; Simon, 1962). As highlighted by organizational
scholars, interdependencies between activities can differ in terms of both the frequency and the
sequencing of work flows (Thompson, 1967; Van de Ven et al., 1976). In the simplest case, activities can
be performed independently from each other and their intermediate outputs are simply pooled in the end
to yield the overall output (“pooled interdependence”). In this case, no coordination is required while
workers are performing their tasks. In other cases, activities are interdependent in a sequential manner,
i.e., the output of one activity serves as the input into another (“sequential interdependence”). In this case,
coordination is required only as workers hand off work outputs across stages of the production process.
Third, “reciprocal interdependence” describes tasks that depend on each other such that work flows back-
and-forth between workers, requiring a significant amount of coordination and mutual adjustment.
Finally, some activities need to be performed simultaneously, without a measurable temporal lapse in the
flow of work (what could be called “simultaneous interdependence”). Reciprocal and especially

                                                                                                              6
simultaneous interdependencies between activities imply a high need for coordination if different workers
perform the respective activities, resulting in high coordination costs.
        In the context of knowledge production, coordination costs may not only depend on the frequency
and sequencing of interactions, but also on the ease of communicating and integrating intermediate
knowledge outputs across individuals. Intermediate knowledge is more easily transferred if it can be
codified at low cost, while communication and integration across different individuals is more difficult if
knowledge is tacit (Osterloh & Frey, 2000; Polanyi, 1966). As such, even for a given type of
interdependence between the various stages of the research process, the costs of distributing activities
across multiple individuals may depend on the tacit versus codified nature of the intermediate knowledge
that is produced. Taken together, the coordination costs between two activities may depend on the
frequency and timing of interactions as well as the tacit vs. explicit nature of intermediate knowledge
outputs. The higher the coordination costs between two activities, the more advantageous it is to have
both performed by the same individual rather than different individuals, implying a positive correlation
between the two activities (./0 in our framework).
        Teams may also try to split an activity into different sub-activities and assign sub-activities to
different members. Similar to our earlier discussion, the resulting coordination costs are likely to depend
on the nature of the interdependencies between sub-activities and on the tacit vs. explicit nature of the
intermediate knowledge outputs. For example, if sub-activities exhibit reciprocal or simultaneous
interdependence, distributing them among multiple individuals would result in high coordination costs,
suggesting a low degree of “decomposability” of the activity (Simon, 1962; Von Hippel, 1990). Such an
activity should be performed by few individuals rather than distributed across many. Conversely, if the
results of sub-activities can easily be pooled to get the desired output, multiple individuals can work
independently and in parallel, allowing a higher degree of distribution of this activity. This discussion
higlights an important point: While one can study how teams divide work within a given activity (e.g., by
considering more detailed sub-activities), we conceptualize division of labor with respect to a given set of
activities at a pre-defined level of aggregation (the columns in Figure 1). Focusing on activities at a fixed
level of aggregation ensures that activities are meaningful and distinct, and can be compared across
teams. This approach is also consistent with current efforts to develop standard classifications of work
activities and to document team members’ contributions using comparable categories (Allen et al., 2014).
Indeed, such efforts provide the data for the following part of the paper, which applies our conceptual
framework to gain empirical insights into the division of labor in scientific teams.




                                                                                                                7
3     Data and Key Measures

3.1    Data

         Our analysis draws on data from articles published in the journal PLOS ONE. This journal is the
largest Open Access peer-reviewed journal and was started in 2006 by the Public Library of Science.4 The
journal is currently ranked in the top quartile in the interdisciplinary sciences by ISI Web of Science, with
a 2014 Impact Factor of 3.23. PLOS ONE has a strong reputation in the scientific community and a recent
study published in Science highlights particularly the journal’s rigorous and transparent peer review
process (Bohannon, 2013).
         Data from PLOS ONE are particularly suitable for two reasons. First, they allow us to gain
insights into a broad range of scientific projects since articles span a range of fields (primarily in the
domains of biology, life sciences, and medicine) and vary considerably in quality and impact. The latter
aspect is particularly useful because it mitigates concerns about selection bias; whereas publications in
highly selective journals such as Science or Nature reflect work in only a small number of very successful
research projects, our sample provides insights into a much broader set of projects and teams. Moreover,
the considerable variation in article impact allows us to explore the relationship between division of labor
and impact empirically. The second important feature is that PLOS ONE is a pioneer in requiring authors
to disclose the contributions made by each team member, which allows us to gain unique insights into
team members’ activities (more details below).
         We obtained data for 14,602 research articles published from February 2007 to September 2011.5
Since we are interested in the division of labor within teams, we dropped 233 single authored papers, 169
papers that did not disclose the contribution of one or more authors, 54 papers that did not use the
standard classification of contributions or listed only “other contributions”, and 61 papers that did not list
any authors as having “written” (since each paper needs to be written, the contribution statements of these
papers are likely incomplete). We complement the information obtained from the articles with
information on the Scopus citations received by each article until October 2014, available on the PLOS
ONE website. In addition, we collected data on the quantity and quality of authors’ prior publications
using the Scopus database. We exclude from our analysis 940 papers that had at least one author who we
could not match to the Scopus database; the records of all other authors were matched using the unique
author identifier provided by Scopus.6 Finally, we exclude papers with more than 20 authors (N=150)

4
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PLOS; http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/reviewer-guidelines
5
  We excluded the first 200 papers published in PLOS ONE to account for the community having to acquaint itself to the new
journal and its processes. Including these papers does not change our results.
6
  We hand-checked authors with more than 200 returned publications and dropped some cases where the Scopus matching
seemed erroneous. For example, our tool returned 1101 publications for the five years prior to the focal PLOS ONE publication
for the very common name Ying LIU and 783 publications for Lin XU. We also dropped a small number of papers with
individuals for whom Scopus returned publications that were more than 60 years old.

                                                                                                                                8
since the organization of knowledge production may be qualitatively different in big science projects (see
Bikard et al., 2015) and since small cell sizes make team level analyses of very large teams difficult.
Overall, we analyze data from 12,995 papers that list 83,727 authors.

3.2    Key measures

Table 1 shows summary statistics for all individual, activity, and team level variables. In the following,
we discuss key measures of contributions and division of labor. We introduce additional variables in the
context of our analyses below.
         Types of contributions. Upon submission of a manuscript, PLOS ONE asks authors to specify
the particular contributions made by each author. To do so, the journal offers a form with five pre-defined
types of contributions: (1) conceived and designed the study (i_conceived) (2) performed the experiments
(i_performed), (3) contributed materials, such as physical inputs/reagents/analysis tools (i_materials), (4)
analyzed the data (i_analyzed), and (5) wrote the paper (i_wrote). For these 5 standard contributions,
authors enter the respective co-authors’ initials into the corresponding box and our variables capture
whether or not a particular individual i made this contribution (aij in our framework). For non-standard
contributions, a free-text field “other” allows authors to indicate additional contributions and which
individuals performed them. We create a dummy variable indicating whether a particular individual was
listed as having made some other contribution (i_other).7
         We recognize that listed contributions may be imperfect measures of the activities performed by
project participants. In particular, our measure does not capture work done by any “ghost authors”,
individuals who made significant contributions but are not listed as authors (Haeussler & Sauermann,
2013; Lissoni et al., 2013). Relatedly, the listing of author contributions may reflect not only objective
contributions but also a social process of negotiation among team members, with more powerful or
accomplished team members potentially negotiating to be listed as having made contributions they did
not actually make. The latter concern is partly mitigated by the fact that being listed as having made
particular contributions confers not only credit but also responsibility for low-quality work, mistakes or
misconduct (Rennie et al., 1997). To further mitigate this concern, we will include a number of individual
level control variables in our regressions. Finally, the contribution measures are dichotomous, informing
us that team members have contributed above a certain minimum threshold to be listed under a particular
activity, but providing little insight into the extent of their contributions beyond that threshold. Despite
their limitations, our measures have key advantages over available alternatives. Most importantly, they
allow us to examine division of labor in a large sample of projects, complementing prior qualitative work


7
 The “other” contributions included items such as “developed design of simulation”, “critically revised the method”, “performed
subject recruitment”, or “found the grant”.

                                                                                                                              9
using small numbers of cases (Owen-Smith, 2001). By using pre-defined categories, we obtain measures
that are easily compared across teams, while relying on the scientists themselves (rather than less
knowledgeable coders) to decide which categories best fit the contributions made by the various team
members. Finally, while information about author contributions can also be obtained through surveys
(Haeussler & Sauermann, 2013; Shibayama et al., 2015), individuals may overestimate their contributions
to a team effort (Ivaniš et al., 2011; Kamo, 2000). The contributions listed on published papers should be
less affected by such biases to the extent that they reflect a consensus assessment of team members, all of
whom realize that giving too much credit to another team member may reduce the credit allocated to
them.8
          Measures of division of labor. Guided by our conceptual discussion, we capture division of
labor using a number of complementary measures.
          At the individual level, we first count the number of activities performed by a given author
(i_countcontributions). A second, relative measure divides this count by the total number of types of
contributions listed on the paper (i_sharecontributions; Gi in our framework). This ratio reflects what
share of the up to 6 listed types of contributions a particular author performed. This variable equals 1 in
the extreme case that a team member performs all the activities that are listed on the paper (i.e., no
specialization). The measure is lowest (0.167) for individuals who perform only one of six listed
activities. Using this relative measure, we also categorize individuals by whether they are “specialists”
(team members who are involved in <=20% of contributions), “generalists” (team members who are
involved in >60% of contributions), or individuals with medium levels of specialization, resulting in the
measures i_specialist, i_generalist, and i_mediumspecialization.
          We aggregate these individual measures to the team level by computing the average number and
share of contributions across all team members, resulting in ti_avgcountcontributions and
ti_avgsharecontributions (Gt in our framework). Similarly, we compute for each team the share of
specialists, generalists and individuals with medium specialization, resulting in the measures
ti_shareofspecialists, ti_shareofgeneralists, and ti_shareofmedspecialization.
          At the level of the activity, we count the number of authors that performed the activity resulting
in the measures a_countconceived, a_countperformed, a_countmaterials, a_countanalyzed,
a_countwrote, and a_countother. We divide these counts by the total number of authors on the paper to
obtain a_shareconceived, a_shareperformed, a_sharematerials, a_shareanalyzed, a_sharewrote, and



8
  PLOS ONE encourages authors to correct errors in published papers and offers a simple process for doing so. Out of roughly
98,000 articles published by April 21, 2014, 3,367 were corrections. Of these corrections, 147 made corrections to author
contributions or author order. Thus, authors make corrections if necessary but corrections to authorship are very rare, presumably
reflecting that publicly stated author contributions are agreed upon before a paper is published.

                                                                                                                               10
a_shareother (Dj in our framework). We average these measures across activities to obtain two team level
measures, ta_avgcountauthors and ta_avgshareauthors (Dt in our framework).
           The count and share-based measures are highly correlated and give very similar results. As such,
we provide some descriptive insights using both types of measures but will focus our detailed analyses on
the share measures. Moreover, the two measures ti_avgsharecontributions and ta_avgshareauthors are
identical, consistent with our conceptual discussion showing that Dt=Gt. As such, we summarize division
of labor at the team level using just one of these measures, ti_avgsharecontributions.
           Team size. t_teamsize is the number of co-authors on the article.


                                               --- Table 1 about here ---

4     Characterizing division of labor in teams

4.1    Individual level and activity level perspectives

           The average team has 6.44 members; 87.04% of teams have 10 or fewer members and 97.67% of
teams have 15 or fewer members. The average project lists 4.8 out of 6 possible activities. Conception,
performing the experiment, analysis, and writing are part of virtually every paper in the sample. The share
of papers that list contributions of materials is somewhat lower (70%), suggesting that many but not all
projects require this type of input (see Furman & Stern, 2011). Only 18% of articles list some “other”
contribution, suggesting that the 5 pre-defined contributions are sufficient to describe the roles of most
authors.
           As per our conceptual discussion, we can first examine division of labor from the perspective of
individuals. Table 1 shows that the average author performs 2.48 different activities. Using the relative
measure (i_sharecontributions), the average author performs 51% of the activities listed on his/her paper.
Panel A in Figure 2 plots the distribution of this measure, showing considerable heterogeneity across
individuals: Roughly 21% of authors perform 20% or less of all listed contributions (“specialists”), while
almost 30% perform more than 60% of all listed contributions (“generalists”).
           Activity level measures summarized in Table 1 show that the average activity was performed by
3.31 individuals, or 56% of all listed team members, conditional upon the activity being listed on a paper.
Panel B in Figure 2 reveals some heterogeneity across activities in the degree to which they are
distributed among team members: The average share of team members performing an activity ranges
from 48% (share of authors who contribute materials or made an “other” contribution if such a
contribution was listed) to 63% (share of authors who analyzed data).




                                                                                                             11
                  Figure 2: Individual and activity level measures of division of labor

                                                          Panel A                                               Panel B




                             30
                                                      27.48                                                               0.56


                                                                                                                      0.54

                                                              21.88
                                     20       21.44                                                                0.48
                   Percent of authors



                                                                                                                                 0.63
                                                                      17.44

                                                                                                                          0.55


                                                                                                                   0.48
                                                                              11.76
                             10




                                                                                          0        .2        .4      .6         .8          1
                                                                                           Share of authors who made a particular contribution

                                                                                                                    Conceived
                                                                                                                    Performed
                                                                                                                    Materials
                                                                                                                    Analyzed
                                                                                                                    Wrote
                             0




                                          0    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9             1
                                                  Share of contributions                                            Other




Note: Panel A shows the distribution of the share of contributions performed by a team member
(i_sharecontributions). Panel B shows the average share of team members performing a particular activity
(e.g., a_shareconceived), conditional upon that activity being listed on the paper.

4.2   Integrating individual and activity level perspectives

        Looking across both individuals and activities allows us to examine whether certain activities
tend to be performed by specialized individuals while others tend to be performed by generalists. For that
purpose, we focus on the authors listed as having performed a particular activity and compute the share of
these authors who are specialists (i_sharecontributions<=0.2, Figure 3, panel A), have medium
specialization (i_sharecontributions>0.2 but <=0.6, panel B), and are generalists
(i_sharecontributions>0.6, panel C). Figure 3 shows that performed and materials (as well as other) have
the highest shares of highly specialized team members and the lowest share of generalist team members.
In contrast, conceived and wrote have the smallest shares of specialists and the largest share of
generalists, perhaps suggesting that these particular activities benefit less from specialization and exhibit
important interdependencies with other activities.
        We can explore potential interdependencies between activities more explicitly by examining
which activities tend to be performed jointly by the same individuals. To do so, we use the individual
level observations and regress the indicator for a focal activity (e.g., i_wrote) on the 5 remaining
activities. Since we are interested in how activities are correlated within a given team, we estimate these
regressions using linear probability models (LPM) with article fixed effects.



                                                                                                                                                 12
        The article fixed effects control for unobserved heterogeneity across projects. In addition, we
include a number of individual level controls. First, we code a number of variables based on author
affiliations. We measure the reputation of an author’s institution using the 2012 Academic Ranking of
World Top 500 Universities (the so-called Shanghai ranking). The variable i_institutionrank is 1 if an
author’s institution belongs to the Top 20 universities, 2 for Top 21-50, 3 for Top 51-100, 4 for Top 101-
200, 5 for Top 201-300, 6 for Top 301-400, 7 for Top 401-500 and 8 for non-listed universities. For
authors with more than one affiliation, we used the highest-ranked institution. The indicator variable
i_developingcountry is one if an author has at least one affiliation in a developing country and zero
otherwise. In addition to information taken from the PLOS ONE articles, we obtained data on authors’
prior publications using the Scopus database. We use the log of the number of publications over the five
years prior to the focal PLOS ONE article as a measure of the quantity of prior publications
(i_lnpriorpubs_quantity). We use the log of the average yearly number of citations to these articles
(dividing total yearly citation counts by the total number of publications) as a proxy for the quality of
prior publications (i_lnpriorpubs_quality). We estimate i_professionalage as the difference between the
year of the PLOS ONE paper and the year of the author’s first publication. Including these measures of
authors’ prior publications and professional age is useful to account for the possibility that the division of
labor in teams reflects not only efficiency considerations but also social mechanisms. For example, more
senior or more accomplished team members may choose to work on activities they prefer and delegate
other activities to more junior team members.
        Model 1 in Table 2 uses as dependent variable the dummy indicating whether a team member has
contributed by writing the paper (i_wrote). We find a strong positive relationship with conceived and
analyzed, consistent with the notion that writing involves the integration of conceptual ideas and
empirical results and that there are interdependencies between these three activities that make it beneficial
for the same team members to be engaged in all three. Model 2 uses as dependent variable whether an
individual was involved in data analysis. The strongest relationship emerges again with writing. In
addition, data analysis is correlated with performing the experiment, perhaps reflecting reciprocal
interdependencies between these two activities (Latour & Woolgar, 1979; Owen-Smith, 2001). Model 3
focuses on the predictors of having provided materials and shows that it has a negative relationship with
all other activities. The negative coefficient is largest for performed, suggesting that individuals who
perform experiments are unlikely to also provide materials. Model 4 reinforces this finding by showing a
strong negative relationship between performed and materials, while also showing a significant positive
relationship between performed and analyzed. Models 5 and 6 examine the predictors of a team member
having conceived the study or performed an “other” activity and are consistent with the earlier results.



                                                                                                            13
          Although the focus of Table 2 is on the relationships between different types of contributions,
several control variables also have significant coefficients. For example, professional age is positively
related to writing, conceiving, and providing materials, while it is negatively related to performing the
experiment or analyzing data. While a deeper analysis of which particular team members are engaged in
which activities is beyond the scope of this paper, this result is consistent with prior work on the roles of
junior versus senior lab members (Owen-Smith, 2001; Shibayama et al., 2015).
          Overall, these regressions suggest systematic patterns in the relationships among activities.
Individuals who write the paper tend to also be engaged in analysis and conception, while individuals
who perform the experiment are likely to also be involved in data analysis. The provision of materials is a
relatively independent activity.9
                                                      --- Table 2 here ---


                               Figure 3: Degree of specialization by type of activity




Note: Share of team members who performed a particular activity and have a high level of specialization
(panel A), medium specialization (panel B), and low specialization (panel C).




9
  An alternative empirical approach is a factor analysis of the activity measures. Using this approach, one factor with eigenvalue
>1 emerges, with the largest loadings for i_conceived, i_wrote, and i_analyzed. Two factors have eigenvalues<1, one combining
i_performed and i_analyzed, and the other including only i_materials. While these results are consistent with our regression
approach, the latter provides more detailed insights into the relationships between each pair of activities.

                                                                                                                                14
4.3     Division of labor and team size

         Prior literature suggests that division of labor may depend on the total volume of work and the
size of the organization (Becker & Murphy, 1992; Jones, 2009; Smith, 1776; Stigler, 1951). As such, we
now use our framework to explore how the division of labor differs across teams of different size.

4.3.1    Individual level perspective

         Panel A in Figure 4 plots ti_avgcountcontributions and ti_avgsharecontributions against the size
of the team, allowing us to examine the relationship between team size and team members’ degree of
specialization. For reference, we also plot the average number of contributions listed on the paper
(t_totalactivitieslisted), which increases from roughly 4.5 for small teams to roughly 5 for larger teams.
         Panel A shows that team members in larger teams tend to be more specialized: While the average
member in teams of 2 performs roughly 3.5 activities (80% of all listed contributions), that number
decreases to roughly 2 activities (roughly 43% of listed contributions) in teams of 14 or more. Despite
this tendency towards specialization in larger teams, however, the measures of specialization level off
well before reaching the extreme (i.e., a single activity).


                                           Figure 4: Individual level measures and team size

                                             Panel A                                                                                   Panel B
                                                                                                                  .8
                     6




                                                                             1
                                                                             .8
                     5




                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                             Share of listed activities
             Count of activities




                                                                                                          Share of authors
                                                                                              .6
                           4




                                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                  .4
               3




                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                             .2
                     2
                     1




                                                                             0




                                                                                                                  0




                                   0   5       10          15           20                                                   0   5        10        15          20
                                           t_teamsize                                                                                 t_teamsize

                                       Activities listed (left scale)                                                            Authors with share<=0.2
                                       Avg. count of act. (left scale)                                                           Authors with share>0.2&<=0.6
                                       Avg. share of act. (right scale)                                                          Authors with share>0.6



Note: Average share and count of activities per team member, and count of listed activities by team size
(Panel A). Share of specialists, intermediate types, and generalists by team size (Panel B).

                                                                                                                                                                     15
        To explore heterogeneity across team members, Panel B plots the shares of specialists (i.e.,
i_sharecontributions<=0.2), intermediate types, and generalists (i_sharecontributions>0.6) in a team. The
share of specialists increases sharply with team size but then stabilizes at a team size of roughly 15,
reaching around 30%. The share of generalists decreases until about a teamsize of 10 but then remains
quite stable at roughly 18%. Thus, while larger teams employ higher division of labor, most members do
not specialize perfectly. Moreover, even large teams have generalists, perhaps because such individuals
help teams overcome the coordination and integration challenges associated with higher division of labor.

4.3.2   Activity level perspective

        Switching from the individual to the activity level perspective, we explore how activities differ
with respect to their distributed vs. concentrated nature across teams of different sizes. Panel A in Figure
5 plots the number of team members who perform a given activity by team size, conditional upon an
activity being listed on the paper. We find that the number of individuals performing a given activity
increases with team size. Conversely, Panel B shows that the share of individuals engaged in a particular
activity decreases, i.e., activities become more concentrated.


                                                            Figure 5: Activity level measures and team size

                                                              Panel A                                                                 Panel B
                               20




                                                                                                        1
            Number of authors engaged in activity




                                                                                      Share of authors engaged in activity
                                                                                                                     .8
                                        15




                                                                                                           .6
                            10




                                                                                                  .4
                5




                                                                                        .2
                               0




                                                                                                        0




                                                    0   5        10         15   20                                          0   5       10         15   20
                                                             t_teamsize                                                              t_teamsize

                                                                 Conceived                                                               Conceived
                                                                 Performed                                                               Performed
                                                                 Analyzed                                                                Analyzed
                                                                 Wrote                                                                   Wrote



Note: Count of team members performing each activity by team size (Panel A). Share of team members
performing each activity by team size (Panel B).

                                                                                                                                                              16
          Considering differences across activities, we find that concentration increases less for performed
and analyzed than for conceived and wrote. For example, the share of team members involved in writing
drops from 90% in teams of 2 to 32% in teams of 20. The share of team members who performed
decreases less strongly from 63% to 51%. This leads to an interesting inversion: Writing and
conceptualization tend to be more distributed than empirical activities in small teams, but empirical
activities tend to be more distributed than writing and conceptualization in large teams. One potential
explanation for the latter result is that conceptual activities require only a relatively fixed amount of work
regardless of project size such that there is less need for a large number of team members to get involved.
Alternatively, conceptual activities may have a lower degree of “decomposability” than empirical
activities, i.e., it is more difficult to split conceptual activities into discrete sub-activities that can be
assigned to different team members (Von Hippel, 1990).

4.3.3     Team size in a regression framework

          Regression analysis allows us to explore the role of team size while controlling for a number of
potentially confounding variables (Table 3). To control for differences in the nature of research and of
resource availability, we include the indicator variable t_funding_basic that equals one if the paper
acknowledges funding from a governmental basic research funding agency such as the National Science
Foundation, National Institutes of Health, German Research Foundation, or the World Health
Organization. The variable t_funding_industry equals one if the paper acknowledges funding from a for-
profit organization. The variable t_funding_other equals one if a paper acknowledges funding from
another source. We further control for differences in the nature of research by including fixed effects for
42 fields (+1 “other”) based on field classifications listed on the article. Note that each paper can be
classified into multiple fields; the average number of field classifications is 2.50.
          We also include controls for the composition and location of teams. The measure t_affiliations
counts the number of unique author affiliations listed on the paper. The dummy t_country_US equals 1 if
the first author’s main affiliation is in the U.S., and t_country_developing equals 1 if the first author’s
main affiliation is in a developing country (other countries is the omitted category).10 We code the
variable t_firm as 1 if at least one author affiliation is a firm.11 Finally, we include as additional article
level controls the number of pages (t_pages), the publication date (t_publicationdate), and the number of
listed contributions (up to 6, t_totalactivitieslisted).

10
   We use the affiliation of the first author since this person likely contributed most to the project and his/her first listed affiliation
is clearly his/her main affiliation. For other authors, the first listed affiliation does not have to be the main affiliation since PLOS
ONE uses one set of affiliation identifiers in running order. As such, an affiliation that appears for an author early in the author
list will appear first for a later author even if it is not the later author’s main affiliation.
11
   We searched for terms such as “corporation”, “inc”, and “S.A.”. We also manually checked author affiliations to identify
frequently occurring firm names such as Pfizer or Roche.

                                                                                                                                       17
         Model 1 uses ti_avgsharecontributions, which is our most aggregated measure of division of
labor. Consistent with Panel A in Figure 4, we find a significant negative coefficient of team size,
suggesting that team members perform a smaller share of all contributions in larger teams, i.e., they are
more specialized. Recall that this measure is equivalent to ta_avgshareauthors. As such, this regression
also shows that as team size increases, activities tend to be performed by a smaller share of individuals –
activities are more concentrated. The positive coefficient on team size squared suggests decreasing
marginal effects, again consistent with Figure 4.
         Models 2-4 provide a more nuanced view by exploring how team size relates to the share of
specialists, generalists, or individuals with medium levels of specialization. Consistent with Panel B in
Figure 4, we find that team size has strong negative association with the share of generalists and a
positive relationship with both specialists and intermediate types.
         Finally, models 5-10 focus on the activity level of analysis, exploring how team size is related to
the share of members performing each of the six activities. These regressions are conditional upon a
contribution being listed, i.e., we drop papers that do not list the focal contribution. Consistent with Panel
B in Figure 5, we find that team size has a negative and convex relationship with all six measures.
However, the size of the coefficient of team size differs across activities, with the largest negative
coefficient in regressions of a_shareconceived and a_sharewrote and a smaller coefficient in the
regression of a_shareperformed.12
         Taken together, these regressions show that the major trends visible in Figures 4 and 5 hold even
when we examine the relationship between team size and division of labor in a multivariate context:
Division of labor increases with team size, as reflected in an increase in the share of specialists and a
decrease in the share of generalists, as well as an increasing concentration of activities among smaller
shares of team members.
                                                    --- Table 3 here ---

5    Differences in the division of labor across fields and types of projects

         The prior sections examined patterns of division of labor across a broad sample of teams, drawing
on individual and activity level measures derived from our conceptual framework. For organizational
scholars, an important question is whether and how division of labor differs across different types of
projects or institutional contexts (Hagstrom, 1964; Shibayama et al., 2015). We now provide initial
descriptive insights into this question by exploring differences between papers in novel vs. established



12
  If we use the counts of team members rather than the shares of team members performing particular activities as dependent
variables, team size has a significant positive coefficient, consistent with Panel A in Figure 5.

                                                                                                                              18
fields and in interdisciplinary vs. single-disciplinary projects. While we focus on documenting potential
differences, we hope that our findings will stimulate future research on underlying mechanisms.
         Our general approach is to estimate a set of regressions with the measures of division of labor as
dependent variables and with our focal project characteristics as independent variables (Table 4). All
regressions control for other project characteristics, including a series of dummy variables for team size.

5.1    Novelty of the field

         To obtain a proxy for the age of a field, we identified for each of the 42 fields the main
professional society or association and determined the year of its founding. We then classified fields as
“novel” if the society/association was founded after 1970. We classified papers according to the youngest
listed field, resulting in 20.86% of papers classified as in a novel field and 79.14% as in an established
field (t_field_novel).
         Model 1 in Table 4 shows that team members in novel fields engage in a smaller share of listed
activities, i.e., they are more specialized. Similarly, models 2-4 show that teams in novel fields have a
significantly smaller share of generalists and a larger share of specialists (see also Figure 6, Panel A).
Activity level regressions (model 5-10) reveal that the greater division of labor reflects primarily that a
smaller share of team members is involved in performing experiments, although a somewhat larger share
of members is involved in writing (Figure 6, Panel B). One potential explanation for the former result is
that newer fields require larger investments into learning new empirical methods. As per our conceptual
discussion, such fixed costs would make it beneficial to allocate experimental work to a smaller number
of (more specialized) individuals. We can also relate these results to the model developed by Jones
(2009), who suggests that a larger stock of total knowledge in a field requires that scientists make larger
investments to reach the knowledge frontier, increasing the benefits from specialization and collaboration.
Interpreted in light of this model, the observed higher division of labor in novel fields suggests that new
fields tend to build upon established fields rather than replacing them, thus relying on a larger total stock
of knowledge and providing greater potential for benefits from specialization.13
         We also explore whether novel and established fields differ with respect to the correlations
between different activities. Towards this end, we replicate the regressions reported in Table 2 but include
interactions between t_field_novel and the activity dummies. Models 1-6 in Table 5 show that in novel
fields, there is a somewhat weaker association between conceiving and writing, between conceiving and
materials, and between conceiving and other contributions, suggesting that conceiving tends to be a more

13
  We chose 1970 as the cut-off to define novel fields since from then on genetics united with biotechnology (e.g., recombinant
DNA was discovered in 1973). Among others, novel fields according to our classification include biotechnology (1976), virology
(1981) and computational biology (1987). If we use as the cutoff the median age of all fields (1964), we find significant
coefficients of t_field_novel also in the regressions of a_shareconceived, a_shareanalyzed, and a_shareother, which suggests
that these activities may also be more concentrated in novel fields.

                                                                                                                           19
independent contribution than in established fields. On the other hand, there is a stronger correlation
between performing and materials, suggesting that providing materials is less independent in novel fields.

5.2   Interdisciplinarity of the project

        To proxy for interdisciplinarity, we count the number of field classifications listed on the paper
and form three categories indicating whether a paper was classified in only one field (19.63%), two or
three fields (64.85%), or 4 or more fields (15.51%).
        Model 1 in Table 4 shows that division of labor is lower in interdisciplinary projects (model 1),
reflecting both a higher share of generalists and a lower share of specialists (models 2-4 and Figure 6
Panel C). Taking an activity level perspective, models 5-10 show that this lower division of labor reflects
primarily the more distributed nature of empirical activities: Interdisciplinary projects have a significantly
higher a_shareperformed and a_shareanalyzed (Figure 6, Panel D). An intuitive interpretation is that
while team members in interdisciplinary projects may be more specialized in terms of their field
background, they integrate these different perspectives by collaborating more closely on the same
activities. In particular, interdisciplinary projects may draw on a broader set of (field-specific) empirical
techniques, thus limiting teams’ ability to concentrate empirical work among a smaller set of individuals
specializing in empirical work. This interpretation highlights the more general point that division of labor
with respect to activities may be different from individuals’ specialization in terms of fields or knowledge
domains. We will return to this issue in the general discussion.
        Models 7-12 in Table 5 explore whether interdisciplinary projects exhibit different correlations
between activities by interacting the field count variable with the activity dummies. We find that
individuals who provide materials are more likely to also write the paper compared to single-discipline
projects. At the same time, individuals who perform the experiment are less likely to also analyze data.
        Taken together, our exploratory analyses show that the division of labor differs significantly
between fields and types of projects, although these differences tend to be smaller in magnitude than
those between teams of different size (Section 4.3). Aggregate team level measures (e.g.,
ti_avgsharecontributions) are useful to detect such differences, yet measures that allow for heterogeneity
across individuals (e.g., shares of specialists and generalists) and across activities (e.g., share of members
writing vs. share of members performing experiments) provide more detailed insights and can even show
contrasting results (Figure 6). Future work is needed to examine the mechanisms that underlie the
observed differences in the division of labor.


                                          --- Tables 4 and 5 here ---



                                                                                                             20
                        Figure 6: Differences in division of labor across fields and types of projects

              Panel A: Novelty and Individual-level Measures                             Panel B: Novelty and Activity-level Measures
0.015                                                                          0.02

 0.01                                                                          0.01

                                                                                  0
0.005
                                                    ti_avgsharecontributions                0                   1
                                                                               -0.01                                              ta_avgshareauthors
    0
                   0                1               ti_shareofspecialists      -0.02                                              a_shareperformed
-0.005
                                                                               -0.03                                              a_sharewrote
 -0.01                                              ti_shareofgeneralists
                                                                               -0.04
-0.015                                                                         -0.05

 -0.02                                                                         -0.06


         Panel C: Interdisciplinarity and Individual-level Measures                    Panel D: Interdisciplinarity and Activity-level Measures
 0.04                                                                          0.06

 0.03                                                                          0.05

 0.02                                                                          0.04
                                                    ti_avgsharecontributions
                                                                                                                                  ta_avgshareauthors
 0.01
                                                                               0.03
                                                    ti_shareofspecialists                                                         a_shareperformed
    0
               1          2&3           4+                                     0.02                                               a_shareanalyzed
-0.01                                               ti_shareofgeneralists
                                                                               0.01
-0.02
                                                                                  0
-0.03                                                                                   1           2&3             4+


    Note: Regression coefficients based on OLS regression reported in Table 4. Only significant coefficients
    shown. Panels A and B focus on novelty as dependent variable (0=established, 1=novel field). Panels C
    and D focus on interdisciplinarity (1 field, 2&3 fields, 4 or more fields).


    6        Division of labor and the quality of scientific output

                   The division of labor is often seen as a key mechanism to increase efficiency and performance. In
    a final set of analyses, we explore the relationship between division of labor and one particular
    performance measure, namely the quality of scientific output. Of course, teams can also pursue a range of
    other outcomes and our empirical analysis will not address potential endogeneity of team size and of the
    division of labor. As such, our primary goal is to demonstrate how our conceptual framework, combined
    with new data sources such as disclosures of contributions, can help researchers explore the relationships
    between organizational features of teams and the output they produce.
                   We proxy for the quality of scientific output using (logged) Scopus citations received by our focal
    papers by October 2014 (t_lncitations). Since citations take time to accumulate, all regressions include
    dummies for the month and year of publication as well as other controls such as article characteristics,
    field fixed effects, the number of affiliations, and the log of team members’ average number of prior
    publications and yearly citations per paper (Table 6).

                                                                                                                                                     21
        Model 1 shows the results without controls for the size of the team. Higher division of labor is
associated with larger citation impact, as reflected in the negative coefficient on ti_avgsharecontributions.
However, both division of labor and citations may reflect underlying differences in the size of the project.
As such, model 2 flexibly controls for team size using dummy variables. We find that
ti_avgsharecontributions now has a positive coefficient, indicating that for teams of a given size, higher
division of labor is associated with lower citation impact.
        Model 3 provides more detailed insights by including not the aggregate measure of division of
labor, but the shares of generalists and specialists (individuals with intermediate levels of specialization
are the reference category and the shares of all three sum up to 100%). A higher share of generalists on
the team is associated with higher citation impact. Model 4 includes the activity level measures indicating
what share of team members is engaged in a given activity. Two coefficients are significant: teams in
which a larger share of members is involved in performing the experiment and in writing the paper
produce papers with significantly higher citation impact. We explore whether this result depends on
which particular team members get involved in these activities by distinguishing between more
accomplished and less accomplished team members. In model 5, we distinguish team members by
whether or not they are above the (team) median in terms of average citations to their prior papers and
find that papers by teams that involve a larger share of their accomplished members in writing
(t_highcitinteam_sharewrote) have more citations. In contrast, the share of less accomplished team
members involved in writing (t_lowcitinteam_sharewrote) has a weak negative association with citations.
The share of highly accomplished team members involved in performing experiments
(t_highcitinteam_shareperformed) has a positive coefficient, while the share of less accomplished team
members involved in performing experiments has no significant coefficient. In model 6, we distinguish
team members in terms of the quantity of their prior publications. A larger share of accomplished team
members involved in writing (t_highpubinteam_sharewrote) has a positive association with citations,
while none of the other variables are significant.
        We can only speculate about the mechanisms underlying these results. It may be that
accomplished team members who are involved in performing experiments are better able to recognize
interesting and unexpected results, or that accomplished team members who are involved in writing are
better able to synthesize results and to highlight the most important findings. Of course, it may also be
that broader involvement by accomplished team members does not make papers better, but that
accomplished team members decide to get involved more deeply in projects that appear particularly
promising. Moreover, one should keep in mind that teams do not necessarily focus on maximizing the
citation impact of their papers. Some teams may focus on quantity or speed rather than impact, while
other teams may focus on minimizing costs (Freeman et al., 2001; Stephan, 2012). Other teams may

                                                                                                               22
pursue not only scientific productivity but also the training of team members (Hackett, 1990; Shibayama
et al., 2015). While we cannot examine these possibilities in this paper, the analysis in this section
illustrates how our framework and measures can be used to illuminate the relationships between different
aspects of division of labor and different types of project outcomes.14

7    Discussion

         Teams play a central role in many organizations and have also become important producers of
new knowledge (Cummings & Kiesler, 2014; Stephan, 2012; Wuchty et al., 2007). However, little is
known about how work is divided and distributed among knowledge workers. Conceptualizing
knowledge production as a process that involves a number of distinct activities such as conceptualization,
data collection, and analysis, we developed a conceptual framework to analyze division of labor in teams
using multiple perspectives. Focusing on individual team members, the first perspective provides insights
into individuals’ levels of specialization. Focusing on particular activities, the second perspective
provides insights into the degree to which activities are distributed across multiple team members vs.
concentrated among a few. Considering both individuals and activities, the third perspective provides
insights into relationships between activities, i.e., which activities tend to be performed together by the
same individuals and which activities tend to be performed independently.
         Drawing on this framework, we then explore the division of labor in scientific teams based on
data from over 12,000 articles disclosing the contributions of individual authors. In addition to providing
nuanced descriptive results that should be of interest in their own right, our empirical analysis also
highlights an important more general point: While division of labor can be characterized using aggregate
measures at the level of the team, there is significant heterogeneity across individual team members and
different types of activities. As such, team level measures may be useful for some purposes, but the higher
level of granularity afforded by individual and activity level measures is likely to provide a richer basis
for future research on the drivers and consequences of division of labor in teams.
         We make several contributions to the organizational literature on teams. Among others, scholars
have studied social networks among team members, antecedents and consequences of team diversity,
optimal incentive provision, and mechanisms that may overcome coordination challenges (Becker &
Murphy, 1992; Hamilton et al., 2003; Majchrzak et al., 2012; Postrel, 2002). While much of this prior
work rests on the premise that team members perform different parts of the overall task, our conceptual


14
   Given our finding of differences in the division of labor across fields and types of projects, we explored whether
the relationships between division of labor and citation impact depend on field or project characteristics. More
specifically, we included interactions between t_avgsharecontributions and the measures of novelty and
interdisciplinarity in the regressions of citations but found no significant coefficients (available upon request).


                                                                                                                    23
and empirical understanding of this division of labor itself is limited. We contribute to this literature by
offering a conceptual framework that systematically considers division of labor in teams from
complementary perspectives and suggests a number of measures at different levels of analysis. This
framework may provide a useful tool for analyzing division of labor in a variety of contexts where
production processes can be conceptualized as involving a number of functional activities. Indeed, the
framework may be useful even for researchers who wish to focus on team members’ knowledge domains
rather than functional activities (Majchrzak et al., 2012; Singh & Fleming, 2010; Teodoridis, 2013). For
example, such an application could explore the degree to which members are specialized with respect to
their knowledge domains, the extent to which a team’s expertise in particular domains is concentrated or
distributed among different team members, and which particular domains are covered jointly by the same
individuals versus covered by different individuals.
        In addition to this conceptual contribution, we provide novel empirical insights into patterns of
division of labor, drawing on a new type of publication data that is likely to become increasingly available
in future years. We suggest that such data and the various measures suggested by our framework may
prove valuable for organizational research more generally by providing a toolkit and empirical setting that
allows researchers to study team processes at a relatively large scale (see Puranam, 2012).
        Our study also contributes more specifically to the literature on scientific teams (Bikard et al.,
2015; Gittelman, 2007; Gruber et al., 2013; Singh & Fleming, 2010; Teodoridis, 2013). Even though the
scientific results of teamwork are typically publicly disclosed (Dasgupta & David, 1994; Sauermann &
Stephan, 2013), how these results are produced tends to remain hidden from outside observers, increasing
the value of new data sources that provide insights into underlying team processes. We present such a
data source and draw on our conceptual framework to provide novel descriptive insights into patterns of
division of labor in scientific teams. In doing so, we uncover significant differences in the division of
labor across types of projects, i.e., a higher division of labor in novel versus established fields and lower
division of labor in interdisciplinary versus single-disciplinary fields. While we demonstrated how the
framework can be used to analyze differences across fields at a given point in time, it may also be useful
for research on changes in the division of labor over time. Such changes may result from broader trends
such as the increasing role of capital intensive equipment, the diffusion of information technologies, or
the standardization and automation of research procedures (Agrawal & Goldfarb, 2008; Stephan, 2012).
        Our results suggest a number of other interesting avenues for future research. First, our empirical
analyses focused on describing patterns of division of labor and we made only limited inroads into
understanding the drivers of these patterns. Our interpretation of results largely relied on prior work
explaining the division of labor from an economic and efficiency oriented perspective, yet there are
several other mechanisms that may also play an important role. Among others, teams may not only pursue

                                                                                                               24
efficiency in the production of scientific knowledge, but also the education of team members (Hackett,
1990; Shibayama et al., 2015). Similarly, the division of labor may reflect social processes that allocate
activities not based on efficiency but based on status and power. Disentangling the relative role of these
mechanisms is a first important avenue for future research.
        Second, while our analysis highlighted heterogeneity across team members in terms of their
functional roles, we did not explore which particular members perform which activities or which
particular team members emerge as specialists versus generalists. Among others, roles may be allocated
based on individual characteristics such as experience, educational background, or social status (Owen-
Smith, 2001; Shibayama et al., 2015). It would also be interesting to focus on particular types of
individuals such as “stars”, explore what they do in teams, and whether their level and type of
involvement in a project shapes their impact on others or project performance (Oettl, 2012). This
direction for future research is highlighted in particular by our observation that the involvement of more
accomplished team members in writing and performing experiments is associated with higher citations
(Section 6).
        Third, our analysis explored the organization of work in given teams, but team formation itself is
likely an endogenous process. For example, team size may reflect organizers’ expected benefits from
division of labor as well as concerns that credit for scientific work has to be shared with other team
members (Bikard et al., 2015; Gans & Murray, 2013; Walsh & Lee, 2015). While abstracting from team
formation should not affect the value of our descriptive results, future efforts to understand the drivers of
division of labor should take team formation into account. Considering endogenous team formation will
be even more important for efforts to establish the causal links between division of labor and the quality
or quantity of output.
        Fourth, our conceptual framework and empirical analysis focused on a given team as the relevant
unit of analysis, but division of labor may reach beyond teams. For example, simultaneous collaboration
in multiple teams may allow individuals to specialize in particular activities even if any given project does
not have the required size. Although the strong empirical relationship between team size and division of
labor is consistent with the view that the size of a given team is very important, future work could
fruitfully explore individuals’ broader research portfolios and the resulting division of labor both within
and across teams.
        Fifth, longitudinal datasets could be used to study dynamics. At the individual level, it would be
important to know whether and how scientists’ degree of specialization changes over their life cycle and
how flexible individuals are with respect to performing different types of activities in the same team or
across different teams. At the team level, it would be interesting to observe how division of labor changes
as individuals learn to collaborate or as team composition changes through entry and exit of members. At

                                                                                                              25
the level of scientific fields, it would be important to study how systematic changes in the size and
composition of teams (Wuchty et al., 2007) are related to changes in the division of labor among team
members.
        Finally, it is important to explore complementarities between our activity based perspective and
the view conceptualizing science as the recombination of knowledge (Simonton, 2003; Singh & Fleming,
2010; Teodoridis, 2013). One the one hand, different activities likely require different types of
knowledge, and differences in knowledge stocks may explain which particular individuals perform which
activities. Similarly, the observed correlations between activities may not only reflect task
interdependencies and coordination costs but also that some activities draw on similar types of
knowledge. On the other hand, prior work suggests that the functional division of labor can be quite
different from the partitioning of knowledge (Postrel, 2002; Takeishi, 2002). Our observation that
interdisciplinary projects involve lower division of labor also suggests the intriguing possibility that team
members who are specialists in terms of fields or knowledge domains may sometimes be generalists in
terms of functional activities. More broadly, it is likely that different team members perform different
activities drawing on different types of knowledge, and an integrated perspective that considers all three
dimensions – individuals, activities, and knowledge domains – may be a particularly fruitful avenue for
future research.
        Our results may also be of interest for the scientific community and for policy makers. First, the
observed patterns of division of labor raise the question how scientists can best be prepared to be
productive members of scientific teams (National Academies, 2014). While conventional views (and
many current prize mechanisms) emphasize individual accomplishment and suggest that scientists should
be trained to perform the full range of research activities, there may be benefits to training scientists more
specifically for particular types of functions. The increasing demand for “data scientists” is just one
example.
        Second, we observe a significant number of individuals who performed only one activity, yet
common authorship guidelines typically require authors’ involvement in a broader range of activities,
including conceptualization or empirical work as well as writing (ICMJE, 2010). While one interpretation
of this discrepancy is that teams violate authorship standards by including too many authors, another
interpretation is that authorship standards need to be revised to accommodate the increasing specialization
of scientific work. The best approach may be to replace or complement the traditional authorship system
with more informative systems that clearly indicate the particular contributions of all team members
(Allen et al., 2014; Rennie et al., 1997). Of course, this is why an increasing number of journals require
the disclosure of author contributions, providing social scientists with a rich data source to investigate the
division of labor in collaborative knowledge production.

                                                                                                             26
REFERENCES


Agrawal, A., & Goldfarb, A. 2008. Restructuring research: communication costs and the democratization
        of university innovation. The American Economic Review, 98(4): 1578-1590.
Allen, L., Scott, J., Brand, A., Hlava, M., & Altman, M. 2014. Publishing: Credit where credit is due.
        Nature, 508(7496): 312-313.
Arora, A., Cohen, W. M., & Walsh, J. P. 2016. The acquisition and commercialization of invention in
        American manufacturing: Incidence and impact. Research Policy, 45(6): 1113-1128.
Becker, G. S., & Murphy, K. M. 1992. The division of labor, coordination costs, and knowledge. The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4): 1137-1160.
Bercovitz, J., & Feldman, M. 2011. The mechanisms of collaboration in inventive teams: Composition,
        social networks, and geography. Research Policy, 40(1): 81-93.
Bikard, M., Murray, F., & Gans, J. 2015. Exploring tradeoffs in the organization of scientific work:
        Collaboration and scientific reward. Management Science, 61(7): 1473-1495.
Bohannon, J. 2013. Who’s afraid of peer review? Science, 342: 60-65.
Cummings, J. N., & Kiesler, S. 2014. Organization theory and the changing nature of science. Journal of
        Organization Design, 3(3): 1-16.
Dasgupta, P., & David, P. A. 1994. Toward a new economics of science. Research Policy, 23(5): 487-
        521.
Franzoni, C., & Sauermann, H. 2014. Crowd Science: The organization of scientific research in open
        collaborative projects. Research Policy, 43(1): 1-20.
Freeman, R., Weinstein, E., Marincola, E., Rosenbaum, J., & Solomon, F. 2001. Competition and careers
        in biosciences. Science, 294(5550): 2293.
Fuhrmann, C., Halme, D., O’Sullivan, P., & Lindstaedt, B. 2011. Improving graduate education to
        support a branching career pipeline: Recommendations based on a survey of doctoral students in
        the basic biomedical sciences. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 10(3): 239-249.
Furman, J. L., & Stern, S. 2011. Climbing atop the shoulders of giants: The impact of institutions on
        cumulative research. The American Economic Review, 101(5): 1933-1963.
Gans, J., & Murray, F. 2013. Credit history: The changing nature of scientific credit, NBER Working
        Paper #19538.
Gibbs, J. P., & Poston, D. L. 1975. The division of labor: Conceptualization and related measures. Social
        Forces, 53(3): 468-476.
Gittelman, M. 2007. Does geography matter for science-based firms? Epistemic communities and the
        geography of research and patenting in biotechnology. Organization Science, 18(4): 724.
Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., & Hoisl, K. 2013. Knowledge recombination across technological boundaries:
        Scientists vs. engineers. Management Science, 59(4): 837-851.
Hackett, E. J. 1990. Science as a vocation in the 1990s. Journal of Higher Education, 61(3): 241-279.
Haeussler, C., & Sauermann, H. 2013. Credit where credit is due? The impact of project contributions and
        social factors on authorship and inventorship. Research Policy, 42(3): 688-703.


                                                                                                         27
Hagstrom, W. O. 1964. Traditional and modern forms of scientific teamwork. Administrative Science
        Quarterly: 241-263.
Hamilton, B. H., Nickerson, J. A., & Owan, H. 2003. Team incentives and worker heterogeneity: An
        empirical analysis of the impact of teams on productivity and participation. Journal of Political
        Economy, 111(3): 465-497.
ICMJE. 2010. Uniform requirements for manuscripts submitted to biomedical journals: Ethical
        considerations in the conduct and reporting of research: Authorship and Contributorship, Vol.
        2010.
Ivaniš, A., Hren, D., Marušić, M., & Marušić, A. 2011. Less work, less respect: authors' perceived
        importance of research contributions and their declared contributions to research articles. PLoS
        ONE, 6(6): e20206.
Jones, B. 2009. The burden of knowledge and the “death of the renaissance man”: Is innovation getting
        harder? Review of Economic Studies, 76(1): 283-317.
Jones, B. F., & Weinberg, B. A. 2011. Age dynamics in scientific creativity. Proceedings of the National
        Academy of Sciences, 108(47): 18910-18914.
Kamo, Y. 2000. “He said, she said”: Assessing discrepancies in husbands' and wives' reports on the
        division of household labor. Social Science Research, 29(4): 459-476.
Knorr-Cetina, K. 1999. Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. 1979. Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific Facts. Beverly
        Hills: Sage.
Lissoni, F., Montobbio, F., & Zirulia, L. 2013. Inventorship and authorship as attribution rights: An
        enquiry into the economics of scientific credit. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
        95: 49-69.
Majchrzak, A., More, P. H., & Faraj, S. 2012. Transcending knowledge differences in cross-functional
        teams. Organization Science, 23(4): 951-970.
National Academies. 2014. The Postdoctoral Experience Revisited.
Nielsen, M. 2011. Reinventing Discovery: The New Era of Networked Science: Princeton University
        Press.
Oettl, A. 2012. Reconceptualizing stars: Scientist helpfulness and peer performance. Management
        Science, 58: 1122-1140.
Osterloh, M., & Frey, B. S. 2000. Motivation, knowledge transfer, and organizational forms.
        Organization Science, 11(5): 538-550.
Owen-Smith, J. 2001. Managing laboratory work through skepticism: Processes of evaluation and
        control. American Sociological Review, 66(3): 427-452.
Polanyi, M. 1966. The Tacit Dimension: University of Chicago Press.
Postrel, S. 2002. Islands of shared knowledge: Specialization and mutual understanding in problem-
        solving teams. Organization Science, 13(3): 303-320.



                                                                                                           28
Puranam, P. 2012. A Future for the science of organization design. Journal of Organization Design,
        1(1): 18-19.
Puranam, P., Alexy, O., & Reitzig, M. 2014. What's “new” about new forms of organizing? Academy of
        Management Review, 39(2): 162-180.
Rennie, D., Yank, V., & Emanuel, L. 1997. When authorship fails: A proposal to make contributors
        accountable. Journal of the American Medical Association, 278(7): 579-580.
Sauermann, H., & Stephan, P. 2013. Conflicting logics? A multidimensional view of industrial and
        academic science. Organization Science, 24(3): 889-909.
Shibayama, S., Baba, Y., & Walsh, J. P. 2015. Organizational design of university laboratories: Task
        allocation and lab performance in Japanese bioscience laboratories. Research Policy, 44(3): 610-
        622.
Simon, H. A. 1962. The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society:
        467-482.
Simonton, D. K. 2003. Scientific creativity as constrained stochastic behavior: the integration of product,
        person, and process perspectives. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4): 475-494.
Singh, J., & Fleming, L. 2010. Lone inventors as sources of breakthroughs: Myth or reality?
        Management Science, 56(1): 41-56.
Smith, A. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London.
Stephan, P. 2012. How Economics Shapes Science: Harvard University Press.
Stigler, G. J. 1951. The division of labor is limited by the extent of the market. The Journal of Political
        Economy: 185-193.
Takeishi, A. 2002. Knowledge partitioning in the interfirm division of labor: The case of automotive
        product development. Organization Science, 13(3): 321-338.
Teodoridis, F. 2013. Generalists, specialists, and the direction of inventive activity, Working Paper.
Thompson, J. D. 1967. Organizations in Action.
Van de Ven, A. H., Delbecq, A. L., & Koenig Jr, R. 1976. Determinants of coordination modes within
        organizations. American Sociological Review: 322-338.
Von Hippel, E. 1990. Task partitioning: An innovation process variable. Research Policy, 19(5): 407-
        418.
Walsh, J. P., & Lee, Y.-N. 2015. The bureaucratization of science. Research Policy, 44(8): 1584-1600.
Wuchty, S., Jones, B., & Uzzi, B. 2007. The increasing dominance of teams in the production of
        knowledge. Science, 316(5827): 1036-1039.




                                                                                                          29
                                              Table 1: Descriptive statistics
                                                                  Mean      SD          Min          Max
              Author level (n=83727)
                  Main variables
                                   i_conceived                       0.48                        0          1
                                   i_performed                       0.51                        0          1
                                   i_analyzed                        0.58                        0          1
                                   i_materials                       0.34                        0          1
                                   i_wrote                           0.47                        0          1
                                   i_other                           0.09                        0          1
                                   i_countcontributions              2.48        1.25            1          6
                                   i_sharecontributions              0.51        0.26         0.17          1
                         Controls
                                   i_priorpubs_quantity             14.99    21.99              0     200.00
                                   i_priorpubs_quality               4.70     7.44              0     829.12
                                   i_professionalage                12.56    10.73              0         60
                                   i_institutionrank                 5.61     2.70              1          8
                                   i_developingcountry               0.12                       0          1

              Activity and Team level (n=12995)
                   Main variables
                                    a_countconceived                 3.17        1.94            1        20
                                    a_countperformed                 3.46        2.40            1        20
                                    a_countmaterials                 3.18        2.40            1        20
                                    a_countanalyzed                  3.78        2.50            1        20
                                    a_countwrote                     3.04        1.97            1        20
                                    a_countother                     3.23        2.62            1        17
                                    a_shareconceived                 0.56        0.27         0.05         1
                                    a_shareperformed                 0.54        0.23         0.06         1
                                    a_sharematerials                 0.48        0.26         0.05         1
                                    a_shareananalyzed                0.63        0.27         0.06         1
                                    a_sharewrote                     0.55        0.30         0.05         1
                                    a_shareother                     0.48        0.28         0.05         1
                                    ti_avgcountcontributions         2.66        0.76            1         6
                                    ti_avgsharecontributions         0.56        0.17         0.18         1
                                    ti_shareofspecialists            0.16                        0      0.94
                                    ti_shareofmedspecialization      0.47                        0         1
                                    ti_shareofgeneralists            0.37                        0         1
                                    ta_avgcountauthors               3.31        1.61         1.00     16.80
                                    ta_avgshareauthors               0.56        0.17         0.18         1
                                    t_teamsize                       6.44        3.53            2        20
                                    t_field_novel                    0.21                        0         1
                                    t_numberfields_1                 0.20                        0         1
                                    t_numberfields_2&3               0.65                        0         1
                                    t_numberfields_>3                0.16                        0         1
                                    t_citations                     23.80    28.17               0       555
                                    ti_avgpriorpubs_quality          4.55     4.62               0       259
                                    ti_avgpriorpubs_quantity        14.42    10.53               0       105
                          Controls
                                    t_totalactivitieslisted          4.80        0.68           1           6
                                    t_affiliations                   3.31        2.06           1          22
                                    t_firm                           0.14                       0           1
                                    t_funding_basic                  0.31                       0           1
                                    t_funding_industry               0.05                       0           1
                                    t_funding_other                  0.61                       0           1
                                    t_country_US                     0.38                       0           1
                                    t_country_developing             0.09                       0           1
                                    t_pages                          9.96        3.29           2          51

Note: Activity level variables (e.g., a_shareconceived) coded as missing if activity was not listed.

                                                                                                                30
                              Table 2: Interdependencies between activities

                                 1             2             3              4          5               6
VARIABLES                     i_wrote     i_analyzed    i_materials   i_performed i_conceived       i_other

i_conceived                   0.415**       0.087**      -0.041**       0.015**                    -0.058**
                              (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.005)                     (0.011)
i_performed                  -0.034**       0.077**      -0.192**                     0.013**      -0.221**
                              (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.006)                     (0.005)       (0.010)
i_materials                  -0.022**      -0.085**                    -0.167**      -0.040**      -0.086**
                              (0.004)       (0.005)                     (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.012)
i_analyzed                    0.244**                    -0.095**       0.082**       0.079**      -0.080**
                              (0.004)                     (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.010)
i_wrote                                     0.306**      -0.026**      -0.042**       0.474**      -0.182**
                                            (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.012)
i_other                      -0.163**      -0.095**      -0.126**      -0.225**      -0.051**
                              (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.014)       (0.010)       (0.010)
i_lnpriorpubs_quantity        0.010**        -0.003       0.026**      -0.107**       0.044**       0.013**
                              (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.005)
i_lnpriorpubs_quality         0.009**       0.021**       0.016**       0.026**       0.011**        -0.002
                              (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.006)
i_professionalage             0.002**      -0.005**       0.002**      -0.011**       0.003**       0.002**
                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
i_institutionrank            -0.008**      -0.005**       0.008**       -0.003*      -0.004**        -0.000
                              (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)
i_developingcountry            -0.012      -0.093**       0.052**       0.081**        0.025*       0.056**
                              (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.019)
Constant                      0.162**       0.483**       0.499**       0.898**       0.103**       0.637**
                              (0.008)       (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.018)
Observations                   83,727        83,050        63,594        80,278        82,672        16,609
R-squared                       0.330         0.168         0.092         0.284         0.299         0.156
Number of papers               12,995        12,859         9,048        12,317        12,785         2,330

Note: OLS with article fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the level of the article. *=significant at
5%, **=significant at 1%.




                                                                                                              31
                                                          Table 3: Division of labor and team size

                                 1              2              3            4             5            6         7            8          9           10
                           ti_avgshare      ti_share       ti_share     ti_share       a_share     a_share    a_share     a_share     a_share     a_share
VARIABLES                 contributions   ofspecialists   ofmedspec   ofgeneralists   conceived   performed   materials   analyzed     wrote       other

t_teamsize                  -0.068**        0.046**        0.062**      -0.109**      -0.097**    -0.012**    -0.062**    -0.058**    -0.108**    -0.038**
                             (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.006)
t_teamsize_sq                0.003**       -0.001**       -0.003**       0.004**       0.004**     0.001**     0.002**     0.002**     0.004**     0.001**
                             (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
t_totalactivitieslisted     -0.057**        0.094**          0.001      -0.095**      -0.034**    -0.060**    -0.038**    -0.041**    -0.047**    -0.090**
                             (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.007)
t_pages                      0.002**         -0.001       -0.003**       0.003**        -0.001     0.005**       0.000     0.006**    -0.002**       0.001
                             (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)
t_publicationdate            0.000**       -0.000**          0.000         0.000       0.000**       0.000       0.000      0.000*     0.000**      -0.000
                             (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
t_firm                        -0.000         -0.007          0.013        -0.006        -0.004      -0.002       0.006      0.017*     -0.013*      -0.008
                             (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.015)
t_funding_basic                0.008         -0.011          0.003         0.009         0.015       0.011       0.005       0.005      -0.005       0.030
                             (0.006)        (0.009)        (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.024)
t_funding_industry             0.008         -0.008         -0.005         0.013         0.006       0.021      -0.015      -0.001       0.009       0.048
                             (0.006)        (0.010)        (0.013)       (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.015)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.027)
t_funding_other                0.000         -0.003          0.000         0.002        -0.001       0.010       0.002      -0.002      -0.014       0.038
                             (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.024)
t_affiliations               0.004**       -0.003**         -0.001       0.004**       0.008**    -0.019**     0.013**      -0.003     0.015**     0.016**
                             (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.003)
t_country_US                   0.001          0.005         -0.008         0.003      -0.021**     0.020**      -0.000     0.015**      -0.006     -0.030*
                             (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.013)
t_country_developing        -0.013**        0.025**         -0.012        -0.012      -0.034**       0.005      -0.004      -0.000    -0.020**      -0.031
                             (0.004)        (0.006)        (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.019)
Field fixed effects             incl.          incl.          incl.         incl.         incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.
Constant                     0.877**        -0.201*          0.101       1.100**       0.731**     0.831**     0.789**     0.751**     0.814**     1.487**
                             (0.058)        (0.088)        (0.115)       (0.102)       (0.105)     (0.099)     (0.140)     (0.115)     (0.108)     (0.255)
Observations                  12,995         12,995         12,995        12,995        12,785      12,317       9,048      12,859      12,995       2,330
R-squared                      0.432          0.266          0.080         0.376         0.285       0.106       0.112       0.144       0.360       0.208
Note: OLS. Models 5-10 conditional upon activity being listed on the paper. *=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                                                        32
                                               Table 4: Differences in division of labor across types of projects
                                 1              2              3              4            5            6         7            8          9           10
                           ti_avgshare      ti_share       ti_share       ti_share      a_share     a_share    a_share      a_share    a_share     a_share
VARIABLES                 contributions   ofspecialists   ofmedspec    ofgeneralists   conceived   performed   materials   analyzed     wrote       other

t_field_novel               -0.011**          0.009*          0.009      -0.018**        -0.009    -0.051**       0.009      -0.010      0.014*      -0.023
                             (0.003)         (0.004)        (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.014)
t_numberfields_1             omitted         omitted        omitted       omitted       omitted     omitted     omitted     omitted     omitted     omitted
t_numberfields_2&3           0.008**        -0.013**          0.003        0.010*         0.002     0.013**      -0.005     0.037**      -0.006      -0.006
                             (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.015)
t_numberfields_>3            0.019**        -0.023**         -0.006       0.029**         0.012     0.031**       0.003     0.057**      -0.003      -0.010
                             (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.019)
t_totalactivitieslisted     -0.057**         0.096**         -0.003      -0.093**      -0.033**    -0.061**    -0.036**    -0.038**    -0.049**    -0.099**
                             (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.006)
t_pages                      0.001**           0.001       -0.003**       0.002**      -0.002**     0.006**      -0.001     0.007**    -0.005**      -0.001
                             (0.000)         (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
t_publicationdate            0.000**        -0.000**          0.000        0.000*       0.000**       0.000       0.000      0.000*     0.000**      -0.000
                             (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
t_firm                        -0.001          -0.005          0.012        -0.008        -0.006      -0.001       0.005      0.016*     -0.016*      -0.016
                             (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.015)
t_funding_basic                0.003           0.000         -0.005         0.004         0.011       0.018      -0.009       0.016     -0.024*       0.017
                             (0.006)         (0.009)        (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.024)
t_funding_industry             0.006          -0.008         -0.002         0.010         0.005       0.021      -0.022       0.002       0.003      0.054*
                             (0.006)         (0.010)        (0.013)       (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.015)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.027)
t_funding_other               -0.003           0.006         -0.005        -0.001        -0.005       0.017      -0.010       0.005    -0.028**       0.032
                             (0.005)         (0.008)        (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.024)
t_affiliations               0.005**        -0.006**         -0.000       0.006**       0.010**    -0.021**     0.017**    -0.007**     0.021**     0.021**
                             (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.003)
t_country_US                  -0.000           0.004         -0.007         0.002      -0.022**     0.017**      -0.001     0.016**      -0.008     -0.029*
                             (0.003)         (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.013)
t_country_developing          -0.007          0.015*         -0.010        -0.005      -0.026**       0.000       0.000       0.000      -0.005      -0.019
                             (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.018)
Team size dummies               incl.           incl.          incl.         incl.         incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.
Constant                     0.734**          -0.063          0.181       0.882**       0.564**     0.774**     0.698**     0.603**     0.622**     1.372**
                             (0.057)         (0.088)        (0.113)       (0.100)       (0.104)     (0.099)     (0.138)     (0.115)     (0.108)     (0.255)
Observations                  12,970          12,970         12,970        12,970        12,760      12,293       9,035      12,834      12,970       2,326
R-squared                      0.440           0.254          0.101         0.389         0.290       0.087       0.110       0.120       0.349       0.186
Note: OLS. Models 5-10 conditional upon activity being listed on the paper. *=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.


                                                                                                                                                               33
                               Table 5: Differences in interdependencies between activities across types of projects
                                  1           2            3               4            5           6          7           8            9              10           11           12
  VARIABLES                    i_wrote    i_analyzed   i_materials   i_performed   i_conceived   i_other    i_wrote    i_analyzed   i_materials   i_performed   i_conceived   i_other

  int_novel_conceived          G0.012       0.001       G0.033*        G0.008                    G0.094**
                               (0.010)     (0.012)       (0.015)       (0.012)                    (0.028)
  int_novel_performed           0.002       0.015       0.057**                       G0.012       G0.029
                               (0.009)     (0.011)       (0.013)                      (0.010)     (0.022)
  int_novel_materials           0.001       0.004                      0.030*         G0.016       G0.026
                               (0.011)     (0.012)                     (0.013)        (0.012)     (0.028)
  int_novel_analyzed            0.013                    0.006          0.016          0.004       0.016
                               (0.010)                  (0.015)        (0.012)        (0.011)     (0.024)
  int_novel_wrote                           0.001       G0.006          0.001        G0.021*      0.108**
                                           (0.012)      (0.016)        (0.012)        (0.011)     (0.031)
  int_novel_other              0.082**      0.013       G0.039         G0.016       G0.105**
                                (0.023)    (0.024)      (0.035)        (0.023)        (0.024)
  int_numberfields_conceived                                                                                 0.006       0.015        G0.006        G0.000                    G0.012
                                                                                                            (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.010)        (0.009)                   (0.020)
  int_numberfields_performed                                                                                 0.004     G0.020**       G0.015                       G0.006     G0.030
                                                                                                            (0.006)     (0.008)      (0.009)                      (0.007)     (0.017)
  int_numberfields_materials                                                                                0.024**      G0.007                     G0.005         G0.007      0.012
                                                                                                            (0.007)     (0.009)                     (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.020)
  int_numberfields_analyzed                                                                                  0.002                     G0.010       G0.012         0.012       0.033
                                                                                                            (0.007)                   (0.010)       (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.017)
  int_numberfields_wrote                                                                                                 G0.010       0.037**       G0.004         0.005      0.056*
                                                                                                                        (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.007)     (0.022)
  int_numberfields_other                                                                                     0.046**     0.028         0.018        G0.017         G0.009
                                                                                                             (0.015)    (0.016)       (0.024)       (0.018)       (0.017)
  i_conceived                  0.418**     0.087**      G0.034**      0.016**                    G0.039**    0.404**    0.057**        G0.029        0.015                      G0.034
                                (0.005)    (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.006)                    (0.012)    (0.015)    (0.018)       (0.022)       (0.018)                     (0.041)
  i_performed                  G0.035**    0.074**      G0.204**                    0.016**      G0.214**   G0.042**    0.118**      G0.162**                     0.025       G0.158**
                                (0.004)    (0.005)       (0.006)                     (0.005)      (0.011)    (0.013)    (0.016)       (0.019)                    (0.015)        (0.036)
  i_materials                  G0.023**   G0.086**                    G0.174**      G0.037**     G0.080**   G0.070**   G0.070**                    G0.157**       G0.025       G0.110*
                                (0.005)    (0.006)                     (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.013)    (0.015)    (0.018)                     (0.018)      (0.017)        (0.044)
  i_analyzed                   0.242**                  G0.096**      0.079**       0.078**      G0.081**    0.240**                 G0.075**      0.106**       0.054**      G0.147**
                                (0.004)                  (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.011)    (0.014)                  (0.021)       (0.018)      (0.016)        (0.036)
  i_wrote                                  0.306**      G0.025**      G0.042**      0.478**      G0.206**               0.326**      G0.101**       G0.034       0.463**      G0.294**
                                           (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.013)               (0.018)       (0.023)       (0.018)      (0.015)        (0.046)
  i_other                      G0.182**   G0.097**      G0.117**      G0.222**      G0.028**                G0.256**   G0.153**      G0.164**      G0.191**       G0.032
                                (0.010)    (0.011)       (0.015)       (0.011)       (0.010)                 (0.031)    (0.033)       (0.051)       (0.037)      (0.035)
  ControlOvariables               incl.      incl.         incl.         incl.         incl.        incl.      incl.      incl.          incl.        incl.        incl.         incl.
  Constant                     0.162**     0.484**      0.499**       0.898**       0.102**      0.635**     0.162**    0.483**       0.499**      0.898**       0.102**      0.637**
                                (0.008)    (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.018)     (0.008)    (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.018)
  Observations                  83,557      82,880       63,507        80,115        82,502       16,578      83,727     83,050        63,594       80,278        82,672       16,609
  RGsquared                      0.330      0.168         0.093         0.284         0.300       0.158       0.330      0.168         0.093         0.284        0.299         0.158
  NumberOofOpapers              12,970      12,834        9,035        12,293        12,760        2,326      12,995     12,859         9,048       12,317        12,785        2,330
Note: OLS with article fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the level of the article. Controls: i_lnpriorpubs_quantity, i_lnpriorpubs_quality,
i_professionalage, i_institutionrank, i_developingcountry. Int_ denotes interaction terms. *=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%

                                                                                                                                                                                          34
                                          Table 6: Division of labor and citation impact
        april 20, 2016. logpriorquant/qual and split for all measures
                                                               1               2               3               4               5               6
        VARIABLES                                       t_lncitations   t_lncitations   t_lncitations   t_lncitations   t_lncitations   t_lncitations

        t_avgsharecontributions                          -0.234**         0.155**
                                                          (0.048)         (0.055)
        t_sharespecialists                                                                 0.011
                                                                                          (0.037)
        t_shareintermediatespecialization                                                 omitted
        t_sharegeneralists                                                                0.092**
                                                                                          (0.033)
        a_shareconceived                                                                                   -0.014           -0.003          -0.003
                                                                                                          (0.032)          (0.032)         (0.032)
        a_shareperformed                                                                                   0.081*
                                                                                                          (0.033)
        a_sharematerials                                                                                   -0.025           -0.027          -0.022
                                                                                                          (0.028)          (0.028)         (0.029)
        a_shareanalyzed                                                                                     0.005            0.002          -0.001
                                                                                                          (0.029)          (0.029)         (0.029)
        a_sharewrote                                                                                      0.121**
                                                                                                          (0.032)
        a_shareother                                                                                       -0.025          -0.021           -0.016
                                                                                                          (0.040)         (0.040)          (0.041)
        t_highciteinteam_sharewrote                                                                                       0.159**
                                                                                                                          (0.023)
        t_lowciteinteam_sharewrote                                                                                        -0.051*
                                                                                                                          (0.025)
        t_highciteinteam_shareperformed                                                                                    0.047*
                                                                                                                          (0.021)
        t_lowciteinteam_shareperformed                                                                                      0.023
                                                                                                                          (0.024)
        t_highpubinteam_sharewrote                                                                                                        0.108**
                                                                                                                                          (0.024)
        t_lowpubinteam_sharewrote                                                                                                           0.001
                                                                                                                                          (0.027)
        t_highpubinteam_shareperformed                                                                                                      0.028
                                                                                                                                          (0.022)
        t_lowpubinteam_shareperformed                                                                                                       0.046
                                                                                                                                          (0.027)
        Team size dummies                                                     incl.           incl.          incl.           incl.           incl.
        Field fixed effects                                  incl.            incl.           incl.          incl.           incl.           incl.
        ti_lnavgpriorpubs_quality                         0.440**          0.426**         0.426**        0.425**         0.433**         0.429**
                                                          (0.017)          (0.016)         (0.016)        (0.017)         (0.017)         (0.017)
        ti_lnavgpriorpubs_quantity                        0.043**          0.049**         0.049**        0.053**         0.060**         0.058**
                                                          (0.013)          (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.013)
        t_totalactivities                                   0.004            0.002           0.001          0.005           0.006           0.006
                                                          (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.015)         (0.015)         (0.015)
        t_pagecount                                       0.035**          0.031**         0.031**        0.032**         0.032**         0.032**
                                                          (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)
        t_firm                                              0.040            0.022           0.022          0.023           0.021           0.018
                                                          (0.021)          (0.021)         (0.021)        (0.021)         (0.021)         (0.021)
        t_funding_basic                                     0.041            0.032           0.032          0.031           0.032           0.030
                                                          (0.038)          (0.038)         (0.038)        (0.038)         (0.038)         (0.038)
        t_funding_industry                                  0.048            0.015           0.015          0.015           0.025           0.018
                                                          (0.044)          (0.044)         (0.044)        (0.044)         (0.044)         (0.044)
        t_funding_other                                     0.038            0.031           0.031          0.031           0.033           0.030
                                                          (0.037)          (0.036)         (0.036)        (0.036)         (0.036)         (0.037)
        t_affiliations                                    0.029**         -0.012**        -0.012**        -0.011*         -0.011*         -0.010*
                                                          (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)
        t_country_US                                        0.004            0.026           0.026          0.025           0.027           0.025
                                                          (0.018)          (0.017)         (0.017)        (0.017)         (0.017)         (0.018)
        t_country_developing                                0.020           -0.002          -0.003         -0.002          -0.002           0.000
                                                          (0.025)          (0.025)         (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.025)         (0.025)
        Publication date month/year dummies                  incl.            incl.           incl.          incl.           incl.           incl.
        Constant                                          1.894**          1.593**         1.650**        1.560**         1.511**         1.517**
                                                          (0.145)          (0.146)         (0.140)        (0.144)         (0.145)         (0.146)
        Observations                                       12,990           12,990          12,990         12,990          12,944          12,892
        R-squared                                           0.224            0.240           0.240          0.241           0.242           0.239

Note: OLS. *=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%

                                                                                                                                                        35
                                                     APPENDIX

1     Framework with more detailed information on levels of contributions

         Our basic framework required information only on whether or not an individual participated in a
particular activity. We can extend the discussion to three cases when more information is available: (1)
information on the shares of individuals’ total effort devoted to different activities (e.g., team members
declare what share of their total time they spent on each activity), (2) information on the share of effort
contributed to a given activity by different individuals (e.g., teams declare what share of an activity was
performed by each team member), and (3) information on the units of effort contributed by different
individuals to different activities (e.g., hours or days). While our data do not include this level of detail,
more detailed data may become available in the future and it is useful to briefly explore these cases to
provide a more general framework.

1.1    Information on shares of individuals’ total effort devoted to particular activities

         Figure A1 illustrates the case when shares of effort are known at the level of the individual.
Compared to the base case, this scenario provides more detailed information on how individuals allocate
their effort across activities. For example, individual 1 spent 50% of her time on activity 1, 20% on
activity 2 and 30% on activity 4. In addition to the indicators of specialization discussed above (count of
activities and share of all activities performed), this additional information allows us to compute a more
nuanced measure. One possibility is to draw on the commonly used Herfindahl index. More specifically,
                       &    %
we can compute Si=     $'( "#$ ,   where aij is now the share of time devoted by member i to activity j. The
larger the share of an individual’s time that is devoted to a small number of activities, the higher is Si. In
the extreme case, Si=1 if the team member spends all her time on a single activity (maximum
specialization). If an individual’s effort is evenly distributed across all K activities, then Si=1/K (the team
                                                                                     +
                                                                                     *,- )*
member is an extreme generalist). The average of the individual measures, St=                 , provides a team-
                                                                                      .

level measure of the degree to which members work as specialists versus generalists.

    Figure A1: Information about shares of individuals’ total effort devoted to particular activities
                                                        Activity                 Herfindahl+based
                                                 1        2           3      4                     Si
                                        1     0.50     0.20               0.30                  0.38
                                        2     0.33     0.33               0.33                  0.33
             Team4member                3                          1.00                         1.00
                                        4     0.60     0.40                                     0.52
                                        5     0.25     0.25        0.25   0.25                  0.25
                                                                                   4Avg.4(St ):40.50

                                                                                                                   36
1.2       Information on the shares of activities’ total volume performed by each member

            In a second case, information is available about effort allocation at the level of the activity. For
example, Science magazine has recently begun to ask what share of a given contribution was performed
by each co-author.1 Figure A2 shows an example where 30% of activity 1 were performed by team
member 1, 20% by team member 2, 35% by team member 4 and 15% by team member 5. In addition to
the earlier measures (the number of team members and the share of team members involved in an
activity), we can now compute a more nuanced activity level measure. One possibility is the Herfindahl-
                           .    %
based measure Cj=          #'( /#$ ,   where /#$ is the share of activity j performed by team member i. The larger
Cj, the more highly concentrated an activity is among a small number of team members. In the extreme
case, Cj=1 if only one team member performs the activity. If the activity is evenly distributed among all N
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                  1,- 01
team members, then Cj=1/N. The average of the activity level measures, Ct=                                 , provides a team level
                                                                                                   &

measure of the degree to which activities are concentrated versus distributed across team members.


     Figure A2: Information about the shares of activities’ total volume performed by each member
                                                                 Activity
                                                         1         2           3       4
                                                1     0.30      0.15                0.40
                                                2     0.20      0.30                0.40
                      Team-member               3                           0.80
                                                4     0.35      0.30
                                                5     0.15      0.25        0.20    0.20
                      Sum                             1.00      1.00        1.00    1.00
                      Herfindahl3based6C j            0.28      0.27        0.68    0.36    Avg.6(C t ):60.40


1.3       Information on levels of individuals’ effort towards different activities

            Finally, information may be available on the absolute level of effort spent by each team member
on each activity (e.g., in hours, or days). This information allows us to compute the shares of individuals’
total effort devoted to particular activities (individual level; case 1 above) as well as the share of the
volume of a particular activity performed by different team members (activity level; case 2 above) and we
can again compute the respective Herfindahl-based measures.
            A novel aspect of this scenario is that we can compute an individual’s share of the total team
effort, wi, and an activity’s share of the total volume of work, wj. Consider the example shown in Figure
A3. Individual 1 contributed 15 units of effort, which represented 26% of the total effort spent on the
project. Similarly, activity 1 received 26 units of effort, which represented 45% of the total volume of
work. We can then use these shares as weights when computing the team level averages of measures of

1
    https://www.sciencemag.org/site/feature/contribinfo/prep/coi.pdf, accessed January 3, 2016.

                                                                                                                                37
                                                                  .
       specialization. More specifically, Stw=                    #'( 3# 4#   is a team level measure of members’ degree of
       specialization, giving more weight to members who contributed more effort to the project. Similarly,
                 &
       Ctw=      $'( 3$ 5$     is a team level measure of the activities’ degree of concentration, giving more weight to
       activities that required a larger amount of work.


                            Figure A3: Levels of effort contributed by each team member to each activity

                                      Raw$data$(units$of$effort)                                                  Shares$of$individual$effort
                                          Activity                    Sum$of          Share$of             Activity                               Herfindahl0based
                                 1          2         3        4 indiv.$effort team$effort$(w i)      1      2         3        4          Sum                   Si
                        1       10          2                  3        15.00             0.26     0.67   0.13               0.20          1.00               0.50
                        2        3          2                  5        10.00             0.17     0.30   0.20               0.50          1.00               0.38
Team6member             3                             3                  3.00             0.05                      1.00                   1.00               1.00
                        4        10         4                           14.00             0.24     0.71   0.29                             1.00               0.59
                        5         3         3         7        3        16.00             0.28     0.19   0.19      0.44     0.19          1.00               0.30
Volume$of$activity            26.00     11.00 10.00 11.00 Total$effort/work:$58                                       6unweighted6average6(S t )              0.55
Share$of$total$work$(w j)      0.45      0.19      0.17     0.19                                                        6weighted6average6(S tw )             0.47

                 Shares$of$activity$volume
                      1     0.38       0.18                0.27
                      2     0.12       0.18                0.45
Team6member           3                       0.30
                      4     0.38       0.36
                      5     0.12       0.27   0.70         0.27
Sum                         1.00       1.00   1.00         1.00
Herfindahl0based$C j        0.32       0.27   0.58         0.36
                               unweighted6average6(C t ):60.38
                                 weighted6average6(C tw ):60.36




                                                                                                                                                    38
