NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BERNANKE'S NO-ARBITRAGE ARGUMENT REVISITED:
CAN OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS IN REAL ASSETS ELIMINATE THE LIQUIDITY TRAP?
Gauti B. Eggertsson
Kevin Proulx
Working Paper 22243
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22243

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

This paper was prepared for the 19th Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile 2015
"Monetary Policy through Asset Markets: Lessons from Unconventional Measures and
Implications for an Integrated World." We thank Luca Dedola, Paul Krugman and Michael
Woodford for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Gauti B. Eggertsson and Kevin Proulx. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Bernanke's No-arbitrage Argument Revisited: Can Open Market Operations in Real Assets
Eliminate the Liquidity Trap?
Gauti B. Eggertsson and Kevin Proulx
NBER Working Paper No. 22243
May 2016
JEL No. E31,E4,E42,E43,E50,E51,E52,E58,E61,E62
ABSTRACT
We first show that, at least in theory, open market operations in real assets can be a useful tool for
overcoming a liquidity trap because they change the inflation incentives of the government, and
thus change private sector expectations from deflationary to inflationary. We argue that this
formalizes Ben Bernanke's arbitrage argument for why a central bank can always increase
nominal demand, despite the zero lower bound. We illustrate this logic in a calibrated New
Keynesian model assuming the government acts under discretion. Numerical experiments
suggest, however, that the needed intervention is incredibly high, creating a serious limitation of
this solution to the liquidity trap. Our experiments suggest that while asset purchases can be a
helpful commitment device in theory, they may need to be combined in practice with fiscal policy
coordination to achieve the desired outcome.

Gauti B. Eggertsson
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu
Kevin Proulx
Brown University
Economics Department
Robinson Hall
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
kevin_proulx@brown.edu

1.

Introduction

This paper looks back on the professional consensus about monetary policy at the zero
bound prior to the 2008 crisis, and proposes a calibrated model that provides one interpretation that explains why it was somewhat off base. It is easy to forget, but the general
consensus in the economics profession in the late 1990’s, when Japan was experiencing
difficulties due to deflation and the zero bound, was that increasing the money supply in
one of a variety of ways was a simple and straightforward answer to stimulating aggregate
demand.
One example of this point of view is from Kenneth Rogoff (1998), a leading international macroeconomist, in response to Krugman (1998), an article that launched the
modern zero lower bound (ZLB) literature. One of Krugman’s key predictions was that
increasing the money supply at the ZLB was irrelevant as long as expectations of future
money supply were fixed. Rogoff’s comment on this summarizes well a commonly held
view at the time:
“No one should seriously believe that the BOJ would face any significant
technical problems in inflating if it puts it mind to the matter, liquidity trap
or not. For example, one can feel quite confident that if the BOJ were to issue
a 25 percent increase in the current supply and use it to buy back 4 percent
of government nominal debt, inflationary expectations would rise.”
This basic logic was later spelled out more explicitly in a general equilibrium model
by Auerbach and Obstfeld (2005) in an article in the American Economic Review, a
leading journal of the economics profession, titled “The case for open-market purchases
in a liquidity trap.” Their argument was that purchasing government debt with money
should plausibly lead people to expect a permanent increase in the money supply, in
contrast to Krugman’s assumption and much as suggested by Rogoff, due to the fact that
a permanent increase in the money supply creates seignorage revenues, which reduces tax
distortions. In this case increasing the money supply should increase prices and output
because people should have no reason to expect the money supply to be contracted to its
original level once things normalize and the short-term interest rate is positive, as this
would imply higher tax distortions.
Since Rogoff’s prediction, the Bank of Japan has not only increased the monetary
base by 25 percent, but rather it has increased it by about 550 percent. Furthermore, it
has accumulated more than 30 percent of outstanding government debt, as well as several
types of real assets, such as stocks, foreign exchange and mortgage backed securities.
A similar story can be told about many other central banks since 2008. Meanwhile, in
Japan, government debt as a fraction of GDP, at 80 percent in 1998, has almost tripled.
The point here is not to single out Kenneth Rogoff for a prediction that in retrospect
seems off base as an empirical matter. Instead, it is to illustrate a broad consensus in the
profession at the time, a consensus of which the quote from Rogoff is a particularly cogent
summary. So as to not seem to be be unfairly singling out any particular author, below
we will provide examples in which the former author of this article made statements that
had a similar tenor as Rogoff’s prediction.
Our suspicion is that the broad consensus at the time had its roots in the classic
account of the Great Depression by Friedman and Schwartz (1963), in which the deflation
from 1929-1933 was explained by a collapse in the money supply. The Great Inflation of
the 1970’s also appeared to support Friedman’s famous dictum that “Inflation is always
2

and everywhere a monetary phenomenom.” It was natural, then, to assume the same
applied to Japan, and that all that was needed was increasing the money supply to halt
the deflation.
Another indication of the consesus of the time was Lars Svensson’s (2001) well known
proposal for a “foolproof way” out of a liquidity trap, which, in contrast to Rogoff’s
proposal, involved printing money to buy up foreign exchange, rather than government
debt. The fact that this solution was claimed to be “foolproof” also indicated to some
extent the general sense among academic economists at the time, especially in the US,
that expansionary monetary policy at the ZLB was only a question of will, rather than
posing any technical difficulties for the world’s central banks.
From the perspective of the former author of this paper, however, the most pertinent
statement about the academic consensus at the turn of the century came up in a conversation with Ben Bernanke, then Chairman, not of the Federal Reserve, but the Princeton
economics department, and editor of the American Economic Review. When proposing
“the liquidity trap” as a Ph.D. dissertation topic, Bernanke issued the following warning:
“I have to warn you. I do not believe in the liquidity trap.” While the current understanding of the word “the liquidity trap” is that it reflects some bound on the short-term
nominal interest rate (often referred to as zero, albeit recent experience suggests it may
be somewhat negative), Bernanke was instead referring more broadly to the fact that he
believed in the power of the central banks to do something to stimulate demand, in the
tradition of Friedman and Schwartz, zero bound or not. This position seemed to have
been very much in line with the thinking of Rogoff, Svensson and Auerbach and Obstfeld,
already cited.
Below is a quote from Bernanke (2000), a speech given at the American Economics
Association, which later would become very widely known as he assumed the Chairmanship of the Federal Reserve. Some interpreted the speech as a roadmap for the Fed’s
subsequent policy actions:
“First, that— despite the apparent liquidity trap— monetary policymakers
retain the power to increase nominal aggregate demand and the price level.
[..] In my view one can make what amounts to an arbitrage argument —the
most convincing type of argument in an economic context—that it must be
true. The monetary authorities can issue as much money as they like. Hence, if
the price level were truly independent of money issuance, then the monetary
authorities could use the money they create to acquire indefinite quantities
of goods and assets. This is manifestly impossible in equilibrium. Therefore
money issuance must ultimately raise the price level, even if nominal interest
rates are bounded at zero. This is an elementary argument.” (italics ours)
In this paper we revisit this elementary argument on the basis of one particular interpretation of Ben Bernanke’s logic. We use it to try to illuminate why the pre-2008
consensus about the power of monetary policy may have been a bit too optimistic about
the ability of central banks to stimulate demand.1 In making this case we do not wish to
claim that the cental bank – or the government as a whole – is unable to stimulate demand
at all. Instead, the point is that doing so may require considerably larger intervention
than suggested by the pre-crisis consensus, for example interventions of the size and scope
1

Paul Krugman has often quipped that he should take Svensson and Bernanke to Japan with him on
an apology tour for having made it seem too easy at the time. See e.g. Krugman (2014).

3

of the radical regime change implemented by Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1933. This
radical regime change is discussed in detail in Eggertsson (2008) and it involved an explicit commitment to inflate the price level by about 30 percent to pre-depression level,
the abolishment of the gold standard, and a massive increase in government spending and
budget deficits. As an indication of how radical it was at the time, the then director of
the budget, Arthur Lewis, declared “this is the end of Western Civilization” and resigned
from his post.2
To frame the approach of the paper let us first ask a basic question: What is an
arbitrage opportunity? An arbitrage opportunity refers to a situation in which an agent
can acquire profit without taking on any risk. In the context of Bernanke’s argument,
he is suggesting that the liquidity trap can be eliminated as a logical possibility because
its existence would imply that the government could generate infinite profits. For the
argument to make sense – for example in the context of a closed economy – one must have
in mind an environment in which the government would care about profits and losses in the
first place. At first blush this does not seem obvious, as these profits would necessarily be
at the expense of the country’s citizens, whose welfare the government should care about
in the first place. Nevertheless, we believe that the proposition that the government cares
about profits and losses is entirely reasonable, because the government needs to rely on
costly and possibly distortionary taxation to pay for its expenditures. Hence if there was
truly an arbitrage opportunity for the government, any rational government would wish
to take it in order to eliminate taxation costs/distortions altogether (not to mention if it
could do so at the cost of foreigners via buying up foreign assets).
Indeed, framing the question in this way makes clear the tight connection between
Bernanke’s no-arbitrage argument and Auerbach and Obstfeld (2005). As we already
noted, their case for open market operations was made on the basis that open market
operations in a liquidity trap should imply a permanent increase in the money supply that
will last even once the zero bound stops being binding. This was the most reasonable
benchmark to them, for contracting the money supply back to its initial level would
imply fiscal costs. Hence a permanent increase in the money supply made sense from the
perspective of both macroeconomic stabilization ex ante and fiscal solvency ex post. They
made their point explicit by numerically computing a comparative statics that showed the
beneficial effect of permanently increasing the money supply (which they coined “open
market operations”). This argument was made slightly differently in an earlier IMF
working paper by one of the authors, Eggertsson (2003), which remains unpublished.
That paper explicitly cites Bernanke’s no-arbitrage argument as a motivation, using the
same quotation as above. In Eggertsson (2003), Bernanke’s argument is modeled as a
violation of Ricardian Equivalence. Eggertssson (2003) assumes the government cannot
collect lump-sum taxes but instead that the government needs to pay tax collection costs
as in Barro (1979). In this case the government cares about profits and losses on its
balance sheet, as it needs to make up for the losses by costly taxation. By analyzing a
Markov Perfect Equilibrium policy game, which presumes that the government cannot
make any credible commitment about future policy apart from paying back the nominal
value of debt as in Lucas and Stokey (1983), Eggertsson (2003) formally shows that
purchasing “real assets” by printing money (or equivalently bonds, since money and bonds
are perfect substitutes at the ZLB) implies a credible permanent increase in the money
supply in the long run due to the fact that the government has no incentive to revert
the supply completely back it original level on account of its fiscal consequences (leading
2

See references in Eggertsson (2008).

4

to costly taxation). This, in turn, provides direct theoretical foundation for Bernanke’s
no-arbitrage argument to “eliminate” the liquidity trap.
The interpretation suggested in Eggertsson (2003) is that open market operations
in real assets provides a straightforward commitment mechanism to lower future interest
rates and higher inflation that mitigates the problem of the ZLB.3 Indeed, the simulations
reported in the paper suggest that open market purchases in real asset seem to allow the
government to replicate quite closely the ideal state of affairs in which the government
can fully commit to future policy and the problem of the ZLB is trivial in terms of
its effect on output and inflation (as in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) that analyze
the full commitment equilibrium in a standard New Keynesian model). In retrospect,
however, this interpretation was perhaps a little premature. A careful examination of
the numerical results illustrates a disturbing feature. The required intervention in real
assets needed to generate this outcome in Eggertsson (2003) corresponds to about 4 times
annual GDP. Moreover, the intervention is conducted under the ideal circumstances under
which the assets bought are in unlimited supply, their relative returns are not affected
by the intervention (but instead equal to the market interest rate in equilibrium), and
assuming that the world is deterministic so there are no risks associated with using real
asset purchases as a commitment device.
More generally, however, if the government buys real assets corresponding to something
like 400 percent of GDP it seems exceedingly likely that all of these assumptions will be
violated in one way or the other. First, an operation of this kind is likely to have a
substantial distortionary effect on pricing – which is not modeled. Second, it is likely
that the government may run into physical constraints such as running out of assets to
buy. Third, as the scale of the operations increases and uncertainty is taken into account,
the risk to the government’s balance sheet may be deemed unacceptable, thus lessening
the power of this commitment device. Finally, with an intervention of this scale it is
very likely that the central bank will hit some political constraints, either due to public
concerns, or concerns from trading partners in the case the assets in question are foreign.
Indeed, all the considerations mentioned above have proved to be relevant constraints for
banks conducting large asset purchases since 2008. Central banks have faced challenges in
finding liquid enough markets to conduct the operation, they have faced strong political
backlash for the scale of the operations (e.g. because they are viewed as favoring the
financial sector and the richest few), and in some cases both the government and the
central banks in question have become exceedingly concerned over balance sheet risks of
the central bank. These risks could put central bank independence in question as they
could imply that the treasury infuses capital into the central bank to prevent unacceptable
high levels of inflation, with the associated budgetary implications.4
In this paper we revisit Bernanke’s no-arbitrage argument in the prototypical New
Keynesian DSGE model, in the tradition of Woodford (2003), using conventional calibra3

In this respect the intervention in Eggertsson (2003) is different from Auerbach and Obstfeld (2005)
in that it increases total government liabilities (money + bonds), and thus the overall inflation incentive
of the government. Since money and bonds are perfect substitutes at the zero bound, it is not obvious
that open market operations themseselves have any effect on future government objectives.
4
There are several recent papers that try to evaluate the extent to which these risk have become
material for current central banks post crisis, such as Hall and Reis (2015) and Del Negro and Sims
(2015). Our overall reading of this literature is that these risks are not pertinent for a balance sheet
of the size of the Federal Reserve today, however, it seems relatively obvious that they would become
relevant in some of the numerical examples we provide later in the paper given how extreme some of the
numbers in question are.

5

tion parameters. This is in contrast to the unpublished work by Eggertsson (2003), who
uses a simpler non-conventional modeling approach, which may raise scepticism of the
numerical experiments conducted. Inside this model, we ask how large of an intervention
the government needs to undertake in real assets to achieve the optimal allocation under
discretion, assuming there is no cost of such interventions. As in Eggertsson (2003), we
find that the numbers are very large. In fact, in our baseline simulation the corresponding
intervention is more than 10 times GDP. This suggests that using the balance sheet of
the government as a commitment device may imply asset positions by the central bank
that would be difficult to implement in practice. Thus, while we find that Bernanke’s noarbitrage argument can be correct in theory, it may run into constraints in practice. For
this reason, following our baseline experiment, which is done in the ideal circumstances in
which the asset is in unlimited supply and at no cost for the government, we also consider
cases in which the assets purchases are costly. In this case the purchases can lose much
of their commitment power.
How does this all relate to recent experience? Consider that on October 31, 2014,
the BOJ unexpectedly announced an expansion of its Comprehensive Monetary Easing
(CME) program from 50 trillion to 80 trillion yen per year. Along with a change in the size
of its balance sheet, the annoucement also included a change in its composition. Beyond
long-term government securities, the central bank would purchase additional riskier assets
such as exchange traded funds and real estate investment trusts. The expressed goal
of the expansion was to meet a 2 percent inflation target within two years. The BoJ
Governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, described the program as “monetary easing in an entirely
new dimension” and in reference to limits in its size relative to GDP said, “We don’t
have any particular ceiling.” In fact, as of August 2015, the size of the BOJ balance sheet
stood at approximately 80 percent of GDP. While this seems like a large number, it is
much smaller than what is needed according to our calibrated model. Would the Bank of
Japan not hit some ceiling if it had to buy assets that are more than 10 times the current
size of its balance sheet? In any event, as of this writing, the BoJ is still unable to hit its
inflation target, and most projections paint a pessimistic picture of its prospect of hitting
it anytime soon.
As another example, the Swiss National Bank bought foreign currency on the order of
90 percent of GDP in order to fight deflation during the crisis, leading to an 800 percent
increase in its money supply. They eventually abandoned this policy since the magnitudes
involved had become so high that the central bank faced strong political pressures to do
so. The effect of this policy on the price level was negligible at best, although for a while
the Swiss National Bank did manage to prevent an appreciation of the Swiss franc relative
to the Euro.
The bottomline, then, may be that the irrevance result of Wallace (1981) that was
later extended by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) to a model with sticky prices and
an explicit zero lower bound, may in the end be stronger than the pre-crisis consensus
suggested. The Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) irrelevance result, in turn, is closely
related to Krugman’s (1998) result that increasing money supply has no effect at the
ZLB if people expect it to be contracted again to its original level once interest rates
turn positive.5 Those irrelevance results suggested that absent some restrictions in asset
5

The difference between Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Krugman (1998) is that while Krugman
(1998) assumed that the central bank followed a monetary targeting rule, Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)
assumed a more conventional Taylor type interest rate reaction function. Moreover, while Krugman (1998)
assumes that the money supply is increased via purchases of short-term nominal bonds, Eggertsson and

6

trade that prevent arbitrage, equilibrium quantities and assets prices are not affected
by a change in the relative supplies of various assets owned by the private sector if the
policy rule of the central bank is taken as given. One way the irrelevance results have
been broken in the literature is via changes about expectations about future monetary
policy. The results here suggest that at least in a simple calibrated New Keyensian model
that imposes a Markov Perfect Equilibrium as an equilibrium selection device, the asset
position of the government needed to achieve the desired commitment, and thus break
these irrelevance results may be extremely high. To be clear – and this seems worth
re-iterating – we do not contend that this implies that nothing can be done at ZLB,
nor even that nothing more could have been done in response to the current crisis, as
the experience of FDR’s radical reflation program, which coordinated monetary, fiscal,
industrial, and exchange rate policy, illustrated during the Great Depression. However it
does imply that actions by central banks to increase demand may be a bit harder than the
pre-crisis consensus suggested and the foolproof ways out of the liquidity trap are hard to
come by. One policy, that we do not consider here, but is found in Bhattarai et al. (2015)
is the option to shorten the maturity structure of outstanding government debt. Their
findings suggest that a policy of that kind may have more potency than the purchases of
real assets studied here. Alternatively, if there is a “freeze” in secondary asset markets,
e.g. due to a drop in the liquidity of assets, there may also be an important role for asset
purchases as shown by Del Negro et al. (2016) in the context of the crisis of 2008. Our
model abstracts from different degrees of asset liquidity, and hence this mechanism does
not play a role here.
We outline the model in Section 2 and summarize the conditions for a Markov Perfect
Equilibrium (MPE) for a coordinated government in Section 3. We present and discuss the
calibrated model in Section 4. With costly taxation and coordinated monetary and fiscal
policy, deficit spending and real asset purchases both serve as an additional commitment
device for solving the credibility problem created by a liquidity trap. They are effective
because they act as an additional device through which a discretionary government can
commit future governments to a higher money supply, and thus higher inflation and lower
real interest rates.

2.

The Model

We start by outlining a standard general equilibrium sticky-price closed economy model
with output cost of taxation, along the lines of Eggertsson (2006). We assume that
monetary and fiscal policy are coordinated to maximize social welfare under discretion.
The difference in the model from the literature is the introduction of a real asset in the
government budget constraint.

2.1.

Private sector

A representative household maximizes expected discounted utility over the infinite horizon:
Woodford (2003) assume that money supply can be increased via purchases of any type of security that
is priced in the economy as in Wallace (1981).

7

Et

∞
X

β t [u(Ct ) + g(Gt ) − v(ht )] ξt

(1)

t=0

where β is the discount factor, Ct is a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate of consumption of each of
a continuum of differentiated goods
1

Z
Ct =

ct (i)


−1

 −1

di

0

with elasticity of substitution equal to  > 1, Gt is a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate of government
consumption defined analagously, ht is labor supplied, ξt is an exogenous shock, and Pt is
the Dixit-Stiglitz price index,
Z

1

Pt =

pt (i)(1−) di

1
 1−

0

where pt (i) is the price of variety i. Et denotes the mathematical expectation conditional
on information available in period t, u(.) is concave and strictly increasing in Ct , g(.) is
concave and strictly increasing in Gt , and v (.) is increasing and convex in ht .6
The household is subject to the following sequence of flow budget constraints
Z 1
Pt Ct + Bt + Et {Qt,t+1 Dt+1 } ≤ nt ht + (1 + it−1 )Bt−1 + Dt − Pt Tt +
Zt (i)di
(2)
0

where Bt is a one period risk-free nominal government bond with nominal interest rate it ,
nt is nominal wage, Zt (i) is nominal profit of firm i, Tt is government taxes, Dt+1 is the
value of the complete set of state-contingent securities at the beginning of period t + 1,
and Qt,t+1 is the stochastic discount factor.
On the firm side there is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms indexed
by the variety, i, which they produce. Each firm has a production function which is linear
in labor
 = ht (i) and, as in Rotemberg (1982), faces a cost of changing prices given
 yt (i)
pt (i)
by d pt−1 (i) .7 The demand function for variety i is given by
yt (i)
=
Yt



pt (i)
Pt

−
(3)

where Yt is total demand for goods. The firm maximizes expected discounted profits
Et

∞
X

Qt,t+s Zt+s (i)

(4)

t=0

where the period profits are given by


 
pt (i)
1− 
− 
Zt (i) = (1 + s)Yt pt (i) Pt − nt (i)Yt pt (i) Pt − d
Pt .
pt−1 (i)
6

We abstract from money by considering the cashless limit of Woodford (1998).
Our results are not sensitive to assuming instead the Calvo model of price setting so long as we do
not assume large resource costs of price changes. See Eggertsson and Singh (2015) for a discussion.
7

8

We assume that the production subsidy, s, satisfies
−1
(1 + s) = 1

in order to eliminate steady-state production inefficiencies from monopolistic competition.
The household’s optimality conditions are given by
vh (ht )
nt
=
uc (Ct )
Pt


1
uc (Ct+1 )ξt+1 −1
= Et β
Πt+1
1 + it
uc (Ct )ξt

(5)
(6)

t
is gross inflation. The firm’s optimality condition from price-setting is
where Πt = PPt−1
given by


−1
Yt
(1 + s)uc (Ct , ξt ) − vy (Yt , ξt ) +uc (Ct , ξt )d0 (Πt )Πt = Et [βuc (Ct+1 , ξt+1 )d0 (Πt+1 )Πt+1 ]

(7)
where we have replaced vh with vy since we focus on a symmetric equilibrium where all
firms charge the same price and produce the same amount.

2.2.

Government

We assume that there is an output cost of taxation s(Tt ) as in Barro (1979).8 Real
government spending is then given by
Ft = Gt + s(Tt ).
The government can issue one-period nominal bonds Bt and purchase a real asset At
with rate of return qt , which we assume satisfies the Fisher no-arbitrage condition in
equilibrium. Furthermore, we assume that the government does not internalize the rate
of return when optimizing social welfare. That is, the government takes the rate of return
on the asset as given when making its policy decision. The consolidated flow budget
constraint can be written as
Bt + Pt At = (1 + it−1 )Bt−1 + (1 + qt−1 )Pt At−1 + ψ(At ) + Pt (Ft − Tt )
where ψ(At ) is a quadratic cost of asset management. We introduce this quadratic cost
as a reduced form way to capture two phenomena. First, it captures that managing large
amounts of assets will involve some adminstration cost. Second, it is a way to model the
relationship that as the scale of the asset purchases increases the real returns of the asset
decreases, as this function reflects a loss of real resources. As we noted in the introduction,
a key conclusion from the numerical experiment we report shortly is that the intervention
done by the central bank is “unreasonably” large. One interesting thought experiment
we will consider below is to set this cost high enough so as to rationalize the scale of the
balance sheet expansion in some central banks observed post crisis. We can then ask if
in this case the intervention has a substantial effect.
8

The function s(T) is assumed to be twice differentiable with derivates s0 (T ) > 0 and s00 (T ) > 0.

9

Next, we define the real value of government debt inclusive of interest payments to be
paid next period as bt = (1 + it ) BPtt and the value of the real asset inclusive of returns as
at = (1 + qt )At , so that we can then write the budget constraint in real terms as


at
at
bt
−1
+
= bt−1 Πt + at−1 + ψ
+ (Ft − Tt )
(8)
1 + it 1 + qt
1 + qt
We define fiscal policy as the choice of Tt , Ft , bt , and at . For simplicity, we will abstract
from variations in real government spending, so Ft = F in all that follows. Conventional
monetary policy is the choice of the nominal interest rate, it , which is subject to the zero
bound constraint
it ≥ 0.
(9)

2.3.

Private sector equilibrium

The goods market clearing condition implies the overall resource constraint


at
Yt = Ct + Ft + d(Πt ) + ψ
.
1 + qt

(10)

We define the private sector equilibrium as a collection of stochastic process
{Yt+s , Ct+s , bt+s , at+s , Πt+s , it+s , Tt+s } for s ≥ 0 that satisfy equations (5)-(10) for each
s ≥ 0, given at−1 , bt−1 , and an exogenous stochastic process for {ξt+s }. Policy must now
be specified to determine the set of possible equilibria in the model.

3.

Markov-perfect Equilibrium

We assume that the government policy is implemented under discretion so that the government cannot commit to future policy. To do so, we solve for a Markov-perfect equilibrium.9 However, we also assume the government is able to commit to paying back the
nominal value of its debt as in Lucas and Stokey (1983). The only way the government
can influence future governments, then, is through the endogenous state variables that
enter the private sector equilibrium conditions.
Define the expectation variables ftE and gtE . The necessary and sufficient condition
for a private sector equilibrium are now that the variables {Yt , Ct , bt , at , Πt , it , Tt } satisfy:
(a) the following conditions


at
at
bt
−1
+
= bt−1 Πt + at−1 + ψ
+ (F − Tt )
(11)
1 + i t 1 + qt
1 + qt
uC (Ct , ξt )
1 + it =
, it ≥ 0
(12)
βftE


−1
E
βgt = Yt
(1 + s)uc (Ct , ξt ) − vy (Yt , ξt ) + uc (Ct , ξt )d0 (Πt )Πt
(13)



at
Yt = Ct + Ft + d(Πt ) + ψ
(14)
1 + qt
9

See Maskin and Tirole (2001) for a formal definition of the Markov-perfect Equilibrium.

10

given bt−1 , at−1 and ftE and gtE ; (b) expectations are rational so that


ftE = Et uc (Ct+1 , ξt+1 )Π−1
t+1
gtE

0

= Et [uc (Ct+1 , ξt+1 )d (Πt+1 )Πt+1 ]

(15)
(16)

Since the government cannot commit to future policy apart from its choice of the endogenous state variables at−1 and bt−1 , the expectations ftE and gtE are only a function of at ,
bt , and ξt . That is, the expectation functions are defined as
ftE = f¯E (at , bt , ξt )

(17)

gtE = ḡ E (at , bt , ξt )

(18)

and we assume that these functions are continous and differentiable. The discretionary
government’s dynamic programming problem is
V (at−1 , bt−1 , ξt ) = max [U (.) + βEt V (at , bt , ξt+1 )]

(19)

subject to the private sector equilibrium conditions (11)-(14) and the expectation functions (17)-(18), which in equilibrium satisfy the rational expectations restrictions (15)(16). The period Lagrangian and first-order conditions for this maximization problem
are outlined in the appendix, along with their linear approximations.10 A Markov Perfect
Equilbrium can now be defined as a private sector equilbrium that is a solution to the
government problem defined by (19).

4.

Results

Following Eggertsson (2006) we model a benchmark deflation scenario as a credibility
problem. In particular, we assume that the following three conditions are satisfied: the
government’s only policy instrument is the short-term nominal interest rate; the economy
is subject to a large negative demand shock given by the preference shock ξt ; and the
government cannot commit to future policy. We calibrate this benchmark with parameter
values from Eggertsson and Singh (2015) that match a 10 percent drop in output and 2
percent drop in inflation.11

4.1.

Optimal monetary policy under commitment

As shown in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), to increase inflation expectations in a
liquidity trap, the central bank commits to keeping the nominal interest rate at zero after
the natural rate of interest becomes positive again. The consequence of the anticipation
of this policy is that the benchmark deflation and large output gap scenario are largely
avoided. For the particular calibration that we work with here, deflation and the output
gap in the first period of the trap are -0.65% and -5.42%, respectively. Figure 3 makes
this comparison clear.
With the benchmark deflation scenario and optimal monetary commitment in hand,
we are now set to conduct numerical experiments to measure how discretionary fiscal
policy with real asset purchases and/or deficit spending compare to the worst and best
case scenarios, i.e., limited discretion and full commitment.
10

Note that we assume that the government and private sector move simulataneously.
They parameterise the model using Bayesian methods as in Denes and Eggertsson (2009) and Denes
et al. (2013).
11

11

Figure 1: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under discretion when the
government’s only policy instrument is open market operations

Figure 2: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under commitment when
the government can only use conventional monetary policy

12

Figure 3: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under the benchmark and
commitment when the aggregate demand shock lasts for 10 periods

4.2.

Deficit spending as an additional policy instrument

In order to discuss optimal discretion under fiscal policy, we must first calibrate the cost
of taxation. We do so by choosing the second derivative of the cost function, s1 , so that 5
percent of government spending goes to tax collection costs. With deficit spending as an
additional policy instrument, the government can commit to future inflation and a low
nominal interest rate by cutting taxes and issuing nominal debt. Nominal debt commits
the government to inflation even if it is discretionary because it creates an incentive for
the government to reduce the real value of its debt and future interest payments. Since
both inflation and taxes are costly, the government will choose a combination of the two
in order to achieve this goal. Figures 4 and 5 summarize this result of Eggertsson (2006)
for our parameterization.
The intuition is straightfoward. Even with the inability to commit, the government
can stimulate aggregate demand in a liquidity trap by increasing inflation expectations.
In order to increase inflation expectations, the government can coordinate monetary and
fiscal policies in order to run budget deficits. Budget deficits increase nominal debt, which
in turn make a higher inflation target credible. Finally, increased inflation expectations
lower the real rate of interest and thus stimulate aggregate demand.
Figure 6 makes the comparison between the benchmark scenario, optimal monetary
commitment, and discretionary fiscal policy. In the first period following the shock, the
inflation rate and the output gap are -0.93% and -6.79% under fiscal discretion, quite
close to their levels under optimal monetary commitment. Lastly, Figure 7 shows taxes
and the evolution of debt to output when the shocks lasts for 10 periods. Taxes deviate
by 60% from steady state, while debt peaks at approximately 35% of output.

13

Figure 4: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under discretion when the
government can use both monetary and fiscal policies

Figure 5: Taxes and debt under discretion when the government can use both monetary and fiscal policies

14

Figure 6: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under the benchmark
discretion, monetary commitment, and fiscal discretion when the aggregate demand shock lasts for 10
periods

Figure 7: Taxes and debt to output under fiscal discretion when the aggregate demand shock lasts for 10
periods

15

4.3.

Real asset purchases and deficit spending

We now turn to how the optimal policy under discretion changes when real asset purchases are used as an additional policy instrument. Figures 8 and 9 show that when
asset management is costless and the output cost of taxation is calibrated to 5% of government spending, the optimal amount of real asset purchases exceeds 2000% of gross
domestic product in all contingencies. Although there is a strong inflation incentive and
corresponding output boom due to the large increase in nominal debt, it seems clear that
the required amount of asset purchases to obtain this response would be infeasible in
practice.12
Therefore, perhaps a more interesting question is, what does the model predict for
inflation and the output gap if we calibrate the asset management cost so that the optimal
amount of real asset purchases is 80% of gross domestic product in the first period of the
recession? We pick this number as a reference point, as it corresponds approximately
to the scale of the Swiss Central Bank in foreign exchange before it abandoned its peg.
Figures 10 and 11 show that when we perform this thought experiment, the effectiveness
of real asset purchases is much more limited. In fact, inflation and the output gap are
only reduced to -1.36% and -8.23%, respectively, which is worse than the case when we
have deficit spending only as the policy instrument. It also the case that as the cost of
asset management gets very large, asset purchases approach zero, and we converge to the
solution under fiscal discretion.13
There are two main takeaways from our results: first, although costless real asset purchases perform the best at reducing inflation and the output gap, the required balancesheet size under this scenario is far too large to be feasible in practice; second, for realistic
levels of asset purchases, a combination of deficit spending and asset purchases does not
perform much better than the worst-case scenario in the numerical example above. These
two points taken together suggest that a combination of fiscal stimulus and central bank
balance sheet policies with more weight on the fiscal stimulus may be the most practical. We have abstracted from the ability of the government to increase real government
spending in the example above, but the existing literature suggest this is another way in
which the discretionary outcome can be improved.
Lastly, figures (12) and (13) make the comparison between all of the policy scenarios
that we have considered more precise (i.e. benchmark discretion, commitment, fiscal
discretion, costless real asset purchases, and real asset purchases calibrated to match 80%
of gross domestic product). We have also confirmed, that as the cost of asset management
gets sufficiently high, then the solution converges to the same as we have already analyzed
in which case the government only uses deficit spending.
12

Technically, there still is a negligibly small cost of asset management in this exercise, with ψ =
1 × 10−7 . This is the smallest level of ψ which induces stationarity in the equilibrium dynamics. See
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003) for an example of this in closing small open economy models.
13
This numerical result indicates a non-linearity that is somewhat interesting, in that a discretionary
government with intermediate costs of administrating the real assets is better off without the ability to
intervene in real assets than with it, as it limits its ability to commit to future inflation. One possible way
of getting around this issue, which we do not pursue here, is to impose the constraint that the government
cannot have negative asset holdings in which case the government may still be able to commit to inflation
in the intermediate asset management cost range. The key point, however, is that in this case commitment
arises due to fiscal commitment as opposed to asset purchases.

16

Figure 8: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under discretion when the
government can costlessly conduct deficit spending and open market operations in real assets

Figure 9: Taxes, debt to output, and asset purchases under discretion when the government can costlessly
conduct deficit spending and open market operations in real assets

17

Figure 10: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under discretion when the
government can conduct deficit spending and open market operations in real assets, with the cost of asset
purchases calibrated to match real asset purchases of 80% of GDP

Figure 11: Taxes, debt to output, and asset purchases under discretion when the government can conduct
deficit spending and open market operations in real assets, with the cost of asset purchases calibrated to
match real asset purchases of 80% of GDP

18

Figure 12: Inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate under the benchmark
discretion, monetary commitment, fiscal discretion, and real asset purchases when the aggregate demand
shock lasts for 10 periods

Figure 13: Taxes and debt to output under fiscal discretion and calibrated real asset purchases when the
aggregate demand shock lasts for 10 periods

19

5.

Sensitivity Analysis
Table 1: Varying the cost of taxation
as a percentage of government spending

Fiscal discretion
Taxation cost (%) π (%) y (%) b/gdp (%)
0.25
-1.61 -9.00
51.80
0.50
-1.47 -8.58
39.44
1.00
-1.31 -8.10
28.76
2.50
-1.09 -7.37
17.75
5.00
-0.94 -6.79
11.81
7.50
-0.87 -6.52
9.33
10.00
-0.83 -6.35
7.82
15.00
-0.78 -6.13
6.02
20.00
-0.75 -6.01
4.93

Discretion with real assets
π (%) y (%) b/gdp (%)
-1.78 -9.41
953.00
-1.85 -9.46
2,414.63
-1.87 -9.41
5,790.70
-0.99 -6.21 13,074.97
-0.10 -3.95
2,562.44
-0.05 -3.86
1,390.96
-0.03 -3.85
979.50
-0.02 -3.84
609.61
-0.02 -3.83
461.96

The table above shows the sensitivity of our results to the size of taxation costs.
The main takeaway is that for any reasonable value of the taxation cost, very large increases in real purchases are needed under full discretion, suggesting a limitation to this
policy once more realistic constraints are added.

6.

Conclusion

This paper takes Bernanke’s no-arbitrage argument to its logical limit and finds that it
implies implausibly large asset purchases in a Markov Perfect Equilbrium. One interpretation of this finding is that open market operations in real assets alone is not sufficient in
a liquidity trap, so instead, fiscal policy may be used in one form or another to support a
reflation at the zero bound. A key abstraction is that the monetary and fiscal policy objective here corresponds to the utility of the representative household. It may seem more
reasonable that the central bank has objectives that are different from social welfare, for
example that it cares greatly about its own balance sheet losses, independently of tax
distortions. If one takes that perspective, however, there is no guarantee that real asset
purchases provide the magic bullet to escape a liquidity trap, for reasons first articulated
by Paul Samuleson in the context of the Great Depression. He argued that during the
Great Depression the Fed was a “prisoner of its own independence” and paralyzed from
taking any action for fear that they may imply balance sheet losses.14
An alternative explanation for the relative ineffectiveness of monetary policy post2008 in guaranteeing inflation at or above target is that central banks never explicitly
committed to an inflationary policy. While one reason central banks refrained from doing
so was the high perceived cost of inflation, another was that many of them thought a
reflationary program by a central bank would not be credible. The pre-crisis consensus
was that this objection was not relevant as the central bank had the ability to print
an unlimited amount of money and buy whatever assets they wanted. The numerical
experiments here suggest governments may in practice face some constraints, due to the
scale involved needed to generate that commitment.
14

See Mayer, Thomas (1993) p.6.

20

We do not wish to interpret this as suggesting that monetary policy is impotent at
the zero bound, however. Instead, our interpretation is that the central banks need to
more explicitly inflate, and second, they may need some fiscal backing to achieve their
objective, via, for example, direct government spending, fiscal transfers, and debt accumulation, together with or perhaps in addition to some additional institutional reforms
which coordinate monetary and fiscal policy. Exploring how this coordination may take
place in practice is likely to be a fertile ground for future research (see e.g. Turner (2015)).

21

References
Auerbach, A. J. and M. Obstfeld (2005). The case for open-market purchases in a liquidity
trap. The American Economic Review 95 (1), 110–137.
Barro, R. J. (1979). On the determination of the public debt. The Journal of Political
Economy, 940–971.
Bernanke, B. S. (2000). Japanese monetary policy: a case of self-induced paralysis?
Japan’s financial crisis and its parallels to US experience, 149–166.
Bhattarai, S., G. B. Eggertsson, and B. Gafarov (2015). Time consistency and the duration of government debt: A signalling theory of quantitative easing. NBER Working
Paper (21336).
Del Negro, M., G. B. Eggertsson, A. Ferrero, and N. Kiyotaki (2016). The great escape?
A quantitative evaluation of the Fed’s liquidity facilities. Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Report (520).
Del Negro, M. and C. A. Sims (2015). When does a central bank’s balance sheet require
fiscal support? Journal of Monetary Economics 73, 1–19.
Denes, M. and G. B. Eggertsson (2009). A bayesian approach to estimating tax and
spending multipliers. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report (403).
Denes, M., G. B. Eggertsson, and S. Gilbukh (2013). Deficits, public debt dynamics and
tax and spending multipliers. The Economic Journal 123 (566), F133–F163.
Eggertsson, G. B. (2003). How to fight deflation in a liquidity trap: committing to being
irresponsible. IMF Working Paper (03/64).
Eggertsson, G. B. (2006). The deflation bias and committing to being irresponsible.
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 283–321.
Eggertsson, G. B. and S. Singh (2015). The non-linear calvo model at the zero bound:
some analytic solutions and numerical results. Mimeo.
Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2003). Zero bound on interest rates and optimal
monetary policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1), 139–233.
Friedman, M., A. J. Schwartz, et al. (1963). A Monetary History of the United States,
1867–1960. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Hall, R. E. and R. Reis (2015). Maintaining central-bank financial stability under newstyle central banking. NBER Working Paper (21173).
Jeanne, O. and L. E. Svensson (2007). Credible commitment to optimal escape from
a liquidity trap: The role of the balance sheet of an independent central bank. The
American Economic Review 97 (1), 474–490.
Krugman, P. (2014). Apologizing to Japan. The New York Times.
Krugman, P. R. (1998). It’s baaack: Japan’s slump and the return of the liquidity trap.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 137–205.
22

Lucas, R. E. and N. L. Stokey (1983). Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy
without capital. Journal of monetary Economics 12 (1), 55–93.
Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (2001). Markov perfect equilibrium: I. observable actions.
Journal of Economic Theory 100 (2), 191–219.
Mayer, T. (1993). The political economy of American monetary policy. Cambridge University Press.
Rogoff, K. (1998). It’s baaack: Japan’s slump and the return of the liquidity trap.
comments and discussion. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998 (2), 137–205.
Rotemberg, J. (1982). Sticky prices in the United States. Journal of Political Economy,
1187–1211.
Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2003). Closing small open economy models. Journal of
international Economics 61 (1), 163–185.
Svensson, L. E. (2000). The zero bound in an open economy: A foolproof way of escaping
from a liquidity trap. NBER Working Paper (7957).
Turner, A. (2015). The case for monetary finance – an essentially political issue. IMF .
Wallace, N. (1981). A modigliani-miller theorem for open-market operations. The American Economic Review , 267–274.
Woodford, M. (1998). Doing without money: controlling inflation in a post-monetary
world. Review of Economic Dynamics 1 (1), 173–219.

23

7.
7.1.

Appendix
Functional forms

We make the following functional form assumptions
1

C 1− σ
u(C, ξ) = ξ C̄
1 − σ1
1
σ

h(i)1+φ
1+φ
1− σ1
1 G
g(G, ξ) = ξ Ḡ σ
1 − σ1

v(h(i), ξ) = ξλ

y(i) = h(i)
d(Π) = d(Π − 1)2
s1
s(T ) = T 2
2
ψ1 2
ψ(a) =
a
2
Note that the discount factor shock, ξ, equals 1 in steady-state, and we scale hours
such that Y = 1 in steady-state, too. This implies
ṽ(Y, ξ) =

7.2.

1
λξY
1+φ

1+φ
κ

.

Calibration
Table 2: Model parameters

Parameter
α
β
σ

φ
00
d
κ
F̄
T̄
Ḡ
s1
ψ1

Value
0.7871
0.9970
1
1.29

13.6012
1.7415
5776.7
0.0072
0.30
0.30
0.25
0.3333
0.0000362

Table 3: ZLB experiment

Parameter Value
rLe
-0.0136
γ
0.1369

24

7.3.

Non-linear markov-perfect equilibrium

Formulate the Lagrangian
Lt = u(Ct , ξt ) + g(F − s(Tt )) − ṽ(Yt ) + βEt V (at , bt , ξt+1 )




bt
at
at
−1
+ φ1t
+
− bt−1 πt − at−1 − ψ
− (F − Tt )
1 + i t 1 + qt
1 + qt


uc (Ct , ξt )
E
+ φ2t βft −
1 + it




−1
E
0
(1 + s)uc (Ct , ξt ) − ṽy (Yt , ξt ) − uc (Ct , ξt )d (πt )πt
+ φ3t βgt − Yt





at
+ φ4t Yt − Ct − F − ψ
− d(πt )
1 + qt
+ η1t (ftE − f¯E (at , bt , ξt ))
+ η2t (gtE − ḡ E (at , bt , ξt ))
+ γ1t (it − 0)
First-order conditions
πt : φ1t [bt−1 πt−2 ] − φ3t [uc d00 πt + uc d0 ] − φ4t d0
 


−1
Yt : −ṽy − φ3t 
(1 + s)uc − Yt ṽyy − ṽy − φ4t

it : −φ1t [bt (1 + it )−2 ] + φ2t [uc (1 + it )−2 ] + γ1t


−1
0
−1
(1 + s)ucc + ucc d πt − φ4t
Ct : uc − φ2t [ucc (1 + it ) ] − φ3t Yt

Tt : gG (−s0 (Tt )) + φ1t





at
at
−1
0
0
at : βEt Va (at , bt , ξt+1 ) + φ1t (1 + qt ) − ψ
− φ4t ψ
− η1t f¯aE − η2t ḡaE
1 + qt
1 + qt
bt : βEt Vb (at , bt , ξt+1 ) + φ1t [(1 + it )−1 ] − η1t f¯bE − η2t ḡbE
ftE : βφ2t + η1t
gtE : βφ3t + η2t
Complementary slackness condition
γ1t ≤ 0, it ≥ 0, γ1t it = 0
Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions
Va (at−1 , bt−1 , ξt ) = −φ1t
Vb (at−1 , bt−1 , ξt ) = −φ1t πt−1

7.4.

Steady-state

We linearize around an inefficient steady-state with positive output cost of taxation so
that
φ̄1 = gG (s0 (T̄ )).
25

Although we linearize around an inefficient steady-state, to simplify we still assume an
appropriate production subsidy, as well as no resource loss from price adjustments, which
requires
d(Π) = 0
so that
Y = C + F.
This requires that we linearize around a zero inflation steady-state
Π=1
which implies
d0 (Π) = 0.
Furthermore, we assume that ā = b̄ = 0 in steady-state, so that from the first order
condition with respect to πt
φ̄3 = 0.
We assume that the production subsidy satisfies
−1
(1 + s) = 1

so that
uc = ṽy .
Also, we linearize around a steady-state with positive interest rates so
1+i=

1
β

which implies
γ̄1 = 0
and from the first order condition for it
φ̄2 = 0.
Using d0 (Π) = 0 and the first order condition for πt
φ̄4 = 0
which implies from the first order conditions for Yt and Ct
φ̄5 = ṽy = uc .
The first order conditions with respect to the expectation variables imply
η̄1 = η̄2 = 0
so that we do not need to know the derivatives of the unknown functions.

26

7.5.

Linear approximation

Private sector equilibrium conditions We approximate the equilibrium conditions
around an inefficient non-stochastic steady-state with zero inflation, 1 + i = 1 + q = β −1 ,
and ā = b̄ = 0. We also normalize steady-state output to Ȳ = 1.


at
gives
Linearizing the resource constraint Yt = Ct + F + d(Πt ) + ψ 1+q
t
Ŷt = C̄ Ĉt
where Ĉt =

(20)

Ct −C̄
.
C̄

Linearizing the price-setting optimality condition gives
ūc d00 πt + ūcc C̄ Ĉt − v̄yy Ŷt − v̄yξ ξˆt + ūcξ ξˆt = β ūc d00 Et πt+1
which can be simplified by making use of the linearized resource constraint
πt = βEt πt+1 + κŶt
where κ =

(21)

(φ+σ −1 )
.
d00

Linearizing the Euler equation gives
ūcc C̄ Ĉt + ūcξ ξˆt = ūc ît + ūcc C̄Et Ĉt+1 + ūcξ Et ξˆt+1 − ūc Et πt+1
which can be simplified by making use of the linearized resource constraint

ū

where r̂te = − ūcξc

Ŷt = Et Ŷt+1 − σ(ît − Et πt+1 − r̂te )
h
i
Et ξˆt+1 − ξˆt and σ = − ūūccc = σ̃ C̄.

(22)

Imposing the Fisher arbitrage relation as an equilibrium condition and linearizing gives
q̂t = ît − Et πt+1

(23)

Linearizing the government budget constraint
bt + at = β −1 bt−1 + β −1 at−1 − β −1 T̄ T̂t
where T̂t =

(24)

Tt −T̄
.
T̄

Lastly, linearizing the expectation functions gives
fˆtE = −σ −1 Et Ŷt+1 + Et ξˆt+1 − Et πt+1
ĝtE

00

= d Et πt+1

(25)
(26)

Markov-perfect FOCs Note that in steady-state all Lagrange multipliers besides φ̄1 =
gG s0 and φ̄3 = ṽy = uc are equal to zero. Linearizing each FOC in the order given above

27

and using appropriate functional form assumptions:
πt : gG s0 bt−1 − d00 φ̂3t − d00 πt
Yt : φŶt − φφ̂3t − φ̂4t
it : −β 2 gG s0 bt + β 2 φ̂2t + γ̂1t
Ct : Ŷt − σ ξˆt − β φ̂2t − φ̂3t + σ φ̂4t
 0

s T̄ C̄ s00 T̄
Tt : −
+ 0 T̂t + φ̂1t
s
Ḡσ
f¯aE
ḡaE
gG s0 + 1
φ̂
+
φ̂3t
a
+
at : −Et φ̂1t+1 + φ̂1t − q̂t − ψβ
2t
t
gG s0
gG s0
gG s0
f¯E
ḡ E
bt : −Et φ̂1t+1 + φ̂1t − ît + Et πt+1 + b 0 φ̂2t + b 0 φ̂3t
gG s
gG s
Guess solutions for all variables at positive interest rates as a linear function of at−1 , bt−1 ,
and r̂te . Expectations will take the form
fˆE = −σ −1 Et Ŷt+1 + Et ξˆt+1 − Et πt+1 = f¯E at + f¯E bt + f¯E r̂e
t
ĝtE

a

00

= d Et πt+1 =

ḡaE at

+

ḡbE bt

+

b

r

t

ḡrE r̂te

Under the assumptions about the shock process, ξˆt , we have
Et ξˆt+1 = (1 − γ)ξˆt
and
r̂te = γ ξˆt
where γ is the probability of remaining at the ZLB. Note that when the ZLB no longer
binds, r̂te = 0.

7.6.

Optimal Policy Commitment

Formulate the Lagrangian
∞
X
Lt = E t
β t {u(Ct , ξt ) + g(F − s(Tt )) − ṽ(Yt )}
t=0


uc (Ct , ξt )
−1
+ φ1t βuc (Ct+1 , ξt+1 )πt+1 −
1 + it




−1
0
0
+ φ2t βuc (Ct+1 , ξt+1 )d (πt+1 )πt+1 − Yt
(1 + s)uc (Ct , ξt ) − ṽy (Yt , ξt ) − uc (Ct , ξt )d (πt )πt

+ φ3t (Yt − Ct − F − d(πt ))
+ γ1t (it − 0)

First order conditions
πt : −φ1t−1 [uc πt−2 ] − φ2t [uc d00 πt + uc d0 ] − φ2t−1 [uc d00 πt + uc d0 ] − φ3t d0
 


−1
Yt : −ṽy − φ2t 
(1 + s)uc − Yt ṽyy − ṽy + φ3t

it : φ1t [uc (1 + it )−2 ] + γ1t


−1
−1
0
Ct : uc − φ1t [ucc (1 + it ) ] + φ1t−1 [ucc πt ] − φ2t Yt
(1 + s)ucc + ucc d πt + φ2t−1 [ucc d0 πt ] − φ3t

28

Complementary slackness condition
γ1t ≤ 0, it ≥ 0, γ1t it = 0

7.7.

Linear approximation

Note that in steady-state all Lagrange multipliers besides φ̄3 = ṽy = uc are equal to zero.
Linearizing each FOC in the order given above and using appropriate functional form
assumptions:
πt : −φ̂1t−1 − d00 φ̂2t − d00 φ̂2t−1 − d00 πt
Yt : φŶt − φφ̂2t − φ̂3t
it : β 2 φ̂1t + γ̂1t
Ct : Ŷt − σ ξˆt − β φ̂1t + φ̂1t−1 − φ̂2t + σ φ̂3t

29

