                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     USING A FREE PERMIT RULE TO FORECAST THE MARGINAL ABATEMENT
                    COST OF PROPOSED CLIMATE POLICY

                                          Kyle C. Meng

                                       Working Paper 22255
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22255


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2016




I thank Ethan Kaplan, Wolfram Schlenker, and in particular Bernard Salani´e for their guidance.
This paper has benefited from suggestions from Joe Aldy, Doug Almond, Scott Barrett, Linda
Bui, Olivier Deschênes, Ray Fisman, Olle Folke, Larry Goulder, Michael Greenstone, Rema
Hanna, Geoff Heal, Solomon Hsiang, Nat Keohane, Wojciech Kopczuk, Gary Libecap, Erich
Muehlegger, Suresh Naidu, Matt Neidell, Paulina Oliva, Ryan Oprea, Steve Salant, Doug
Steigerwald, Tom Vogl, Gernot Wagner, Reed Walker, Marty Weitzman, Justin Wolfers, and
seminar participants at Columbia University, Environmental Defense Fund, Georgia Tech,
Harvard Kennedy School, IZA, NBER EEE Summer Institute, New York Fed, Rutgers, Stanford,
UC Irvine, UC Santa Barbara, University of Connecticut, and University of Michigan. I am
particularly grateful to Richard Goettle, Jennifer Morris, and Sergey Paltsev for sharing output
from the IGEM and EPPA models. Andy Bilich provided excellent research assistance. All
remaining errors are my own. I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that
relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Kyle C. Meng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Using a Free Permit Rule to Forecast the Marginal Abatement Cost of Proposed Climate Policy
Kyle C. Meng
NBER Working Paper No. 22255
May 2016, Revised October 2016
JEL No. G14,Q52,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a method for forecasting the marginal abatement cost (MAC) of climate
policy using three features of the failed Waxman-Markey bill. First, the MAC is revealed by the
price of traded permits. Second, the permit price is estimated using a regression discontinuity
design (RDD) comparing stock returns of firms on either side of the policy’s free permit cutoff
rule. Third, because Waxman-Markey was never implemented, I extend the RDD approach to
incorporate prediction market prices which normalize estimates by policy realization
probabilities. A final bounding analysis recovers a MAC range of $5 to $19 per ton CO2e.


Kyle C. Meng
Bren School of Environmental
Science and Management
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
4416 Bren Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
kmeng@bren.ucsb.edu
1     Introduction
      “Overall, Waxman-Markey reduces gross domestic product by an average of $393
      billion annually between 2012 and 2035...”
                                            -The Heritage Foundation (6/22/2009)1


      “...under [Waxman-Markey]... the net annual economy-wide cost of the cap-and-
      trade program in 2020 would be $22 billion.”

                                                 -Center for American Progress (6/22/2009)2

   Decisions over proposed policies rely on forecasting costs and benefits. In some cases,
program evaluation of similar past policies may be informative. However, when the policy
of interest is relatively novel, policymakers often turn to economic models with poorly con-
strained primitive parameters. While recent studies have strengthened our understanding of
climate policy benefits,3 current estimates of climate policy costs are characterized by this
dilemma. This challenge is particularly relevant for the United States which, despite be-
ing the largest cumulative greenhouse gas emitter, has yet to implement a national climate
policy. Instead, recent U.S. climate policy debates have relied on computable general equi-
librium (CGE) models, which have thus far produced a wide range of cost estimates. This
range is captured by the two quotes above, issued on the same day, for the same proposed
policy, but informed by di↵erent CGE models.
   This paper develops an alternative empirically-driven approach for forecasting the marginal
abatement cost of climate policy based on market expectations. In the combined spirit of
Hayek (1945) and Chetty (2009), my approach acknowledges that while primitive parame-
ters for climate policy may be unknown to the researcher, “local” information may be held
by market participants whose aggregate behavior could reveal a “sufficient statistic” for the
policy’s marginal abatement cost.4 The policy of interest is the Waxman-Markey bill, a
cap-and-trade climate policy that passed the U.S. House of Representatives in 2009, failed
passage in the U.S. Senate in 2010, and is to date the U.S. climate legislation that came
closest to becoming implemented.

    1 Available:heritage.org/research/testimony/the-economic-impact-of-the-waxman-markey-cap-

and-trade-bill
    2 Available:grist.org/politics/cbo-pollution-cuts-cost-little/
    3 See, for example, Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher (2005), Deschênes and Greenstone (2007), Schlenker

and Roberts (2009), Feng, Oppenheimer and Schlenker (2012), Gra↵ Zivin and Neidell (2010), Deschênes
and Greenstone (2011), Hsiang, Meng and Cane (2011), Dell, Jones and Olken (2012), and Hsiang, Burke
and Miguel (2013).
    4 Specifically, the permit price of a cap-and-trade policy is a “sufficient statistic” for marginal cost in

that any vector of primitive parameters consistent with a particular permit price implies the same marginal
cost. Note that unlike the welfare applications discussed in Chetty (2009), the parameter estimated in this
paper captures only the policy’s marginal cost, not marginal welfare. To obtain welfare e↵ects for the policy,
one needs marginal costs and benefits at every level of abatement up to the policy’s constraint.


                                                      1
   I recover the market expected marginal abatement cost of the Waxman-Markey bill by
using three distinct features of the policy. First, under standard theoretical assumptions,
the equilibrium permit price emerging from a cap-and-trade system is equal to the marginal
abatement cost of the policy. Second, written into the Waxman-Markey bill was a cuto↵
rule granting certain firms free permits. This allows one to use a regression discontinuity
design (RDD) to examine the di↵erence in stock returns between firms just above and below
the cuto↵. Finally, because Waxman-Markey existed only as a probable policy during the
2009-2010 period, I extend the standard RDD approach by normalizing estimates using
market beliefs that Waxman-Markey would be implemented, as captured by price changes
from a prediction market tied to the policy.
    Understanding the marginal abatement cost, or permit price, of the Waxman-Markey bill
is important for three reasons. First, under certain conditions, the marginal abatement cost
of complying with a cap-and-trade system with broad sectoral coverage such as Waxman-
Markey is equal to the economy-wide U.S. marginal abatement cost.5 This parameter,
together with recent estimates of climate policy benefits, allows for cost-benefit analyses.
Second, cap-and-trade policies with permit auctioning generate government revenue that
could be used to reduce distortionary taxation (Bovenberg and Goulder, 1996). The size
of the potential welfare improvement is determined in part by the permit price. Third, the
permit price of a U.S. cap-and-trade system determines the potential benefits from linkages
with other national cap-and-trade systems (Ranson and Stavins, 2015).
    When a policy is uncertain, neither firm value with or without the policy is directly ob-
served. However, if market-held beliefs over the likelihood of cap-and-trade implementation
can be observed via prediction market prices (Snowberg, Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2013), then
changes in such prices can be combined with stock returns in an event study to recover
the market-expected firm-level e↵ects of the policy. This suggests that the policy’s permit
price may be recovered by taking the di↵erence in estimated e↵ects between firms with and
without free permits.
    Unfortunately, such a broad comparison may be invalid as cap-and-trade systems gen-
erally do not allocate free permits randomly. It is, however, possible that some free permits
are allocated in a manner unrelated to other firm characteristics.6 A specific rule under
Waxman-Markey indicated that firms in manufacturing subsectors with historical energy
intensity greater than 5% would receive free permits. This suggests the basis for a regres-
sion discontinuity design (RDD) provided that firm stock returns are continuous at the 5%

    5 The marginal abatement cost of complying with a cap-and-trade system equals the economy-wide

marginal abatement cost under least-cost allocation when the permit price is binding for all sources of U.S.
emissions. Violations of this equivalence occur whenever distortions lower the residual demand for permits.
Examples include the presence of binding auxiliary policies such as renewable portfolio standards and when
firms can easily relocate carbon-intensive operations overseas to unregulated countries.
    6 Fowlie and Perlo↵ (2013) use a free permit allocation rule in the RECLAIM NOx cap-and-trade program

to identify the e↵ects of free permits on equilibrium emissions.


                                                     2
threshold under Waxman-Markey if not for the free permit rule. However, Waxman-Markey
was never implemented. In an extension of the standard RDD framework to account for
policy uncertainty, I formally demonstrate that identification further requires unobserved
determinants of stock returns in the absence of the policy to be continuous at the 5%
threshold.
    I show that di↵erential cumulative stock returns for firms above and below the historical
energy intensity threshold closely track Waxman-Markey developments, diverging from zero
at the start of 2009, peaking around the House passage of the bill, and converging back
to zero thereafter during 2010. For graphical analysis, I implement 2-step procedures illus-
trating the RD coefficient in both time-series and cross-sectional dimensions. My preferred
approach estimates a 1-step panel RD model which interacts time-series variation in predic-
tion market prices with a local cross-sectional polynomial function of the RD treatment. I
find robust evidence that firms in sectors with energy intensity greater than 5% experience
a gain of 7 to 9 percentage points relative to firms in sectors with energy intensity less
than 5%. I do not find discontinuities at placebo thresholds less or greater than 5% energy
intensity.
   Several lines of evidence suggest that, given this 5% threshold, sorting was unlikely.
If indeed the free permit rule was unexpected, sorting in 2009 would be impossible as
the energy intensity running variable is defined by data from public government sources
in 2004-2006. It is unlikely that this rule was anticipated prior to 2009 as U.S. climate
legislation preceding the Waxman-Markey bill did not feature a similar free permit rule.
Indeed, average stock returns for manufacturing firms in 2007 and 2008 do not exhibit a
jump at the 5% threshold. Likewise, sector-level lobbying expenditures on climate policy as
well as other covariates do not exhibit a discontinuity at the 5% threshold suggesting that
firm activity did not determine the location of the threshold.
    My RDD framework estimates a reduced-form parameter capturing the jump in stock
returns between firms above and below the 5% energy intensity threshold. To map this
estimate onto my structural parameter of interest, the permit price, or marginal abatement
cost of Waxman-Markey’s cap-and-trade system, I consider a standard model of cap-and-
trade and two additional structural assumptions, with supporting statistical and anecdotal
evidence. Only one element of his mapping is neither directly observed or estimated, the
cumulative number of free permits granted to treated firms under Waxman-Markey. In
the spirit of Horowitz and Manski (2000), I consider “worst” and “best” case bounds by
assuming that, under the policy, treated firms uniformly experience future emission decline
rates equal to that of the worst and best performing manufacturing subsectors observed
during years prior to the expected start of Waxman-Markey. This produces an implied
lower and upper bound for the marginal abatement cost of $5 and $19 per ton of CO2 e in
2015, respectively. This range is narrower in spread and below the mean of CGE estimates of



                                             3
the same policy. Interestingly, the range of estimates recovered by my method is comparable
with estimates from CGE models funded by academic and governmental institutions. Only
under drastic assumptions of future emissions decline, in the range of -19 to -35% per year
for all treated firms, do I recover marginal abatement costs in the realm produced by CGE
models funded by private institutions.
    A forecasting approach based on market expectations may be well-suited for estimating
the marginal abatement cost of climate policy if information on key parameters, such as
those dictating technological change, is largely private. The induced innovation hypothesis
(Hicks, 1932) suggests that climate policy could trigger significant technological advances
(Ja↵e, Newell and Stavins, 2003). While this has been explored theoretically (Goulder
and Schneider, 1999; Nordhaus, 2002; Buonanno, Carraro and Galeotti, 2003; Acemoglu
et al., 2012), induced technological change presents modeling difficulties for many CGE
models of climate policy (Jacoby et al., 2006). My approach is agnostic about the structure,
direction, and rate of technological change, and instead relies on the expectations of market
participants to reveal dispersed information over the technological frontier.
    Using market expectations have certain drawbacks. While my estimates capture the
expected cost of the implemented policy, I am unable to confirm what markets expected to
be implemented corresponds exactly to the Waxman-Markey bill, especially if future policy
revisions were anticipated. Furthermore, even if one knows the exact policy expected to be
implemented, I could not conduct counterfactual analyses using my approach as I recover the
marginal abatement cost associated with a single emission constraint and not the entire cost
curve along various constraint levels.7 As such, my method informs upon the level but not
the slope of the marginal abatement cost curve and thus should complement counterfactual
analyses performed by CGE models.
   To the best of my knowledge, this paper provides the first forecast of the marginal abate-
ment cost under cap-and-trade policy outside CGE models.8 In doing so, it connects with
several strands of literature, both in substance and methodology. Existing papers use histor-
ical fluctuations in energy prices to inform upon the potential e↵ects of future U.S. climate
policy on employment (Deschênes, 2011), competitiveness (Aldy and Pizer, 2015), and wel-
fare (Cullen, 2013). In each paper, the extension to potential climate policy e↵ects involves
multiplying an estimated energy price elasticity with the expected change in energy prices
under climate policy, with the latter value either assumed or itself obtained from CGE mod-

    7 This implies that while I am unable to estimate the total abatement cost associated with the Waxman-

Markey policy, I could potentially recover an upper bound on total cost. The product of the permit price
and emissions equals the total abatement cost for a firm that does not engage in any abatement response,
which is greater than the total cost for any firm that does abate. I thank a referee for bringing this to my
attention.
    8 It is possible that a market expected forecast of Waxman-Markey’s marginal abatement cost may still be

far o↵ the actual value had the policy been implemented. If future economic conditions are highly uncertain,
any forecast of regulatory costs would also be inaccurate. Unfortunately, because Waxman-Markey was never
implemented, I cannot determine the degree of forecast error in my estimates.


                                                     4
els. This paper contributes to this literature by providing an empirically estimated permit
price for arguably the most important U.S. climate policy considered to date. Cullen and
Mansur (2014) directly recovers an implied short-run carbon abatement cost in the absence
of technological change using an estimated relationship between recent CO2 emissions and
the ratio of coal to natural gas prices. This recovered abatement cost, however, is specific
only to short-run fuel-switching from coal to natural gas in the electricity sector and may
not equal the marginal abatement cost of a cap-and-trade policy with national coverage over
multiple sectors. Finally, this paper is intellectually similar to Anderson and Sallee (2011)
and Greenstone, List and Syverson (2012) which empirically recover the marginal cost of
realized environmental regulations.
    This is also among the first papers to use the prediction market event study presented by
Snowberg, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2007) and Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2009) in a forecasting
context. There is, however, a long tradition of employing traditional event study methodol-
ogy to evaluate, ex-post, the costs of realized regulation including event studies examining
the cost of realized U.S. (Lange and Linn, 2008; Linn, 2010) and E.U. (Bushnell, Chong and
Mansur, 2013) environmental regulations. Regarding the Waxman-Markey bill, Lemoine
(2016) conducts a traditional event study for events related to the bill but the emphasis is
not on recovering the policy’s marginal abatement cost.
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background
on the Waxman-Markey bill and the use of prediction markets in event studies. Section 3
introduces a reduced-form framework for RDD under policy uncertainty. Section 4 presents
reduced-form results along with robustness checks. Section 5 provides a structural frame-
work mapping the RD parameter onto Waxman-Markey’s marginal abatement cost and
compares my estimates with that of CGE models. Section 6 o↵ers a brief discussion. The
online appendix includes a more detailed model of cap-and-trade, formal derivations for po-
tential bias due to thin trading, an adjustment procedure for prediction market expiration,
a data summary, further background on Waxman-Markey and related bills, and a summary
of CGE models.


2     Background
2.1    The Waxman-Markey cap-and-trade bill
Over the past two decades, emissions trading, known popularly as “cap-and-trade”, has
become an increasingly important regulatory instrument for controlling regional and global
pollutants such as greenhouse gases (Stavins, 1998; Aldy et al., 2010). In a typical cap-
and-trade system, a limit, or cap, on cumulative emissions is set for the lifetime of the
policy with the regulator issuing annual emissions permits under this cap. Regulated firms
are either given or must purchase permits to cover their annual emissions. The primary


                                             5
appeal of cap-and-trade is that, under standard theoretical assumptions, the allocation of
emissions across firms after permit trading should achieve the required cap at the lowest
aggregate compliance cost (see Appendix A.1) (Montgomery, 1972; Rubin, 1996). Following
the success of the U.S. SO2 trading system introduced in the Clean Air Act Amendments of
1990 (Carlson et al., 2000; Ellerman et al., 2000), variants of cap-and-trade have been imple-
mented domestically and internationally. Well-known systems currently in operation include
the European Unions Emissions Trading System (EU-ETS), the U.S. Regional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative (RGGI), and the California cap-and-trade system.
    This backdrop has made cap-and-trade the centerpiece of U.S. domestic climate policy
e↵orts over the last two decades. After a series of failed Senate cap-and-trade bills in the
early 2000s, the Democratic-led 111th House of Representatives introduced the American
Clean Energy and Security Act in the spring of 2009. Known informally as the Waxman-
Markey bill after its primary sponsors, the legislation specified a declining annual limit on
emissions beginning in 2012 which would eventually cover 85% of greenhouse gas emitting
sectors.9 Waxman-Markey required that covered emissions be at 83%, 58% and 17% of
2005 levels by 2020, 2030, and 2050 respectively. To smooth costs over time, regulated firms
were allowed unlimited permit banking and permit borrowing with some restrictions over
the lifetime of the policy.10 Importantly, in contrast to earlier periods in which Congress
considered several cap-and-trade bills simultaneously, the 111th Congress only seriously
deliberated over the Waxman-Markey bill and its Senate variant.
    Written within the Waxman-Markey bill was a rule which granted free permits to a
particular subset of firms. Specifically, Waxman-Markey considered a firm in a 6-digit
NAICS manufacturing sector (i.e. NAICS 31-33) eligible for free permits if for that sector
recent11 energy intensity12 was over 5% and trade intensity13 exceeded 15%.14 These permits
were granted annually according to firm-level output and industry-wide emissions intensity
from 2012-2025 and phased-out over the 2026-2035 period.15 Importantly, this was the first

    9 While central Waxman-Markey, cap-and-trade was not the only component of the legislation. There

were also supply-side interventions such as a renewable energy portfolio standard as well as demand-side
interventions such as incentives for electric vehicles. Insofar as other policy components distort incentives
towards cost-minimizing abatement options, the resulting permit price and thus marginal abatement cost
would deviate from that of a hypothetical least-cost policy with the same overall abatement level.
   10 In particular, borrowing of permits 1-year ahead incurs an 8% interest rate.
   11 Section 763(b)(2)(D) required an “average of data from as many of the years of 2004, 2005, and 2006

for which such data are available” from the U.S. Census Annual Survey of Manufacturers.
   12 Defined as “dividing the cost of purchased electricity and fuel costs of the sector by the value of the

shipments of the sector” in Section 763(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II) of H.R.2454.
   13 Defined as “dividing the value of the total imports and exports of such sector by the value of the

shipments plus the value of imports of such sector” in Section 401(b)(2)(A)(iii) of H.R.2454.
   14 The policy also granted free permits to local distribution companies of electricity. There was, however,

no cuto↵ for which firms got free permits and thus could not be used as an identification strategy.
   15 This is known also as “output-based allocation”. Section 764(b)(2)(A and B) required that for the

period from 2012-2025, annual permits are granted based on the product of output over the past two years
and the most recent sector-level greenhouse gas intensity (measured as ton of emissions per ton output).
Section 764(a)(B) requires a complete phaseout from 2026-2035.


                                                      6
time a cuto↵ criteria for free permits appeared in U.S. climate legislation. All prior climate
legislation16 directed government regulators to eventually design a free permit allocation
rule without providing specific guidance. This suggests that it was unlikely for firms to sort
around this specific threshold for years prior to the introduction of the Waxman-Markey
bill in 2009.
   Waxman-Markey passed the House of Representatives on June 26, 2009, marking the first
time cap-and-trade legislation had passed either Houses of Congress. Soon thereafter the
Senate introduced complementary cap-and-trade bills with a free permit rule and provisions
a↵ecting permit prices that were similar to those in Waxman-Markey (see Appendix F and
Table A.4 for a detailed comparison of these bills).17 The similarities between Waxman-
Markey and Senate bills were likely due to President Obama’s explicit support for the
Waxman-Markey bill and because a Senate bill that deviated too much from Waxman-
Markey would require the legislative burden of additional House voting.
  Despite these e↵orts in the Senate, the overall prospects for cap-and-trade declined after
House passage. With the exception of Republican Senator Lindsay Graham joining Sen-
ate cap-and-trade e↵orts on Nov 4, 2009, the rest of 2009 and 2010 witnessed the gradual
demise of cap-and-trade. Prospects for cap-and-trade were a↵ected by the failure to reach
a new binding international agreement at the UNFCCC Copenhagen negotiations and fur-
ther declined following Scott Brown’s Senate victory which weakened the filibuster-proof
supermajority needed by the Democrats. On April 23, 2010, Senator Lindsay Graham
withdrew support for cap-and-trade. Three months later, on July 22, 2010, a little over a
year after House passage of Waxman-Markey, the Senate formally dropped deliberation over
a comparable cap-and-trade bill (see Appendix E for a summary of these events). While
the Waxman-Markey was ultimately never implemented, the period between May 2009 to
August 2010 was marked by daily fluctuations in cap-and-trade prospects which fortunately
was captured by an accompanying prediction market.


2.2     Prediction market event studies
The typical prediction market contract is a bet on the realization of a particular event at a
certain date. When that date is reached, holders of a contract receive $1 if the event is real-
ized and zero otherwise with contract prices fluctuating within the unit interval prior to the
termination date.18 Under certain assumptions about prediction market participants,19 the
   16 Prominent examples are the 2003 McCain-Lieberman (S.R. 139), 2005 McCain-Lieberman (S.R. 1151),

2007 McCain-Liberman (S.R. 280), 2007 Lieberman-Warner (S.R. 2191), and the 2008 Boxer-Lieberman-
Warner (S.R.3036) bills.
   17 In the bicameral U.S. legislative system, a piece of legislation must pass both Houses of Congress before

being sent to the President. Thus, passage of Waxman-Markey by the House of Representatives needed to
be followed by a similar cap-and-trade bill approved by a Senate filibuster-proof supermajority.
   18 Actual Intrade contract prices range from $0 - $10. I normalize prices to match probabilities.
   19 Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2006) show that two assumptions are required in order for prediction market

prices to equal mean beliefs: 1) utility has a log form and 2) trader wealth and beliefs are independent. For


                                                      7
price of the contract can be interpreted as the average market belief over event realization.
    Prediction market prices can be paired with stock returns in a prediction market event
study. This approach provides two important advantages over traditional event study
methodology. First, in the case of an eventually realized policy, prediction market prices
mitigate concern over “fuzzy information” release. Traditional event studies examine ab-
normal stock returns in response to an unexpected release of information. Isolating the
moment when markets first become aware of this information is a central challenge. This
is typically manifested in the selection of an event window in which one assumes that the
probability of policy realization is 0 prior to the window and 1 when the event occurs. Any
early release of information may violate this assumption and result in estimates that are
sensitive to event window selection (Snowberg, Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2007).
    Second, and perhaps more importantly, prediction market prices allow researchers to
estimate abnormal returns for a probable event even if this event is never realized. In
other words, the availability of prediction markets transforms event studies into a tool for
policy forecasting. This potential was noted by Snowberg, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2013)
but, to the best of my knowledge, has not been implemented in the literature. In particular,
the availability of prediction markets solves a central empirical challenge: for probable
but unrealized policies, neither firm values under the probable policy nor in its absence
are directly observed. There are, during any legislative period, a number of important
policies that fail to become law but whose costs remain of interest, perhaps to inform future
legislative e↵orts.20 Such a prediction market was available for cap-and-trade policy during
2009-2010.


2.3     Cap-and-trade prediction market
From May 1, 2009 to Dec 31, 2010,21 the online trading exchange Intrade hosted a prediction
market contract on the prospects of a U.S. cap-and-trade system. This contract was titled:22

       “A cap and trade system for emissions trading to be established before midnight
       ET on 31 Dec 2010.”
other standard utility functions, the divergence between prediction market prices and mean beliefs is shown
generally to be quite small when 1) traders are risk averse, 2) prices are within the $0.20 $0.80 range, and
3) the distribution of beliefs exhibit relatively low dispersion. In the case where trader wealth and belief are
correlated, the prediction market price reflects the wealth weighted average belief in the trading population.
   20 Prediction markets have been o↵ered for recent e↵orts to reform immigration, social security, and health

care regulation in the U.S. A list of all Intrade prediction markets is available here:www.intrade.com/v4/
reports/special/all-intrade-markets/all-intrade-markets.xlsx
   21 Intrade began o↵ering this contract on March 25, 2009. However, trading began only on May 1, 2009,

which marks the start of my sample period.
   22 Intrade further defined this contract by noting:

       “A cap and trade system will be considered established once federal legislation authorizing the
       creation of such a system becomes law, as reported by three independent and reliable media
       sources. Emissions trading under the system does not need to begin for the contract to be
       expired.”


                                                       8
Figure 1 plots the price time series for this contract. A price of $0.50 indicates that market
participants believed, on average, that cap-and-trade had a 50% chance of being realized
before the end of 2010. Each solid red line identifies a political event that a↵ected cap-and-
trade prospects (summarized in Appendix E).
    Two aspects of this prediction market make it fall short of the ideal. First, the contract
describes a generic cap-and-trade system without explicit mention of the Waxman-Markey
bill. In Section 5.1, I discuss several pieces of statistical and anecdotal evidence suggesting
that market participants were likely reacting to the Waxman-Markey bill. Second, this
prediction market was relatively thinly traded. During the event period, 11,260 contracts
were traded for a total value of $190,000. An average of 30 contracts were transacted every
2 days.23 Transaction-level data acquired privately from Intrade indicates that there were
143 unique traders participating in the market.24 To examine the potential implications of
thin trading, Section 4.3 conducts a series of empirical tests to examine the potential biases
due to thin trading, as formalized in Appendix B.


3     Reduced-form framework: RDD under policy uncer-
      tainty
This section develops the econometric framework for conducting a regression discontinuity
design under policy uncertainty. Identifying assumptions for the reduced-form RD param-
eter are first introduced graphically within a simplified setting and then formalized more
generally. Section 5 will introduce the structural assumptions needed to interpret the RD
parameter as the marginal abatement cost of the Waxman-Markey bill.


3.1     Observational challenge: graphical illustration
Figure 2 illustrates this paper’s main observational challenge in its simplest form. There is
one time period. The policy index p indicates whether the Waxman-Markey bill has (p = w)
or has not (p = o) been realized. Firms are indexed by i and are either in sector j 2 {F, A}.
Under Waxman-Markey, firms in sector j 2 F with energy intensity EIj > .05 receives free
permits. Conversely, firms in sector j 2 A with energy intensity EIj < .05 have to purchase
permits. ri (j, p, EIj ) is firm-level stock returns (or the percentage change in firm value).
  First, consider first the standard RDD setting for the hypothetical case where Waxman-
Markey has been implemented, p = w, as shown in Panel (A) of Figure 2. Solid lines indicate
   23 By comparison, the prediction market used in Snowberg, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2007) had an average

of 129 trades for every 10-minute interval during election night.
   24 While Intrade does not provide information on where traders are located, Intrade has said in a public

letter to the U.S. CFTC that “our 82,000 plus membership are predominantly resident in the United States”
and that “78% of traffic to Intrade.com in the period 1 January to 30 June [2008] was from the U.S.” Available
here: http://www.intrade.com/news/misc/CFTC_Intrade_Comment_Reg_Treatment_Event_Mkts.pdf


                                                      9
observed values while dashed lines indicate unobserved values. In this setting, the researcher
observes the stock returns of firms with and without free permits and can estimate their
respective conditional mean functions, E[ri |j 2 F, p = w, EIj > .05] and E[ri |j 2 A, p =
w, EIj < .05]. Identification of the discontinuity requires that E[ri |j 2 A, p = w, EIj ]
be continuous in EIj around the 5% threshold (Hahn, Todd and Klaauw, 2001). That
is, expected stock returns under Waxman-Markey should be continuous at the 5% energy
intensity threshold if not for the assignment of free permits.
    Unfortunately, Waxman-Markey was never realized. This means that the researcher
observes neither E[ri |j 2 F, p = w, EIj ] nor E[ri |j 2 A, p = w, EIj ] over any energy inten-
sity value. Furthermore, because Waxman-Markey was a probable policy during this time
period, stock returns themselves do not directly reveal returns in the absence of Waxman-
Markey, E[ri |p = o, EIj ]. These three unobserved conditional mean functions are shown as
dashed lines in Panel (B) of Figure 2. Suppose, however, the researcher somehow observes
the change in the probability that Waxman-Markey would be implemented at some future
date. One could then estimate firm-level stock returns under Waxman-Markey relative to
the no-policy scenario, normalize estimates according to the change in Waxman-Markey
probabilities, and examine whether relative returns exhibit a discontinuity at the 5% en-
ergy intensity threshold. Identification of in this setting requires an additional continuity
assumption. Expected stock returns in the absence of Waxman-Markey, E[ri |p = o, EIj ],
must also be continuous in EIj around the 5% threshold.


3.2         General framework
There are two reasons why, in practice, a more general framework is needed to estimate an
RD parameter under policy uncertainty. First, there are more than two policy states. In
particular, as noted in Section 2.3, the cap-and-trade prediction market did not explicitly
mention the Waxman-Markey bill and thus may cover multiple similar policies. Furthermore,
it is possible that alternative climate policies, such as a renewable portfolio standard, were
considered at the time in lieu of cap-and-trade. Second, the cap-and-trade prediction market
existed continuously over many trading days such that one can gain statistical power by
utilizing daily time-series variation in prediction market prices and stock returns. More
broadly, this section formally demonstrates how the observational challenge presented in
Section 3.1 could be overcome using two variables that are observed on each trading date t:
the stock return of firm i in sector j, rijt , and the cap-and-trade prediction market price,
✓t .
   For a representative trader, define P as the set of all policies that could be implemented
on any date.25 Next, define W ⇢ P as the subset of cap-and-trade policies to be passed by

        example, Waxman-Markey implemented at the end of 2010 would be a di↵erent element in P than
   25 For

the same policy but implemented on a di↵erent date.


                                                10
the end of 2010 covered by the cap-and-trade prediction market. Because the cap-and-trade
prediction market did not specify the Waxman-Markey bill, W may include multiple policies
in addition to Waxman-Markey. The remaining subset of policies not covered by the cap-
and-trade prediction market is denoted by O ⇢ P such that W [ O = P. O includes the
no-climate policy state and any non-cap-and-trade climate policy expected to be established
by the end of 2010, such as a renewable portfolio standard. It also includes all policies -
cap-and-trade or otherwise - to be established after 2010. Denote vijt (W) and vijt (O)
as expected firm value conditional on the set of policies covered and not covered by the
prediction market. Firm value, vijt , is the expected value over the two policy sets:

                                    vijt     =       ✓t vijt (W) + (1               ✓t )vijt (O)
                                             =       vijt (O)(1 +             ijt ✓t )                                 (1)

where the second line follows after defining:

                                                           vijt (W) vijt (O)
                                               ijt     =                                                               (2)
                                                                 vijt (O)
or the percentage di↵erence in expected firm value under cap-and-trade policies covered by
the prediction market relative to other policies. I henceforth refer to ijt as the firm-level
cap-and-trade e↵ect. Taking logs and first di↵erences of Equation 1, and noting that for
                                                                        26
sufficiently small     ijt ✓t ,   ln(1 +    ijt ✓t )   ⇡     ijt ✓t ,        one can write stock returns, rijt , as:

                                   rijt =     ijt ✓t         ijt 1 ✓t 1        +         ln vijt (O)                   (3)

where  indicates time di↵erences.
   An RDD design can exploit the free permit assignment at the 5% energy intensity thresh-
old. To demonstrate this, I decompose the firm-level cap-and-trade e↵ect into an average
e↵ect of the permit rule and a firm and date varying residual term. Specifically:
                                                       ijt   = Dj + ⌘ijt                                               (4)

where Dj = 1{EIj > .05} is an indicator variable which equals one when firm i is in sector
j with energy intensity greater than 5%.    is the reduced-form parameter of interest and
captures the average trading-date di↵erence in cap-and-trade e↵ect between firms receiving
and not receiving free permits. The residual ⌘ijt captures two additional components of the
cap-and-trade e↵ect: firm and date heterogeneity in the free permit rule treatment and all
other firm and date-varying determinants besides the free permit rule. Section 5 presents
a structural analog for Eq. 4 so that can be interpreted structurally. Substituting Eq. 4
into Eq. 3, followed by adding and subtracting ⌘ijt ✓t 1 , yields:


  26 During   the sample period, average ✓t = 0.24, the average estimated cap-and-trade e↵ect is -0.02.


                                                                 11
                    rijt = Dj ✓t + ⌘ijt ✓t +             ⌘ijt ✓t   1   +   ln vijt (O)                 (5)

Notice that Eq. 5 di↵ers from a standard RDD setup in that the cross-sectional treatment
variable, Dj , is interacted with a time-series variable ✓t . This implies that identifica-
tion requires two continuity assumptions, one which follows standard RDD convention and
another because our event of interest was never realized. Formally, Assumption 1 states:

Assumption 1: (Continuity under cap-and-trade policy)
     Eit [⌘ijt |EIj ] is continuous at EIj = .05.

where the expectation is taken over firms i and dates t. This is a variant of the standard
RDD continuity assumption under a certain policy, stating that the cap-and-trade e↵ect
should be continuous at the 5% energy intensity threshold if not for the allocation of free
permits during all trading days.27 Assumption 1 may be violated if firms could sort around
the threshold or if the threshold itself was strategically placed in response to firm activity.
    Next, Assumption 2 states:

Assumption 2: (Continuity under non-cap-and-trade policy)
     Eit [ln vijt (O)|EIj ] is continuous at EIj = .05.

This assumption states that expected stock returns under all other non-cap-and-trade poli-
cies must also be continuous at the 5% threshold. This assumption may be invalid if the
e↵ect of alternative policies on firm returns, such as a renewable portfolio standard, also
exhibits a discontinuity at 5%. Under these two assumptions, estimation of Eq. 5 for across
trading dates and for firms within a narrow bandwidth of the 5% energy intensity threshold
would produce an unbiased estimate of the reduced-form parameter of interest:

                       b = limEIj #.05 Eit [rijt |EIj ] limEIj ".05 Eit [rijt |EIj ]                   (6)
                                                   E t [ ✓t ]

   While Assumptions 1 and 2 are sufficient to identify , for statistical power, estimation of
Eq. 5 requires two modifications. First, because I include firms within a certain bandwidth
around the 5% threshold with cap-and-trade e↵ects that may vary with energy intensity, a
component of ⌘ijt is modeled as a flexible function of energy intensity. Second, to capture
  ln vijt (O), I employ a variety of standard controls from the finance literature as well as
semi-parametric controls.



  27 Because  ⌘ijt includes heterogeneity in the free permit treatment e↵ect, Assumption 1 is robust to the
presence of variable treatment e↵ects (see (Hahn, Todd and Klaauw, 2001)).


                                                    12
4     Reduced-form results
This section presents my reduced-form RDD results in several parts. First, I conduct two
forms of graphical analysis via 2-step procedures that illustrate the RD parameter in the
time-series and cross-sectional dimensions. Second, for my preferred model, I estimate a
1-step panel RD estimator which interacts time-series variation in prediction market prices
with a local semi-parametric function of the cross-sectional RD treatment allowing for cor-
rect inference. Point estimates from this panel estimator are shown to be robust across
di↵erent controls for firm value absent cap-and-trade policy, sample bandwidth around the
threshold, and functional form fitted to energy intensity. Third, I consider a series of indi-
rect tests of identifying Assumptions 1 and 2 by examining whether there are discontinuities
at the 5% threshold across various sector-level covariates and average stock returns before
and after 2009-2010. Lastly, I present additional results testing for the presence of placebo
discontinuities at thresholds less and greater than 5%, biases due to thin-trading in the
prediction market, and biases arising from concerns over prediction market expiration.
    For all results, I construct a panel of 2-day stock returns derived from data obtained from
the Center of Research in Security Prices (CRSP)28 during the period from May 1, 2009 to
Dec 31, 2010 with all publicly traded firms in the 31-33 NAICS manufacturing sectors.29 In
the cross-sectional dimension, I restrict my sample to firms in sectors that satisfy Waxman-
Markey’s rule of trade intensity exceeding 15% using data from the U.S. International Trade
Commission.30 Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2006) show that with certain utility functions, a
favorite-longshot bias and reverse favorite-longshot bias can occur for prediction market
prices below $0.20 and exceeding $0.80 respectively. Addressing this concern, I restrict my
sample in the time-series dimension by only including trading days when prediction prices
lie between $0.20-$0.80. Data sources are further detailed in Appendix D.
    Table A.1 displays 6-digit NAICS sectors by energy intensity bins.31 For conciseness,

   28 2-day trading intervals account for Intrade prediction markets having later closing hours than the

primary U.S. stock exchanges as well as the occurrence of after-hours stock trading. In particular, Intrade
closing prices are observed 2am on weekdays and 3am on weekends. If after-hours stock trading were to
occur, the e↵ect of information released after 4pm ET on trading days or over weekends would not be picked
up using observed daily returns. Applying the Hadri (2000)’s Lagrange Multiplier test on my sample panel
of stock returns failed to reject a null that all panels are stationary in favor of an alternative where some
panels contain a unit root.
   29 Only 3 firms in my sample indicate multiple 6-digit NAICS sectors over my sample period. None of

the sector changes a↵ected free permit treatment assignment.
   30 In theory, one could conduct another RDD analysis along the 15% trade intensity cuto↵, conditional

on energy intensity above 5%. However, in practice, there are very few firms within narrow bandwidths of
the trade-intensity cuto↵. For example, within a 3% bandwidth of the 15% trade intensity threshold, there
are 8 publicly listed firms in my dataset. By comparison, there are 202 firms within a 3% bandwidth of the
5% energy intensity threshold.
   31 My energy intensity variable uses data from the 2004-2006 U.S. Census Annual Survey of Manufacturers

(ASM), as required by the Waxman-Markey bill. I prefer this variable to the energy intensity variable
constructed for the Senate requested “Interagency Report on International Competitiveness and Emission
Leakage” (EPA, 2009) because the latter only uses 2006 ASM data. In practice the two variables are highly
correlated with a bivariate linear model producing a coefficient of 0.98 and R2 = 0.92.


                                                     13
only sectors within a 3% bandwidth around the 5% energy intensity threshold are shown
with bins widths corresponding to the 2%, 2.5%, and 3% bandwidth samples. There does
not appear to be clustering of particular 3-digit manufacturing sectors on either side of
the threshold. Firms in paper (NAICS 322), petroleum and coal products (NAICS 324),
chemical (NAICS 325), plastics and rubber products (NAICS 326), nonmetallic mineral
product (NAICS 327), primary metal (NAICS 331), fabricated metal product (NAICS 332),
and computer and electronic product (NAICS 334) subsectors appear on both sides of the
threshold. Section 4.2 tests for discontinuities in sector-level covariates at the threshold.


4.1    Main RD estimate
Eq. 5 is estimated using firms within a certain bandwidth around the 5% threshold. Because
stock returns may vary with energy intensity for firms within the bandwidth, I follow Hahn,
Todd and Klaauw (2001) and consider a local polynomial regression analog of Eq. 5:

                      rijt = Dj ✓t + f (EIj ) ✓t + Zit      i   + ✏ijt                     (7)

where as with before Dj = 1{EIj > .05} is an indicator variable which equals one when firm
i is in 6-digit NAICS sector j with energy intensity greater than 5%. is the RD parameter
of interest. f (EIj ) is a flexible polynomial function fully interacted with Dj , allowing for
di↵erent parameters on either side of the threshold. For example, under a linear specification
f (EIj ) = ↵1 + ↵2 (EIj .05) + ↵3 Dj (EIj .05). Continuity of the conditional mean of
the error term, E[✏ijt |EIj ], at the 5% threshold is required in order to satisfy identifying
Assumptions 1 and 2.
    Zit is a set of controls capturing stock returns in the absence of Waxman-Markey. This
is typically known in the finance literature as “normal market performance.” Six sets of
controls are considered. The first three models follow standard practice from finance. The
first model includes only firm fixed e↵ects. The second model is the CAPM with firm
fixed e↵ects and an aggregate market return index multiplied by a firm-specific coefficient.
The third model employs the 3-factor Fama-French model (Fama and French, 1993) which
augments CAPM with value-based and size-based portfolios each multiplied by firm-specific
coefficients to account for common risk factors associated with book-to-market ratio and firm
size. Three additional models employ more flexible time controls. My fourth model includes
a full set of firm and trading date fixed e↵ects which removes daily shocks to stock returns
common to all sample firms. To explicitly allow daily oil prices to have di↵erential e↵ects
across firms, my fifth model augments the fourth model by adding interactions between the
daily percentage change in crude oil prices with 2-digit NAICS sector dummies. Finally, my
last model includes firm fixed e↵ects and trading date by 2-digit NAICS sector fixed e↵ects
to flexibly remove any trading date shocks that may have di↵erential e↵ects across sectors.
Before showing panel model estimates from all six versions of Eq. 7, I first graphically

                                              14
present       in the time-series and cross-sectional dimensions.

Graphical analysis: time series Eq. 7 can be estimated via the following two-step
procedure. In the first step, the following cross-sectional local polynomial regression is
estimated for every trading date t:
                                   rijt =    t Dj   + ft (EIj ) + ⌫ijt                      (8)

where     is the di↵erential abnormal returns between firms on either side of the 5% energy
          t
intensity threshold on each date t. ft (EIj ) includes a date fixed e↵ect. t is the raw
probability unadjusted daily cap-and-trade e↵ect. In the second stage, t is regressed in the
time-series dimension on the daily prediction market price change:

                                            bt =       ✓ t + µt                             (9)

Results from this 2-step procedure are shown graphically in Figures 3 and 4. To generate
these graphs, I first remove firm fixed e↵ects from the panel of stock returns. Eq. 8 is then
estimated on the ensuing residuals for firms within a 4% bandwidth of the cuto↵ with a
flexible quadratic function, ft (EIj ), in energy intensity. Figure 3 plots the cumulative daily
raw cap-and-trade e↵ect over the 2007-2011 period. Notice that Figure 3 closely tracks the
timing of Waxman-Markey developments discussed in Section 2.1 and captured by cap-and-
trade prediction market prices in Figure 1. The cumulative di↵erence between firms on
either side of the threshold hover around zero during 2007-2009 and dramatically increase
when the 111th Congress begins at the start of 2009. The cumulative di↵erence peak around
the House passage of the bill at the start of the summer of 2009 and converge back to zero
thereafter towards the end of the 111th Congress as 2010 closes. Figure 4 shows Eq. 9 by
plotting the relationship between the raw probability unadjusted daily cap-and-trade e↵ect
and cap-and-trade prediction market price changes during the May 1, 2009 to Dec 31, 2010
sample period. A linear fit indicates a of 7%.

Graphical analysis: cross section I reverse the steps of the previous procedure to
provide a more conventional RD graph in the cross section, similar to that illustrated in
Figure 2. First, for every sample firm, I estimate the following time series regression within
the period from May 1, 2009 to Dec 31, 2010:

                                   rijt =   ij     ✓t + ci + ⌫ijt                          (10)

where ij is the firm-level cap-and-trade e↵ect and ci are firm fixed e↵ects. In the second
stage, I test whether there is a cross-sectional discontinuity in ij by estimating:

                                  c
                                  ij = Dj + f (EIj ) + µij                                 (11)



                                                     15
Figure 5 follows the RD literature by showing the non-parametric version of Eq. 11 for
firms within a 4% bandwidth of the cuto↵. To generate Figure 5, I first remove trading date
fixed e↵ects from the panel of stock returns before estimating Eq. 10. Triangles indicate the
estimated cap-and-trade e↵ect averaged over firms within separate 1% wide energy intensity
bins. The underlying support of sector-level energy intensity, the running variable, is shown
in the gray histogram. The distribution is left-skewed with relatively fewer number of firms
near the 5% energy intensity threshold. While this may be a concern for statistical power,
it need not threaten identification provided that the firm distribution is continuous around
the threshold. A density continuity test using the McCrary (2008) procedure was conducted
and did not detect a discontinuity in the support of the running variable at 5%.32 Solid
lines show linear models fitted over the unbinned data on both sides of the 5% threshold
while dashed lines show a similar fit using a quadratic model. Under both models, there
is a discontinuity of about 7% percent. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the overall
shape of the response function is negatively sloped on both sides of the threshold which is
expected as more energy intensive firms would experience larger losses under climate policy.

Panel estimates The previous 2-step RD procedures provide graphical evidence of the
discontinuity at the 5% energy intensity threshold. However, they do not take into account
sampling variability in estimates of bt and bij and thus may not report correct standard
errors.33 Instead, my preferred procedure is to directly estimate Eq. 7 with standard errors
clustered at the 6-digit NAICS level to allow arbitrary forms of serial and cross-sectional
correlation for firms within a given sector.
   Table 1 shows estimates of       for each combination of i) six di↵erent normal market
performance controls (panels), ii) local linear and quadratic functional forms for energy
intensity (down rows within a panel), and iii) estimation bandwidths ranging from 2% to
4% in 0.5% intervals around the threshold (across columns). Table 1 shows a statistically
significant estimate of around 7% to 9% across these modeling choices.34 A few patterns are
worth discussing. First, point estimates are relatively una↵ected by the choice of controls
for normal market performance across panels of Table 1 lending support for Assumptions 1
and 2. Second, models using either a linear or quadratic function of energy intensity produce
fairly similar estimates for bandwidths set at 2.5%, 3.5% and 4%. The linear model fails
to detect a discontinuity only within a 3% bandwidth though the point estimate is within
the uncertainty of other models. The quadratic model fails to detect a discontinuity only
within a bandwidth of 2% possibly due to overfitting given the reduced sample size at that
bandwidth. Figure A.1 displays point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of from the

   32 The point estimate on a jump at 5% in the distribution of energy intensity is 0.78 with a standard error

of 0.54.
   33 This is akin to incorrect standard errors in a generated regressor setting.
   34 For comparison, the average cap-and-trade e↵ect across all listed firms estimated using the 3-factor

Fama French model is -2%.


                                                     16
firm and date fixed e↵ects model for finer 0.1% bandwidth increments using both linear (top
panel) and quadratic (bottom panel) functions of energy intensity.


4.2    Indirect tests of Assumptions 1 and 2
This section conducts several indirect tests of identifying Assumptions 1 and 2.

Sector-level covariates Assumption 1 requires that the cap-and-trade e↵ect be contin-
uous at 5% energy intensity if not for the free permit rule. Given the free permit rule,
firm sorting around the 5% threshold is unlikely. First, as noted in Section 2.1, climate
legislation prior to the Waxman-Markey bill did not include the 5% threshold such that it is
unlikely that firms were anticipating this threshold based on prior experience. Second, free
permit assignment is based on 2004-2006, publicly available, government data on sectoral
energy intensity values. It is unlikely that firms in 2009 would rewrite such data. However,
Assumption 1 could still be violated if there was strategic placement of the threshold by
Congressional legislators, perhaps in response to firm activity.
   Table 2 examines covariate balance for several 6-digit NAICS sector-level variables that
may influence the placement of the threshold. For each covariate, I consider both linear
and quadratic models of energy intensity and di↵erent estimation bandwidths and apply
the cross-sectional specification in Eq. 11 at the sectoral level. Panels (A) and (B) examine
whether the location of the free permit rule reflected concerns over labor market e↵ects.
Panel (A) of Table 2 examines whether there is a discontinuity at 5% energy intensity in
log average number of production workers for the sector. I do not detect a statistically sig-
nificant discontinuity with any of my linear models and only pick up statistically significant
coefficients within a 2% and 2.5% bandwidth using a quadratic function of energy intensity.
Panel (B) models the log average number of establishments and detects only a marginally
significant coefficient using a linear model of energy intensity within a 4% bandwidth. For
neither covariate are the results sufficiently stable across modeling choices to conclude there
is a discontinuity at the threshold. Firms that can pass-through more of its regulatory
costs onto consumers would experience lower profit losses. Panel (C) tests whether there
is a discontinuity at 5% energy intensity in market concentration as measured by a 6-digit
NAICS-level Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) constructed from average daily firm stock
values in 2007-2008. I do not detect a jump in market concentration.
    Legislators may have determined the 5% threshold in response to firm lobbying activity.
Panel (D) examines the presence of a jump at 5% energy intensity in log lobbying expen-
ditures on the Waxman-Markey bill (see Appendix D for details on lobbying expenditure
construction). I do not detect a statistically significant discontinuity at 5% energy intensity
for any bandwidth and functional form in energy intensity suggesting that there was not
additional lobbying pressure by firms in sectors that would have received free permits. It


                                              17
is, however, possible that this free permit allocation rule was determined by climate policy
lobbying prior to the Waxman-Markey bill in 2009. In Panel (E), I extract and total lob-
bying expenditures across the full set of official climate legislation considered by Congress
between 2003-2008.35 Again, I do not detect a jump in lobbying expenditures on climate
bills prior to the Waxman-Markey bill at the 5% threshold. Finally, it should be noted
that while I do not systematically detect discontinuities in any of these covariates, some of
the noisy point estimates in Table 2 are quite large. Given the small number of sectors in
my estimating samples, it may be that discontinuities exist in these covariates and I am
statistically underpowered in detecting them.

Firm-level stock returns in 2007, 2008, and 2011 Assumption 2 requires that condi-
tional on controls for normal market performance, firm stock returns are continuous at 5%
energy intensity in the absence of cap-and-trade policies covered by the prediction market.
An indirect test of Assumption 2 is to examine whether stock returns in 2007 and 2008,
prior to the 111th Congress, and in 2011, after the 111th Congress, exhibit discontinuities at
5% energy intensity. Assumption 2 would be violated if discontinuities at the 5% threshold
existed in any alternative policy not covered by the cap-and-trade prediction market and
markets believed such policy to be probable prior to or after 2009-2010. Detecting a discon-
tinuity in stock returns prior to 2009-2010 could also imply that markets were anticipating
this threshold prior to the 111th Congress.
    Figure 3 already shows the discontinuity in cumulative daily stock returns at the 5%
threshold during 2007, 2008, and 2011. Table 3 estimates the discontinuity using the cross-
sectional specification in Eq. 11 for average daily returns in 2007, 2008, and 2011 in Panels
(A), (B), and (C) respectively. Rows in each panel show coefficients from models fitting
a linear and quadratic function of energy intensity. Columns indicate the bandwidth size
around the 5% threshold. I find little evidence of a discontinuity at 5% energy intensity
across the combination of stock returns, polynomial order, and bandwidth window. Nearly
every coefficient and standard error is small in magnitude and not statistically significant.
I only detect a statistically significant e↵ect in 2011 average stock returns using a quadratic
function in energy intensity within a 2% bandwidth. This is represented graphically in Figure
A.2 which shows average daily stock returns in 2007, 2008 and 2011 for each 1%-wide energy
intensity bin along with linear and quadratic models fitted over unbinned values.


4.3    Additional robustness tests
I turn now to several additional robustness test of my main RD result.

   35 These include the 2003 McCain-Lieberman (S.R. 139), 2005 McCain-Lieberman (S.R. 1151), 2007

McCain-Liberman (S.R. 280), 2007 Lieberman-Warner (S.R. 2191), and the 2008 Boxer-Lieberman-Warner
(S.R.3036) bills.


                                               18
Placebo test at di↵erent energy intensity thresholds Table 4 shows estimates of
  from Eq. 7 under alternate placebo free permit thresholds at 3%, 4%, 6%, and 7%
energy intensity, shown across columns. All models include both firm and date fixed e↵ects
estimated within a 4% estimation sample bandwidth on both sides of the treatment threshold
with cluster-robust standard errors at the 6-digit NAICS level. The first row of coefficients
are from models fitting a local linear function of energy intensity while the second row uses a
local quadratic function. For both functional forms, a statistically significant discontinuity
is detected only at the correct 5% threshold.

Possible consequences of thin trading in prediction market Section 2.3 noted
that the Intrade cap-and-trade market was thinly traded. Previous field and experimental
studies have found that prediction market prices are relatively una↵ected by thin trading or
manipulation by individual traders (see Appendix B for a brief literature review). Intuitively,
e↵orts to manipulate a prediction market by some increase arbitrage opportunities for others
such that distortions, if they do exist, are unlikely to last over long periods.
   Because bias due to thin trading cannot be fully ruled out, Appendix B formally considers
three possible sources of deviation between the observed prediction market price and the
true unobserved cap-and-trade probability: additive bias, classical measurement error, and
multiplicative bias. First, I show that the inclusion of firm fixed e↵ects in each variant of my
panel specification in Eq. 7 indirectly addresses additive bias. Second, I demonstrate that
in the presence of classical measurement error, the interaction between my cross-sectional
RD treatment variable Dj and the prediction market price change, ✓t , results in lower
attenuation bias than if the prediction market price change were uninteracted. Third, I
derive the resulting bias in in the presence of multiplicative bias.
    Table A.2 provides indirect tests of whether multiplicative bias in the prediction market
price a↵ects my RD estimate. Each column shows an interacted version of Eq. 7:

     rijt =   1 Dj   ✓t +   2 Dj   ✓t Wt + f (EIj ) ✓t + f (EIj ) ✓t Wt + Zit   i   + ✏ijt   (12)

where Wt is a time-series variable that captures the competitiveness of the prediction market
during date t. 2 is now the coefficient of interest and indicates whether the estimated
discontinuity is a↵ected by the presence of potential distortions in the prediction market.
Table A.2 shows results from models with firm and date fixed e↵ects with both a linear and
quadratic term for energy intensity. Column (1) replicates the main uninteracted coefficient
from Eq. 7. In Column (2) I include an interaction with the total trading volume for the
2-day period. The interacted coefficient is close to zero and statistically insignificant while
the uninteracted coefficient is similar to that in Column (1) for both linear and quadratic
models. Transaction-level data revealed the presence of 2 large traders. One large trader,
a major buyer, was responsible for 38% of all contracts sold before the contract expired.


                                                19
Another large trader was responsible for 22% of all contracts purchased. In Column (3) I
examine the potential role of the two large volume traders by including an interaction with
trading volume attributed to these two individuals. Again, the interacted coefficient is nearly
zero and statistically insignificant while the uninteracted coefficient is similarly to that in
Column (1). Simply considering the involvement of these two large traders, however, does
not preclude other trading days in which the market was dominated by relatively few traders.
Using transaction-level data with unique trader identifiers, I construct a daily buyer-based
normalized Herfindahl-Hirshman Index.36 This index captures the relative competitiveness
of the prediction market for any given day and provides my most stringent test, shown in
Column (4). For the linear model, I detect an uninteracted term that is similar in magnitude
to that in Column (1) though it itself is statistically insignificant. Importantly, I do not
detect a statistically significant interaction term. Coefficients for the quadratic model are
also not statistically significant though point estimates are now of larger magnitude. Finally,
in Columns (5) and (6) I split my sample into 2009 and 2010 trading days. I do not find that
estimates of from each subsample di↵er much in magnitude from the full sample estimate
in Column (1).

Concerns over prediction market expiration                        Another source of multiplicative bias
may arise from Intrade contract expiration. The cap-and-trade prediction market used for
this analysis expired on December 31, 2010, regardless of whether cap-and-trade regulation
were to eventually pass Congress. Thus, while the prospects of cap-and-trade realization
might indeed be declining in 2010, a component of the price movements shown in Figure 1
might also reflect expectations that policy realization is unlikely to occur before the end of
2010. In practice this was unlikely, as any legislation, having failed in the current Congress, is
rarely reintroduced with identical features in a subsequent Congress. However, it is difficult
to ascertain whether markets expected Waxman-Markey prospects to exist following the end
of the 111th Congress. If so, a bias is introduced between the prediction market price and
average market beliefs which increases as the expiration date nears. In Appendix C, I detail
an adjustment procedure to separate average market beliefs, the true variable of interest,
from concerns over contract expiration. This procedure uses information from a similar
Intrade prediction market with an earlier expiration date at the end of 2009 (see Figure
A.3). Under certain additional assumptions, I can use the period of overlap between the
2009 and 2010 expiring contracts to separate the e↵ects of concerns over contract expiration
with the true market belief in cap-and-trade prospects.
   In Table A.3, I find that adjusting for contract expiration yields estimates of that are
similar to my main result. While these estimates are slightly smaller in magnitude, they fall
   36 Formally, for trading day t, there are j = 1...J traders each purchasing s
                                                      t                          jt share of all contracts trans-
                                                                         H   1/J
acted that day. The normalized Herfindahl-Hirshman Index is Ht⇤ = 1t 1/J t where H is the Herfindahl-
                         P                                                      t
Hirshman Index, Ht = j s2jt .


                                                       20
well within the uncertainty of my main results shown in Table 1. This is possible because
whereas the adjustment procedure illustrated in Figure A.5 inflates prediction market price
levels to account for concerns of impending contract expiration, much of this adjustment is
already removed from the unadjusted prediction market price after first di↵erencing.


5     Structural interpretation: marginal abatement cost
      under Waxman Markey
Sections 3 and 4 provided the estimating framework and results for the reduced-form RD
parameter , the di↵erence in stock returns for firms on either side of the free permit thresh-
old under cap-and-trade policies covered by the prediction market relative to other policies.
This section discusses the additional steps required for mapping onto the structural param-
eter of interest: the marginal abatement cost under the Waxman-Markey policy. Because
the Waxman-Markey bill contained auxiliary abatement policies that may induce additional
reductions in capped sectors, my recovered parameter corresponds to the cost of meeting the
cap, conditional on these other policies; and may not equal the U.S. economy-wide marginal
abatement cost. For comparison purposes, most analyses obtained from CGE models will
also model the presence of these auxiliary policies.
    This section has five parts. First, I introduce a benchmark model of cap-and-trade reg-
ulation. Second, I consider two assumptions, one restricting variation in key features across
cap-and-trade policies covered by the prediction market and another restricting variation
in permit prices across trading dates. Third, I discuss a bounding analysis for the cumula-
tive free permits expected by a treated firm to recover bounds on the marginal abatements
cost under Waxman-Markey. Fourth, I consider two deviations from the benchmark model
that may be relevant for the Waxman-Markey bill. Finally, I compare my range of implied
Waxman-Markey marginal abatement costs with that estimated by prominent CGE models.


5.1    Mapping reduced-form onto structural parameters
Under standard theoretical assumptions, the equilibrium permit price of a cap-and-trade
policy during any period equals that period’s overall marginal abatement cost of meeting
the policy’s aggregate cap (see Appendix A.1 for full derivation) (Montgomery, 1972). Fur-
thermore, a cap-and-trade policy with unlimited permit borrowing and banking over time
results in permit prices that follow Hotelling’s rule (Hotelling, 1931), rising at the (exoge-
nous) interest rate. This implies that only knowing the first period permit price, ⌧0 , is
adequate for the time path of the overall marginal abatement cost. Thus, my structural
parameter of interest is ⌧0 (w), the first period permit price under Waxman-Markey, p = w.
    I consider a standard model of cap-and-trade regulation which depletes a fixed stock



                                             21
of aggregate emissions over the lifetime of the policy, y 2 [0, Y ]. Following Rubin (1996),
output and permit markets are perfectly competitive, free permits are allocated in a lump-
sum manner, and there is unlimited permit banking and borrowing over time. Section 5.3
explores implications when the second and third conditions are violated. For any single
cap-and-trade policy covered by the prediction market, p 2 W, optimal value for firm i in
sector j during trading date t is (see Appendix A for full derivation):

                     vijt (p) = ⌧t0 (p)Aij (p)1{j 2 F (p)}
                                Z Y                              Z       Y
                              +      e y ⇡(x⇤ijty (p))dy ⌧t0 (p)             x⇤ijty (p)dy            (13)
                                 0                                   0

where Aij is the cumulative free permits granted to firm i over the lifetime of the policy and,
as in Section 3.1, F denotes the sectors receiving free permits. is the exogenous interest
rate, ⇡() is a general concave instantaneous profit function, and x⇤ijty is optimal emissions.
Notice that there are two di↵erences between the first period permit price in Eq. 13 and my
structural parameter of interest, the trading date-invariant first period permit price under
Waxman-Markey. First, because the cap-and-trade prediction market did not specify the
Waxman-Markey bill, ⌧t0 (p) is indexed by policy p 2 W, which may contain other policies
besides Waxman-Markey. Second, ⌧t0 (p) is indexed by trading date t.
   To recover ⌧0 (w), I turn to two additional assumptions.

Assumption 3: (Homogeneity in cap-and-trade policies)
        a) F (p) = F (w) 8p 2 W
        b) Aij (p) = Aij (w) 8i, p 2 W
        c) ⌧t0 (p) = ⌧t0 (w) 8p 2 W

Assumption 3 states that the various cap-and-trade policies covered by the prediction market
contract exhibit the same free permit rule, firm-level cumulative free permits, and first
period permit price. While it is impossible to identify each element of the set of cap-and
trade policies, W, believed by market participants to be covered by the prediction market,
two arguments are provided in favor of this assumption. First, as discussed in Section 2.1,
the two most notable cap-and-trade policies considered by the 111th Senate contained key
features that were identical to that found in Waxman-Markey. Specifically, the Kerry-Boxer
and Kerry-Lieberman bills had identical free permit rules, consistent with Assumptions 3a
and 3b. Furthermore, these Senate bills had similar provisions that would have a↵ected
permit prices such as sectoral coverage, cap schedules, international o↵set, and domestic
o↵set provisions, consistent with Assumption 3c (see Appendix F and Table A.4). Second,
the placebo tests shown in Table 4 did not detect jumps in energy intensity at thresholds
greater or less than 5% energy intensity, consistent with Assumption 3a.37
  37 Notice   that Assumption 3 is less restrictive than assuming that the cap-and-trade e↵ect be the same
for all policies covered by the prediction market.


                                                   22
    For firms receiving free permits, Assumption 3 allows the cap-and-trade e↵ect, first
introduced in Eq. 2, to be interpreted as the Waxman-Markey e↵ect. Applying Eq. 13:

                                             RY                                      RY
            ⌧t0 (w)Aij (w)1{j 2 F (w)}        0
                                                  e    y
                                                           ⇡(x⇤ijty (w))dy ⌧0t (w)   0
                                                                                          x⇤ijty (w)dy
    ijt   =                            +                                                                 1
                      vijt (O)                                          vijt (O)
                                                                                       (14)
which is the structural analog to the reduced-form expression in Eq. 4. The first term cap-
tures the discounted value of cumulative free permits under Waxman-Markey. The second
and third terms capture all other changes in stock returns under the policy, corresponding
to ⌘ijt in Eq. 4.
    The first period permit price in Eq. 14 is indexed by trading date t and reflect the role of
daily aggregate shocks during 2009-2010 that may a↵ect expectations over future abatement
costs. To recover a trading date invariant first period permit price, I further assume that
daily aggregate shocks do not systematically a↵ect both the Waxman-Markey first period
permit price and firm value in the absence of Waxman-Markey. Consider the following
decomposition, ⌧t0 (w) = ⌧0 (w) + ⇠t , with Et (⇠t ) = 0. Assumption 4 formally states:

Assumption 4: (Uncorrelated permit price) cov(⇠t , vijt1 (O )) = 0

In the context of the schematic in Figure 2, Assumption 4 requires that day-to-day vertical
shifts in the conditional mean function in the absence of cap-and-trade policy, E[ri |p =
o, EIj ], are uncorrelated with vertical shifts in . In other words, aggregate determinants of
baseline firm value absent cap-and-trade should not be systematically related to the demand
for permits under cap-and-trade.38 The strongest evidence in favor of this assumption comes
from the stability of the RD parameter across di↵erent trading date controls, as shown down
each panel of Table 1. In particular, the RD parameter is similar whether one omits trading
date fixed e↵ects (Panels A-C), controls for trading date fixed e↵ects (Panel D), or control
for trading date-by-sector fixed e↵ects (Panel F). One can now write the following mapping
between the reduced form RD parameter , which takes expectations across firms i and
trading date t, and the first period permit price under Waxman-Markey:




   38 As an example, consider a regulated oil-consuming manufacturing firm facing two types of aggregate

shocks: a drop in oil prices and an increase in aggregate demand. The value of the firm should rise in both
cases but permit prices may change in di↵erent directions. If lower oil prices induce fuel-switching away
from coal-fired electricity, permit prices will drop from lower permit demand from the electricity sector.
On the other hand, an increase in aggregate demand would increase emissions and permit demand, raising
permit prices.


                                                      23
       
ˆ =Eit ⌧0t (w)Aij (w)                                                                                                  (15)
           vijt (O)
                     
                        1 + ijt ✓t
  =⌧0 (w)Ei Aij (w)Et                                                                                                   (16)
                            vijt
                                                                                     "             "               ##!
                            1      ˆ               ✓t                                                      f\
                                                                                                            (EIj )✓t
  =⌧0 (w) Ei Aij (w)Et           + Ei Aij (w)Et                                + Ei Aij (w)Et
                           vijt                   ⌫ijt                                                       vijt
                                                                                                                       (17)
where Eq. 16 employs the Law of Iterated Expectations, Assumption 4, and substitutes
vijt (O) using Eq. 1. Eq. 17 applies the estimating equation for ijt from Eq. 11 (see
Appendix A.2 for detailed steps). Rearranging Eq. 17 in terms of ⌧0 (w) and replacing
expectations with sample means:

⌧0 (w) =
                                                              ˆ
    PN h                PT         i           PN h               PT            i        PN h                     PT t i
1
N     i    Aij (w) T1    i
                                1
                             [ vijt ] + ˆ N1    i   Aij (w) T1     i   [ v✓ijt
                                                                            t
                                                                               ] +   1
                                                                                     N       i   Aij (w)f\
                                                                                                         (EIj ) T1 i [ v✓ijt ]
                                                                                           (18)
where N and T are the number of treated firms and trading days in the estimation sample,
respectively. Observe that every term in Eq. 18 is either directly observed (i.e. vijt , ✓t ) or
estimated (i.e. ˆ, f\
                    (EIj )) with the exception of Aij (w), the firm-level cumulative number
of free permits. I now turn to a bounding procedure for Aij (w).


5.2       Bounding cumulative free permits
There are two broad approaches for obtaining Aij (w). One approach is to explicitly model
firm-level emissions from 2012-2025, the period during which free permits are granted. This
requires knowing the primitive parameters that determine future emissions. An alternative
approach is to provide reasonable bounds for Aij (w) using recent emission trends. I pur-
sue this latter approach by employing “worse” and “best” case scenarios as discussed by
Horowitz and Manski (2000). Specifically, I look to historical data and obtain the highest
and lowest rates of emission decline observed for manufacturing subsectors during 2006-
2010.39 I then apply either of these two rates uniformly to all treated firms in my sample
from 2012-2025 to generate emission paths, and thus cumulative free permits. For this ex-
ercise to be valid, I am implicitly assuming that actual average emissions for sample firms
during 2012-2025 must not decline faster (slower) than the single fastest (slowest) emission
declining subsector during 2006-2010. The first and second columns of Table 5 display rates
   39 It is highly unlikely that emission levels should increase on average for manufacturing firms under a

cap-and-trade policy. In theory, under any strictly positive permit price, all firms, regardless of permit
allocation and marginal abatement cost, should weakly decrease emissions relative to business as usual.


                                                         24
of emission decline for available manufacturing subsectors during 2006-2010. During this
recent period, the petroleum refinery sector (NAICS 324110) experienced the lowest drop
at -0.7% while the textiles sector (NAICS 313-316) experience the highest drop at -19.3%
annually. Notice that because Aij appears in the denominator of Eq. 18, a slower rate of
emission decline implies a higher Aij and thus a lower ⌧0 (w).40
    Specifically, my bounding analysis follows three steps. First, I obtain 2011 average firm-
level emissions for all 6-digit NAICS manufacturing sub-sectors receiving free permits. 2006
was the last year with available sub-sector emissions which I divide by the number of firms
in 2006 to get average firm-level emissions. To obtain 2011 sub-sector average firm-level
emissions, I reduce 2006 values by a uniform rate of 1.5% annually, the rate of change for
the overall NAICS 31-33 manufacturing sector.41 Second, for the 2012-2025 period under
Waxman-Markey, I assume that annual emission rates for all treated firms follow that of the
fastest or slowest declining manufacturing subsector during 2006-2010. Third, for the 2026-
2035 period, I impose an annual reduction of 10% in 2026, 20% in 2027, up to a complete
100% phase-out by 2035, as specified by Waxman-Markey.
   To illustrate this procedure, Figure A.6 plots the permits received for an average firm in
the Plastics Material and Resin Manufacturing subsector under a worst-case annual emission
rate of -0.7% (petroleum refinery) and a best-case annual emission rate of -19.3% (textiles).
Also included are the annual permit paths under annual emission rates of -1.5% (all manu-
facturing), -7.6% (aluminum), -13.9% (transport), and -35% for the 2012-2025 period. The
vertical line marks the start of the policy such that the area under each curve represents
cumulative free permits, Aij (w), associated with each assumed emission rate.
   Table 5 displays the corresponding implied first period permit price, or marginal abate-
ment cost, using Eq. 18 with ˆ and f\   (EIj )) obtained from the panel data model shown
in Panel (C), Row (1), Column (5) of Table 1.42 The reported 90% confidence interval is
obtained via Monte Carlo draws from the estimated joint variance-covariance matrix of ˆ
and f\
     (EIj )). The marginal abatement cost, shown in 2009 US dollars, are for 2015 under an
assumed annual interest rate   of 5%.43 I recover a lower bound marginal abatement cost of
$4.88 when assuming emissions from all treated firms decline under Waxman-Markey at the
recent rate of the worst performing manufacturing subsector. Similarly, I recover an upper

   40 Similarly, it is possible that markets expected future policy revisions to extend the duration of the free

permit rule beyond 2035 such that Aij increases, implying a lower ⌧0 (w). Ideally, such a scenario would not
lead to values below my lower bound for ⌧0 (w).
   41 Greenhouse gas emission levels for all 6-digit NAICS subsectors are available for 2006 from EPA (2009).

Later data is available from the U.S. D.O.E. for 2010 and covers only emissions for the overall manufacturing
sector (NAICS 31-33) and for a dozen select manufacturing subsectors. Thus, I am unable to observe rates
of emission change for all 6-digit NAICS subsectors after 2006. See Appendix D for more data details.
   42 The panel models using Fama-French factors and trading date fixed e↵ects produce nearly identical

point estimates and uncertainty for . However, the panel model with date fixed e↵ects does not separately
identify the intercept in f\ (EIj )) and so cannot be used to recover ⌧0 (w).
   43 For comparison purposes, an interest rate of 5% is chosen because it is the mean interest rate amongst

the CGE models discussed in Section 5.4.


                                                      25
bound of $18.65 when applying the recent rate of the best performing subsector. I recover
marginal abatement costs exceeding $25 per ton of CO2 e only when assuming emission
decline rates lower than -25% per year.


5.3     Deviations from the benchmark model
I now turn to potential biases in the recovered Waxman-Markey first period permit price,
⌧0 (w) from two violations of the benchmark cap-and-trade model in Section 5.1.

Restrictions on permit borrowing The benchmark cap-and-trade model assumes un-
restricted banking and borrowing of permits. While permit banking is unlimited under
Waxman-Markey, a firm would incur a ⇢ = .08% annual borrowing cost for each borrowed
permit. For example, if a firm chooses to use one 2016-vintaged permit for 2015 compliance,
it must retire (i.e. not use for compliance) 1.08 2016-vintaged permits in 2016. Similarly,
if that firm uses one 2017-vintaged permit for 2015 compliance, it must retire 1.16 2017-
vintaged permits in 2017.44
    Unfortunately, knowing when the borrowing restriction would bind requires accurate
forecasts of permit demand during the policy. As with Section 5.2, I consider an alternative
bounding approach. If the borrowing restriction never binds, then the permit price rises at
the rate of interest as in the benchmark model. If, however, this restriction were to bind
during any period, the permit price would rise during that period at less than the interest
rate (Rubin, 1996; Schennach, 2000). Thus, assuming that the borrowing restriction binds
in every period would generate an upper bound on the implied first period permit price.
    Appendix A.3 formally details the implication of borrowing restrictions in an extended
cap-and-trade model with vintage-specific permits. Define ⌧vyt as the permit price of vintage
v in period y on trading date t. When the borrowing restriction binds in every period, Eq.
15, becomes:
                                        "        Z Y                            #
                                 ˆ = Eit ⌧00 (w)      e       ⇢y
                                                                   Aijy (w)dy                             (19)
                                          vij (O) y=0

which, for a given value of ˆ, implies a higher first period permit price than if borrowing
was unrestricted. Table A.6 replicates Table 5 in the main text showing the recovered
first period permit price assuming that the borrowing restriction binds in all periods. The
resulting lower and upper bound marginal abatement costs are $8.41 and $24.29 per ton
CO2 e in 2015, or $3.53 and $5.64 higher than under unlimited permit borrowing.

   44 Technically, there are two further restrictions. First, vintaged permits 5 years beyond the current

compliance period cannot be borrowed and at most 15% of total compliance in any year can be met using
borrowed permits. For the sake of simplicity, I do not model these additional restrictions which would result
in higher implied initial period permit prices. However, it is unclear if these additional constraints will ever
bind during the lifetime of the policy.


                                                      26
Output-based allocation The benchmark cap-and-trade model assumes that permits
are allocated in a lump-sum manner, under which firms face the same marginal incentives
regardless of permit allocation.45 In reality, the Waxman-Markey bill allocates free permits
based on an output-based allocation rule which can a↵ect firm-level output in the short run
as well as exit decisions in the long-run. The rule states that free permits received by firm
i in sector j year y is determined by:
                                                            Xjy
                                          Aijy (w) = qijy                                             (20)
                                                            Qjy
where qijy is output of firm i in year y and Xjy and Qjy are total emissions and output in
sector j such that Xjy /Qjy is sector-level emissions intensity.46
    Under output-based allocation, the allocation of free permits is no longer exogenous
to the firm as it now faces an additional incentive to increase output. This implies that,
all things equal, firms that receive free permits would also have higher output such that
one can no longer attribute the RD parameter entirely to the allocation of free permits.
Appendix A.3 formally shows that in the short run without firm exits and the long run
with possible exits, output-based allocation generates a downward bias in my estimates of
and my recovered permit price. Obtaining the magnitude of this bias requires knowing the
concavity of the production function and expectations over future output and input prices.


5.4     Comparison with CGE estimates
To date, multi-sector computable general equilibrium (CGE) models are the prevailing tech-
nique for estimating the marginal abatement cost of proposed cap-and-trade policies (see
Appendix G for a summary) and thus serve as a potential benchmark for my estimates.
These models examine the cost of a specific policy through a structural representation of
the economy with various primitive parameters that capture, inter alia, expected future
prices, demand elasticities, and technological change. While one may attribute di↵erences
between my estimates and that of CGE models to varying information sets, it is important
first to note other potential di↵erences between these two methods.
    First, the policy of interest may di↵er. CGE models estimate the marginal abatement
cost of a known policy. The estimates from this paper correspond to the marginal cost of
a policy which markets expected to be implemented. While the presence of a discontinuity
at 5% energy intensity gives confidence that markets expected this unique feature of the
Waxman-Markey bill, I cannot confirm that markets expected the realized policy to adhere
strictly to the Waxman-Markey bill over its 35 year lifetime. If market expected key features

  45 This  is also referred to as the Coase Independence Theorem.
  46 Technically,  Waxman-Markey requires that the average output over the previous two periods be used
to determine current period free permits. I do not consider this for ease of exposition as implications are
unaltered.


                                                    27
to be altered at any point during implementation, my estimate would correspond to a policy
that is di↵erent from Waxman-Markey.
    Second, some CGE models analyze the total costs of a stand-alone cap-and-trade policy.
My estimate recovers the permit price from Waxman-Markey’s cap-and-trade system in
conjunction with the suite of auxiliary climate-related policies expected under Waxman-
Markey. If such policies induce carbon abatement options that the cap-and-trade system
alone would not induce, then my estimate corresponds to the marginal abatement cost of
meeting the cap rather than the economy-wide marginal abatement cost generated by CGE
models examining just the cap-and-trade component of Waxman-Markey.
   Third, even if the policy of interest were the same, the unit of analysis may di↵er. My
analysis is conducted at the firm level and thus cannot exclude non-U.S. e↵ects on firms
with international operations nor does it capture dynamics of firm entry within a sector.47
   Table A.5 summarizes the 2015 Waxman-Markey marginal abatement cost estimated by
prominent CGE models (see Appendix G for a summary of these models). For each estimate,
I indicate the name and sector of the funding institution, the name and scenario of the
CGE model employed, whether the model allows perfect foresight, and whether the analysis
includes non-cap-and-trade components of Waxman-Markey. The unconditional mean CGE
estimate of the 2015 marginal abatement cost is $21.42 per ton CO2 e with a minimum
and maximum of $7.99 and $37.73 respectively. Di↵erences across a few characteristics are
worth noting. First, for models that examine multiple scenarios such as the NEMS and
EPPA models, assuming full usage of o↵sets yields lower estimates. Second, there does not
seem to be a large di↵erence in estimates between myopic CGE models and those that have
perfect foresight. Third, CGE models that include other components of Waxman-Markey
tend to produce higher estimates. Finally, estimates funded by private institutions are
higher on average than those funded by academic or governmental institutions.
    Figure 6 compares the CGE estimated marginal abatement cost shown in Table A.5
with the lower and upper bound estimates generated from my approach. The range of my
estimates falls below the unconditional mean of CGE estimates and substantially overlaps
with the lower estimates generated by CGE models funded by academic and governmental
institutions.48 In order for my method to imply the higher marginal abatement costs esti-
mated by privately funded CGE models, I need to assume annual rates of emission decline
for all treated firms at or above the best performing manufacturing subsector over recent
years. The overall comparison is similar when using the higher range of estimates in Table
A.6 under the assumption of fully binding borrowing restrictions.


  47 Ryan (2012) shows that the latter is particularly relevant for estimating the cost of the 1990 Clean Air

Act Amendments on the US cement industry.
  48 My method relies heavily on the efficient market hypothesis. One implication is that market participants

may be looking to CGE analyses to inform their trading behavior. Such informational dependence may
explain for the close alignment between my estimates and that of certain CGE models.


                                                     28
6     Discussion
This paper develops an empirical method for forecasting the market-expected marginal
abatement cost of a proposed climate policy, a central parameter for cost-benefit analysis.
This method is enabled by three features of the Waxman-Markey climate bill, the most
promising, though ultimately unsuccessful, U.S. climate policy considered to date. First,
the centerpiece of the Waxman-Markey bill was a cap-and-trade system under which the
equilibrium permit price, if observed, would be equal to the marginal abatement cost of
the policy. Second, Waxman-Markey specified an unprecedented rule for allocating certain
firms free permits which can be exploited using a regression discontinuity design. Finally,
the availability of a prediction market tied to the Waxman-Markey policy allows one to
recover the market-expected e↵ect of the policy on stock returns, even if the policy was
never realized. A final bounding analysis produces a range for the market-expected marginal
abatement cost under Waxman-Markey in 2015 between $5 and $19 per ton of CO2 e.
    To date, nearly all forecasts of the marginal abatement cost of climate policy are gener-
ated by computable general equilibrium models. My approach yields a range of estimates
under Waxman-Markey that is both more narrow in spread and below the mean of CGE
analyses of the Waxman-Markey bill. Interestingly, my estimates are within the range of the
lower estimates generated by CGE analyses funded by academic and governmental institu-
tions. This suggests that it is unlikely markets expected the higher range of cost estimates
generated by privately-funded CGE models.
    While the method developed in this paper has the advantage of being empirically-driven,
it should not be viewed as a substitute for CGE models. My method recovers the marginal
abatement cost of the policy that markets expected would be implemented, which may not
correspond exactly to the Waxman-Markey bill. Furthermore, while this paper may help
narrow uncertainty regarding the level of the marginal abatement cost curve, it does not
inform upon its slope which is necessary for optimal climate policy design. CGE models,
on the other hand, structurally evaluate cap-and-trade policies for a known policy and can
evaluate counterfactual policies along di↵erent abatement levels. It is possible, however,
that these two methods serve complementary roles during future climate policy debates.
For example, one can now conduct model selection by ruling out CGE models or a subset of
the parameter space for a given model that produce estimates which greatly diverge from a
market-based estimate. This opportunity for model validation may lend greater credibility
to CGE-generated counterfactual analyses.




                                             29
References
Acemoglu, Daron., Philippe. Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous.
 2012. “The Environment and Directed Technical Change.” American Economic Review,
 102(1): 131–66.

Aldy, Joseph E., Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W. H. Parry, and
 William A. Pizer. 2010. “Designing Climate Mitigation Policy.” Journal of Economic
 Literature, 48(4): 903–934.

Aldy, Joseph E., and William A. Pizer. 2015. “The Competitiveness Impacts of Climate
 Change Mitigation Policies.” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
 Economists, 2(4): 565–595.

Anderson, Soren T., and James M. Sallee. 2011. “Using Loopholes to Reveal the
 Marginal Cost of Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards.” American Economic
 Review, 101(4): 1375–1409.

Blanes i Vidal, Jordi, Mirko Draca, and Christian Fons-Rosen. 2012. “Revolving
  Door Lobbyists.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3731–48.

Bovenberg, A Lans, and Lawrence H Goulder. 1996. “Optimal environmental taxation
 in the presence of other taxes: general-equilibrium analyses.” The American Economic
 Review, 86(4): 985–1000.

Buonanno, Paulo, Carlo Carraro, and Marzio Galeotti. 2003. “Endogenous Induced
 Technical Change and the Costs of Kyoto.” Resource and Energy Economics, 25: 11–34.

Bushnell, James B., Howard Chong, and Erin T. Mansur. 2013. “Profiting from
 Regulation: Evidence from the European Carbon Market.” American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy, 5(4): 78–106.

Camerer, Colin F. 1998. “Can Asset Markets Be Manipulated? A Field Experiment with
 Racetrack Betting.” Journal of Political Economy, 106(3): pp. 457–482.

Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen Palmer. 2000.
 “Sulfur Dioxide Control by Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?” Journal
 of Political Economy, 108(6): 1292–1326.

Chetty, Raj. 2009. “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural
 and Reduced-Form Methods.” Annual Review of Economics, 1(1): 451–488.

Coase, Ronald H. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics,
 3: 1–44.

Cullen, Joseph A. 2013. “Dynamic Response to Environmental Regulation in Electricity
 Markets.” mimeo.

Cullen, Joseph A., and Erin T. Mansur. 2014. “Inferring Carbon Abatement Costs
 in Electricity Markets: A Revealed Preference Approach using the Shale Revolution.”
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20795.




                                            30
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature
 Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3): 66–95.

Deschênes, Olivier. 2011. “Climate Policy and Labor Markets.” The Design and Imple-
 mentation of U.S. Climate Policy, 37–49. University of Chicago Press.

Deschênes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “The Economic Impacts of Cli-
 mate Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather.”
 American Economic Review, 97(1): 354–385.

Deschênes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality, and
 Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the U.S.” American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4): 152–185.

Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, Richard Schmalensee, Juan-Pablo Mon-
  tero, and Elizabeth M. Bailey. 2000. Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain
  Program. Cambridge University Press.

EPA, U.S. 2009. “Interagency Report on International Competitiveness and Emission
 Leakage.”

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1993. “Common risk factors in the returns
  on stocks and bonds.” Journal of Financial Economics, 33: 3–56.

Fawcett, Allen A., Katherine V. Calvin, and Francisco C. de la Chesnaye. 2009.
  “Overview of EMF 22 U.S. transition scenarios.” Energy Economics.

Feng, Shuaizhang, Michael Oppenheimer, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2012. “Climate
  Change, Crop Yields, and Internal Migration in the United States.” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 17734.
Fowlie, Meredith, and Je↵rey M. Perlo↵. 2013. “Distributing Pollution Rights in Cap-
  and-Trade Programs: Are Outcomes Independent of Allocation?” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 95(5): 1640–1652.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Stephen H. Schneider. 1999. “Induced Technical Change
 and the Attractiveness of CO2 Abatement Policies.” Resource and Energy Economics,
 21: 211–253.

Gra↵ Zivin, Josh, and Matthew Neidell. 2010. “Temperature and the Allocation of
 Time: Implications for Climate Change.” Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Greenstone, Michael, John A. List, and Chad Syverson. 2012. “The E↵ects of Envi-
 ronmental Regulation on the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing.” National Bureau
 of Economic Research Working Paper 18392.

Hadri, Kaddour. 2000. “Testing for stationarity in heterogeneous panel data.” The Econo-
 metrics Journal, 3(2): 148–161.

Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and
 Estimation of Treatment E↵ects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica,
 69(1): pp. 201–209.


                                          31
Hahn, Robert W., and Robert N. Stavins. 2011. “The E↵ect of Allowance Allo-
 cations on Cap-and-Trade System Performance.” The Journal of Law and Economics,
 54(S4): S267–S294.

Hanson, Robin, Ryan Opera, Hibbert Chris Porter, David, and Dorina Tila.
 2011. “Can Manipulators Mislead Prediction Market Observers?” mimeo.

Hayek, F. A. 1945. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” The American Economic Review,
 35(4): pp. 519–530.

Hicks, John. 1932. The Theory of Wages. Macmillan & Co.

Horowitz, Joel L., and Charles F. Manski. 2000. “Nonparametric Analysis of Random-
 ized Experiments with Missing Covariate and Outcome Data.” Journal of the American
 Statistical Association, 95(449): pp. 77–84.

Hotelling, Harold. 1931. “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources.” The Journal of
 Political Economy, 39(2): 137–135.

Hsiang, Solomon M., Kyle C. Meng, and Mark A. Cane. 2011. “Civil conflicts are
 associated with the global climate.” Nature, 476(7361): 438–441.
Hsiang, Solomon M., Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel. 2013. “Quantifying the
 Influence of Climate on Human Conflict.” Science.
Jacoby, Henry D., John M. Reilly, James R. McFarland, and Sergey Paltsev.
  2006. “Technology and technical change in the MIT EPPA model.” Energy Economics,
  28(5-6): 610–631.

Ja↵e, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. 2003. “Technological
  Change and the Environment.” In Handbook of Environmental Economics. , ed. K.-G.
  Mäler and J. R. Vincent, 461–516. Elsevier.

Kolstad, Charles D., Gilbert E. Metcalf, Ian Sue Wing, and Roberton C.
 Williams. 2010. “Peer Review of Computable General Equilibrium Models for Climate
 Change Analysis.” Environmental Protection Agency.

Lange, Ian, and Joshua Linn. 2008. “Bush v. Gore and the E↵ect of New Source Review
  on Power Plant Emissions.” Environmental and Resource Economics, 40(4): 571–591.

Lemoine, Derek. 2016. “Green Expectations: Current E↵ects of Anticipated Carbon Pric-
  ing.” Review of Economics and Statistics.

Linn, Joshua. 2010. “The e↵ect of cap-and-trade programs on firms’ profits: Evidence from
  the Nitrogen Oxides Budget Trading Program.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management, 59(1): 1–14.

McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression disconti-
 nuity design: A density test.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698 – 714.
Montgomery, W. David. 1972. “Markets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control
 Programs.” Journal of Economic Theory, 5(3): 395 – 418.



                                           32
Nordhaus, William D. 2002. “Modeling Induced Innovation in Climate Change Policy.”
 In Technological Change and the Environment. , ed. A. N. Nakicenovic and W. Nordhaus.
 Resources for the Future Press.
Ranson, Matthew, and Robert N. Stavins. 2015. “Linkage of greenhouse gas emissions
 trading systems: learning from experience.” Climate Policy, 1–17.
Rhode, Paul W., and Koleman S. Strumpf. 2004. “Historical Presidential Betting
 Markets.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(2): 127–141.
Rhode, Paul W., and Koleman S. Strumpf. 2008. “Manipulating Political Stock Mar-
 kets: A Field Experiment and a Century of Observational Data.” Working Paper.
Robin, H., R. Oprea, and D. Porter. 2006. “Information Aggregation and Manipulation
 in an Experimental Market.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 60(4): 449
 – 459.
Rothschild, David M., and Rajiv Sethi. 2016. “Trading Strategies and Market Mi-
 crostructure: Evidence from a Prediction Market.” Journal of Prediction Markets, 10(1).
Rubin, Jonathan D. 1996. “A Model of Intertemporal Emission Trading, Banking, and
 Borrowing.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 31(3): 269 – 286.
Ryan, Stephen P. 2012. “The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated
 Industry.” Econometrica, 80(3): 1019–1061.
Schennach, Susanne M. 2000. “The Economics of Pollution Permit Banking in the Con-
  text of Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments.” Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management, 40(3): 189–210.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear Temperature E↵ects
  indicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change.” Proceedings from
  the National Academy of Science, 106(37): 15594–8.
Schlenker, W., W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. 2005. “Will U.S.
  Agriculture Really Benefit from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedo-
  nic Approach.” The American Economic Review, 95(1): 395–406.
Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz. 2007. “Partisan Impacts on
  the Economy: Evidence from Prediction Markets and Close Elections.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 122(2): 807–829.
Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz. 2013. “Prediction Markets for
  Economic Forecasting.” In Handbook of Economic Forecasting. Vol. 2, Part A of Handbook
  of Economic Forecasting, , ed. Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, 657–687. Elsevier.
Stavins, Robert N. 1998. “What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment?
  Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(3): 69–
  88.
Wolfers, Justin, and Eric Zitzewitz. 2006. “Interpreting Prediction Market Prices as
 Probabilities.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12200.
Wolfers, Justin, and Eric Zitzewitz. 2009. “Using Markets to Inform Policy: The Case
 of the Iraq War.” Economica, 76(302): 225–250.


                                          33
Figures

                                                                  Figure 1: Cap-and-trade prediction market prices
                                                  .6
   Intrade price (prob. of Waxman-Markey passage)
         .1        .2       .3
                             0    .4      .5




                                                              1                2     3   45      6   7    8    9

                                                       May9       Aug9       Nov9        Feb10    May10       Aug10   Nov10

Notes: Vertical lines mark days with events a↵ecting cap-and-trade prospects. (1) 6/26/2009: House passes
Waxman-Markey. (2) 11/4/2009: Graham joins Senate e↵ort. (3) 12/20/2009: Copenhagen negotiations
concluded. (4) 1/19/2010: Scott Brown wins Mass. Senate seat. (5) 1/27/2010: Graham-Kerry-Lieberman
seeks non cap-and-trade alternatives. (6) 3/31/2010: Obama supports o↵shore drilling. (7) 4/23/2010:
Graham drops support. (8) 6/15/2010: Obama oval office speech. (9) 7/22/2010: Senate drops cap-and-
trade legislation. See Appendix E for further details.




                                                                                         34
                      Figure 2: RDD under realized and unrealized policy




Notes: Panel (A) shows the standard RDD setup under a realized policy. Panel (B) indicates the setup
when policy is never realized. Solid (dashed) lines indicate observed (unobserved) values. See discussion in
Section 3.1.

                                                    35
   Figure 3: Cumulative daily probability unadjusted cap-and-trade e↵ect (2007-2011)



                        .6
        Cumulative daily discontinuity
              0          .2
                        -.2
                        -.4        .4




                                         Jan7     Jan8           Jan9           Jan10            Jan11
Notes: Daily probability unadjusted cap-and-trade e↵ect, t , estimated using Eq. 8 over 2007-2011. Vertical
red lines denote the 2009-2010 period covering the 111th U.S. Congress.


Figure 4: Daily probability unadjusted cap-and-trade e↵ect vs. prediction market price
change (2009-2010)
                        .04  .02
         Daily discontinuity
                   0




                                                                                               β=0.071
        -.02            -.04




                                            -.1      -.05               0               .05              .1
                                                        Daily prediction market price change
Notes: Scatter shows daily probability unadjusted cap-and-trade e↵ect, t , estimated using Eq. 8 against
daily prediction market price changes within sample period. Linear fit from Eq. 9 shown in solid black line.
                                                                     36
          Figure 5: Discontinuity in cap-and-trade e↵ects at 5% energy intensity




Notes: Triangles indicate local averages of firm-level cap-and-trade e↵ects, ij , estimated using Eq. 10
within a 0.01 wide bin of 6-digit NAICS energy intensity. Solid (dashed) line shows a linear (quadratic)
fit over the unbinned data. Distribution of sample firms by 6-digit NAICS energy intensity shown in gray
histogram.




                                                  37
                                                                       Figure 6: Comparing RD and CGE estimates of Waxman-Markey marginal abatement cost

                                                                        CGE estimates                                                                                                                            Prediction market RD estimates




                                  50      60    70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Glass (3272)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cement (327310)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Textiles (313−316)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport. Equip. (336)




                                                                                                                             Petro. refining (324110)
                                                                                                                            All manufacturing (31−33)




                            40
                                                                                                                                                        Forest products (321, 322)
                                                                                                                                                                                     Alumina & Aluminum (3313)
                                                                                                    ACCF/NEMS (high cost)


                                                                                                    ACCF/NEMS (low cost)




                     30
                                                                                                    NBCC/NEEMS




38
                                                     MIT/EPPA (med offset) EIA/NEMS (med offset)




               20
                                                               EPA/IGEM    EPA/ADAGE                Heritage (IHS)
                                                                           EIA/NEMS (full offset)




          10
                                                                           MIT/EPPA (full offset)




      2015 WM marginal abatement cost (in 2009$)
     0
                                                         Academic/Government Private                                        0                           −5                                              −10     −15        −20         −25                                                           −30   −35
                                                                     Institution                                                                                                                     Assumed annual pct change in free permits

     Notes: Left panel shows estimates for the Waxman-Markey marginal abatement cost in 2015 (in 2009$) for various CGE models by sector of funding
     institution. Each data point is labeled by funding institution/CGE model (model scenario). Right panel shows 2015 marginal abatement cost using the
     prediction market RD method corresponding to the local linear model in Table 1, Panel (C), Row (1), Column (5). Uncertainty generated from Monte-Carlo
     draws of estimated parameters. Each estimate assumes a di↵erent annual rate of change in firm-level emissions. Dashed vertical red lines show emission
     rates for various U.S. manufacturing subsectors during 2006-2010.
Tables
 Table 1: Discontinuity in Waxman-Markey e↵ects at 5% energy intensity threshold

                                                      (1)       (2)    (3)     (4)              (5)
                                                                    Bandwidth
Model                                 Poly. order    2%        2.5%    3%     3.5%             4%
Firm fixed e↵ects                                                       Panel (A)
                                          1          0.087     0.075      0.043      0.067     0.079
                                                    (0.038)   (0.037)    (0.039)    (0.036)   (0.032)
                                          2          -0.027    0.082      0.103      0.073     0.071
                                                    (0.033)   (0.049)    (0.043)    (0.035)   (0.035)
CAPM                                                                    Panel (B)
                                          1          0.089     0.085      0.066      0.078     0.078
                                                    (0.046)   (0.045)    (0.042)    (0.038)   (0.030)
                                          2          -0.046    0.062      0.097      0.084     0.088
                                                    (0.035)   (0.050)    (0.051)    (0.046)   (0.045)
3-factor Fama-French                                                    Panel (C)
                                          1          0.090     0.084      0.057      0.077     0.077
                                                    (0.040)   (0.044)    (0.043)    (0.039)   (0.032)
                                          2          -0.040    0.067      0.104      0.082     0.090
                                                    (0.037)   (0.045)    (0.046)    (0.041)   (0.042)
Firm, date fixed e↵ects                                                 Panel (D)
                                          1          0.087     0.075      0.043      0.066     0.077
                                                    (0.039)   (0.038)    (0.040)    (0.036)   (0.032)
                                          2          -0.027    0.081      0.104      0.073     0.071
                                                    (0.033)   (0.048)    (0.043)    (0.035)   (0.035)
Firm, date fixed e↵ects; oil⇥sector                                     Panel (E)
                                          1          0.091     0.080      0.044      0.066     0.076
                                                    (0.041)   (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.036)   (0.032)
                                          2          -0.032    0.079      0.103      0.073     0.071
                                                    (0.033)   (0.049)    (0.043)    (0.035)   (0.035)
Firm, date⇥sector fixed e↵ects                                          Panel (F)
                                          1          0.064     0.050      0.042      0.071     0.069
                                                    (0.031)   (0.036)    (0.038)    (0.036)   (0.031)
                                          2          0.033     0.087      0.090      0.077     0.079
                                                    (0.058)   (0.051)    (0.039)    (0.036)   (0.038)

Number of firms                                       45       106     202      264       531
Each coefficient shows a separate regression discontinuity estimate of from Eq. 7. Controls for
normal market performance vary by panel. Polynomial order for energy intensity varies by rows
within a panel. Sample bandwidth around the 5% threshold varies across columns. All models
include 109 2-day intervals from May 1, 2009 to July 31, 2010. Robust standard errors clustered
at 6-digit NAICS level in parentheses.




                                           39
                         Table 2: Sector-level covariate balance
                                                 (1)     (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)
                                                                 Bandwidth
Covariate                     Poly. order        2%     2.5%       3%      3.5%         4%
log avg number                                                   Panel (A)
  of workers                       1         1.051      0.669     0.938       0.377     0.448
                                            (1.025)    (1.143)   (0.994)     (0.921)   (0.843)
                                   2         2.576      1.688     1.395       1.292     1.240
                                            (0.911)    (0.931)   (0.876)     (0.812)   (0.830)
Number of sectors                                10      15        25          41        66

log avg number                                                   Panel (B)
  of establishments                1         0.643      0.487     0.755       1.050     1.106
                                            (0.881)    (0.899)   (0.768)     (0.659)   (0.624)
                                   2         1.476      1.160     0.512       0.485     0.887
                                            (1.058)    (0.955)   (0.907)     (0.885)   (0.826)
Number of sectors                                21      29        56          87       133

Herfindahl-Hirschman                                             Panel (C)
  Index                            1         -0.275     -0.258    -0.053      -0.016    -0.084
                                            (0.274)    (0.305)   (0.255)     (0.219)   (0.213)
                                   2         -0.482     -0.319    -0.419      -0.432    -0.303
                                            (0.319)    (0.252)   (0.251)     (0.266)   (0.249)
Number of sectors                                20      28        53          83       126

log Waxman-Markey                                                Panel (D)
  lobbying (nominal $)             1         3.317      2.481     1.998       1.382     1.508
                                            (2.406)    (1.918)   (1.469)     (1.328)   (1.117)
                                   2         -0.473     2.264     3.506       3.215     1.830
                                            (4.506)    (3.934)   (2.806)     (2.269)   (1.926)
Number of sectors                                11      16        31          46        64

log pre-2009 climate policy                                      Panel (E)
  lobbying (nominal $)             1         4.020      3.604     2.267       2.442     2.122
                                            (3.116)    (2.524)   (1.928)     (1.721)   (1.490)
                                   2         4.643      2.072     5.110       3.368     2.871
                                            (6.713)    (4.815)   (3.504)     (3.086)   (2.549)
Number of sectors                              11        15       29      37         48
Each coefficient shows a separate regression discontinuity estimate of from estimating Eq.
11 at the sector level. Sector-level outcomes vary by panel. Functional forms for energy
intensity vary by rows within a panel. Sample bandwidths around the 5% threshold vary
across columns. All models include firm and date fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors
clustered at 6-digit NAICS level in parentheses.




                                            40
                         Table 3: Firm-level covariate balance

                                                   (1)       (2)    (3)     (4)              (5)
                                                                 Bandwidth
Outcome                  Polynomial order         2%        2.5%    3%     3.5%             4%
2007 avg stock returns                                               Panel (A)
                                 1                0.000     0.000      -0.001     -0.001    0.000
                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)
                                 2                -0.001    0.000      0.001      0.000     -0.001
                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.000)   (0.001)

Number of firms                                    44       100        193        253       514
2008 avg stock returns                                               Panel (B)
                                 1                -0.001    -0.000     -0.001     0.000     -0.001
                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)
                                 2                -0.002    -0.001     -0.000     -0.001    -0.000
                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)

Number of firms                                    45       106        202        264       530
2011 avg stock returns                                               Panel (C)
                                 1                -0.000    -0.000     -0.001     -0.001    -0.001
                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)
                                 2                -0.002    -0.001     -0.000     -0.000    0.001
                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)

Number of firms                                 45     106       199      260      518
Each coefficient shows a separate regression discontinuity estimate of   from estimating
Eq. 11 at the firm level. Firm-level outcomes vary by panel. Functional forms for energy
intensity vary by rows within a panel. Sample bandwidths around the 5% threshold vary
across columns. All models include firm and date fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors
clustered at 6-digit NAICS level in parentheses.




                                            41
              Table 4: Placebo tests at di↵erent energy intensity thresholds
                                 (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)
                                         Energy intensity threshold
                                 3%       4%       5%         6%          7%
          Poly. order
          1                     -0.035    -0.020    0.077     0.003      0.055
                               (0.046)   (0.038)   (0.032)   (0.053)    (0.046)
          2                     -0.040    0.029     0.071     -0.011     0.008
                               (0.072)   (0.065)   (0.035)   (0.095)    (0.061)

          Number of firms      1445      1485      531       207         91
          Each coefficient shows a separate regression discontinuity estimate
          of from Eq. 7. Placement of placebo energy intensity threshold
          vary across columns. All models include firm and trading date fixed
          e↵ects within a 4% energy intensity bandwidth. All models include
          109 2-day intervals from May 1, 2009 to July 31, 2010. Robust
          standard errors clustered at 6-digit NAICS level in parentheses.




     Table 5: 2015 marginal abatement cost (in 2009$) implied by RD estimates

Assumed annual              Corresponding
 emissions rate            sector (NAICS)           5th percentile     Mean       95th percentile
        0                         –                      1.26           4.59           7.72
     -0.70%           Petro. refining (324110)           1.33          4.88            8.19
     -1.45%          All manufacturing (31-33)           1.42          5.19            8.72
     -5.20%          Forest products (321, 322)          1.93          7.05           11.84
     -7.60%         Alumina & Aluminum (3313)            2.32          8.49           14.26
    -11.60%              Cement (327310)                  3.1          11.36          19.08
    -12.80%                 Glass (3272)                 3.37          12.34          20.73
    -13.90%           Transport. Equip. (336)            3.63          13.29          22.32
    -19.30%              Textiles (313-316)              5.09          18.65          31.31
      -25%                        –                       6.99         25.57          42.94
      -30%                        –                       8.95         32.78          55.04
      -35%                        –                      11.25         41.18          69.15

First column shows assumed annual emissions rate. Second column shows corresponding man-
ufacturing subsector with 2006-2010 emissions changing at each rate. RD estimates (see Eq.
7) based on Table 1, Panel (C), Row (1), and Column (5)). 90% confidence interval gener-
ated using 250 Monte Carlo draws from estimated parameter and variance-covariance matrix.
Marginal abatement cost recovered using Eq. 18. 5% interest rate assumed.




                                            42
                   Appendix to
     Using a Free Permit Rule to Forecast the
Marginal Abatement Cost of Proposed Climate Policy




        FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION




                        43
Appendix A                A model of cap-and-trade policy
This theoretical appendix serves two purposes. First, I introduce a standard model of cap-
and-trade to establish the canonical “equivalence” result following Rubin (1996)’s dynamic
extension of Montgomery (1972). This states that in a perfectly competitive setting, the
least-cost marginal abatement cost of an economy-wide constraint on greenhouse gas emis-
sions is equal to the equilibrium permit price under a cap-and-trade system with the same
constraint. This provides the theoretical basis for how the initial period permit price can
be recovered using my regression discontinuity design. I then consider the potential biases
in the recovered permit price due to two violations of the standard model present in the
Waxman-Markey bill: restrictions on permit borrowing and output-based permit allocation.


Appendix A.1             Marginal abatement cost and permit price equiva-
                         lence
I first characterize the properties of how a hypothetical regulator could achieve a total level
of emissions abatement over time across heterogeneous firms at least-cost. Because it would
be impractical for any regulator to achieve this allocation, I then demonstrate how a cap-
and-trade system with auctioned or freely allocated permits and unlimited banking and
borrowing of permits can achieve the same allocation. In particular, the equilibrium permit
price from the cap-and-trade system equals the marginal abatement cost of the least-cost
solution to the regulator’s problem.

Regulator’s problem: joint-cost minimization
    There are i = 1...N firms in sector j that, in the aggregate, must deplete a fixed known
stock of R emissions over the period y 2 [0, Y ].49 R is the aggregate emissions constraint,
or cap. Consider an instantaneous profit function, ⇡i (xijy ), that is concave and strictly
increasing in emissions with standard Inada conditions. The regulator’s problem with choice
variable xijy and state variable by is to maximize discounted total profit:50
                                           Z       Y            N
                                                                X
                                                           y
                               maxxijy                 e              ⇡i (xijy )dy
                                               0                i=1
                                                           N
                                                           X
                                  s.t.     ḃy =                 xiy
                                                           i=1
                                           b0 = R,              bY       0,   xijy   0

   49 I assume that cap-and-trade regulation ends in 2050 as written in Waxman-Markey to avoid explicit

assumptions about both business-as-usual emissions and cap-and-trade regulation beyond 2050.
   50 This setup di↵ers from the Rubin (1996) model along two dimensions. First, the objective function

is written in terms of firm profits and not the di↵erence between unconstrained and constrained profits.
Second, I write an equation of motion over depletion rather than accumulation. These choices were made
for expository simplicity and are mathematically immaterial.


                                                           44
where is the exogenously determined rate of interest. Solving the current value Hamilto-
nian yields the following first order conditions:

                                       ⇡i0 (xijy ) = ⇤y 8i                                        (A.1)
                                             ⇤˙ y       ⇤y = 0                                    (A.2)
                                                            Y
                                           ⇤ Y bY e              =0                               (A.3)
where ⇤y is the positive current value shadow price at year y and can be naturally interpreted
as the marginal abatement cost as it corresponds to the marginal profit associated with an
extra unit of allowed emissions under the aggregate cap. Equations A.2-A.3 summarize two
well-established features of this problem. First, a simple rearrangement of Equation A.2
yields Hotelling’s rule (Hotelling, 1931), ⇤y = ⇤0 e y : the marginal abatement cost rises
at the rate of interest. Second, defining the optimal allocation of emissions for the joint
problem Xt⇤⇤ = (x⇤⇤        ⇤⇤
                   1jy ...xN jy ), Hotelling’s rule together with the transversality condition in
                     R Y PN ⇤⇤
Equation A.3 yield 0        i=1 xijy dy = R. That is, total emissions must equal the cap R by
the end of the policy period.

Cap-and-trade
    In practice, implementation of the joint-cost solution requires that the regulator know
a lot of information. In particular, it needs to know the marginal abatement cost curves
of every firm. Alternatively, the regulator can introduce a cap-and-trade system. Here, it’s
role is to create R cumulative permits such that in each period Aijy is given freely to firm
i in sector j 2 F and Aay is auctioned o↵.51 Denote dijy as the number of permits sold
(>0) or purchased (<0). Under the cap-and-trade policy, the firm’s dynamic problem is to
choose xijy and dijy with permit banking:
                                     Z Y
                                                        y
                       maxxijy ,dijy     e                  [⇡i (xijy ) + ⌧y dijy ] dy            (A.4)
                                            0
                               s.t.       ḃijy = Aijy 1{j 2 F }             xijy        dijy
                                          bij0 = 0,             bijY   0,   xijy     0

where ⌧y is the permit price and bijy is the state variable denoting the number of banked
(> 0) or borrowed (< 0) permits carried into the subsequent period. First order conditions
for the current value Hamiltonian are:
                                          ⇡i0 (xijy ) =          ijy                              (A.5)
                                                    ⌧y =         ijy                              (A.6)
                                         ˙ ijy          ijy     =0                                (A.7)
                                                            Y
                                          ijY bY    e           =0                                (A.8)

  51 Observe that Montgomery (1972) and Rubin (1996) assume that all permits are distributed freely, that
is Aa
    y = 0 8y. This is inconsistent with Waxman-Markey.



                                                        45
where ijy is the positive current value shadow price. Defining the market equilibrium as
Xy⇤ = (x⇤1jy ...x⇤N jy ), Dy⇤ = (d⇤1jt ...d⇤N jt ), and ⌧y⇤ and further imposing market clearing and
terminal conditions:
                                                        PN
                                                         i=1   d⇤ijy + Aay = 0 8y                                                      (A.9)
                                               hR       PN                                       i
                                                    Y
                                         ⌧Y⇤        0    i=1 (Aijy           x⇤ijy       d⇤ijy )dy = 0                                (A.10)

Rubin (1996) shows that the market equilibrium satisfying Equations A.5 - A.10 achieves
Xy⇤⇤ = Xy⇤ and ⇤y = ⌧y⇤ for each period y. That is, the decentralized emissions trading
solution yields the same least-cost emissions allocation as the joint cost problem and the
marginal abatement cost obtained from the joint cost problem equals the equilibrium permit
price under cap-and-trade.52
    Next, consider specifically the Waxman-Markey cap-and-trade policy, p = w. Optimal
firm value can be written as:
                 Z       Y           h                                                                                    i
   vij (w) =                 e   y
                                      ⇡(x⇤ijy (w))dy           ⌧y [x⇤ijy (w) + ḃ⇤ijy (w)            Aijy (w)1{j 2 F (w)}] dy
                     0
                                                                     Z       Y                                     Z       Y
            =        ⌧0 (w)Aij (w)1{j 2 F (w)} +                                 e   y
                                                                                         ⇡(x⇤ijy (w))dy   ⌧0 (w)               x⇤ijy (w)dy
                                                                         0                                             0
                                                                                                                                      (A.11)
                         RY
where Aij (w) = 0 Aijy (w)dy is the cumulative number of free permits granted to firm
i over the lifetime of the policy. The second line follows by applying Hotelling’s rule,
⌧y (w) = ⌧0 (w)e y and noting that the boundary conditions on banked emissions imply
RY ⇤
 0
    ḃijy (w)dy = 0. Writing now in terms of firm value relative to expected firm value under
all non-Waxman-Markey policies, we have:
                                                               RY                                         RY
             ⌧0 (w)Aij (w)1{j 2 F (w)}                         0
                                                                    e        y
                                                                                 ⇡(x⇤ijy (w))dy ⌧0 (w)     0
                                                                                                               x⇤ijy (w)dy
      ij   =                           +                                                                                              1
                        vij (O)                                                              vij (O)
                                                                                                                                      (A.12)

which is the trading date-invariant, structural version of Eq. 4 in the main text. In partic-
ular, the reduced-form RD parameter is:

                                                                   ⌧0 (w)Aij (w)
                                                             =                                                                        (A.13)
                                                                       vij (O)




   52 Observe that the Coase independence property, whereby the equilibrium permit prices are una↵ected

by the initial distribution of free permits, holds throughout this framework (Coase, 1960; Montgomery, 1972;
Hahn and Stavins, 2011).


                                                                        46
Appendix A.2              Recovering the permit price
To see how the reduced-form RDD parameter maps onto the first period permit price,
⌧o (w), consider the following estimated version of Eq. A.13:
       
ˆ =Eit ⌧0t (w)Aij (w)                                                                    (A.14)
             vijt (O)
                              
         ⌧0 (w)Aij (w)           ⇠t Aij (w)
  =Eit                 + Eit                                                             (A.15)
             vijt (O)             vijt (O)
                                                   
                             1                             ⇠t
  =⌧0 (w)Ei Aij (w)Et                  + Ei Aij (w)Et                                    (A.16)
                         vijt (O)                       vijt (O)
                      
                             1
  =⌧0 (w)Ei Aij (w)Et                                                                    (A.17)
                         vijt (O)
                      
                         1 + ijt ✓t
  =⌧0 (w)Ei Aij (w)Et                                                                    (A.18)
                             vijt
                                                                "          "           ##!
                             1          ˆ                ✓t                      f\
                                                                                  (EIj )✓t
  =⌧0 (w) Ei Aij (w)Et               + Ei Aij (w)Et             + Ei Aij (w)Et
                            vijt                        ⌫ijt                       vijt
                                                                                                               (A.19)
where Eq. A.15 applies the permit price decomposition, ⌧0t (w)+⌧o (w)+⇠t . Eq. A.16 applies
the Law of Iterated Expectations. Eq. A.17 applies Assumption 4, cov(⇠t , vijt1 (O )) = 0. Eq.
A.18 substitutes vijt (O) using Eq. 1. Eq. A.19 applies Eq. 11, ijt = ˆ + f\     (EIj ) + µijt ,
and a further covariance assumption, cov(µijt , v✓ijt
                                                   t
                                                      ) = 0.53 Rearranging Eq. A.19:

                                                         b
 ⌧0 (w) =      h            h          ii        h            h          ii                                  (A.20)
                                                                                                   f\
                                                                                                    (EIj )✓t
            Ei Aij (w)Et         1
                                vijt        + ˆEi Aij (w)Et        ✓t
                                                                  ⌫ijt        + Ei Aij (w)Et         vijt


Eq. 18 in the main text is the sample version Eq. A.20.


Appendix A.3              Deviations from the benchmark model
Restrictions to permit borrowing

   The benchmark model allows unlimited permit banking and borrowing over time. While
permit banking is unlimited in Waxman-Markey, there are restrictions on permit borrowing
through the use of vintage-specific permits. In particular, a firm would incur a ⇢ = .08
annual borrowing cost for each future permit. While it is unclear whether this borrowing
restriction would ever bind during the lifetime of the policy, one could assume that the
borrowing restriction binds in every period to generate an upper bound on the recovered

  53 This is plausible as estimates from the trading-date fixed e↵ects models shown in Panels (D-F) of Table
1 controls for trading date variation.


                                                       47
initial period permit price.
    Formally, define ⌧vy as the permit price of vintage v permit in compliance period y. ⌧vy
is dictated by two equalities. To help with intuition, consider the case with only two periods
and vintages. For the first equality, no-arbitrage across periods implies that permit prices
for any vintage v must follow Hotelling’s rule: ⌧v1 = ⌧v0 e . The second equality relates
permit prices across vintages during the initial period: ⌧00 = ⌧10 e⇢ . Combining these two
equalities yields:

                                                              e⇢
                                                  ⌧00 = ⌧11                                 (A.21)
                                                              e
Eq. A.21 has a cost-benefit interpretation.54 The left hand side of Eq. A.21 indicates
the marginal benefit of borrowing one permit. A borrowed v = 1 permit for initial period
compliance has a value equivalent to a v = 0 permit, or ⌧00 . Borrowing a v = 1 permit
requires repayment of 1 + ⇢ permits during the next period. The discounted value of this
marginal cost during the initial period is captured by the right hand side of Eq. A.21.
Optimal borrowing implies equality in Eq. A.21.
  In the general case with y 2 [0, Y ] periods and vintages, the two equalities become
⌧vy = ⌧v0 e y and ⌧00 = ⌧v0 e⇢v . The relationship between the price of a v vintaged permit
when it is issued (i.e. y = v) and the initial period price of the initial vintaged permit is:

                                              ⌧yy = ⌧00 e(    ⇢+ )y
                                                                                            (A.22)

which, consistent with the prior literature on borrowing restrictions, rises over time below
the interest rate (Rubin, 1996; Schennach, 2000). The resulting expression for the reduced-
form parameter becomes:
                                          Z
                                   ⌧00 (w) Y
                                =              e ⇢y Aijy (w)dy                       (A.23)
                                   vij (O) y=0

which for a given value of          implies a higher initial period permit price ⌧00 (w).

Output-based permit allocation

    The benchmark model assumes that permits are allocated in a lump-sum manner. In
reality, the Waxman-Markey bill allocates free permits based on an output-based allocation
rule. This section demonstrates how an output-based allocation may impact firm-level
output in the short run as well as exit decisions in the long-run, both of which a↵ects the
recovered first period permit price. The rule states that the free permits received by firm i
in sector j year y is:



  54 I   thank Steve Salant for this interpretation.


                                                       48
                                                              Xjy
                                           Aijy (w) = qijy                                            (A.24)
                                                              Qjy

where qijy is output of firm i in year y and Xjy and Qjy are total emissions and output in
sector j such that Xjy /Qjy is sector-level emissions intensity.55 For simplicity, I maintain
the benchmark assumption that sector j is perfectly competitive such that Xjy /Qjy is
exogenous to the firm. Under output-based allocation, the allocation of free permits is no
longer exogenous to the firm as the firm faces an additional incentive to increase output.
This implies that all things equal, firms that receive free permits also have higher output
levels than firms that do not receive free permits such that one can no longer attribute the
RD parameter entirely to the allocation of free permits.
    To see how output based allocation a↵ects firm decisions in the short and long run,
consider the following instantaneous profit function:

                                       ⇡ijy = py q(xijy )      zy xijy                                (A.25)

where q() is an increasing, concave production function. zy is unit cost for a carbon intensive
input that results in one ton of emission for each unit used for production. In the short
run, an operating firm cannot exit the industry. Inserting Eqs. A.24 and A.25 into the
optimization problem in Eq. A.4 yields the following modified version of Eq. A.5:

                                           ⇡i0 (xijy )                   O
                                               Xjy
                                                                    =    ijy                          (A.26)
                               1   qi0 (xijy ) Qjy 1{j   2 F (w)}

There are two implications of Eq. A.26, one for the cost of the policy overall and another
for the distribution of optimal emissions across firms. First, because of the denominator in
Eq. A.26, the marginal abatement cost under output-based allocation is higher than under
lump-sum allocation at every emission level for a firm receiving free permits. And since
marginal abatement costs must be equalized across firms in equilibrium, the permit price
must also be higher, resulting in a higher overall cost of compliance. Second, Eq. A.26
together with the concavity of the profit function imply that all else equal, emissions, and
hence output, of a firm receiving free permits is higher than that of a firm not receiving free
permits during every period of the policy. This implies that the structural expression for
the RD parameter from Eq. A.13 becomes:




  55 Technically,Waxman-Markey requires average output over the previous two periods be used to deter-
mine current period free permits. I do not consider this for ease of exposition as implications are unaltered.


                                                         49
                           ⌧0 (w)Aij (w)
                      =
                               vijt (O)
                           RY
                            0
                                e y py [q(x⇤i,j2F (w),y )                q(x⇤i,j2A(w),y )]dy
                     +
                                                             vijt (O)
                           RY
                            0
                                     e       y
                                                 [zy + ⌧y (w)][x⇤i,j2F (w),y     x⇤i,j2A(w),y ]dy
                                                                                                    (A.27)
                                                               vijt (O)

where the second term and third terms, which was previously zero under lump-sum permit
allocation, now capture the di↵erence in firm revenue and costs, respectively, for firms
receiving free permits and those buying auctioned permits. The second term is positive
and the third term is negative. However, the sum of these two terms is negative. This
is because a firm that buys auctioned permits optimally emits at a level where marginal
revenue, q 0 (x⇤i,j2A(w),y ), equals marginal cost, zy + ⌧y (w). By comparison, an otherwise
similar firm facing output-based free permits would produce higher emissions with marginal
revenue below marginal cost. Thus, the gain in the second term of Eq. A.27 is smaller
than the loss in the third term, resulting in a downward biased estimate of and a lower
implied first period permit price. The magnitude of this bias depends on the concavity of
the production function and expectations over future output and input prices.
   The output based allocation under Waxman-Markey is conditional on ongoing operation.
In the long-run, this acts as an operating subsidy which distorts firm exit decisions by
lowering long-run average costs, allowing a firm to operate longer than it would in the
absence of free permits. To see this, suppose without the free permits, future input and
output prices are such that a firm would exit the industry in period y = ȳ < Y or x⇤ijy = 0
for y > ȳ. If instead, the output-based allocation allows the firm to operate longer until
y = ỹ > ȳ, Eq. A.13 becomes:

                          ⌧0 (w)Aij (w)
                     =
                               vijt (O)
                          R ȳ
                           0
                               e y py [q(x⇤i,j2F (w),y )                q(x⇤i,j2A(w),y )]dy
                     +
                                                            vijt (O)
                          R ȳ
                           0
                                 e       y
                                             [zy + ⌧y (w)][x⇤i,j2F (w),y       x⇤i,j2A(w),y ]dy
                                                              vijt (O)
                          R ỹ
                           ȳ
                                 e       y
                                             py q(x⇤ij2F (w)y )     [zy + ⌧y (w)]x⇤ij2F (w)y dy
                     +                                                                              (A.28)
                                                               vijt (O)

If output-based allocation allows a firm to operate over a longer period, profits during this
extended period, captured by the fourth term in Eq. A.28, should be negative by definition.
Thus, the downward bias in is reinforced by the presence of firm exits in the long run.


                                                               50
Appendix B                    Potential consequences of a thinly traded
                              prediction market
To understand how thin trading may e↵ect estimates of , I consider three possible sources
of deviation between the observed change in prediction market price, ✓t and the true
unobserved change in cap-and-trade probabilities,                   qt :

                                             ✓ t = ↵1 + ↵ 2 q t + ! t                            (B.1)

where ↵1 is additive bias, ↵2 is multiplicative bias, and !t ⇠ (0, !2 ) is an error term which
is uncorrelated with qt as in the classical measurement error setup. I now consider the
consequences of each term in isolation.

Additive bias          Suppose only additive bias existed such that ↵2 = 1 and !t = 0. Eq. 5
becomes:

            rijt = 1{j = F } ✓t + Zit          i   + ⌘ij ✓t     ↵1 ( 1{j = F } + ⌘ij ) + ⌫ijt

where the error term is now augmented by ↵1 ( 1{j = F } + ⌘ij ). Observe that this extra
term is absorbed by the inclusion of a firm fixed e↵ect in Zit , which is present in all my
regression models.

Multiplicative bias  Suppose only multiplicative bias existed such that ↵1 = 0 and !t =
0. Then Eq. 5 becomes:
                                                                        ⌘ij ✓t
                         rijt =        1{j = F } ✓t + Zit       i   +          + ⌫ijt
                                  ↵2                                      ↵2

where now the estimated coefficient of interest is no longer an unbiased estimate of .

Measurement error              Suppose now only classical measurement existed such that ↵1 = 0
and ↵2 = 0. Eq. B.1 becomes                 ✓t =     qt + !t . I consider the consequences of classical
measurement error in prediction market prices when the mismeasured variable is interacted
with a Bernoulli variable which is the treatment under my regression discontinuity design.56
   As a benchmark, consider the following true uninteracted model:

                                                   o
                                          rjt =    uninteract   qt + ✏jt                         (B.2)

where ✏jt is a mean zero error term. I make an additional standard assumption that
cov( ✓t , ✏jt ) = 0. Using the mismeasured prediction market price ✓t instead of the


  56 I   am grateful to Doug Steigerwald for this particular formulation.


                                                       51
true probability qt , produces in the limit an estimate plim ˆuninteract =                         o
                                                                                                   uninteract   ⇤
biasuninteract where biasuninteract is the attenuation bias multiplier:

                                        biasuninteract =        1    1/(1 + S)                           (B.3)
                                                                                               2
          2
where      is the variance of qt and S is the signal-to-noise ratio 2q .
              q                                                        !
    Consider now the following interacted model which is a simplified version of my regression
discontinuity specification in Eq. 7:
                                                   o
                                         rijt =    interact Dj      qt + ✏jt                             (B.4)

where Dj ⇠ Bernoulli(p) is the RD treatment variable. Because Dj is indexed by j, I
make the additional assumption that the Dj is independent of ( qt , !t ). If then one uses
mismeasured prediction market price ✓t instead of the true probability qt , the OLS
estimate is plim ˆinteract = interact
                             o
                                      ⇤ biasinteract where biasinteract is the attenuation bias
multiplier:
                                         biasinteract      =1       1/(1 + S̃)                           (B.5)

                  var(Dj qt )
where S̃ =         var(Dj !t ) .   Considering each component of S̃ separately:

                            var(Dj qt ) =             E(Dj2 qt2 )       (E(Dj qt ))2
                                           =      E(Dj2 )E( qt2 )       (E(Dj )E( qt ))2
                                           =             pE( qt2 )       p2 E( qt )2                     (B.6)

where the second line follows by independence between Dj and qt and the third line follows
by applying the mean and variance of a Bernoulli random variable. Similarly:

                               var(Dj !t ) =          E(Dj2 !t2 )       (E(Dj !t ))2
                                             =    E(Dj2 )E(!t2 )        (E(Dj )E(!t ))2
                                                                        2
                                             =                      p   !                                (B.7)

where the second line follows by independence between Dj and !t and the third line follows
                                                        2
by the earlier assumption that !t ⇠ (0,                 ! ).   Plugging Eqs. B.6 and B.7 into B.5 yields:

                                                          ⇣                                ⌘
                                                                         (1 p)(E[ qt ])2
                              biasinteract       =1     1/ 1 + S +               2                       (B.8)
                                                                                 !

              (1 p)(E[ qt ])2
Because         2      > 0, observe that biasuninteract > biasinteract for any signal-to-noise
                !
ratio, S, such that my interacted regression discontinuity estimate will always be closer
to the true estimate than if one were to directly estimate the e↵ects of prediction market
prices. That is, attenuation bias is always smaller in the interacted model. The degree in


                                                               52
which attenuation bias is lessened depends on both the probability of treatment p and on
the expected true change in policy probabilities, E[ qt ].

Prior field and experimental evidence on the influence of thin trading Prior
experimental and field research show that prediction market prices are relatively una↵ected
by thin trading or manipulation by individual traders. Intuitively, e↵orts to manipulate
a prediction market by some should increase arbitrage opportunities for others such that
distortions, if they do exist, is unlikely to last for long periods. Camerer (1998) places tempo-
rary bets designed to manipulate racetrack markets and concludes that successful long-term
manipulation was unlikely even when considering e↵orts to distort relatively thinly traded
markets. A similar conclusion is reached for both historical presidential betting markets
(Rhode and Strumpf, 2004) and recent presidential prediction markets (Rhode and Strumpf,
2008). In particular, Rhode and Strumpf (2008) find that experimental e↵orts to manip-
ulate the 2000 Iowa Electronic Market during thinly traded moments and observed e↵orts
to manipulate the 2004 Tradesport market had e↵ects that dissipated hours afterwards.
Similarly, recent experimental work shows that price manipulators in prediction markets
were unable to distort price accuracy (Robin, Oprea and Porter, 2006) nor influence the
beliefs of third party observers (Hanson et al., 2011). A notable exception is Rothschild and
Sethi (2016) who find evidence of possible manipulation in the 2012 Intrade presidential
prediction market.


Appendix C               Adjusting for contract expiration
Intrade prediction markets are traded up to a certain date upon which contract holders are
paid $1 if the event is realized for each contract held. For the cap-and-trade prediction
market, that expiration date was December 31, 2010, coinciding with the end of the 111th
Congress. Because it is rare that a piece of legislation, having failed passage in the current
Congress, is reintroduced with identical features in a subsequent Congress, this expiration
date should coincide with the expected final possible date of Waxman-Markey approval.
    However, it is difficult to ascertain whether markets expected Waxman-Markey prospects
to exist following the end of the 111th Congress. If so, this introduces a bias between the
prediction market price and average market beliefs which would increase as the expiration
date nears. To remove this bias, one would like to weight prediction price levels using a
kernel that varies with the number of remaining trading days.
   Formally, the true variable of interest is qt (T ) where T = 12/31/2011, the date in which
the cap-and-trade system begins under the policy. I do not observe qt (T ). Instead, I observe
a prediction market price for a contract expiring on date T 1 = 12/31/2010 < T . I now
define this as ✓t (d, T 1 ), where d = T 1   t, the number of remaining days until expiration.



                                                53
Specifically, it has the following piece-wise form:
                                             8
                                             <k(d)q (T ),          b
                                                            if d < D
                                                    t
                              ✓t (d, T 1 ) =                                               (C.1)
                                             :q (T ),       otherwise
                                              t

where k(d) is a weighting kernel which is a function of d and exists only when the remaining
number of days is less than some threshold D. b In other words, k(d) captures any concerns
about an impending contract expiration. Importantly for this exercise, I assume k(d) to
be discontinuous such that prediction market participants only become concerned about
contract expiration after a certain point when there are fewer than D  b days remaining.
   The problem lies in estimating k(d). Fortunately, the availability of additional Intrade
data allows for an empirical estimate of k(d). The prediction market contract shown in
Figure 1 was not the first cap-and-trade contract o↵ered by Intrade. Around the same time
that the 2010-expiring contract begin trading, InTrade o↵ered an identical contract with
an earlier expiration date set for T 2 = 12/31/2009 < T 1 < T . This contract, with prices
denoted as ✓t (d, T 2 ), lasted only eight months and is shown as a dashed line in Figure A.3.
   Estimating k(d) requires the following assumption: for all trading days when both
contracts exist, d       Db for ✓t (d, T 1 ) and d < D
                                                     b for ✓t (d, T 2 ). That is during 5/1/2009-
12/31/2009, prices from the 2010-expiring contract were una↵ected by concerns over expi-
ration while prices from the 2009-expiring contract incorporated such concerns. Thus:

                                 ✓t (d, T 2 )
                        k(d) =                8t 2 [5/1/2009, 12/31/2009]                  (C.2)
                                 ✓t (d, T 1 )

The solid line in Figure A.4 plots k(d) and appears trend stationary. To remove noise in
k(d), the following linear regression is performed:

                                      k(d) = ↵0 + ↵1 d + ✏d                                (C.3)

where ✏d is a mean zero disturbance. The predicted kernel, k(d),   d is shown as the dashed
line in Figure A.4. The threshold D                                        d = 1. To recover
                                      b is defined as the point at which k(d)
qt , I simply rewrite Equation C.1 to obtain:
                                                     8         1
                                                     < ✓t (d,T ) ,        b
                                                                   if d < D
                                                1          d
                                                          k(d)
                     qt (T ) = adjusted ✓t (d, T ) =                                   (C.4)
                                                     :✓ (d, T 1 ), otherwise
                                                        t


Figure A.5 plots the original ✓t (d, T 1 ) against the adjusted ✓t (d, T 1 ) using the predicted
kernel from Equation C.3. Observe that the two time series begin diverging at the beginning
of 2010 when d < D̂. This divergence, which increases until the end of the 2010, inflates
the original price series to remove any concerns about contract expiration. Thus, while the
prospects for cap-and-trade indeed collapsed when the Senate formally withdrew cap-and-



                                                  54
trade legislation on July 23, 2010, market beliefs over cap-and-trade prospects were actually
higher than what the original prediction market indicated.
   Table A.3 replicates Table 1 using the adjusted Intrade prices. Resulting estimates are
slightly smaller but are not statistically di↵erent than those presented in Table 1.


Appendix D                 Data summary
Prediction market prices Intrade publicly provides daily closing prices and trading
volume for the contract “A cap and trade system for emissions trading to be established
before midnight ET on 31 Dec 2010”. Intrade publicly provides a similar contract ending in
31 Dec 2009 used for constructing the expiration-adjusted prediction market prices discussed
in Appendix C. Transaction-level data for the 2010-expiring contract was acquired privately
from Intrade and was used to identify large individual traders and to construct a daily
buyer-based normalized Herfindahl-Hirshman Index.

Stock returns and market indices 2-day returns for publicly listed U.S. stocks over
the 2007-2011 period derived based on data from the US Stock Database c 2012 Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP), The University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
2-day Fama-French factors were constructed out of variables downloaded from Kenneth
French’s website.57 Daily West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices downloaded from the
U.S. EIA.58

Sector-level energy intensity, trade intensity, and covariates Average 2004-2006
energy and trade intensity at the 6-digit NAICS level for manufacturing sectors (NAICS
31-33) was constructed based on data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of
Manufacturers (ASM)59 and the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC).60

Manufacturing greenhouse gas emissions Total U.S. manufacturing greenhouse gas
emissions and for specific subsectors 61 in 2006 and 2010 was obtained from the U.S. DOE
Manufacturing Energy and Carbon Footprints analysis of the Manufacturing Energy and
Consumption Surveys.62 Number of firms at the 6-digit NAICS level provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau’s Statistics of U.S. Businesses.
  57 Available:   www.mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html
  58 Available:   https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_pri_spt_s1_d.htm
   59 Available: census.gov/manufacturing/asm/
   60 Available: dataweb.usitc.gov/
   61 Specifically, Petroleum Refining (324110), Food and Beverage (311;312), Iron and Steel (3311; 3312),

Computers, Electronics and Electrical Equipment (334; 335), Forest Products (321;322), Fabricated Metals
(332), Plastics (326), Alumina and Aluminum (3313), Machinery (333), Cement (327310), Glass (3272),
Transportation Equipment (336), Foundries (3315), Textiles (313-316)
   62 Available:    energy.gov/eere/amo/downloads/us-manufacturing-energy-use-and-greenhouse-gas-
emissions-analysis


                                                   55
Lobbying expenditures Since the passage of the Lobbying and Disclosure Act of 1995,
all individuals engaged in lobbying members of the federal government are required to
register with the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Senate Office of Public
Records (SOPR).63 Each lobbying record indicates lobbyist name (or names in the case
of a team of lobbyists), the name of the firm hiring lobbying services, the amount spent,
and in some cases the specific issue or legislation that is the target of lobbying e↵orts (see
Blanes i Vidal, Draca and Fons-Rosen (2012) for further background on reports). Lobbying
records were were obtained from the Center for Responsible Politics (CPR) who maintains
and organizes this data.
     To extract all lobbying records related to the Waxman-Markey bill, I search the “Spe-
cific Lobbying Issues” variable for records that contain any of the following strings: i)
H.R.2454 or H.RES.2454 (Waxman-Markey), ii) H.R.587 or H.RES.587 (House bill ac-
companying Waxman-Markey), iii) H.R.2998 or H.RES. 2998 (House bill accompanying
Waxman-Markey), and iv) S.1733 or S.RES.1733 (Senate bill related to Waxman-Markey
sponsored by John Kerry).
    To extract all lobbying records related to climate policy prior to the Waxman-Markey bill,
I search the “Specific Lobbying Issues” variable for records that contain any of the following
strings: i) S.R.139 or S.RES.139 (2003 McCain-Lieberman Bill), ii) S.R.1151 or S.RES.1151
(2005 McCain-Lieberman Bill), iii) S.R.280 or S.RES.280 (2007 McCain-Liberman Bill), iv)
S.2191 or S.RES.2191 (2007 Lieberman-Warner Bill), and v) S.R.3036 or S.RES.3036 (2008
Boxer-Lieberman-Warner Bill).
    CPR codes firms according to their own sectoral definitions which is generally coarser
than 6-digit NAIC definitions. To aggregate lobbying expenditures to the 6-digit NAICS
level, I use the CPR-provided crosswalk from their own sectoral definition to 6-digit NAICS.
In cases where 1 CRP sector is assigned to multiples 6-digit NAICS sectors, I divide the
lobbying expenditure evenly across the linked 6-digit NAICS sectors.


Appendix E                 Specific cap-and-trade related events
The period between the passage of Waxman-Markey on June 26, 2009 and the withdrawal
of cap-and-trade from the Senate on July 23, 2010 marked the peak and decline of U.S.
cap-and-trade prospects. This section provides a short summary of several critical events
during this period along with a news link. As shown by the vertical lines in Figure 1, these
events were well captured by prediction market price movements.

   63 The Lobbying and Disclosure Act defines a lobbyist “any individual who is employed or retained by a

client for financial or other compensation for services that include more than one lobbying contact, other
than an individual whose lobbying activities constitute less than 20 percent of the time engaged in the
services provided by such individual to that client over a six month period.” From 1998-2006, lobbyists were
required to file reports on a semi-annual basis. Since the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act of
2007, reports are required every quarter.


                                                    56
(1) June 26, 2009: House passes Waxman-Markey
Initial hearings on draft legislation were held on the week of April 20, 2009 with the full
bill introduced into the House shortly thereafter on May 15, 2009. The bill was approved
on June 26, 2009 by a vote of 219-212 with 8 supporting Republicans and 44 Democrats
opposed.64

(2) November 4, 2009: Lindsay Graham joins Senate climate e↵ort
After passage of Waxman-Markey, e↵orts to pass legislation in the Senate were lead by Sen-
ators Lieberman, an independent, and Kerry, a Democrat. The arrival of Lindsay Graham,
a Republican Senator from South Carolina buoyed cap-and-trade prospects.65

(3) December 20, 2009: UNFCCC Copenhagen negotiations concluded
With the Kyoto Protocol expiring in 2012, countries were expected to negotiate a new
international climate treaty at Copenhagen. While a general agreement was reached in the
final hour, the agreement was non-binding and was generally regarded as not substantial
enough to succeed the Kyoto Protocol.66

(4) January, 19, 2010: Scott Brown wins Mass Senate seat
The Democrat’s tenuous supermajority in the Senate was lost when Scott Brown won Ed-
ward Kennedy’s Massachusetts Senate seat in a special election.67

(5) January 27, 2010: Graham, Kerry, Lieberman seek cap-and-trade alterna-
tives
With cap-and-trade looking unlikely, Senate sponsors look for alternative policy ideas.68

(6) March 31, 2010: Obama supports o↵shore drilling
After months of political pressure, President Obama agrees to expand domestic oil produc-
tion.69

(7) April 23, 2010: Lindsay Graham drops support of Senate bill
After political pressure from his constituents and party, Senator Graham criticizes Senate
Democratic Leadership over disagreements regarding immigration reform on April 23, 2010.
Graham formally withdrew from Senate climate e↵orts on April 24, 2010.70

  64 Article:http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/27/us/politics/27climate.html
  65 Article:abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2009/11/graham-joins-dems-wh-to-write-new-climate-

change-bill/
  66 Article:nytimes.com/cwire/2009/12/21/21climatewire-obama-negotiates-copenhagen-accord-

with-senat-6121.html
  67 Article:www.denverpost.com/latin/ci_14337907
  68 Article:nytimes.com/cwire/2010/01/27/27climatewire-got-ideas-about-a-climate-bill-kerry-

graham-64375.html
  69 Article:nytimes.com/gwire/2010/03/31/31greenwire-obama-proposes-opening-vast-offshore-

areas-to-74696.html
  70 Article: nytimes.com/2010/04/25/us/politics/25graham.html




                                              57
(8) June 15, 2010: Obama oval office speech
President Obama focuses on energy issues in his first oval office speech.71

(9) July 22, 2010: Senate drops cap-and-trade legislation
Without a filibuster-proof supermajority, Senate democrats drop consideration of cap-and-
trade bill.72


Appendix F                  Comparing Waxman-Markey with later Sen-
                            ate climate bills
In the bicameral U.S. legislative system, a piece of legislation must pass both Houses of
Congress before being sent to the President for ratification. Thus, passage of Waxman-
Markey by the House of Representatives needed to be followed by a similar cap-and-trade
bill approved by a Senate filibuster-proof supermajority. There were two prominent Senate
bills considered during the Fall of 2009 and into 2010. Critical to my use of prediction
markets from 2009-2010 is the assumption that the Senate variant of the bill was similar
along key features such that the expected permit price for those bills was similar to that
of Waxman-Markey (WM). In Table A.4, I compare the Waxman-Markey bill with the two
most prominent Senate climate bills, the Kerry-Boxer (KB) and Kerry-Lieberman (KL)
bills along four key features that may a↵ect the equilibrium permit price: i) cap schedule,
ii) sectoral coverage, iii) permit allocation rule, and iv) domestic and international o↵set
provisions.
    Table A.4 shows that KB and KL had the same sectoral coverage and permit allocation
rule as WM and only a slightly altered cap schedule. In particular KB required slightly
greater abatement in 2020 while KL required slightly greater abatement in 2013. This
di↵erence implies that KB and KL may result in slightly higher permit prices.
   The overall limit from domestic agriculture and international o↵sets was the same across
the three bills. For domestic agricultural o↵sets, KB allowed five additional types of o↵sets
not permitted under WM.73 Compared to WM, KL added two new practices and eliminated
one.74 For international o↵sets KB and KL bills lowered the annual limit on international
o↵sets from 1 to 0.5 billion tons. However, both Senate bills increased the threshold under

  71 Article:  nytimes.com/2010/06/16/us/politics/16obama.html
  72 Article:  www.nytimes.com/2010/07/23/us/politics/23cong.html
   73 Specifically, they were: i) planting and cultivation of permanent tree crops; ii) greenhouse gas emission

reductions from improvements and upgrades to mobile or stationary equipment (including engines); iii)
practices to reduce and eliminate soil tillage; iv) reductions in greenhouse gas emissions through restoration
of wetlands, forestland, and grassland; and v) sequestration of greenhouse gases through management of
tree crops
   74 Specifically, KL added i) resource-conserving crop rotations of at least 3 years; and ii) practices that

will increase the sequestration of carbon in soils on cropland, hayfields, native and planted grazing land,
grassland, or rangeland; and removed i) reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from manure and e✏uent


                                                      58
the “exceedance policy” whereby if the annual domestic o↵sets amount is below 0.9 (KB) or
1.5 (KL) billion tons, the regulator can increase international o↵sets by up to an addition
0.75 (KB) or 1 billion (KL) tons. Because of uncertainty regarding both domestic and
international o↵set markets, it is unclear whether these di↵erences had a major e↵ect on
the expected permit price.


Appendix G                CGE models of cap-and-trade policy
This section summarizes the most prominent CGE analyses of the Waxman-Markey bill
during 2009 as well as the time when each analysis was first publicized.
   During deliberations for Waxman-Markey, several CGE modeling groups were contracted
by organizations and government agencies. The Environmental Protection Agency hired RTI
and Dale W. Jorgenson Associates to run the ADAGE and IGEM models respectively. The
EPA analyses were first released on April 20, 2009.75 Kolstad et al. (2010) provide a detailed
peer review of ADAGE and IGEM commissioned by the EPA. With the exception of IGEM
which estimates parameters econometrically, parameters within CGE models are calibrated
to match observed macroeconomic activity. The o↵set usage assumptions adopted in this
paper were based on EPA analysis (EPA, 2009). The Department of Energy’s Energy
Information Agency (EIA) model the policy using its National Energy Modeling System
(NEMS) model with results released in August 2009.76 The EPPA model is run by the
Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Climate Change at MIT.77 The EPPA model
results were first released in April 2009. Model runs were also commissioned by several
advocacy organizations. The American Council for Capital Formation (ACCF) and National
Association for Manufacturers (NAM) hired SAIC to run the EIA’s NEMS model with
results released on August 12, 2009.78 The National Black Chamber of Commerce hired
CRA international to run the MRN-NEEM model with results first released on May 21,
2009.79 The Heritage foundation hired Global Insight to run its IHS model with results first
reported via a Congressional testimony on June 22, 2009.80
   These models di↵er along many dimensions (see Fawcett, Calvin and de la Chesnaye
(2009) for a review). One important distinction pertinent for this analysis is whether agents

  75 Final  report: www.epa.gov/climatechange/economics/economicanalyses.html
  76 Final  report: http://www.eia.gov/analysis/requests/2009/hr2454/pdf/sroiaf(2009)05.pdf
  77 Final report: globalchange.mit.edu/files/document/MITJPSPGC_Rpt173_AppendixC.pdf
  78 Initial press release: http://accf.org/accfnam-study-on-waxman-markey-bill/. Final report: http:

//instituteforenergyresearch.org/analysis/the-accfnam-estimate-of-waxman-markey/
  79 Initial   press release:     http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/nbcc-study-finds-waxman-
markey-reduces-gdp-by-350-billion-61941032.html Final report:           www.nationalbcc.org/images/
stories/documents/CRA_Waxman-Markey_Aug2008_Update_Final.pdf
  80 Initial testimony:     http://www.heritage.org/research/testimony/the-economic-impact-of-the-
waxman-markey-cap-and-trade-bill. Final report: www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/08/the-
economic-consequences-of-waxman-markey-an-analysis-of-the-american-clean-energy-and-
security-act-of-2009


                                                 59
in the models are myopic or exhibit perfect foresight. Myopic CGE models are solved
iteratively at each time step while in models with perfect foresight agents optimize simulta-
neously over the entire policy time-horizon. The Hotelling model introduced in Appendix A
exhibits perfect foresight. Of the CGE models analyzing Waxman-Markey, IGEM, ADAGE,
and MRN-NEEM have perfect foresight whereas EPPA, NEMS, and IHS are myopic.
   Another important area of distinction is whether the CGE models incorporated non-
cap-and-trade components of the Waxman-Markey bill. ADAGE, NEMS, and MRN-NEEM
models include many non-cap-and-trade provisions. IGEM and EPPA do not model those
provisions. It is not clear from available IHS documentation whether non-cap-and-trade
provisions are modeled.




                                             60
Appendix Figures
                                   Figure A.1: RD estimates at 0.1% incremental bandwidths
                      .2
                      .15
       RD estimates
       .05       .1   0
                      -.05




                             .02               .025            .03             .035              .04
                                                            Bandwidth
                      .2
                      .1
       RD estimates
                      0
                      -.1




                             .02               .025            .03             .035              .04
                                                            Bandwidth
Notes: All RD estimates of from a version of Eq. 7 with firm and trading date fixed e↵ects. Top panel
uses a linear function in energy intensity. Bottom panel uses a quadratic function in energy intensity. 90%
confidence interval shown.
                                                             61
    Figure A.2: Average stock returns in 2007, 2008, and 2011 at 5% energy intensity




                                                                                                           800
                                   .08      .04




                                                                                                           600
                     Avg 2007 stock returns
                                    0




                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                              400
                         -.04




                                                                                                           200
                                   -.08
                                   -.12




                                                                                                           0
                                                  .01   .02   .03   .04   .05      .06   .07   .08   .09
                                                                     Energy intensity




                                                                                                           800
                                   .08      .04




                                                                                                           600
                     Avg 2008 stock returns
                                    0




                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                              400
                         -.04




                                                                                                           200
                                   -.08
                                   -.12




                                                                                                           0




                                                  .01   .02   .03   .04   .05      .06   .07   .08   .09
                                                                     Energy intensity
                                                                                                           800
                                   .08
                                   .04




                                                                                                           600
                     Avg 2011 stock returns
                                    0




                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                              400
                         -.04




                                                                                                           200
                                   -.08
                                   -.12




                                                                                                           0




                                                  .01   .02   .03   .04   .05      .06   .07   .08   .09
                                                                     Energy intensity
                                                                           62
Notes: Triangles indicate local averages of firm-level average stock returns in 2007, 2008 and 2011 within a
0.01 wide bin of 6-digit NAICS energy intensity. Solid (dashed) line shows a linear (quadratic) fit over the
unbinned data. Distribution of sample firms by 6-digit NAICS energy intensity shown in gray histogram.
 Figure A.3: Price for Intrade 2009-expiring and 2010-expiring cap-and-trade contracts



                 .6
        daily closing price
        .2       0       .4




                                         Jul9      Oct9       Jan10       Apr10          Jul10         Oct10

                                                2010−expiring contract               2009−expiring contract

Notes: Time series of daily prices for Intrade cap-and-trade contracts expiring at end of 2009 (dashed) and
2010 (solid). Red vertical line marks start of 2010.




Figure A.4: Empirical and estimated weighting kernel for expiring cap-and-trade contracts
                              1
                              .8
                 Kernel weights
                  .4       .6 .2
                              0




                                   500           400          300              200               100           0
                                                            Days until end of contract

                                                       Empirical kernel             Predicted kernel

                                                                                            [ as a function
Notes: Time series of empirical (solid, blue) and predicted (dashed, red) weighting kernel, k(D)
of D days remaining until contract expiration.
                                                                    63
 Figure A.5: Price for Intrade 2010-expiring contract with termination date adjustment



                    .6
                    .5
           daily closing price
                .3  .2
                    .1    .4




                                                         May9      Aug9              Nov9                Feb10         May10            Aug10

                                                                2010−expiring contract                     Adjusted 2010−expiring contract

Notes: Time series of daily prices for Intrade cap-and-trade contracts expiring in 2010 (solid) and with
adjustment for termination date using predicted weighting kernel in Figure A.4.

 Figure A.6: Assumed free permits for firm in Plastics Material & Resin Manufacturing
                                                        50000
                    Projected firm−level free permits
                                                        40000
                                                        30000
                                                        20000
                                                        10000
                                                        0




                                                                2010          2015          2020              2025       2030          2035
                                                                                             Year

                                                                 0.7% (Petroleum)                1.5% (All Manu)          7.6% (Aluminum)
                                                                 13.9% (Transport)               19.3% (Textiles)         35%

Notes: Example of an assumed time path of freely permits for an average firm in the Plastics Material and
Resin Manufacturing Sector (NAICS=325211). Each line assumes di↵erent annual rate of permit decline
from 2012-2025. Solid line assumes -1.5% annual decline, the 2006-2010 average decline in emissions for all
U.S. manufacturing firms. Dashed gray lines assumes annual declines associated with various manufacturing
subsectors in 2006-2010. Permits are gradually phased out from 2026-2035 according to Waxman-Markey
(see Section 2.1).
                                                                                            64
Appendix Tables

             Table A.1: 6-digit NAICS sectors by energy intensity bins

                                  Energy Intensity 2 [.02, .025)
  Soybean Processing (311222)
  Cane Sugar Refining (311312)
  Frozen Fruit, Juice, and Vegetable Manufacturing (311411)
  Frozen Specialty Food Manufacturing (311412)
  Fruit and Vegetable Canning (311421)
  Other Hosiery and Sock Mills (315119)
  Sawmills (321113)
  Hardwood Veneer and Plywood Manufacturing (321211)
  Coated and Laminated Packaging Paper and Plastics Film Manufacturing (322221)
  Coated and Laminated Paper Manufacturing (322222)
  Sanitary Paper Product Manufacturing (322291)
  Asphalt Shingle and Coating Materials Manufacturing (324122)
  Medicinal and Botanical Manufacturing (325411)
  Plastics Bag Manufacturing (326111)
  Plastics Packaging Film and Sheet (including Laminated) Manufacturing (326112)
  Resilient Floor Covering Manufacturing (326192)
  All Other Plastics Product Manufacturing (326199)
  Tire Manufacturing (except Retreading) (326211)
  Rubber and Plastics Hoses and Belting Manufacturing (326220)
  Glass Product Manufacturing Made of Purchased Glass (327215)
  Ball and Roller Bearing Manufacturing (332991)
  Ammunition (except Small Arms) Manufacturing (332993)
  Bare Printed Circuit Board Manufacturing (334412)
                                 Energy Intensity 2 [.025, .03)
  Petroleum Refineries (324110)
  Rolled Steel Shape Manufacturing (331221)
  Steel Wire Drawing (331222)
  Nonferrous Metal (except Copper and Aluminum) Rolling, Drawing, and Extruding (331491)
  Electron Tube Manufacturing (334411)
  Storage Battery Manufacturing (335911)
                                  Energy Intensity 2 [.03, .05)
  Yarn Texturizing, Throwing, and Twisting Mills (313112)
  Broadwoven Fabric Mills (313210)
  All Other Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing (324199)
  Inorganic Dye and Pigment Manufacturing (325131)
  Synthetic Organic Dye and Pigment Manufacturing (325132)
  Phosphatic Fertilizer Manufacturing (325312)
  Unlaminated Plastics Film and Sheet (except Packaging) Manufacturing (326113)
  Polystyrene Foam Product Manufacturing (326140)
  Vitreous China, Fine Earthenware, and Other Pottery Product Manufacturing (327112)
  Other Aluminum Rolling and Drawing (331319)
  Aluminum Foundries (except Die-Casting) (331524)
  Iron and Steel Forging (332111)
  Nonferrous Forging (332112)
                                  Energy Intensity 2 (.05, .07]
  Gum and Wood Chemical Manufacturing (325191)
  Ethyl Alcohol Manufacturing (325193)
  All Other Basic Organic Chemical Manufacturing (325199)
  Plastics Material and Resin Manufacturing (325211)
  Ceramic Wall and Floor Tile Manufacturing (327122)
  Primary Smelting and Refining of Nonferrous Metal (except Copper and Aluminum) (331419)
  Steel Investment Foundries (331512)
  Carbon and Graphite Product Manufacturing (335991)
                                Energy Intensity 2 (.07, .075]
  Carbon Black Manufacturing (325182)
  All Other Basic Inorganic Chemical Manufacturing (325188)
                                   Energy Intensity 2 (.075, .08]
  Paper (except Newsprint) Mills (322121)
  Newsprint Mills (322122)
  Iron and Steel Mills (331111)
  Electrometallurgical Ferroalloy Product Manufacturing (331112)

                                              65
    Table A.2: Examining potential multiplicative bias in prediction market prices
                                    (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)
                                             Trading       Big trader   Herfindahl    Only      Only
Poly. order                        Main      volume         volume        index       2009      2010
1                  Uninteracted    0.077          0.085      0.083        0.075       0.088     0.078
                                  (0.032)        (0.030)    (0.030)      (0.142)     (0.035)   (0.069)
                    Interacted                    -0.000     -0.000       0.003
                                                 (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.193)
2                  Uninteracted    0.071          0.074      0.074        0.235       0.070     0.110
                                  (0.035)        (0.034)    (0.033)      (0.148)     (0.044)   (0.043)
                    Interacted                    -0.000     -0.000       -0.239
                                                 (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.224)

Number of firms                     531       531         531           531     531     531
Number of dates                     109       109         109           109      84      25
Estimates from interacted model in Eq. 12 with firm and date fixed e↵ects within 4% bandwidth.
Robust standard errors clustered at 6-digit NAICS level in parentheses.




                                            66
   Table A.3: RD estimate using expiration date adjusted prediction market prices

                                                      (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)
                                                                        Bandwidth
Model                                 Poly. order    2%        2.5%       3%      3.5%         4%
Firm fixed e↵ects                                                       Panel (A)
                                          1          0.070     0.068     0.047       0.060     0.067
                                                    (0.030)   (0.030)   (0.031)     (0.029)   (0.025)
                                          2          -0.009    0.066     0.082       0.066     0.063
                                                    (0.027)   (0.039)   (0.034)     (0.029)   (0.029)
CAPM                                                                    Panel (B)
                                          1          0.072     0.078     0.070       0.071     0.066
                                                    (0.038)   (0.038)   (0.035)     (0.030)   (0.024)
                                          2          -0.028    0.047     0.076       0.077     0.079
                                                    (0.031)   (0.041)   (0.041)     (0.040)   (0.039)
3-factor Fama-French                                                    Panel (C)
                                          1          0.073     0.078     0.063       0.071     0.066
                                                    (0.033)   (0.036)   (0.035)     (0.031)   (0.025)
                                          2          -0.023    0.051     0.082       0.076     0.082
                                                    (0.033)   (0.036)   (0.038)     (0.036)   (0.036)
Firm, date fixed e↵ects                                                 Panel (D)
                                          1          0.070     0.068     0.047       0.059     0.066
                                                    (0.031)   (0.030)   (0.032)     (0.029)   (0.025)
                                          2          -0.009    0.066     0.082       0.066     0.063
                                                    (0.027)   (0.039)   (0.034)     (0.029)   (0.029)
Firm, date fixed e↵ects; oil⇥sector                                     Panel (E)
                                          1          0.074     0.072     0.048       0.060     0.065
                                                    (0.033)   (0.032)   (0.032)     (0.028)   (0.025)
                                          2          -0.013    0.064     0.082       0.066     0.063
                                                    (0.027)   (0.039)   (0.034)     (0.030)   (0.029)
Firm, date⇥sector fixed e↵ects                                          Panel (F)
                                          1          0.050     0.047     0.045       0.061     0.058
                                                    (0.025)   (0.029)   (0.030)     (0.028)   (0.024)
                                          2          0.059     0.071     0.070       0.067     0.067
                                                    (0.054)   (0.041)   (0.031)     (0.029)   (0.029)

Number of firms                                        45      106      202      264        531
Each coefficient shows a separate estimate of from Eq. 7 using expiration date adjusted prediction
market prices (see Appendix C). Controls for normal market performance vary by panel. Functional
forms for energy intensity vary by rows within a panel. Sample bandwidths around the 5% threshold
vary across columns. All models include 109 2-day intervals from May 1, 2009 to July 31, 2010.
Robust standard errors clustered at 6-digit NAICS level in parentheses.




                                           67
Table A.4: Comparing key features between Waxman-Markey and Senate climate bills

                                                                            Climate bills
Feature                         Criteria             Waxman-Markey          Kerry-Boxer      Kerry-Lieberman

Cap schedule               Baseline Year                      2005              2005                 2005
                      2012(WM/KB) /2013(KL)                   97%               97%                 95.25%
                               2020                           83%               80%                  83%
                               2030                           58%               58%                  58%
                               2050                           17%               17%                  17%

Coverage                    Number of sectors                 10           same as W-M        same as W-M

Free permit rule               Threshold                    5% EI          same as W-M        same as W-M
                                                           15% TI

All O↵sets             Annual max (tons)                  2 billion        same as W-M        same as W-M
Domestic Ag.       Number of eligible practices*             7                    12                8
International          Annual max (tons)                  1 billion           .5 billion        .5 billion
                       Exceedence policy*                .5 billion          .75 billion         1 billion
* See details in Appendix F




          Table A.5: CGE estimates of 2015 marginal abatement cost (in 2009$)

                                   CGE model           Perfect        Other W-M    Marginal abatement
Institution        Sector           (scenario)       foresight?      components?      cost (2009$)
ACCF             Private       NEMS (high cost)         No              YES                 37.73
ACCF             Private        NEMS (low cost)         No              YES                 31.18
EIA            Government      NEMS (full o↵set)        No              YES                 14.86
EIA            Government      NEMS (med o↵set)         No              YES                 22.99
EPA            Government          ADAGE                Yes             YES                 17.33
EPA            Government           IGEM                Yes             NO                  17.12
Heritage         Private             IHS                No              YES                 17.59
MIT             Academic       EPPA (full o↵set)        No              NO                   7.99
MIT             Academic       EPPA (med o↵set)         No              NO                  23.41
NBCC             Private           NEEMS                Yes             YES                 24.02

                                                                        Mean                21.42
                                                                        Min                  7.99
                                                                        Max                 37.73

CGE estimates of 2015 marginal abatement cost (in 2009$) under Waxman-Markey. See Ap-
pendix G for summary of CGE models.




                                                68
Table A.6: 2015 marginal abatement cost (in 2009$) implied by RD estimates under full
borrowing restriction

 Assumed annual            Corresponding
  emissions rate          sector (NAICS)           5th percentile   Mean     95th percentile
         0                       –                     2.19          8.02         13.47
      -0.70%         Petro. refining (324110)           2.3          8.41         14.13
      -1.45%        All manufacturing (31-33)          2.42          8.85         14.86
      -5.20%        Forest products (321, 322)         3.08         11.28         18.94
      -7.60%       Alumina & Aluminum (3313)           3.57         13.05         21.92
     -11.60%            Cement (327310)                4.48         16.41         27.55
     -12.80%               Glass (3272)                4.78         17.51         29.41
     -13.90%         Transport. Equip. (336)           5.07         18.56         31.17
     -19.30%            Textiles (313-316)             6.64         24.29         40.79
       -25%                      –                      8.58        31.41         52.74
       -30%                      –                     10.57        38.68         64.95
       -35%                      –                     12.86        47.09         79.07

 First column shows assumed annual emissions rate. Second column shows corresponding man-
 ufacturing subsector with 2006-2010 emissions changing at each rate. RD estimates (see Eq. 7)
 based on Table 1, Panel (C), Row (1), and Column (5)). 90% confidence interval generated us-
 ing 250 Monte Carlo draws from estimated parameter and variance-covariance matrix. Marginal
 abatement cost recovered using Eq. 18. 5% interest rate assumed. Marginal abatement cost
 recovered using Eq. 18 but assuming permit borrowing restriction binds during duration of
 policy (see Appendix A.3 for details). 5% interest rate assumed.




                                           69
