NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICAL AGENDA EFFECT AND STATE CENTRALIZATION
Daron Acemoglu
James A. Robinson
Ragnar Torvik
Working Paper 22250
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22250

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

We thank seminar participants at the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research conference, CEMFI,
Chicago-Northwestern Political Economy Conference, George Mason University, the Michelsen Institute,
the University of Oslo, and the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign for comments and suggestions,
and Layne Kirshon for excellent research assistance. Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the ARO MURI Award No. W911NF- 12-1-0509. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Daron Acemoglu, James A. Robinson, and Ragnar Torvik. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Political Agenda Effect and State Centralization
Daron Acemoglu, James A. Robinson, and Ragnar Torvik
NBER Working Paper No. 22250
May 2016
JEL No. D70,H11,P48
ABSTRACT
We provide a potential explanation for the absence of, and unwillingness to create, centralized
power in the hands of a national state based on the political agenda effect. State centralization
induces citizens of different backgrounds, interests, regions or ethnicities to coordinate their
demands in the direction of more general-interest public goods, and away from parochial
transfers. This political agenda effect raises the effectiveness of citizen demands and induces
them to increase their investments in conflict capacity. In the absence of state centralization,
citizens do not necessarily band together because of another force, the escalation effect, which
refers to the fact that elites from different regions will join forces in response to the citizens doing
so. Such escalation might hurt the citizen groups that have already solved their collective action
problem (though it will benefit others). Anticipating the interplay of the political agenda and
escalation effects, under some parameter configurations, political elites strategically opt for a
non-centralized state. We show how the model generates non-monotonic comparative statics in
response to the increase in the value or effectiveness of public goods (so that centralized states
and public good provision are absent precisely when they are more beneficial for society). We
also suggest how the formation of a social democratic party may sometimes induce state
centralization (by removing the commitment value of a non-centralized state), and how elites may
sometimes prefer partial state centralization.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E52-446
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
James A. Robinson
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu

Ragnar Torvik
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Department of Economics
N-7491 Trondheim
Norway
ragnar.torvik@svt.ntnu.no

1

Introduction

There is a great deal of variation across societies both historically and today in the degree to which
a national state has achieved the Weberian monopoly of violence over its territory, developed the
authority and the capacity to enforce laws, maintain law and order, and raise taxes and provide public
goods — a vector of attributes that social scientists call “state capacity”. A growing literature has
documented the importance of state capacity for economic outcomes (e.g., Johnson, 1982, Amsden,
1989, Evans, 1995, Evans and Rauch, 1999, 2000, Besley and Persson, 2009, 2011, Acemoglu, GarcíaJimeno and Robinson, 2015, Acemoglu, Moscona and Robinson, 2016),
Fundamental for establishing capacity however is whether or not a state has managed to centralize
authority and moved from various systems of “indirect rule” to a situation where a national state
actually directly organizes these activities. The extent to which this process, which we refer to as state
centralization, has been undertaken, varies greatly as well. At one end of the scale there are countries
such as most Western European ones, as well as China and Japan, with a high degree of state
centralization, while at the other end, the Afghan, Somali, Pakistani, Philippine, and Colombian
states, among many others, are very far from having forged such centralization. In non-centralized
states, rule and authority are delegated to other entities, such as traditional elites in the Philippines,
tribal elites in Pakistan and various types of warlords in Colombia. Though state centralization
appears to be a critical prerequisite for establishing capacity,1 and is mostly taken for granted (e.g.
in the literature on East Asian development), we are far from a consensus as to why many states have
not centralized power or even attempted to establish the monopoly of violence over their territories.
This question is particularly puzzling since it would appear that all power-holders should want to
monopolize power in their countries (e.g., North, 1982, Chapter 3). If so, why is the state so hard
to centralize?
This paper investigates political economic causes of lack of state centralization. At the center
of our model is the political agenda e¤ ect, based on the idea that state centralization changes the
dynamics of political action and con‡ict in society, and the anticipation of this may discourage
e¤orts to build and centralize the state. More speci…cally, when citizens from di¤erent regions,
sectors, interests, backgrounds, or ethnicities organize jointly, their agenda will change in a direction
that makes their demands from power-holders (elites) focus more on (general-interest) public goods.
The greater e¢ ciency of public goods — relative to transfers — encourages them to invest more in
their con‡ict capacity, increasing the e¤ectiveness of their demands.2 In turn, state centralization,
which involves the elites coordinating nationally, induces citizens to organize nationally as well —
rather than at the local or the ‘parochial’level. It is this indirect e¤ect of state centralization which
makes elites often prefer a non-centralized state. Herein lies the main mechanism of our model: the
elites may strategically opt for a non-centralized state so as not to induce the citizens to organize
nationally and thus avert the political agenda e¤ect.
1
For the link between di¤erent aspects of state centralization and the capacity of the state to e¤ectively provide
public goods and regulate economic activity, see the historical accounts by Rosenthal (1992), Epstein (2000) and Nye
(2007), and empirical work by Dincecco and Katz (2016), Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
(2013), and Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson (2013).
2
Here ‘citizens’stands for members of civil society, distinguished from those who are the political elite or the powerholders (or their direct agents, such as the police or the military). The citizens could be acting as peasants, workers
or civil society members in formulating demands and participating in potential con‡ict with the state and its agents.

1

The process of centralization and strengthening of the national state in Britain between 1758
and 1834 (see, e.g., Brewer, 1990, Harling 1996) illustrates the political agenda e¤ect — the changes
in the societal equilibrium accompanying state centralization. Charles Tilly’s (1995) classic study
emphasizes that this process “. . . brought eighteenth century Britons into open confrontation with
one another. . . ” (p. 5). At the start of the period, Tilly notes, contention was about
“local people and local issues, rather than nationally organized programs and parties”
(p. 5),
[but] “between 1758 and 1833 a new variety of claim-making had taken shape in
Britain . . . Mass popular politics had taken hold on a national scale” (p. 13).
Tilly observes how the forms of collective action that emerged were completely new. For example,
the open meeting became “a kind of demonstration . . . a coordinated way of publicizing support
for a particular claim on holders of power. Frequently a special purpose association, society or club
called the meeting. What is more, meetings recurrently concerned national issues, emphatically
including issues that the government and Parliament were on their way to deciding” (p. 10). Tilly
further points out that “the means by which ordinary people made collective claims . . . underwent a
deep transformation: increasingly they involved large scale, coordinated interaction that established
direct contact between ordinary people and agents of the national state” (p. 14).
Tilly also argues that the driving force of this changing nature of contention and increasing
coordination of civil society was indeed the development of the national state:
“an expansion of taxes, national debt, and service bureaucracies, which increased not
only the state’s size but also its weight within the economy .. These changes ... promoted
a shift towards collective action that was large in scale and national in scope”[and] “the
expansion of the state pushed popular struggles from local arenas and from signi…cant
reliance on patronage towards autonomous claim-making in national arenas”(Tilly, 1995,
p. 49, 53).
This was precisely because, according to Tilly, the state gained “increasing importance... for the
fates of ordinary people” (p. 16), and that this
“generated threats and opportunities. Those threats and opportunities in turn stimulated interested parties to attempt new sorts of defense and o¤ense; to match association
with association, to gain electoral power, to make direct claims on their national government. Through long strenuous interaction with authorities, enemies and allies, those
ordinary people fashioned new ways of acting together in their interests and forced their
interlocutors to change their own ways of making and responding to claims. Cumulatively, struggles of ordinary people with power-holders wrought great changes in the
British structure of power” (Tilly, 1995, p. 16).3
Our formal model to capture and further elucidate these interactions considers a society with
N regions, with location being the only dimension of heterogeneity across groups of citizens.4 Each
3
4

Johnson (2015) presents a similar argument to Tilly’s in the French case.
This is for speci…city, and working with other dimensions of heterogeneity would lead to essentially identical results.

2

region is also inhabited by a group of elites. Citizens can make demands from elites backed up by
their ability to engage in con‡ict. If they are not able to engage in con‡ict, the elites will not respond
to their demands and provide any redistribution. When they are able to engage in con‡ict, the elites
will placate their demands with the cheapest form of redistribution — consisting of a combination
of direct transfers and public good provision — to convince them not to engage in costly con‡ict.
The e¤ectiveness of the demands of citizens is determined by two factors: they need to invest
in their con‡ict capacity, which is costly, and moreover, only some groups of citizens (in our model,
for simplicity, citizens from one region only) are able to solve their collective action problem and
invest. These “strong” citizens then have a choice — either engage in local demands (backed up by
the threat of local con‡ict), or organize other “weak citizens” and engage in demands and con‡ict
at a national (or at the very least supra-local) level. In our model, when the demands are local, the
cheapest way of placating them for the local elite is to make parochial, local transfers. However, when
the demands are at the supra-local (or national) level, then general-interest public goods become
a better option, because di¤erent types of public goods bene…t all citizen groups — not just the
local group. This formalizes the political agenda e¤ect: when the con‡ict is at the supra-local level,
citizens will invest more in their con‡ict capacity because they recognize that a successful outcome
in the con‡ict will lead to public good provision, which is more bene…cial for them (and in the
absence of redistribution from the elite, they themselves will be able to invest in public goods in case
they win the con‡ict). This argument further shows that the political agenda e¤ect also provides
a mechanism for why, as documented by the studies cited in footnote 1, public good provision will
be associated with centralized states — parochial transfers emerge as the most economical way of
meeting citizen demands in the absence of state centralization.
Weighing against a national organization, however, is the escalation e¤ ect: if the citizens band
together in a national organization, this will escalate the …ght by inducing the elites to also form
a national organization and pool their resources to …ght against the citizens. The escalation e¤ect
features prominently in the calculus of strong citizens: by forming a national organization, they will
directly bene…t the weak citizen groups (who would have otherwise remained unorganized), but they
may face a lower probability of success and thus lower transfers because of the escalation of the
con‡ict.5
We show that for an interesting part of the parameter space, in the absence of a centralized state,
the escalation e¤ect is potent enough that strong citizens do not initiate a national organization,
and as a result, the elites are able to avoid the political agenda e¤ect. However, if the elites were to
choose a centralized state, this would induce citizens to also join up in a national coalition, putting in
motion the political agenda e¤ect. As a result, the elites may strategically choose a non-centralized
state in order to avoid this political escalation e¤ect.
Several important, and somewhat surprising, conclusions follow from this theory. First, in the
relevant region, citizens ex ante bene…t from a centralized state, because it enables all of them to
organize and make demands, and as already noted, these demands will be met via the provision
of general-interest public goods. In contrast, with a non-centralized state, only strong citizens are
able to do so (and they do not internalize the positive impact they have on other citizen groups).
5

Such escalation may not always harm the strong citizens, but will always do so at the margin when they are
indi¤erent between engaging in con‡ict by themselves and forming a broader coalition.

3

Second, and paradoxically, a greater value of public goods — and similarly, lower heterogeneity in
the preferences of citizens — can make the provision of public goods and state centralization less
likely. This is because when public goods become more valuable, this may further discourage elites
from building a centralized state, thus pushing in the direction of parochial, location- or issue-speci…c
transfers. Third, we show how a social democratic party may change the nature of equilibrium. This
happens when such a party induces citizens to band together before the identity of the strong group
is revealed, wrestling away from the elites the …rst mover advantage (which enabled the elites to
e¤ectively commit to not banding together as long as the citizens did not do so also). Put di¤erently,
once citizens commit to acting in a nationally coordinated manner, the strong citizen groups will
always organize the weak groups, and in response, elites now prefer the centralized state. In the
relevant part of the parameter space, this always increases the ex ante utility of citizens. Finally,
we show how elites may opt for partial state centralization, which enables them to increase their
power in the con‡ict and thus reduce the transfer they need to make, while still making use of the
escalation e¤ect to discourage strong citizens from forming coalitions with weak citizens.
This escalation e¤ect, as well as the political agenda e¤ect, is evident in many experiences of
political centralization, particularly in Post-World War II Southeast Asia. For example, Malaysia
was split by the British prior to World War II into the Crown colony of the Straights Settlement,
(consisting of Singapore, Melaka, Penang and Province Wellesley), the Federated Malay States
and the Unfederated Malay States. The states were ruled indirectly through the traditional rulers
(Emerson, 1937). In addition there was a Chinese Protectorate which dealt with any issues related
to the Chinese people. This patchwork of polities meant that Malaya was politically highly noncentralized (e.g., Andaya and Andaya, 1982, p. 245). This changed after World War II. During
the war, the Japanese took over Singapore as a colony, and united the rest of the country as a
protectorate, weakening traditional rulers and fomenting a Malay national identity in opposition
to the British. Andaya and Andaya argue that “Malays increasingly began to see themselves as
belonging to a Malaya-wide entity, rather than to their individual states,”(1982, p. 248), which was
a very di¤erent situation from the types of parochialism evident previously. This national identity
came together with the rapid growth of the Malayan Communist Party (MCP), which was initially
armed by the British to …ght the Japanese during the war, and thereafter assumed virtual de facto
control of the country when the Japanese surrendered. The response of the British was to propose
to merge all of the polities into a Malayan Union in a way that implied equal treatment for Malays
and Chinese. But this policy, in turn, triggered a response akin to our political agenda e¤ect: “For
the …rst time in history, the Malays rose in one movement to …ght against the formation, putting
aside parochial sentiments relating to individual states, districts or clans” (Hooker, 2003, p. 8).
This reaction led to a compromise Federation of Malaya, and to strengthened state institutions to
contain the Communist rebellion. Harper (1999, pp. 195-196) notes that “During the Emergency
the classic functions of the state — military, …scal, administrative — were greatly extended and new
ones adopted. A centralized federal government grew in strength — The state became for the …rst
time a physical presence in the lives of many of its subjects.”. Slater’s summary of the situation very
much emphasizes how the elites had to centralize the state in response to this bottom-up con‡ict.
He states: “Malaysia’s strong central state”has its roots in “elite responses to especially challenging
pressures from below” (Slater, 2010, p. 59), and
4

“endemic and unmanageable threats from below inspired the construction of a strong
and centralized state apparatus in Malaya in the decade following World War II. By
the time of independence in 1957, the Malayan state was already noteworthy for the
e¤ectiveness of its coercive and administrative institutions. The initial processes of statebuilding were compounded and accelerated in the early 1970s, as the racial riots of May
1969 provided a powerful impetus for government leaders to strengthen their coercive
grip and increase their …scal demands upon the Malaysian population” (Slater, 2010, p.
147)
The situation in Indonesia in the 1960s was also very similar. Once again, the signi…cant strengthening of state institutions (in the context of the transition from Sukarno to Suharto and the emergence of the so-called New Order, e.g., Anderson, 2011) came in response to the communist insurgency. Slater also sums up this case as an illustration of what we have called the escalation e¤ect:
“it was the dramatic rise of contentious class politics in the mid-1960s, via the mobilization of a
powerful, grassroots communist party with a massive rural and urban membership, that spurred
a remarkable increase in elite collective action upon the birth of the Suharto regime” (2010, pp.
26-27). He then generalizes these two cases to the entirety of Southeast Asia: “Mass movements
preceded the rise of authoritarian Leviathans ... New elite coalitions arose in active support of . . .
increased state centralization” (Slater, 2010, p. 23).
Our paper is related to the growing literature in economics and political science on the role of
state capacity, political centralization and the formation of the state, mentioned already above. Some
of this literature has developed political mechanisms that deter elites from building states. Acemoglu
(2005) suggests that states with strength beyond a certain level, though they may improve public
good provision, will make citizens worse o¤ and may be resisted. Besley and Persson (2009, 2011)
emphasize that if incumbent elites are threatened with the loss of power then they may refrain from
building a state because the capacity can be subsequently used against them. Our model develops
a very di¤erent mechanism, with di¤erent predictions. For instance, in these previous studies, when
public goods become more valuable, this makes it more attractive to build a state, but this is not
necessarily the case in our model. Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni (2011) develop a model where
incumbent elites face democratization and create an ine¢ cient state in order to favorably in‡uence
the democratic political equilibrium. The large literature on civil war can also be interpreted in terms
of state formation, for example political factors may deter states from eliminating rebel groups and
establishing a monopoly of violence (e.g., Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni, 2010, Acemoglu, Robinson
and Santos, 2013).
Our results on the political agenda e¤ect are also related to the large literature on clientelism
which has emphasized how politicians target transfers to their supporters (Bates, 1981, Shefter,
1977, 1993, Lizzeri and Persico, 2001, Kitschelt and Wilkinson, 2007, Robinson and Verdier, 2013,
Stokes et al., 2013) and to the long-standing puzzle in political science of when politics focus on
the provision of general-interest public goods as opposed to patronage, clientelism and parochial
bene…ts (see Kitschelt, 2000, for an overview). We provide a new argument here based on the
political agenda e¤ect — public goods politics emerge when citizens organize collectively, a process
which leads to a demand for public as opposed to parochial transfers. This argument also provides
5

a potential explanation for the …ndings of Anderson, François and Kotwal (2016), which document
how local elites in Maharashtra, India are able to dominate politics and curtail the provision of public
goods, among other things, by clientelism, particularly aimed at preventing coordination by nonelite citizens. Our result is related to, but distinct from, Lizzeri and Persico’s (2004) argument that
when politicians need to appeal to a larger number of voters (due to democratization), it becomes
more cost-e¤ective for them to do this by providing public goods. Our emphasis on the roles of the
political agenda e¤ect and state centralization in curtailing clientelism is also di¤erent from one of
Shefter’s (1977) suggestions that clientelism is weakened when new political parties mobilize outside
the existing political system.
It is also worth noting that the emphasis on how the state shapes society and vice versa is related
to the work of Habermas (1989), who suggested the notion of a ‘public sphere’as an inclusive place in
society where people come together to discuss and deliberate and form opinions. Habermas viewed
this as related to state formation, noting that “Civil society came into existence as the corollary of
a depersonalized state authority” (1989, p. 19). Other scholars, such as Katznelson (1985), Evans
(1995), and Migdal (1988, 2001), have also emphasized the interaction between the state and society,
but have tended to treat both the strength of the state and society as historically determined.
Finally, our work is also related to several strands of the literature on state formation in the
sociology and political science literatures. One line emphasizes the role of social movements, which
the state may in‡uence by using its resources or by other means (Tilly, 1978), or by favoring some
speci…c groups, for example, through selective policy or repression (McAdam, et al., 1988). Another
in‡uential line, also due to Tilly (1990), emphasizes the role of war-making on state-building. This
argument is distinct, but complementary to ours, since state centralization induced by war or the
threat of war would still put in motion the political agenda e¤ect. Perhaps even more closely related
is the emphasis of several scholars that state formation or centralization is speci…cally motivated by
the desire to control society, as in Anderson’s (1974) and Hechter and Brustein’s (1980) theories of
the emergence of absolutism in early modern Europe, or Saylor’s (2014) examination of contemporary
state-building in several developing countries.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce our model of state
centralization. In Section 3 we study the equilibrium political power and political agendas with
and without state centralization. The equilibrium emergence of state centralization is discussed in
Section 4. In Section 5 we extend the model to deal with a case where the citizens can coordinate
into a national political movement ahead of an eventual centralization of the state, and in Section
6 we extend the model to discuss a case where the elites may centralize the state only in parts of
the territory. Section 7 concludes. We present some omitted proofs and discuss several additional
extensions of the model in the Appendix.

2

Model

In this section, we present our basic model of state centralization. The ideas discussed in the
Introduction are conceptualized in the context of a model consisting of regional heterogeneity though,
as noted there, other dimensions of heterogeneity would be entirely analogous.

6

2.1

Preferences and Technology

We consider a society consisting of N regions, and we use i 2 N

f1; :::; N g to denote a particular

region. Each region is inhabited by a set of homogeneous citizens and homogeneous elites, each with
measure normalized to 1. Throughout, there will be no con‡ict of interest among citizens or elites

within a given region, and we will not distinguish between the group and a particular element thereof,
and use the superscripts c (respectively, e) to denote the entire group of citizens (respectively, elites)
or an individual member.6
Elite preferences depend only on their consumption, denoted for an elite agent of region i by
Cie ;
where Cie

0. Since the total measure of elites within each region is normalized to 1, Cie also denotes

total consumption expenditure of elites in region i.
Citizen preferences depend both on their consumption and on public goods (such as public
schooling or the quality of roads, which may matter less for elites who are able to a¤ord their own
private alternatives). However, re‡ecting the potential con‡ict of interest across regions, the quality
of these public goods within an individual’s own region matters more for her than those in other
regions. Namely, the utility of a citizen from region i is
Cic + Gi + (1

)

X

Gj ;

j6=i

where Cic

0 is the private consumption of citizen i, Gi

the individual’s own region, and
among citizens: when

0 is the total quantity of public goods in

2 [0; 1] parameterizes the extent of heterogeneity in preferences

is close to zero, an individual cares about public goods in other regions

equally (e.g., because this facilitates trading or an individual can get easy access to these public
goods), and conversely when

is close to 1, an individual only cares about public goods in her

region.
Total output of the consumption good within each region is Y , and we simplify the setup by
assuming that this is inelastically produced and initially accrues to the elite (e.g., it is their endowment of land or natural resources). It can also be taxed without any distortions. One unit of this
consumption good can be converted into

units of any of the regional public goods.

Let us next de…ne, for future reference,

(n) as the marginal utility of funds for citizens. Namely,

this is the maximum symmetric citizen utility that a coalition of citizens from a coalition N 0 with

jN 0 j = n can achieve from one unit of the consumption good per region. To compute this, note that

if we convert a fraction x of the unit of consumption from each region into the public good from
that region (by the symmetry requirement), then each citizen will have a utility of (1 + (1
1)) x + 1

x = ((1

)n + ) x+ 1

)(n

x. Clearly, this expression always has a corner maximizer in

x, thus enabling us to write
(n)

maxf1; ((1

6

)n + ) g:

(1)

As noted above, ‘region’ here stands for either locational heterogeneity, ethnic or religious heterogeneity, or heterogeneity in terms of other preferences. An important application of the model is to ethnic heterogeneity, which
would imply that the con‡ict in the non-centralized state is between elites and citizens of a certain ethnicity, and state
centralization involves elites of di¤erent ethnicities banding together.

7

It is also straightforward to see that (n) is nondecreasing in n. We next impose our …rst parametric
assumption on this
Assumption 1

function:

(1) = 1 and

(N ) > 1:

The …rst part of this assumption imposes that

< 1, which ensures that when in isolation, a

single group prefers not to invest in the public good. The second part implies that when all N
regions are combined, it is worthwhile to invest in public goods. In particular, the second part
requires that

is not too large. Substantively, this assumption restricts attention to situations in

which the demand for public goods will be greater when all regions are simultaneously investing in
public goods.7 This assumption thus restricts attention to the part of the parameter space that is
of interest for our analysis. Since
a unique n such that

(n) is nondecreasing, Assumption 1 also implies that there exists

(n) > 1 for n > n but

(n ) = 1.

Remark 1 Our analysis below will show that the functional form of

(n) plays no major role in

our results. Thus we could generalize (1) to
(n) = f (n) maxf1; ((1

)n + ) g;

where f (n) is a nondecreasing function re‡ecting the greater e¤ectiveness of using funds when
resources are deployed at the more centralized level or in a more coordinated fashion. For instance,
the case where f (n) = 1 for all n < N , and f (N ) > 1 can be interpreted as capturing the greater
e¢ ciency of a “centralized state” allocating funds for all regions.

2.2

Policies, Political Power and State Centralization

Policies in this economy concern how much of each region’s output Y will be taxed and how much
of this will be provided as direct transfers to citizens and how much of it will be invested in public
goods. These policies are decided by the group which has local or national political power. Initially,
political power in region i rests with the elite from that region, but may be contested by citizens.
We next describe how this con‡ict takes place and the technology for con‡ict. The key is whether
the state is “centralized”. As described in the Introduction, our focus is whether political power and
…scal policy are determined entirely at the local level or are centralized to the national level.
The two cases we initially consider are total lack of state centralization, denoted by s = 0, and
full centralization, analogously denoted by s = 1. Under a non-centralized state, each local elite acts
entirely autonomously, without any coordination, whereas under full centralization, they commit to
transfer power to a national political body that represents their collective preferences as we describe
next.
Under both centralized and non-centralized state structures, citizens can contest political power.
We assume that the extent to which they can do so depends on whether they are able to solve their
within-region collective action problem, and for simplicity we assume that only one of the N regions
(drawn uniformly at random) will be able to do so, and the remaining N

1 regions will not. We

refer to the citizens that have solved their collective action problem as “strong”, and the citizens
7

Many public goods, such as infrastructure or public health investments, would have this property.

8

in the remaining regions as “weak”. Strong citizens can contest local political power, while weak
citizens cannot unless they join up in a coalition or “organization” with the strong region.8
Suppose, without loss of any generality, that it is citizens in region 1 that are strong. An
additional decision for this group of citizens is whether to form a coalition with other regions. We
denote by Z c = 0 the decision not to form such a coalition, and by Z c = 1 the decision to o¤er to
form a coalition to citizens from other regions. We ignore for now the decision to o¤er to form a
coalition with a subset of this homogeneous set of citizens from other regions; we return to this issue
in the Appendix and show that this simpli…cation is without consequence. Following the choice of
Z c = 1, citizens from all other regions decide whether to join this coalition, denoted by zic 2 f0; 1g
for i 6= 1. Let us also designate N z

in N z

c =1

c =1

fi : i = 1 or zic = 1g (and note that region 1 is always

). If Z c = 0, it means that citizens from region 1 will engage only in local con‡ict and

present local demands from their elites. If Z c = 1 and zic = 1 for all i

2, then citizens from di¤erent

regions will have formed a national organization, and engage in national con‡ict and present national
demands.
Under a non-centralized state (s = 0), after observing the realization of the strength of citizens
of di¤erent regions and N z
use a similar notation,

zie ,

c =1

, each regional elite also decides whether to join up in a coalition. We

to denote the decision of the elite from region i to form a coalition with

the elite from region 1 (ignoring coalitions excluding region 1 is without loss of any generality as will
become apparent). We denote by N z

e =1

fi : i = 1 or zie = 1g the coalition of the elite.

Under a centralized state (s = 1), on the other hand, the elites pool their resources and delegate

these to a national organization, which then confronts all demands and con‡ict from the citizens.
Subsequent to the state centralization decision and the coalition formation decisions, each region within this citizen-side coalition decides how much to invest in the con‡ict technology (e.g.,
armaments or organizational capital), denoted by
f

c
i gi2N zc =1 .

c
i,

with the collection of these investments being

We assume that the cost of investment in terms of the …nal good is given by

which is continuously di¤erentiable and satis…es (0) = 0,
lim

c
i !1

0( c)
i

0( c)
i

> 0,

= 1. Each regional elite has con‡ict capacity given by

00 ( c )
i
e

0 for all

c
i

( ci ),
0, and

0. We take this elite-side

capacity as exogenous to simplify the discussion and show in the Appendix that endogenizing it does
not a¤ect our main results.
Finally, each regional elite facing the threat of con‡ict — i.e., those with indices belonging to the
set N z

c =1

[N z

e =1

— decides on a transfer-public good package to encourage peaceful settlement with

the citizens. We denote the package o¤ered by elites in region i by (Ti ; Gi ), where Ti + Gi =

(with Y

Ti

Gi =

Y

being left for the consumption of the elite in region i). No concession can

be simply captured by setting (Ti ; Gi ) = (0; 0). More speci…cally, there are three possibilities to
consider. Either (i) N z

package. Or (ii)

e
N z =1

e =1

= f1g, in which case the elite in region 1 individually o¤er a policy

f1g, in which case the elites in this coalition jointly decide on a policy

package, which they will each o¤er.9 The fact that they all o¤er the same policy package is natural,
since at this point, there is no con‡ict of interest among regional elites in N z
8

e =1

for in case this

The interpretation here is that when weak groups are part of an organization with a strong group that has already
solved its collective action problem, they can also de facto solve their own collective action problem, thus becoming
capable of contesting power in their region or in a national con‡ict.
e
9
There is no interesting possibility that N z =1 is a singleton but not equal to f1g, since in this case the citizens
are not organized, and thus there is no need to make any concessions.

9

o¤er is rejected, they will all have exactly the same probability of losing the con‡ict and su¤ering
the same consequences (as we describe next). Or …nally (iii) i 2 N z
elite group is facing the organized coalition N

z c =1

c =1

nN z

but is not part of N

e =1

z e =1

, in which case this

, so will have to make

an individual o¤er again. Following the o¤er (Ti ; Gi )i2N ze =1 or (Ti ; Gi )i , the corresponding group
e
e
of citizens decide whether to accept this concession or to …ght (fN
z c =1 2 f0; 1g or fi 2 f0; 1g). If

f e = 1, there will be …ghting, and the winner of the con‡ict is determined stochastically.

To explain how con‡ict takes place, …rst consider the case in which s = 0 (i.e., no state centralization) and N z

e =1

= Nz

c =1

= f1g, so that con‡ict is local. Then there will be a single con‡ict in

region 1, and no con‡ict with any other region, since all other citizen groups are weak. The outcome
of the con‡ict in region 1 depends on whether
c
1

where

e
1

>

+ ;

is a random variable drawn from a cumulative distribution H( ). If this inequality holds,

then the citizen side wins and determines the taxes, transfers and the public good provision level.
If it does not, the elite side wins and makes all the policy decisions.
Given this speci…cation, the probability that citizens in region 1 win this con‡ict is simply
H(

c
1

e

):

Let us next turn to the case in which still s = 0 and at least one of N z

c =1

and N z

e =1

is not a

singleton, so that con‡ict is not purely local. Then, analogously, the outcome of the con‡ict depends
on whether

X

c
i

i2N zc =1

> Nz

e =1

e

+ :

(2)

If this inequality holds, the coalition of citizens wins, and otherwise the elite coalition wins, and
makes the policy choices. Intuitively, the left-hand side involves the investments of all citizen groups
that are in a coalition with a strong partner, and thus able to take part in a con‡ict. The right-hand
side involves the strength of all elite groups that have joined the coalition involving region 1. The
right-hand side thus re‡ects the fact that all their resources are pooled. Notice that this expression
applies when N z

e =1

is not equal to N z

c =1

. If some region j 2 N z

e =1

they are contributing to the elite side of this …ght, and since j 2
=

but j 2
= Nz

c
N z =1 ,

c =1

, it means that

citizens from this region

are not contributing to the citizen side. The cost to the elite from region j is that if the citizen side
wins, they will have also lost, whereas if they had not joined this coalition, because their citizens
are weak, they would have never lost the con‡ict. Conversely, if j 2 N z

c =1

outcome of the con‡ict in region j is determined depending on whether
X
c
e
+ ;
i >
i2N z

but j 2
= Nz

e =1

, then the

c =1

implying that the elite in this region are facing the full strength of the citizen coalition N z

c =1

.

Finally, consider the case in which s = 1, so that there is state centralization, and the citizen

coalition is given by N z

c =1

. Because state centralization has already pooled all elite resources, the

outcome of the con‡ict now depends on whether
X
c
i

>N

i2N zc =1

10

e

+ :

In all of this, the con‡ict always destroys a fraction 1

2 (0; 1) of the total output, representing

the fact that con‡ict is costly. Hence, the party that wins the con‡ict will have access to a regional
output in the amount of

Y . This cost can be avoided if the elite in question choose to make an

o¤er (Ti ; Gi ) that the citizen side prefers to …ghting, and thus chooses fie = 0.
Finally, in what follows we will also impose:
Assumption 2 The density of the distribution function H, h, exists over its entire support
H

[ N

h( N

e

e

; ) where

) Y >

> 0, is continuously di¤erentiable and is nonincreasing. Moreover,

0 (0).

This assumption is useful for several reasons. First, it ensures that the second-order condition in
the con‡ict choice of citizens is satis…ed. Second it guarantees that the density of the distribution
function H, which shapes the marginal incentives of citizens in their investment decisions, is wellde…ned and positive over the range in which these investments will take place ( is an arbitrary
positive constant, making sure that the support of the distribution does not stop exactly at 0).
Third, it also ensures that starting at zero con‡ict capacity, citizens have an incentive for investment
in this capacity. This assumption is the weaker version of the oft-imposed requirement that

2.3

0 (0)

= 0.

Timing of Events and Equilibrium

To summarize, the timing of events is as follows.
1. The elites decide whether to centralize the state (i.e., choose between s = 0 and s = 1). Note
that at this stage, all regional elites have the same preferences over state centralization.
2. It becomes common knowledge in which region citizens are strong. Suppose, without loss
of any generality that this is region 1. Then citizens in region 1 decide whether to form a
coalition with other regions (i.e., choose between Z c = 0 and Z c = 1). If Z c = 0, then there
is no coalition of citizens from di¤erent regions. If Z c = 1, then other regions decide whether
to join the coalition of the strong citizens from region 1 (i.e., they choose zic = 0 or zic = 1 for
i = 2; : : : ; N ). In region 1 and those in i 2 N z

choose

c
i

c =1

(or equivalently, those where zic = 1) citizens

0.

3. Then elites from di¤erent regions decide whether to join in a coalition with the elite from
region 1, which are the ones facing the strong citizens (i.e., they decide zie = 0 or zie = 1 for
i = 2; : : : ; N ). Then:
(a) In regions i 2
= Nz

c =1

[Nz

e =1

(or equivalently those with i

2 and zic = zie = 0) political

power is not contested and the elites decide the policy vector (Ti ; Gi ).

(b) Elites that are in N z

e =1

jointly decide what o¤er (Ti ; Gi )i2N ze =1 to make to the citizens

they are facing, and those in N z

c =1

nN z

e =1

individually make such o¤ers.

4. If the state is centralized (s = 1), then elites from di¤erent regions will have already formed
their grand coalition, i.e., N z

e =1

= N . Then, all of the elites jointly decide what o¤er

(Ti ; Gi )i2N ze =1 to make to the citizens they are facing.
11

5. Following these o¤ers, citizens decide whether to accept the o¤ers they have received or not
e
e
(fN
z c =1 2 f0; 1g or fi 2 f0; 1g). If the o¤er is accepted, it is implemented. Otherwise, there

is …ghting and whether the citizens or the elite win is determined according to (2), and the
winner sets the policies with the value of output reduced to Y .
6. Policies are implemented, and all payo¤s are realized.

In what follows, we focus on pure-strategy subgame perfect equilibria. This detailed timing of
events also speci…es citizen and elite strategies, and a subgame perfect equilibrium is de…ned, in the
usual fashion, as a strategy pro…le in which all actions are best responses to other strategies in all
histories. When this will cause no confusion, we refer to pure-strategy subgame perfect equilibria
simply as “equilibria”.
Remark 2 The timing of events also clari…es that there are two di¤erent ways in which the elites
can “centralize the state” (form their grand coalition and coordinate their actions). The …rst is
by choosing s = 1 in stage 1, and the second one is by choosing N z

e =1

= N in stage 4. As

we have speci…ed the payo¤s, these two options are entirely equivalent. It is straightforward, but
cumbersome, to introduce a slight cost advantage for the …rst option, so that elites explicitly choose
s = 1 when this is in their interest rather than wait for stage 4. In what follows, we simplify the
discussion by assuming that when state centralization is in their interest, the elites will do so by
setting s = 1.

3

Equilibrium

Pure-strategy subgame perfect equilibria are characterized by backward induction. We start by the
policy o¤er of elites under threat of con‡ict and the response of citizens.
e
Lemma 1 Regardless of whether s = 0 or s = 1, any equilibrium always involves fN
z c =1 = 0, i.e.,

there will always be an o¤ er from the elite that induces no …ghting. Moreover, this o¤ er will give
citizens exactly the same utility as they would obtain with …ghting.
Proof. See the Appendix.
The intuition for this is simple. Since

< 1, con‡ict is costly, and the elites can always bene…t

by o¤ering the policy mix that makes citizens as well o¤ as they would be with con‡ict. Moreover,
since the elite have the possibility to make such an o¤er, they will never propose a policy mix that
gives citizens strictly greater utility than the latter could obtain by …ghting. This last observation
also implies that in the previous stages of the game in our analysis of the decisions of citizens, we
could always use the utility that they would obtain under …ghting.
The next question is what policy mix the elites will use, what coalitions will form along the
equilibrium path, and whether the elites will choose state centralization. To investigate these issues,
we …rst characterize the equilibria in subgames starting …rst without state centralization, and then
with state centralization.

3.1

Equilibrium Without a Centralized State (s = 0)

Suppose that the elites have decided not to form a centralized state, designated by s = 0.
12

The Escalation E¤ect
Our next result formalizes the escalation e¤ect in a society without state centralization. It shows
that when there has been no state centralization, the coalition formation of elites will mimic that
of citizens. Throughout, we continue to suppose, without loss of any generality, that region 1 is the
one where citizens are strong.
Lemma 2 Suppose s = 0 (there has been no state centralization) and citizens have formed a coalition
Nz

c =1

(3 1). Then
Nz

e =1

= Nz

c =1

:

Proof. See the Appendix.
Intuitively, no elite in a region where the citizens have not joined the coalition N z

to join the coalition

e
N z =1 ,

c =1

would want

since they are facing weak, unorganized citizens that cannot make any

demands, but if they join the coalition, this will force them to make concessions or be included in
the …ght with positive probability of losing (because at least some other members of the coalition are
facing organized citizens). Conversely, elites in the regions where citizens have joined the coalition
Nz

c =1

will be facing organized demands, and are better o¤ pooling their resources with other elites.

The anticipation of this behavior highlights the escalation e¤ ect mentioned in the Introduction:

when citizens in region 1 decide to form a coalition with citizens from other regions, they will escalate
the con‡ict, inducing other elite groups to join the …ght as well.10
Choice of Con‡ict Capacity
Suppose now that a coalition N z

c =1

of citizens has formed. How will they choose their con‡ict

capacity? First, we know from Lemma 2 that N z

e =1

= Nz

c =1

. Next recall that even though the

group of citizens will make their …ghting decisions jointly, the level of con‡ict capacity is the purview
of each region.11 Hence, it will be the solution to a maximization problem in which each group i of

citizens in the coalition N z
of elites. Setting N

z c =1

c =1

c
i

recognizing that they will be facing an identical coalition

= n, this maximization problem for each i 2 N z
0
1
X
c
max
H@
n e A (n) Y
( ci ):
j
c
i

10

chooses

0

c =1

is:

(3)

j2N zc =1

As already noted in the Introduction, the escalation e¤ect does not always harm the strong citizens (citizens from
region 1). For instance, if the strength of elites, e , is small and the level of investment of citizens, c , is large,
the likelihood that citizens prevail in the con‡ict when both sides have formed their grand coalitions (given by the
probability that jN j c > jN j e + ) will be greater than the likelihood that citizens from region 1 win against elites
from region 1 (given by the probability that c1 > e + ). However, as we will see below, the escalation e¤ect will
always harm citizens from region 1 at the margin when they are indi¤erent between engaging in con‡ict by themselves
and forming a larger coalition (e.g., their grand coalition). This is because for them to be indi¤erent in this fashion,
we have to be in the case where e is relatively large compared to c .
11
This assumption is made so as to ensure that forming a coalition does not automatically increase their investments
in con‡ict capacity by removing the free-rider e¤ect (which thus prevents us from mixing two potentially distinct
bene…ts of forming a larger coalition, the …rst coming from the political agenda e¤ect, and the second one from the
wrecked coordination to remove the free-rider e¤ect). In the Appendix we characterize the equilibrium of the model
when citizens solve the free-rider e¤ect in their investment in con‡ict capacity, and show that all of our results apply
identically in this case (though the exact thresholds are di¤erent).

13

0

Intuitively, H @

X

j2N z

1

n e A is the probability that the citizens will win the con‡ict — since

c
j

c =1

X

their total con‡ict capacity will be

c
j

and the exogenous con‡ict capacity of the elite they

c
j2N z =1

are facing is n e . If they lose in the con‡ict, then the regional elites choose the policies and naturally
set zero taxes, yielding zero utility to citizens. If the citizens succeed, they can tax the entire income
that is not destroyed in con‡ict,

Y , and they can use this either for the direct transfers or public

good investments, and the term

(n) captures the marginal utility of these funds when they are

optimally used. Finally, (

c
i)

is the cost that this group of citizens faces from their investments.
c

The …rst-order condition for this problem is (for each i 2 N z =1 )
0
1
X
c
0 c
h@
n e A (n) Y
( i ) = 0;
j

(4)

j2N zc =1

with the second-order condition
0
h0 @

X

c
j

j2N zc =1

1

n e A (n) Y

00

( ci ) < 0:

Assumption 2 ensures that the …rst-order condition (4) will always hold, thus removing the need
to write this in complementary slackness form, and also that there will be a unique solution where
the second-order condition holds (since h0

0).

One important implication of (4) is that citizens from all regions will choose the same investment
in con‡ict capacity, and this will depend only on n (and not on the exact identity of the regions
in N z

c =1

).12 We denote this investment level by

Nz

c =1

; Nz

e =1

; ( Nz

c =1

) , where the …rst

argument is the conditioning on the size of the coalition of citizens, the second argument is the size
of the coalition of elites the citizens will be facing, and the term

( Nz

c =1

) highlights the other

major e¤ect discussed in the Introduction, the political agenda e¤ ect. The presence of this term,
and thus the political agenda e¤ect, both directly increases the utility of citizens from con‡ict in
(3) and raises their level of investment in con‡ict capacity in (4). Since we are in the case of no
state centralization and N z

c =1

capacity can be simply denoted
Indeed, because

00

= Nz

e =1

= n (from Lemma 2), the equilibrium level of con‡ict

(n; n; (n)).

> 0 everywhere, the level of investment in con‡ict capacity is always

(strictly) increasing in whatever increases the marginal utility of additional investments, given by
P
c
h
n e (n) Y . The political agenda e¤ect then follows straightforwardly from this
i2N zc =1 i
observation, since

@
and d (n)=dn

(n; n; (n)) =@ (n) > 0;

0. Intuitively, a higher

(n) implies that the marginal utility of the funds that

citizens can capture following a successful con‡ict is greater, and this will encourage them to invest
more in con‡ict. In turn, larger coalitions of citizens can use funds more productively to provide
public goods, thus explaining why

(n) is increasing in n.

12

This applies to citizens from region 1 as well, since, after joining the coalition, the problem facing all citizens,
including those from region 1, are identical.

14

More speci…cally, substituting these equilibrium con‡ict investments in the utility functions of
citizens, we can observe that the utility of citizens from each region i 2 N z

c =1

under a non-centralized

state (s = 0) is

Uic [njs = 0] = H (n

(n; n; (n))

n e ) (n)Y

(

(n; n; (n))) :

(5)

From Lemma 1, the elite will make an o¤er to citizens that just convinces them not to …ght, and
at this point they have already paid the cost of investments in con‡ict capacity. Hence, the utility
of citizens from each region i 2 N z

c =1

entering con‡ict will be H (n

(n; n; (n))

n e ) (n) Y .

With the same logic that citizens can use their funds most e¤ectively by providing public goods,
elites in the coalition N z

e =1

= Nz

c =1

can also deliver this utility most e¤ectively by providing public

goods, since one unit of the consumption good invested in the public good equally across each region
in N z

c =1

of H (n

yields the utility of

(n) to each group of citizens. Hence, the cost of delivering a utility

n e ) (n) Y to citizens in this coalition is H (n

(n; n; (n))

Thus the utility of elites in i 2 N

z e =1

(n; n; (n))

n e) Y .

can be written as

Uie [njs = 0] = [1

H (n

(n; n; (n))

n e )]Y:

Because of the political agenda e¤ect, Uic [njs = 0] is increasing in

(6)

(n), while Uie [njs = 0] is

decreasing in (n). The latter is true despite the fact that, when the citizens have formed a coalition
of size n, each dollar that the elite decides to redistribute is also worth more by exactly the same
amount,

(n), since in this case a higher

(n) also raises the investment of citizens in their con‡ict

capacity.
Second, because h0

0, the marginal utility of funds is decreasing in the investments of other

citizens in the coalition and in the size of the coalition, making investments of di¤erent groups of
citizens strategic substitutes. For the same reason, the marginal utility of funds is increasing in the
size of the coalition of elites, creating a force towards greater investments when citizens are facing a
larger coalition of elites.
Coalition Decision of Citizens
Let us now consider the coalition decision of citizens. If Z c = 1, then clearly zic = 1 for all
i = 2; : : : ; N . This is because when they do not join a coalition with citizens from region 1, these
unorganized groups of citizens cannot contest power and thus receive zero transfers in public goods,
whereas once they do so, they will receive positive transfers in the next stage of the game.
This then implies that if Z c = 1, the grand coalition of all citizens will form. Consequently, the
choice for citizens from region 1 is to choose Z c = 0 and act by themselves, or initiate the formation
of this grand coalition.13
Suppose …rst that N z

c =1

= f1g. Then with the same notation as above and noting that in this

case the size of the coalition is 1 and (also from Assumption 1)
U1c [1js = 0] = H (

(1; 1; 1)

13

e

)Y

(1) = 1, (5) becomes

(

(1; 1; 1)) :

(7)

As already noted, in the Appendix we discuss the case in which citizens from region 1 can restrict the coalition to
a certain number of regions, thus inducing the formation of a smaller coalition, and show that when H( ) is uniform
and ( ) is quadratic, they will never choose to do this. We also establish that when N is su¢ ciently large, even if
citizens choose to form a smaller coalition, the elites will opt for a non-centralized state.

15

For future reference, we also write the utility of elites from region 1 in this case, which follows readily
from (6):
U1e [1js = 0] = [1

H(

e

(1; 1; 1)

)]Y:

(8)

Note also that in this case, the most e¢ cient way of transferring resources for the elite is a direct
transfer, so there will be no investment in public goods. That is, T1 = H (

(1; 1; 1)

e

) Y and

G1 = 0.
Suppose next that N z

c =1

= N . Then because the equilibrium is symmetric and thus citizens

from di¤erent regions will choose the same investment level, (5) becomes
U c [N js = 0] = H (N

(N; N; (N ))

e

N

) (N )Y

(

(N; N; (N ))) ;

(9)

and similarly, (6) becomes
U e [N js = 0] = [1
Since from Assumption 1,

H (N

(N; N; (N ))

(N; N; (N ))

)]Y

(10)

(N ) > 1, we also know that all transfers from elites to citi-

zens in this case will take the form of public good provision.
H (N

e

N

N

e

That is, Ti = 0 and Gi =

) Y for all i.

We can conclude that citizens from region 1 will prefer to form the grand coalition of citizens
when their utility from the grand coalition, (9), is strictly greater than their utility from standing
(N ),14 while the latter, (7), does not depend on

alone, (7). The former, (9), is increasing in
Therefore, there exists a value of
H (N

(N ),

(N; N;

(N ), such that

(N ))

N

=H(
Then whenever

(N ) >

and whenever (N ) <

(N ).

e

)

(N ) Y
e

(1; 1; 1)

(

(N; N;

) Y

(

(N )))

(11)

(1; 1; 1)) :

(N ), citizens from region 1 (the strong citizens) prefer a grand coalition,
(N ), they prefer to act by themselves. This conclusion is intuitive. Forming

a coalition with citizens from other regions is costly because of the escalation e¤ect: the …ght will
escalate because, in response, the grand coalition of elites will form and …ght against them (this is
captured by the fact that

e

is now multiplied by N on the left-hand side). The bene…t, on the other

hand, is related to the political agenda e¤ect as well as to the fact that now all citizens are coordinated
(captured by the fact that

(N; N; (N )) is multiplied by N ). The latter e¤ect corresponds to the

more e¤ective use of funds in case of victory in the con‡ict, and exhibits itself in the presence of
the term

(N ) multiplying the probability of success on the left-hand side, and the greater level of

investment in con‡ict capacity of all citizens (i.e., the fact that
14

(N; N; (N )) >

(N; N; 1)).

The derivative is given by:
H (N (N; N; (N )) N e ) Y
@ (N; N; (N ))
+
N h (N (N; N; (N ))
@ (N )

N

e

) (N ) Y

0

(

(N; N; (N ))) :

The …rst term is clearly positive. We can further see that the second term is positive by the following argument. First,
@ (N;N; (N ))
> 0 with a straightforward application of the implicit function theorem. Second, the term in square
@ (N )
brackets in the second line is also strictly positive, since the …rst-order condition (4) implies that
h (N
and thus this term is equal to (N

(N; N; (N ))
1)h (N

N

e

) (N ) Y =

(N; N; (N ))

16

N

e

0

(

(N; N; (N ))) ;

) (N ) Y > 0.

Another important point is worth noting: equation (11) is purely from the viewpoint of citizens
in region 1, trading o¤ the escalation e¤ect against the coordination of all citizens and the political
agenda e¤ect. However, when citizens from region 1 form a coalition with other citizens, they
create a positive externality on these citizens, who would have otherwise not contested power and
obtained zero transfers and public goods, and a commensurate negative externality on elites from
other regions, which now will have to make transfers to their citizens. The ex ante expectation of
this externality plays an important role in interpreting our results below.
The coalition formation decision of citizens, and the resulting utility levels for citizens and elites,
are summarized in the next proposition.
Proposition 1 Suppose the elites have not formed a centralized state (i.e., s = 0), and suppose
without loss of any generality that it is citizens from region 1 that are strong. Then there exists
(N ) such that the following are true:
1. If

(N ), then citizens from region 1 choose Z c = 0 and act independently.

(N ) <

There is no redistribution in regions i = 2; : : : ; N , and in region 1, there is redistribution
in the form of direct transfers to convince citizens in this region not to …ght.
T1 = H (
2. If

e

(1; 1; 1)

That is,

) Y and G1 = 0.

(N ), then citizens from region 1 choose Z c = 1 and all of the regions

(N ) >

choose zic = 1, joining the coalition of citizens from region 1. In this case, there will be
redistribution in all regions in the form of public good provision.
Gi =

H (N

(N; N; (N ))

N

Proof. The existence of the threshold
when
Zc

(N ) <

e

That is, Ti = 0 and

) Y for all i.
(N ) follows from (11). Then by the de…nition of

(N ),

(N ), the right-hand side of (11) is greater and thus citizens from region 1 prefer

= 0, and the rest of part 1 follows straightforwardly. When

of (11) is greater, and citizens from region 1 prefer

Zc

(N ) >

(N ), the left-hand side

= 1. The rest of part 2 once again follows

readily.
An important point, related to our discussion in the Introduction, is that when

(N ) <

(N )

and con‡ict is local, elites placate the citizens by making direct transfers to them instead of providing
public goods. Instead, when

(N ) >

(N ) and con‡ict is national, there will be public good

provision instead of direct transfers. This emphasizes the link between the nature of con‡ict and
demands from citizens and whether the responses from elites are “patrimonial”.
We can also readily determine the expected utility of elites before the identity of the citizens that
are strong is determined. When

(N ) <

(N ), there is only 1=N probability that they will have to

redistribute income to their citizens as speci…ed in Proposition 1, whereas when

(N ) >

(N ), all

elites will necessarily make transfers as speci…ed in Proposition 1. Therefore, the following corollary
to Proposition 1 follows immediately (proof in the text).
Corollary 1 When

(N ) <
Ue

(N ), the expected utility of elites is
h
i
e
H( (1; 1; 1)
) Y:
[s = 0] = 1
N
17

(12)

When

(N ) >

(N ), the expected utility of elites is
U e [s = 0] = [1

H(N

(N; N; (N ))

N

These expressions make it clear that, as shown in Figure 1, when

e

)]Y:

(13)

(N ) crosses the threshold of

(N ), there is a downward jump in the utility of elites due to the change in the equilibrium coalition
of citizens.15 This discontinuous behavior at the threshold

(N ) re‡ects the political agenda e¤ect,

and highlights the advantage of a non-centralized state for the elites when the marginal utility of
funds for citizens is not too high (i.e., is less than

(N )). It is this advantage (in the political

agenda e¤ect), as we will see next, that will induce elites to opt for a non-centralized state for a
range of values of

3.2

(N ).

Equilibrium under a Centralized State

We next present the analogous analysis for the case in which there is a centralized state, i.e., s = 1.
Choice of Con‡ict Capacity
The choice of con‡ict capacity is very similar to that under the non-centralized state, except that now
the elite have already committed to nationally-coordinated action. Therefore, when the coalition of
citizens is N z

c =1

, the optimization problem for citizens from region i 2 N z
0
1
X
c
max
H@
N e A (n) Y
( ci );
j
c
i

where N z

c =1

0

c =1

becomes

j2N zc =1

= n. Here we have used the fact that because of state centralization, the baseline

includes a greater amount of elite resources being deployed against the citizens. The …rst-order
conditions are then identical to (4), with the n

e

term replaced by N

e

, and we do not write them

out to conserve space. One important implication is that the escalation e¤ect which played an
15

That the jump is downward follows from the same argument as the one we use in step 1 of the proof of Proposition

3.

18

important role in our analysis without state centralization is no longer present — the elites have
already banded together and there will be no further escalation of con‡ict on the elite side even if
citizens form a non-local coalition.
The Coalition Formation Decision of Citizens
The coalition decision of citizens can be analyzed similarly to the one without state centralization.
First, it is again straightforward to see that when citizens from region 1, who we have again set as
the ones that are strong without loss of any generality, choose Z c = 1, then citizens from all other
regions will choose zic = 1. Thus the choice for citizens from region 1 is once more simply between
Nz

c =1

= f1g and N z

c =1

= N . When they choose N z

c =1

= f1g, we again have

(1) = 1, and thus

their overall utility under state centralization (s = 1) will be
U1c [1js = 1] = H (
Conversely, when they choose N z
U c [N js = 1] = H (N

c =1

(1; N; 1)

e

N

)Y

(

(1; N; 1)) :

(14)

= N , their overall utility under state centralization will be

(N; N; (N ))

N

e

) (N )Y

(

(N; N; (N ))) :

(15)

The comparison of these two expressions boils down to
H (N

(N; N; (N ))
>H(

When evaluated at (N ) =

N

e

) (N ) Y

(

(N; N; (N )))

e

(

(1; N; 1)) :

(1; N; 1)

N

) Y

(16)

(N ), the left-hand side of (16) is identical to the left-hand side of (11),

while its right-hand side is strictly smaller than the right-hand side of (11) because of the presence
of N multiplying

e

inside the H function. Intuitively, this re‡ects the absence of the escalation

e¤ect mentioned above — citizens can now make their coalition formation decision without worrying
about how this will escalate the con‡ict by inducing the elites to form a coalition, and therefore they
are more likely to form such a coalition. These observations also establish the next proposition.
Proposition 2 Suppose the elites have formed a centralized state (i.e., s = 1), and suppose without
loss of any generality that citizens from region 1 are strong. Then citizens from region 1 choose
Z c = 1 and all the regions choose zic = 1, joining the coalition of citizens from region 1. There
will be redistribution in all regions in the form of public good provision. That is, Ti = 0 and
Gi =

H (N

(N; N; (N ))

e

N

) Y for all i.

Proof. The proof is straightforward by observing that (16) is always satis…ed. To see this note
that since

(N )

is independent of
H (N

(N; N; 1)

1 and the left-hand side of (16) is increasing in

(N ) while the right-hand side

(N ), a stronger (more demanding) condition than (16) is that
N

e

) Y

(

(N; N; 1)) > H (

(1; N; 1)

N

e

) Y

(

(1; N; 1)) : (17)

To see that this must always hold, we …rst prove that
H (N

(N; N; 1)

N

e

) Y >H(

19

(1; N; 1)

N

e

) Y:

(18)

Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that this is not the case. From (4), we have
h (N

(N; N; 1)

N

e

) Y

=

0

(

(1; N; 1)

N

e

) Y

=

0

( (1; N; 1)):

h(

(N; N; 1)

But since h is nonincreasing from Assumption 2,
h (N
00

Then, given that
(1; N; 1)

N

e

> 0,

(N; N; 1)

(N; N; 1) >

N

e

)

h(

(1; N; 1)

e

N

):

(1; N; 1). This in turn implies that N

(N; N; 1)

N

e

>

, and thus
H (N

(N; N; 1)

N

e

) Y >H(

(1; N; 1)

N

e

) Y;

yielding a contradiction.
Next, since (18) holds, we must have from (4) and Assumption 2 that
0(

(1; N; 1)), and hence that (

0(

(N; N; 1) <

(N; N; 1) < ( (1; N; 1)), establishing that (17), and thus (16),

is always satis…ed.
Intuitively, because the escalation e¤ect is entirely absent, citizens simply gain additional strength
by joining together without any cost of doing so. This means that when elites form a centralized
state, citizens will also respond by forming their grand coalition. This result thus highlights the cost
of state centralization from the viewpoint of elites. It implies that citizens will necessarily form a
coalition in their potential con‡ict against the elites.16
The next corollary once again characterizes the expected utility of elites.
Corollary 2 When there is state centralization (s = 1), the equilibrium utility of elites is given by
U e [s = 1] = [1

4

H (N

(N; N; (N ))

N

e

)] Y:

(19)

Equilibrium State Centralization

In this section, we study the state centralization decision of elites by combining the results from
Corollaries 1 and 2. We will …rst provide a sharp result under Assumption 2, which ensures that h
is nonincreasing (i.e., h0 ( )

0), and then in the next subsection we will generalize this result to the

case in which h is single-peaked, which will reveal an additional strategic interplay.

4.1

Main Result

Proposition 3 Let
hold. Then there exists

(N ) be as de…ned in Proposition 1, and suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2
(N ) <

(N ) > 1 such that we have the following characterization of the

unique equilibrium:
16

The result that citizens will form their grand coalition under a centralized state is due to the assumption that
the escalation e¤ects disappear entirely under state centralization. If we relax this, for example, by assuming that
the centralized state is equivalent to elites pooling some fraction of their resources (thus giving them a strength K e ,
where K 2 (1; N )), and their remaining power will be pooled in response to citizens joining together in con‡ict, then
there will exist another threshold, ~ (N ) <
(N ) such that the citizens will form their grand coalition under state
centralization only if (N ) > ~ (N ).

20

1. If

(N ) <

(N ), then the elites choose state centralization (s = 1).

2. If

(N ) < (N ) <

(N ), then the elites choose a non-centralized state (s = 0).

3. If

(N ) < (N ), then the elites choose state centralization (s = 1).17

Proof. We will proceed in several steps.
Step 1: We …rst prove that
H (N

(N; N;

(N ))

e

N

)

(N ) Y > H (

e

(1; 1; 1)

) Y:

(20)

Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that this is not the case. From (4), we have
h (N

(N; N;

(N ))
h(

e

N

))

(N ) Y
e

(1; 1; 1)

) Y

=

0

(

=

0

( (1; 1; 1)):

(N; N;

(N ))

(21)

But since h is nonincreasing from Assumption 2,
h(
00

But then, given that
(

(N; N;

e

(1; 1; 1)
> 0,

)

h (N

(N; N;

(N )) >

(N ))) > (

(1; 1; 1)), and thus

H (N

(N ))

(N; N;

(N; N;

e

N

)

(N ))
(1; 1; 1).

(N ) Y > H (

e

N

)

(N ):

This immediately implies that,

e

(1; 1; 1)

) Y;

yielding a contradiction, establishing step 1.
Step 2: We next prove that
contrary that

(N ) > 1. The proof is again by contradiction. Suppose on the

(N ) = 1 (which would mean that for all possible values of

(N ), citizens form their

grand coalition). Then (20), which we established in step 1, cannot hold either. If it did, then (21),
combined with the fact that h is nonincreasing, would now imply that
and thus (

(N; N;

(N ))) < (

H (N

(N; N;

(1; 1; 1)). But then the de…nition of

(N ))

N

e

)

(N ) Y < H (

(N )) <

(N; N;

(N ) would imply
e

(1; 1; 1)

) Y;

contradicting (20). But since we know from step 1 that (20) must hold, we conclude that
Step 3 : De…ne

(N; N;

(N ) > 1.

(N ) such that
H (N

Since

(1; 1; 1),

(N; N;

(N ))

(N )) is increasing in

non-state centralization, and for all
Step 4: We next prove that
Recall from step 1 that H (N

N

e

)=

1
H(
N

(1; 1; 1)

(N ) (from (4)), for all

(N ) <

(N ) <

e

):

(N ) >

(N ), the elite prefer

(N ), they prefer state centralization.
(N ).

(N; N;

(N ))

N

e

)

(N ) > H (

(1; 1; 1)

e

). Dividing

both sides by N , we have
H (N

(N; N;

(N ))

N

e

(N )
1
> H(
N
N

)

17

(1; 1; 1)

e

Throughout we simplify the statement of the propositions by omitting the case where
involves the citizens being indi¤erent between joining up in a coalition and not.

21

):
(N ) =

(N ), which

Since from (1) and Assumption 1,
H (N
which yields that for

(N ) =

(N; N;

(N ) =

(N ))

(N ) = (N
N

e

)>

(N

1
H(
N

1) ) < N , this implies
(1; 1; 1)

e

);

(N ), (12) is strictly greater than (19). Since

(12) is strictly greater than (19), we must have that

(N ) >

(N ) >

(N ) and

(N ).

We now proceed to prove the three claims in the proposition.
Part 1: If

(N ) <

(N ), (12) is strictly less than (19), and thus the elites prefer a centralized

state with citizens forming their grand coalition to a non-centralized state where there is no coalition
formation among citizens. Therefore they choose s = 1.
Part 2: If

(N ) <

(N ) <

(N ), then (12) is strictly greater than (19), and thus the elites

prefer a non-centralized state to forming a centralized state and having citizens form their grand
coalition against it. Therefore, they opt for s = 0.
Part 3: In this case, because

(N ) >

(N ), the citizens will always form their grand coalition,

thus the elites also prefer to do the same, and thus again s = 1.
The most interesting part of Proposition 3 is the second one, establishing that when
(N ) <

(N ) <

(N ), the elites prefer a non-centralized state. The logic for this result goes via the

escalation and political agenda e¤ects discussed above and the externality that citizens from region
1 create on other citizens when they form a coalition with them. Because

(N ) <

(N ), when

the state is not centralized, citizens from region 1 prefer not to form a coalition with other citizens
because of the escalation e¤ect — when they form a coalition, they know that the elites will respond
by forming their own coalition and thus escalate the con‡ict. Because (N ) >

(N ), this reluctance

to form a citizen coalition is, from an ex ante point of view, highly bene…cial for elites, because of
the aforementioned externality and the political agenda e¤ect: whenever citizens form this coalition,
other citizens bene…t and elites lose out. Each elite group, therefore, bene…ts from this externality
with probability (N

1)=N . In addition, because of the political agenda e¤ect, if the state were

centralized, they would have to endure higher levels of citizen investments in con‡ict capacity. In
contrast, when the state is centralized, citizens from region 1 will form a coalition with other regions,
obviating these bene…ts on elites. This can be thought of as a reverse escalation e¤ ect, re‡ecting
the desire of elites to avoid the political agenda e¤ect that arises when citizens form the grand
coalition in response to state centralization — the centralization of the state this time escalates the
con‡ict on the side of the citizens, who recognize that they are facing a national, uni…ed elite and
thus become more willing to form their own grand coalition, which then puts in motion the political
agenda e¤ect. In what follows, to make the discussion more speci…c, we do not use the term reverse
escalation e¤ect, and simply refer to the wish of the elite to avoid citizens forming a coalition as the
political agenda e¤ect.
Parts 1 and 3 are straightforward in this light: when

(N ) <

(N ), the elites actually prefer

citizens to form their grand coalition because they are su¢ ciently powerful against the citizens that
the con‡ict being between N regions is advantageous for them.18 Conversely, when

(N ) >

(N ),

the agenda e¤ect is su¢ ciently powerful that citizens will always form a coalition with other regions,
18

In particular, in this region of the parameter space e is su¢ ciently large relative to
that
e
H (N (N; N; (N )) N e ) is much smaller than H ( (1; 1; 1)
), making the elite prefer the con‡ict to be
between their grand coalition and the grand coalition of the citizens.

22

and consequently, the elites prefer s = 1.19 Moreover, in this case, any transfers from the elites to
citizens take the form of public goods.
Parts 1-3 together imply a nonmonotonic relationship between

(N ) and state centralization.

Note a limitation of this result, however. We do not know whether

(N ) is greater than one or

less than one. In the latter case, part 1 can never take place, and thus the relationship becomes
monotonic. This nonmonotonic relationship also implies nonmonotone comparative statics, which
are summarized in the next corollary. In this and the subsequent corollaries, the references to “more
likely”or “less likely”stand for expanding or contracting the part of the parameter space where the
result applies.
Corollary 3 The likelihood of a centralized state and any public goods being provided is potentially
nonmonotone in the productivity of public good provision, , and in the heterogeneity of the preferences of di¤ erent regions over public goods, .
Proof. Suppose we are in the case in which
(N

(N ) > 1. Then a higher

increases

(N ) =

(N

1) ) , thus contracting the region of the space of the remaining parameters for which

(N ) <

(N ). This makes state centralization and the provision of public goods less likely (the

latter since when we are in part 2 of Proposition 3, any payments from the elite to citizens take the
form of direct transfers, not the provision of public goods). Further increases in (N ) ultimately take
society out of the region where

(N ) <

(N ) <

(N ), thus again inducing state centralization

and public good provision. The nonmonotonicity with respect to

is similar.

This corollary shows that, somewhat paradoxically, an increase in the productivity or value of
public goods can make them less likely to be provided and the centralized state that can e¤ectively
provide them less likely to emerge.20 This is because a higher
to citizens,
(N ) <

raises the marginal value of funds

(N ), which may then shift from the region in which
(N ) <

(N ) <

(N ) to the one where

(N ). This shift would induce a stronger political agenda e¤ect, and the desire

of elites to avoid this political agenda e¤ect would push them towards not establishing a centralized
state, which would in turn discourage citizens from forming a national coalition. Intuitively, a
higher productivity of public goods makes the political agenda e¤ect more powerful, and this further
increases the strategic value of choosing a non-centralized state for the elites. Similarly, lower
heterogeneity in the preference of di¤erent regions also has a nonmonotonic e¤ect (whereas one might
have expected that greater heterogeneity would always make public good provision less likely). The
intuition is the same as for the comparative static for the productivity of public goods: as
we may shift from the region in which

4.2

(N ) <

(N ) to the one where

decreases,

(N ) < (N ) <

(N ).

Extension: Multiple Equilibria

In this subsection, we relax Assumption 2 and replace it with the following:
Assumption 20 The density of the distribution function H, h, exists over its entire support H
[ N

e

; 0], is continuously di¤erentiable and single-peaked.

19
Notice that here we are making use of the convention we introduced in Remark 2 that whenever the elites prefer to
form their grand coalition, we will refer to this as s = 1, even though they could alternatively achieve this by choosing
s = 0, and then ex post forming their grand coalition (with entirely equivalent consequences to s = 1).
20
If we adopted the generalization suggested in Remark 1, an increase in f (N ) relative to f (1), re‡ecting a greater
(cost) advantage of the centralized state in providing public goods, we would also have nonmonotonic e¤ects.

23

There are two generalizations in Assumption 20 relative to Assumption 2. First, it allows h to be
single-peaked rather than nonincreasing everywhere. Second, the assumption that h( N
0 (0)

e

) Y >

is dropped (we will analyze both this and the converse case in the next proposition).

Now the …rst-order condition of citizens in their con‡ict capacity, (4), may no longer have a
unique solution. The next proposition delineates the circumstances under which this will be the
case. When there is a unique equilibrium, the results are similar to those highlighted in Proposition
3. When there are multiple solutions, these translate into multiple equilibria, some of which have
greater investments in con‡ict capacity by citizens. In this case, the patterns of state centralization
are somewhat richer, but have the same overall intuition. To limit attention to the more interesting
cases, whenever there are multiple equilibria, we focus on symmetric equilibria (when the equilibrium
is unique, it is always symmetric as already characterized).
Proposition 4 Let

(N ) be as de…ned in Proposition 1, and suppose that Assumption 1 and 20

hold.
1. Suppose also that h( N

e

0 (0),

) Y >

h( ) is concave to the left of its peak, and

0(

) is weakly
convex. Then, there exists a unique equilibrium. In this unique equilibrium, there exists e (N )
such that

(a) If e (N ) < minf
(b) If

(N ) <

(N );

(N )g, then the elites choose state centralization (s = 1).
(N ) < e (N ) <

(N ) and

state (s = 0).
(c) If

(N ), then the elites choose a non-centralized

(N ) < e (N ), then the elites choose state centralization (s = 1).

2. Suppose instead that h( N

e

) Y <

0 (0),

h( ) is concave to the left of its peak and

0(

) is

weakly convex. Then, generically, there are either one or three symmetric equilibria. One
equilibrium involves the elites choosing state centralization (i.e., s = 1) and no investment by
the citizens in their con‡ict capacity, and is stable under best-response dynamics. In addition,
when there are three equilibria, there is also a middle equilibrium, which is unstable under
best-response dynamics, and an equilibrium with the highest level of citizen investment in their
con‡ict capacity, which is also stable under best-response dynamics. Assuming that there are
no equilibrium switches in response to changes in

(N ), the equilibrium with the highest level

of citizen investment is identical to the one described in part 1.
00 (

3. If h( ) is not concave to the left of its peak or
odd number of equilibria. If h( N

e

) Y <

) is not weakly convex, there is generically an

0 (0),

there always exists an equilibrium with state

centralization and no investment by citizens in their con‡ict capacity. Assuming that there are
no equilibrium switches in response to changes in

(N ), the equilibrium with the highest level

of citizen investment is identical to the one described in part 1.
Proof. First suppose that h( N

e

) Y >

0 (0)

(which was imposed as part of Assumption 2

before) and that h( ) is concave to the left of its peak and

0(

) is weakly convex. Then, Figure 2a

shows the marginal bene…t and cost for additional investment for citizens that are part of the active
coalition of citizens. The …gure makes it clear that in this case there will be a single intersection, and
24

thus the uniqueness result continues to hold. The rest of the proof is similar to that of Proposition
3, with the major di¤erence that when h0 > 0, we can no longer deduce that

(N ) <

(N )

(but the case where (N ) > (N ) does not generate additional equilibrium outcomes, since when
e (N ) > (N ), the citizens will form their grand coalition with or without a centralized state, and
whether (12) is strictly greater than (19) becomes irrelevant).

Second, note that when h( N

e

) Y <

0 (0),

h( ) is concave to the left of its peak, and

0(

) is

weakly convex, Figure 2b shows that the marginal cost of investment may be everywhere above the
marginal bene…t for citizens from a given region, in which case there will be a unique equilibrium
with no citizen investment. Figure 1c illustrates how, when this is not the case, there will exist
three symmetric equilibria under state centralization, one of which is again the corner equilibrium
with no citizen investment. In this corner equilibrium, because under state centralization (s = 1),
citizens choose no investment in their con‡ict capacity, and thus their probability of success is
always lower under state centralization than any other coalition con…guration (i.e., h( N
h(n (n; n; (n))

N

e

e

) <

) for any n), centralizing the state is a strict best response for the elites. The

fact that the middle equilibrium is unstable under best-response dynamics follows from standard
arguments (from the fact that marginal cost is less steep than marginal bene…ts). The equilibrium
with the highest level of investment in citizen con‡ict capacity satis…es exactly the same …rst-order
conditions for citizens as the unique equilibrium in part 1 under the usual assumption that there
are no switches across equilibria in response to changes in parameters (compare Figures 2a and 2c).
Figure 2d shows how there might exist two equilibria in the non-generic case in which the

25

0

schedule

is tangent to h( ). Our notion of genericity rules out such tendencies (any small perturbation of either
the

0

or the h schedule in this case would restore the existence of one or three equilibria).

Finally, Figure 2e depicts a case with …ve equilibria when h( ) is not concave to the left of its
peak. The fact that the number of equilibria is generically odd follows from standard arguments.
The equilibrium with the highest level of investment in their con‡ict capacity again satis…es the
same …rst-order conditions for citizens.
There are several senses in which this proposition is a generalization of Proposition 3. First,
under the assumption that h( N

e

) Y >

0 (0)

(which was imposed via Assumption 2 previously),

the result that there exists a unique equilibrium also holds when the density h is increasing provided
that it is concave to the left of its peak and

0(

) is weakly convex. However, in this case the

threshold

(N ) may be greater than the threshold

range where

h0

(N ) (when the unique equilibrium is in the

> 0). When this is so, we also need to consider some additional con…gurations. In
particular, we might have that e (N ) < (N ) < (N ), but the implications of this are identical
to the con…guration where e (N ) < (N ) < (N ) (as summarized in part 1 of Proposition 3). Or
we might have that

(N ) < e (N ) <

(N ), and yet the proposition shows that in this case the

implications are identical to the third part of Proposition 3, because citizens will form their grand
coalition regardless (because (N ) < e (N )).
Second and more radically, when h( N

e

) Y <

0 (0),

we are likely to have multiple equilibria,

at least under state centralization.21 In this case, as already noted, we focus on symmetric equilibria

(where all regions that are part of the active coalition choose the same level of investment). The
proposition shows that, unless the marginal cost of investment is everywhere above the marginal
bene…t, there will be three such equilibria when h( ) is again concave to the left of its peak and

0(

)

is weakly convex. One of these equilibria will feature zero investment by the citizens under state
centralization, and because this is the best con…guration for the elites, they will have no incentive
to deviate from state centralization. There will also exist a middle equilibrium which is unstable.
Finally, the third symmetric equilibrium, the one with the highest level of investment by citizens in
their con‡ict capacity, is similar to the equilibrium characterized in the …rst part of the proposition
(and once again does not allow us to rank the thresholds
21

(N ) and

(N )).

There may not be multiple equilibria without state centralization, since we may have that h(
though h( N e ) Y < 0 (0).

26

e

) Y >

0

(0), even

Third, when h( ) is not concave to the left of its peak or

0(

) is not weakly convex, there can be

more equilibria, though these have a similar structure to those characterized in part 2.
Overall, we interpret these results as showing the general robustness of the insights highlighted
in Proposition 3.

5

The Role of a Social Democratic Party

The main reason why there is no state centralization when

(N ) <

(N ) <

(N ) is because the

elites are using lack of state centralization as a strategic tool to discourage citizens from banding
together in a national organization. They are able to do so because of two features of the setup
studied here: …rst, they have the …rst mover advantage in choosing state centralization; and second,
they recognize that once the identity of the region where citizens are strong is realized, those citizens
(citizens from region 1), do not internalize the positive e¤ect they have on the utility of citizens from
other regions.
In this section, we argue that, under certain historical conditions, the emergence of a social democratic party might play a bene…cial role countering this strategic incentive of elites. In such cases,
social democratic politics will coordinate citizen con‡ict against elites, induce state centralization
and pave the way to greater state capacity and the provision of general-interest public goods, and
as such, improve the ex ante welfare of the citizens.
Indeed, in countries such as Sweden, Norway and Denmark, social democratic parties formed the
nexus of citizen organizations in the …rst half of the 20th century, and managed to coordinate several
aspects of citizen-…rm negotiations and other citizen demands. The literature on Scandinavian social
democracy emphasizes that it was successful precisely because it built multi-class and multi-sectoral
coalitions uniting rural and urban interests — what Gourevitch (1986, p. 133) dubs the “cow
trade”. Scholars such as Esping-Anderson (1985) have seen these coalitions emerging as a way of
strengthening the band of industrial workers in their relations with employers, while Berman (2006)
points out that social democracy was built of communitarian impulses and tried to foment solidarity
amongst workers. Even more relevant for our argument in this section, Moene and Wallerstein (2006)
have suggested that the creation of social democracy in the 1930s, rather than following it, preceded
many of the features of Scandinavian societies commonly argued to undergird social democratic
politics, such as social harmony. Like our approach, this argument emphasizes how various societal
and state institutions respond to the formation of a powerful social democratic party.
In the context of the model, we introduce a stage of the game preceding the state centralization
decision, where citizens decide to form and delegate power to such a social democratic party. Because,
as we have just argued, citizens may be better o¤ ex ante from state centralization, there is a prima
facie case that such an organization, by inducing centralization of bargaining (or of broader forms
of con‡ict against the elites), might be useful for citizens. The next proposition shows that this is
indeed the case, and in fact that a social democratic party would signi…cantly expand the part of
the parameter space where state centralization takes place and citizens would receive greater utility
from the provision of public goods by elites.
Proposition 5 Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and citizens have a decision to form a
social democratic party before the state centralization decision of the elites. Then, there exists a
27

unique equilibrium. Let

(N ) and

(N ) such that:
1. If

(N ) 2 ( b (N ),

(N ) be as de…ned in Proposition 3. There also exists b (N ) <

(N )), then citizens strictly prefer to form a social democratic party, and

this induces state centralization on the part of the elites.
2. If

(N ) 2 (

3. If

(N ) <

(N ); b (N )), then there is no state centralization.

(N ) or if

(N ) >

(N ), then the elites choose s = 1 regardless of the social

democratic party formation decision of citizens.
Proof. Part 1. The utilities of citizens without and with state centralization are, respectively,
1
e
[H( (1; 1; 1)
) Y
( (1; 1; 1))] ;
(22)
U c [s = 0] =
N
and
U c [s = 1] = H (N

(N; N; (N ))

N

e

) (N ) Y

(

(N; N; (N ))):

(23)

When the citizens form a social democratic party, Lemma 2 implies that the elites will choose to
centralize the state. Let us de…ne the threshold b (N ) such that (22) is equal to (23), i.e.,
H N

(N; N; b (N ))

N

e

b (N ) Y

( (N; N; b (N )))

1
e
[H( (1; 1; 1)
) Y
( (1; 1; 1))]:
N
Because the left-hand side of this expression is the same as the left-hand side of (11), while the
right-hand side is equal to right-hand side of (11) divided by N , we have that b (N ) <
(N ).
=

Moreover, because the left-hand side is monotonically increasing in (N ), we also have that whenever
(N ) > b (N ), citizens ex ante strictly prefer state centralization to a non-centralized state.
Suppose also that b (N ) >

(N ). Then, because b (N ) 2 (

(N );

(N )), in this range there

will be no state centralization without a social democratic party (cfr. Proposition 3). Since citizens

can induce state centralization by forming a social democratic party, they strictly prefer to do so in
this range.
Part 2. In this range,

(N ) 2 (

(N ); b (N )), citizens are better o¤ with a non-centralized

state, and so are the elites. Therefore, citizens choose not to form a social democratic party, and in
response, the elite prefer not to centralize the state.

Part 3. This part directly follows from Proposition 3.
Intuitively, the option to form a social democratic party turns citizens into Stackelberg leaders,
and gives them an option to force the elites to centralize the state. As a result (and because
b (N ) <
(N )), state centralization becomes more likely with a social democratic party than

without. Nevertheless, even in the presence of a social democratic party, the escalation e¤ect is
still present, and citizens may still shy away from inducing state centralization (in the proposition,
this will be the case for the parameter values of (N ) between (N ) and b (N ) if it happens that
(N ) < b (N ), which is a possibility since these two thresholds cannot be ranked unambiguously in
general; in contrast if
(N ) > b (N ), citizens will always prefer to form a social democratic party
and to induce state centralization).

A straightforward corollary to Proposition 5 emphasizes that, compared to Proposition 3, state

centralization is now more likely.
28

Corollary 4 The likelihood of a centralized state and any public good being provided is more likely
when the citizens have the possibility to form a social democratic party. The attractiveness of forming
a social democratic party is increasing in the productivity of public good provision, , and decreasing
in the heterogeneity preferences of citizens in di¤ erent regions, .
Proof. The …rst part follows since b (N ) <

(N ) and thus the parameter space where we

have state centralization is larger. The second part follows as the gain in citizen utility with state
centralization is increasing in

and decreasing in .

This corollary thus highlights that the strategic incentive of the elites obtained in Corollary 3
was a consequence of the elites trying to strategically remove the political agenda e¤ect. When the
political agenda e¤ect is already incorporated in the investment decisions of citizens by the presence
of it social democratic party, this source of strategic incentive is weakened.

6

Partial State Centralization

In many societies such as Colombia, the Philippines or Pakistan, lack of full state centralization
does not take the form of all elites and citizens engaging in local con‡ict, but certain subnational
areas acting autonomously (both in terms of con‡ict and for public good provision decisions). For
instance, in the Philippines the central government in Manila exercises very weak authority over
several parts of the country, in particular, the southern Island of Mindanao where they have set up
an autonomous region, currently called Bangsamoro (Abinales, 2000). The island has been plagued
by insurgency since the 1960s (McKenna, 1998), and warlords have large private armies and operate
with impunity (e.g. Human Rights Watch, 2010, Arguillas, 2011). The situation in Pakistan vis-àvis the provinces of South and North Waziristan, Balochistan and the semi-autonomous tribal areas,
which are all left to be ruled by local warlords and elites with minimal control of the national state,
is similar.
In terms of our model, these situations correspond to partial state centralization which corresponds to a situation where there exists a well-de…ned national state, but this state does not extend
its control to all the provinces, leaving areas such as Waziristan in Pakistan and Mindanao in the
Philippines to largely autonomous local elites who themselves deal with local demands and con‡icts.
To capture this possibility in our model, suppose that in the …rst stage, instead of a simple decision
over state centralization (s = 0 or 1), the elites can form any partition of subcoalitions (e.g., if
there are four regions, the …rst two and the last two could form to partially centralized local states).
Citizens have access to the same technology of coalition formation as in our baseline model, whereby
if region 1 (which is again designated as the strong region without loss of any generality) choose
Z c = 1, this will induce all other regions to join in. It is straightforward to see that Lemma 2 still
holds, and thus the escalation e¤ect continues to be present — citizens from region 1 know that if
they choose Z c = 1, then they will be facing the grand coalition of elites.
Our next result shows that in this case, they will often opt for partial state centralization, with
detrimental results for citizens.
Proposition 6 Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Let
Proposition 3, and recall that

(N ) <

(N ) and

(N ). There now exists
29

2 (N )

(N ) be as de…ned in
2(

(N );

(N )), such

that if

(N ) 2 (

(N );

2 (N )),

then there will be partial state centralization and citizens will be

worse o¤ than in the case of no state centralization.
Proof. When

(N ) <

(N ), we have from (11) that

H (N

(N; N; (N ))
<H(

e

N

) (N ) Y
e

(1; 1; 1)

) Y

(

(N; N; (N )))

(

(1; 1; 1)) :

Suppose instead that the elites form a subcoalition of two regions. This gives a new threshold

2 (N )

such that
H (N

(N; N;

2 (N ))

=H(
where

N

e

)

2 (N )

(1; 2; 1)

Y

(

(N; N;

2 (N )))

2 e) Y

(

(1; 2; 1)) ;

(1; 2; 1) refers to the investment level of citizens acting by themselves against a coalition

of two regional elites (as captured by the fact that

e

is multiplied by 2). Notice that this is

the level of investment by citizens when they face a coalition of two regional elites, but they have
themselves not formed the grand coalition. By the same arguments as before, it is clear that
2 (N )

<

whenever

(N ), because of the presence of 2 on the right-hand side of the above expression. Thus
(N ) 2 (

(N );

2 (N )),

citizens will not form their national coalition when elites form a

subcoalition of size two (and may not even form their national coalition in response to a subcoalition
of a greater size, the threshold for which can be computed analogously).
Moreover, when this is the case, the elites will always strictly prefer to form such a subcoalition,
because this reduces the probability that citizens win the con‡ict and thus the necessary transfers.
To see this, recall that the threshold
H (N

(N; N;

(N ) is de…ned such that
(N ))

N

e

)=

1
H(
N

(1; 1; 1)

e

):

But we also have

1
1
e
H ( (1; 1; 1)
) > H ( (1; 2; 1) 2 e ) :
(24)
N
N
To prove the latter, suppose to obtain a contradiction that this is not the case. Since h is nonincreasing from Assumption 2 this implies
h(

e

(1; 1; 1)

)

h(

(1; 2; 1)

2 e) :

In turn from (4) we have
h(
h(
Given that
(1; 2; 1)

00

> 0,

e

) Y

=

0

( (1; 1; 1)), and

2 e )) Y

=

0

(

(1; 1; 1)
(1; 2; 1)

(1; 1; 1)

(1; 2; 1) :

(1; 2; 1). This immediately implies that

(1; 1; 1)

e

>

e

2 , and thus that
H(

(1; 1; 1)

e

)>H(

(1; 2; 1)

2 e) ;

yielding a contradiction. This implies that the two elites are strictly better o¤ by partial state
centralization (Note that their probability of facing strong citizens is given by 2=N , and that if they
30

face strong citizens they share the cost of concessions, and thus they strictly prefer a partial state
when (24) holds).
Thus for

(N ) 2 (

(N );

2 (N )),

citizens do not form their grand coalition in the presence of

partial state centralization of size 2 and the elites are better o¤ in ex ante sense. As a result, partial
state centralization of size 2 is preferred to no state centralization (which was the outcome without
this option). This does not prove that the equilibrium will involve partial state centralization of
size 2, since partial state centralization of some di¤erent size might be preferable for the elites. But
it establishes that the equilibrium will have some partial state centralization as claimed. (And by
the same arguments as above we can …nd the threshold

n (N )

state of n 2 (1; N ) elites forms which satis…es

n (N ),

(N ) <

2(

(N );

(N )) where a partial

i.e. that the citizens do not form

their grand coalition. In general the best response of the elites is to form the partial state with the
highest n that satis…es this requirement).
Intuitively, partial state formation takes place as a strategic step by elites to increase their
power while still preventing the political agenda e¤ect. Recall that when

(N ) 2 (

(N );

(N )),

the elites are able to, and prefer to, prevent the formation of a national coalition of citizens, thus
obviating the political agenda e¤ect. This, in particular, means that they cannot form a national
state, because this will induce citizens to respond with their own national organization. However,
when partial state formation is possible, the elites can take more limited steps to increase their
organizational power and ability to …ght demands from citizens, without inducing citizens to form
a national organization. When they can do so, this not only leads to a pattern resembling the
patchwork of subnational polities often acting outside of the control of the central state in many
developing countries, but also further reduces the need to provide public goods to citizens to placate
them.

7

Concluding Remarks

The dominant view in political science is that many states remain incapable of centralizing power
and monopolizing the means of coercion over the territory they ostensibly control, because they face
insurmountable barriers to getting stronger. In this paper, we have argued that states may rather
do so because they do not want to build that strength. At the center of our story is a new political
economic force which we have called the political agenda e¤ ect. This e¤ect captures the phenomenon
that state centralization changes the nature of the societal con‡ict against the state and the political
elites that control it. If this political agenda e¤ect is su¢ ciently powerful, then the elites prefer to
live with a non-centralized state (even if state centralization has other direct bene…ts, for example,
the ability to confront local demands more e¤ectively). The speci…c channel via which the nature of
the con‡ict against the centralized state is di¤erent than against a non-centralized state in our model
is the willingness of citizens with di¤erent interests to band together and shift their demands from
parochial ones towards more general-interest ones (such as the provision of general-interest public
goods). This increases the value of con‡ict to the citizens and encourages them to invest more in
their con‡ict capacity, to the detriment of the elites who now have to placate stronger demands.
We developed these ideas in the context of the most parsimonious model we could construct
which would still help us develop and elucidate the strategic forces at work. Several straightforward
31

generalizations are possible but were not pursued in this paper to save space. We now brie‡y mention
those before moving on to areas for future research which we view as more original and promising.
Our analysis assumed that there were no direct bene…ts from a centralized state. This is clearly
an unrealistic assumption. Centralized states bring a variety of bene…ts, ranging from more
e¤ective law enforcement and security to more e¢ cient economy-wide regulation. As explained
in Remark 1, introducing such bene…ts has no impact on our analysis or results, but would
imply that strategic lack of state centralization will have greater social costs.
Relatedly, an alternative natural assumption would have been that a centralized state also
becomes more e¤ective in providing public goods than a collection of local elites. In the context
of our model, this would make the

function also depend directly on whether the state is or is

not centralized. It would also provide a direct mechanism via which a centralized state would
be associated with public good provision. We chose not to make this assumption both on the
grounds of parsimony and because the result that there will be an association between state
centralization and e¤ective public good provision is true in our model for a more interesting,
endogenous reason — because without state centralization, speci…c, parochial transfers are the
most economical way for the elite to meet citizen demands.
An extension related to the previous point might be useful to develop. If a centralized state
is necessary for public good provision (which is in contrast to our baseline model, where
there is no technological bene…t for public good provision from state centralization), the elites
may strategically choose a non-centralized state even against the grand coalition of citizens,
because this would be a strategic commitment to preventing public good provision, and when
the resources captured in contest cannot be invested in public goods, the grand coalition of
citizens becomes less e¤ective. This extension is straightforward to develop and we did not do
it to conserve space, even though we do …nd it interesting and potentially relevant for thinking
about lack of state centralization in some contemporary cases.
We also chose not to assume that a citizen organization can directly control the investment
decisions of each of its constituent parts. But as shown in the Appendix, our (qualitative)
results are identical when we introduce such control and thus remove the free-riding in citizen
investment decisions.
Yet another alternative assumption is to introduce economies of scale in the provision of public
goods, which would go in the same direction of the regional spillovers we have used in the
function. Once again, this would have no impact on our analysis or results.
We view our paper as part of a broader investigation. As already discussed in the Introduction,
a few other papers have already proposed models in which states may strategically opt to remain
weak (e.g., as a commitment not to expropriate, as in Acemoglu, 2005; as a way of preventing rivals
having an e¤ective means of taxation, as in Besley and Persson, 2009; or as an e¤ort to prevent the
formation of a powerful army capable of sharing rents, as in Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni, 2011b).
There are also several fruitful areas for future investigation. Here we mention a few.

32

Our simpli…ed modeling of heterogeneity across regions enabled a coalition of citizens, once
formed, to formulate its demands e¤ectively. Richer forms of heterogeneity would necessitate
such organizations to mediate within-citizen con‡icts and aggregate their heterogeneous preferences. Which types of coalitions or organizations can do so and how this interacts with the
elite-citizen con‡ict and the state centralization decisions is a completely underresearched area.
Also absent in our, and all other economic analyses to the best of our knowledge, is Habermas’s
notion, mentioned in the Introduction, that the formation of states paves the way for the emergence of ‘public spheres,’which then impact the evolution of opinions. In a political economic
setting, this can be interpreted as communication and information exchange improving following state centralization, which then impact how individuals would vote or make demands.
Lack of state centralization can again emerge strategically in anticipation of di¤erent types of
demands that will follow from this process.
One of the most in‡uential theories concerning state formation in social science is Tilly’s
(1995), linking state formation to war-making and the threat of war. The forces we have
emphasized, as already anticipated in the Introduction, do not contradict this emphasis, but our
analysis has abstracted from it. An interesting direction is to investigate the interplay between
war and the strategic motives for opting for a non-centralized state. Beyond some obvious,
but still interesting, comparative statics (e.g., showing that the forces we have emphasized
become less important in the presence of the threat of war), such an extension could allow
an investigation of whether some types of states with the capability to wage war while still
strategically discouraging citizens from forming e¤ective coalitions to make demands could
emerge.
Our analysis, like almost all other work in this topic in political economy, has abstracted
from the internal organization of the state, which is an important and underresearched area.
Centralized states behave di¤erently than non-centralized ones in many dimensions (e.g., development of professional bureaucracies, adherence to the rule of law, etc.), which may be because
the internal organization of a centralized state develops very di¤erently than a non-centralized
one.
Last but not least, this area has very little empirical work (beyond those cited in the Introduction, which show the importance of state capacity). Whether centralized states change the
nature of societal organization and how the anticipation of this impacts political equilibria are
interesting, albeit di¢ cult, areas to study empirically.

Appendix: Omitted Proofs and Additional Results
In this Appendix we …rst present the proofs of Lemmas 1 and 2. We then turn to extensions of the
model, where we …rst study the case of endogenous investments in the con‡ict capacity of elites,
thereafter allow for subcoalition formation of citizens, and …nally remove the free-rider e¤ect in
investment in con‡ict capacity.

33

Omitted Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1. Suppose that the coalition of citizens is N z
e
N z =1

con‡ict with a coalition of elites

with

e
N z =1

=

c =1

ne .

with N z

c =1

= n, and is in

The citizens have at this stage invested
c
in their con‡ict capacity, and denote their total con‡ict capacity by ~ and the total con‡ict capacity
e
e
e
of the elites by ~ (in the case with exogenous con‡ict capacity of elites, ~ = ne e , but ~ could be

di¤erent than this when elites invest in their con‡ict capacity as we consider below, and this lemma
applies in that case also).
e
Consider …rst the case where fN
z c =1 = 1, i.e., where there is …ghting. The cost of con‡ict capacity

for each group of regional citizens is at this stage sunk and we simply denote it by
and thus the expected utility of each group of regional citizens i 2
by

c
where H(~

~e ) (n) n

e
~c
Uic fN
z c =1 = 1 = H(

~e ) is the probability the citizens win the …ght,

of funds for each group of regional citizens, and

ne

e

c
N z =1

Y

n

i

for group i,

from this con‡ict is given

i;

(A-1)

(n) the (maximum) marginal utility

Y =n the income gain for each group of regional

citizens in the coalition if they win.
The expected utility of each elite i 2 N z
e
Uie fN
z c =1

c =1

from the con‡ict is similarly given by
h
i
c
~e ) Y:
= 1 = 1 H(~

(A-2)

e
We next contrast this expression with the case where fN
z c =1 = 0, i.e., where the elites make an

o¤er that the citizen side prefers to …ghting. Denote the utility that each citizen group i 2 N z

c =1

e
obtains without …ghting by Uic fN
z c =1 = 0 . For the citizens not to …ght all members of the coalition

must prefer to accept the o¤er from the elite coalition. This requires that the following participation
constraint
e
Uic fN
z c =1 = 0

should hold for each i 2 N z

c =1

e
Uic fN
z c =1 = 1

. Since utility is transferable across citizens of di¤erent regions

(by choosing the level of transfers and public good provision), we can combine these participation
constraints as

X

i2N z

c =1

X

e
Uic fN
z c =1 = 0

i2N zc =1

e
Uic fN
z c =1 = 1 :

Since defeat has identical conclusions for all regional elites, as also noted in the text, all ne members
of the coalition of elites contribute equally, and denoting the total costs of concessions to the citizens
by B, the symmetric maximization problem for each regional elite is
X
X
B
c
e
e
c =1 = 0
max Y
subject
to
U
f
Uic fN
z
z c =1 = 1 ;
i
N
B 0
ne
c
c
z =1
z =1
i2N

i2N

where substituting for the elite coalition’s transfers, we also have
X
X
e
Uic fN
(n)B
z c =1 = 0 =
i2N zc =1

i:

i2N zc =1

e
Next substituting for Uic fN
z c =1 = 1 , this maximization can be expressed as

max Y
B 0

B
subject to
ne

(n)B

X

i

i2N zc =1

34

c
H(~

~e ) (n)ne Y

X

i2N zc =1

i:

Since the joint utility of the elite coalition is decreasing in B, it will choose B to make the joint
participation constraint of the citizen coalition hold with equality. This gives
c
B = H(~

~e )ne Y;

and substituting this into the utility of regional elites without …ghting, we have that for each elite
i 2 Nz

e =1

e
Uie fN
z c =1 = 0

=

1

>

1

c
H(~
c
H(~

which establishes that each regional elite i 2 N z

~e ) Y
~e )

e =1

e
Y = Uie fN
z c =1 = 1 ;

is strictly better o¤ with policy concessions than

with …ghting, and completes the proof of the lemma.
Proof of Lemma 2. Suppose that citizens have formed a coalition N z

c =1

with N z

c =1

=n

1

(as usual including region 1, which is without loss of any generality the region with strong citizens).
Consider …rst the elites in regions i 2
= Nz

c =1

. If these elites join the coalition N z

e =1

, they

participate in giving policy concessions (or in …ghting), while if they do not participate in the
coalition they face weak citizens that will not be able to make any demands. Since, in view of the
fact that h( ) is strictly positive over the relevant domain, policy concessions always have to be
strictly positive, and elites in regions i 2
= Nz

N

z e =1

. This establishes that N

z e =1

Consider next the elites i 2

N

c
N z =1

z c =1

c =1

are strictly better o¤ by not joining the coalition

.

(where citizens have joined the coalition N z

c =1

with the

strong citizens from region 1). Let us denote the investment in con‡ict capacity of citizens from
P
c
region i in N z =1 by ci , so that the total con‡ict capacity of the coalition of citizens is i2N zc =1 ci .
Suppose that the elite coalition N z
the regional elite i 2 N

e =1

forms in response and has nl

n members. The utility of

z e =1

without state centralization can then be written
h
i h
i
X
c
l e
Uie nl js = 0 = 1
H
Y;
n
z c =1 j
j2N

which incorporates from Lemma 1 that there will be policy concessions rather than …ghting.
e

c

Now to obtain a contradiction suppose that N z =1 6= N z =1 , which implies nl < n. Consider a
e z e =1 N z c =1 nN z e =1 with size nm nl (if on the other hand nm > nl , the
subcoalition of elites N

e z e =1 and N z e =1 swapped around). The utility of
same argument applies with the two coalitions N
e z e =1 is
an elite i in N
h
i
h
i
X
c
m e
e
l
Uie [nm js = 0] = 1
H
n
Y
U
n
js
=
0
;
i
z c =1 j
j2N

where the last inequality follows as nm
nl and H( ) is increasing. To complete the proof, now
e
e z =1 deviating and switching to join N z e =1 . The size of this new
consider a regional elite j in N
coalition N z

e =1

e

[ fjg will be nl + 1, thus giving each of its members, i 2 N z =1 [ fjg a utility of
h
i
h
i
X
c
l
e
e
l
n
+
1
Uie nl + 1js = 0 = [1
H
]Y
>
U
n
js
=
0
;
c
j
i
z =1
j2N

where again the last inequality follows because H( ) is increasing. This establishes that any elite
group that is not part of the largest coalition, in this instance N z
by joining it. Since
N

z c =1

e
N z =1

, completing the proof.

c
N z =1

e =1

, would be strictly better o¤

from the …rst part of the proof, this establishes that N z

35

e =1

=

Endogenous Con‡ict Capacity of Elites
We now extend the model to include endogenous con‡ict capacity also of the elites. In particular, we
assume that the con‡ict capacity

e
i

of each regional elite i results from investments with a strictly

increasing, convex and continuously di¤erentiable cost function
00 ( e )
e i

> 0 for

e
i

e
e ( i ),

with

e (0)

= 0, and

0 ( e ),
e i

> 0. The timing is the same as in the main model, with the only di¤erence being

that citizens and elites make their con‡ict capacity investments simultaneously.
As already noted in its proof, Lemma 1 directly generalizes to this case. To see that Lemma
2 also generalizes, one needs to modify its proof so that the switch is always to the elite coalition
with the greatest total power (rather than simply with the largest number of members). Using these
results, we can now carry out an analogous analysis to that in the text to show that the results
presented in the text generalize with only minor modi…cations.
Equilibrium without a Centralized State Given Lemma 1, elites will invest in their con‡ict
capacity to reduce the policy concessions they have to make (since these reduce the bene…t for
…ghting for citizens). Since from Lemma 2, N z

c =1

write the maximization problem for each elite i 2
0
0
@1
max
e
i

H @n

0

c

= Nz

e
N z =1

X

j2N ze =1

e =1

, we set N z

as
11

e AA
Y
j

c =1

= Nz

the same level of con‡ict capacity, which is denoted by
i2

e
N z =1

= n, and

e
e ( i );

where we have already imposed the equilibrium result that citizens in coalition N z
c

e =1

c =1

have chosen

. The …rst-order condition for each elite

can be found as
0

h @n

X

c

j2N ze =1

with the second-order condition

0

h0 @n

c

X

j2N

z e =1

1

eA
j

Y

1

eA
j

Y

0 e
e( i )

= 0;

00 e
e( i )

< 0:

We continue to impose Assumption 2, and in particular that h0 ( )
conditions of elites, this implies that we need to have

jh0 (

(A-3)

(A-4)
0. For the second-order

)j not too large, which we assume in the

remainder of the Appendix. This also assumes that the solution for the elite is also unique given
c

. Moreover, as already noted in the text, the investment of citizens is increasing in

h0 (

)

0), and with the same reasoning, the investment of elites is decreasing in

that under

h0 (

)

0 and

jh0 (

c

e

(because

. This implies

)j su¢ ciently small so that the second-order condition always holds,

the equilibrium is unique. Let us denote the unique equilibrium level of con‡ict capacity of elites in
the coalition N z

e =1

e

by

(n; n), where the …rst argument conditions on the size of the coalition of

citizens and the second argument designates conditioning on the size of the coalition of elites.
Note also that the maximization problem (imposing equilibrium behavior by elites) and the

resulting investment levels by citizens are the same as in equation (4) in the text, with the only
di¤erence being that

e

is now replaced by

e

(n; n). As already anticipated, the second-order
36

conditions of citizens are always satis…ed. For future reference in this Appendix, we repeat this
condition here as

0

h@

X

c
j

1

(n; n)A (n) Y

e

n

c
j2N z =1

and denote its solution by

0

( ci ) = 0;

(A-5)

(n; n; (n)) as in the text.

Let us next turn to the coalition decision of citizens from region 1, which are once again designated
the strong ones without loss of any generality. Suppose …rst that N z

this case the size of the coalition is 1 and from Assumption 1,

c =1

= f1g. Then noting that in

(1) = 1, the utility of citizens from

region 1 becomes
U1c [1js = 0] = H (

e

(1; 1; 1)

(1; 1)) Y

(

(1; 1; 1)) :

(A-6)

The utility of elites from region 1 in this case is given by
U1e [1js = 0] = [1

H(

e

(1; 1; 1)

(1; 1))]Y

e

e(

(1; 1)):

(A-7)

Note again that the most e¢ cient way of transferring resources for the elite is a direct transfer, so
there will be no investment in public goods. That is, T1 = H (
Suppose next that

c
N z =1

e

(1; 1; 1)

(1; 1)) Y and G1 = 0.

= N . Then the utility of citizens becomes

U c [N js = 0] = H (N

(N; N; (N ))

e

N

(N; N )) (N )Y

(

(N; N; (N ))) ;

(A-8)

and similarly the utility of elites is
U e [N js = 0] = [1

H (N

(N; N; (N ))

Since from Assumption 1, we have
Gi =

H (N

(N; N; (N ))

N

e

N

e

(N; N ))]Y

e(

e

(N; N )):

(A-9)

(N ) > 1, we can immediately conclude that Ti = 0 and
(N; N )) Y for all i 2 N .

As in the text, citizens from region 1 will prefer to form the grand coalition of citizens when
their utility from the grand coalition, (A-8), is strictly greater than their utility from standing alone,
(A-6). The former, (A-8), is increasing in
while the latter, (A-6), is independent of

(N ) with exactly the same argument as in footnote 14,
(N ). Therefore, once again there exists a value of

(N ),

(N ), such that
H (N

(N; N;

(N ))

N

=H(
and whenever

(N ) >

coalition, and whenever

e

(N; N ))

(N ) Y

(

(N; N;

e

(1; 1)) Y

(

(1; 1; 1)) ;

(1; 1; 1)

(N )))

(A-10)

(N ), citizens from region 1 (the strong citizens) will prefer the grand
(N ) <

(N ), they will prefer to act by themselves.

The coalition formation decision of citizens, and the resulting utility levels for citizens, are thus
identical to the ones summarized in Proposition 1, with the only di¤erence being that
replaced by

e

(1; 1) when

(N ) <

(N ), and is replaced by

e

(N; N ) when

(N ) >

e

is now

(N ). The

corollary that determines the expected utility of elites in di¤erent regions of the parameter space,
which will be useful in our analysis in the rest of the Appendix becomes:

37

Corollary A-1 When
Ue
When

(N ) >

(N ) <
h
[s = 0] = 1

(N ), the expected utility of elites is
i
1
e
H( (1; 1; 1)
(1; 1)) Y
N
N

e

e(

(1; 1)):

(A-11)

(N; N )):

(A-12)

(N ), the expected utility of elites is

U e [s = 1] = [1

H(N

(N; N; (N ))

e

N

(N; N ))]Y

e

e(

The coalition decision of citizens can be analyzed

Equilibrium under a Centralized State

similarly to the one without state centralization, and it continues to be the case that the choice for
citizens from region 1 is once again simply between N z

they choose

c
N z =1

= f1g,

= f1g and N z

c =1

= N . Because when

(1) = 1, their overall utility under state centralization will be

U1c [1js = 1] = H (
while when they choose N z

c =1

c =1

(1; N; 1)

e

N

(1; N )) Y

(

(1; N; 1)) ;

= N , their overall utility under state centralization will be

U c [N js = 1] = H (N

(N; N; (N ))

e

N

(N; N )) (N )Y

(

(N; N; (N ))) :

The comparison of these two expressions once again boils down to
H (N

(N; N; (N ))
>H(

N

e

(N; N )) (N ) Y

(1; N; 1)

e

N

(1; N )) Y

(

(N; N; (N )))

(

(1; N; 1)) :
e

As in the main text, this condition always holds. To see this, …rst note that

now responds to the

changes in the size of the citizen coalition. In particular, from (A-3) it follows that
e

in the size of the citizen coalition, and thus

e

(1; N ) >

e

is decreasing

(N; N ). Then with the same argument

in the text holding a fortiori including this additional e¤ect, we have that
H (N

(N; N; (N ))
>H(

N

e

N

e

(1; N; 1)

which implies the desired condition given that

)) Y
) Y

(

(N; N; (N )))

(

(1; N; 1)) ;

(N ) > 1 and

e

(1; N ) >

e

(N; N ). Thus the

results are essentially identical to those in Proposition 2, and the expected utility of elites under
state centralization is given by
Corollary A-2 When there is state centralization (s = 1), the equilibrium utility of elites is given
by
U e [s = 1] = [1

H(N

(N; N; (N ))

N

e

(N; N ))]Y

e(

e

(N; N )):

(A-13)

Equilibrium State Centralization We now characterize the state centralization decision of elites
by combining the results from Corollaries A-1 and A-2. The reasoning is similar to the analysis in
the main text: the elites prefer state centralization if and only if (A-13) exceeds (A-11). Note that
(A-13) is decreasing in

(N ), while (A-11) is independent of

state centralization if and only if
H(N

(N ) <

(N; N;
=

N

H(

(N ), where

(N ))

e

N
e

(1; 1; 1)
38

(N ). Thus the elites (strictly) prefer

(N ) is de…ned by

(N; N ))Y +
1
(1; 1))Y +
N

e(

e

(N; N ))

e(

e

(1; 1)):

(A-14)

The only di¤erence from the analysis in the main text is that, because of the presence of the cost
function of the elites in (A-14), it is no longer necessarily the case that
Proposition A-1 Let

(N ) be as de…ned in (A-10) and

that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold (and that
elites, (A-4), holds). Then:
1. If

(N ) <

(a) If

jh0 j

(N ) >

(N ) as de…ned in (A-14), and suppose

is not so large, so that the second-order condition of

(N ) we have

(N ) <

(N ), then the elites choose state centralization (s = 1).

(b) If

(N ) < (N ) <

(c) If

(N ) < (N ), then the elites choose state centralization (s = 1).

2. If

(N )

(N ).

(N ), then the elites choose a non-centralized state (s = 0).

(N ), then the elites choose a non-centralized state (s = 0).

Proof. Part 1: We now have three possibilities. In part a, where

(N ) <

(N ), (A-11) is

strictly less than (A-13), and thus the elites prefer a centralized state (with citizens forming their
grand coalition) to a non-centralized state, and choose s = 1. In part b, where

(N ) <

(N ) <

(N ), then (A-11) is strictly greater than (A-13), and thus the elites prefer a non-centralized state
to forming a centralized state (because a centralized state would induce citizens to form their grand
coalition), and thus choose s = 0. In part c, where

(N ) >

(N ), the citizens will always form

their grand coalition, and in response, the elites will also do so; thus s = 1.
Part 2: In this case, where

(N )

(N ), either the citizens or the elites (or both groups)

prefer a centralized state, and since both groups can induce this possibility by forming their grand
coalition, we have s = 1.
It is also straightforward to see that we have a version of Corollary 3, showing that comparative
statics with respect to the productivity of public goods or the degree of preference heterogeneity
across regions are non-monotonic. Overall, this analysis shows that when the con‡ict capacity of
elites is endogenous, our main results generalize with minimal quali…cations.

Subcoalition Formation of Citizens
In the text, when the strong citizens organized, all weak citizens could join their coalition (unless
the strong citizens decided to stand alone). Because citizens from weak regions always prefer joining
a coalition involving the strong citizens, such organizations always lead to the formation of the
grand coalition of citizens, and the relevant choice for strong citizens was between standing alone
and forming the grand coalition. We now extend the basic model and assume that strong workers
can invite speci…c regions to join the coalition, thus enabling them to choose the exact size of the
coalition, denoted by n in this part of the Appendix. (Since all other regions are symmetric, which
speci…c regions are included in the coalition is immaterial). Therefore, the choice of strong workers
is over coalitions of sizes n = 1; 2; : : : ; N .
In this case, though the general qualitative forces remain the same, the analysis becomes more
involved. To make progress, we now analyze the case in which H is uniform and

is quadratic,

and show that, under some additional mild conditions, there will never be a coalition other than
39

the singleton of the strong citizens or the grand coalition of all citizens, and thus the results from
the text continue to apply unchanged. We then study the case in which H is uniform but

is an

arbitrary convex function to show that even when citizens choose to form an “interior”subcoalition
(i.e., a subcoalition greater than a singleton and smaller than their grand coalition), the elites prefer
a non-centralized state under similar conditions to those in the text.
Note …rst that Lemmas 1 and 2 continue to hold. This, in particular, implies that whenever
strong citizens choose a coalition of size n, they know that they will be facing an elite coalition of
size n, which will then make them an o¤er to cease con‡ict in return for their expected return from
the con‡ict.
Let us simplify the analysis here by treating n as a continuous variable, which will enable us to
derive a …rst-order condition for an interior subcoalition decision of citizens.
As in the text, payo¤s of citizens from region i 2 N z

c =1

from (5) as

Uic [njs = 0] = H (n

with N z

n e ) (n)Y

(n; n; (n))

c =1

(

= Nz

e =1

= n are given

(n; n; (n))) :

(A-15)

Let us next replace Assumption 2 with the following:
Assumption 200 (i) H( ) = h1 + h0 ,
(ii) ( ) = +

1 2
2k ,

(iii) h1 Y > 1, and
(iv) h1

1
5k .

Part (iii) of the assumption ensures that the investment level of citizens will be positive over the
support of H, while the last part also requires the density of H not to be too low.
The …rst-order conditions of citizens from region 1, (4), for investment choice gives
0 1

(n; n; (n)) =

(h1 (n) Y ) = k (h1

where we have simpli…ed notation by de…ning
only matters for

via its e¤ect on

(n)Y

as a function of

1)

( (n)) ;

(A-16)

(n) only, since in this case, n

(n). This allows us to rewrite (A-15) as

Uic [njs = 0] = H (n

n e ) (n)Y

( (n))

(

( (n))) :

Then treating n as a continuous variable, the derivative of this which must equal zero in a …rst-order
condition for an interior subcoalition decision is
dU1c [njs = 0]
dn

= h1

(n)Y

H (n

( (N )) d (n)
+
@ (N )
dn
d (n)
@ ( (N )) d (n)
0
n e) Y
( ( (n)))
dn
@ (N )
dn
e

( (n))

( (n))

for some n 2 (1; N ). Now substituting for

0(

+n

@

( (n))) from (A-16), this expression can be simpli…ed

to

dU1c [njs = 0]
dn

= h1

(n)Y (

H (n

( (n))

( (n))

n e) Y

e

)+

d (n)
+ h1
dn
40

(A-17)
(n)Y (n

1)

@

( (N )) d (n)
:
@ (N )
dn

Note that the last two terms on the right-hand side are nonnegative. Thus, if

( (n)) >

e

then

the payo¤ of the strong citizens in region 1 is increasing in the number of groups of regional citizens
n in the coalition, and we have a corner solution at n = N . This already reveals that for an interior
solution to the subcoalition decision we need
Consider next the case where

( (n)) <

e

to be su¢ ciently large.

e

. In this case dU1c [njs = 0] =dn starts out negative

since at n = 1, d (n)=dn = 0, and in (A-17), we are left only with the …rst, negative term. We will
next show that there exists no local maximum for U1c [njs = 0] with n 2 (1; N ), so that the optimal
choice for workers from region 1 will be either n = 1 or n = N . Recall …rst that there exists a unique
n such that (n) > 1 for n > n but (n ) = 1. Thus clearly dU1c [njs = 0] =dn < 0 for n < n , and
the relevant parameter region for coalition formation is: n > n . Here d (n)=dn = (1
also from (A-16) we have @
and substituting for H (n

) , and

( (N )) =@ (N ) = kh1 Y . Therefore, assuming an interior solution
n e ) with h1 (nk (h1

( (n))

(n)Y

1)

n e ), we can rewrite (A-17)

1)

e

)

(A-18)

e

+ h0 ) (1

as
dU1c [njs = 0]
dn

= h1

(n)Y (k (h1

(n)Y

+h1 Y (nk (h1

(n)Y

+h1

1) kh1 Y (1

(n)Y (n

1)

n

)

) ;

and also,
d2 U1c [njs = 0]
dn2

= 2h1 Y (k (h1
+ (2n

(n)Y

1) kh21

+2 (n)kh21

2

2

e

1)
)2

Y 2 (1

Y 2 (1

)

) (1

)

2

(A-19)

<0

as the second-order condition.
Now for a solution to (A-18) to be an interior subcoalition choice, (A-18), implies that we must
have
e

=

1
[ (n)k(h1 (n)Y 1) +
(n) + (1
) n
[nk(h1 (n) 1) + h0 ](1
) + (n 1) (n)kh1 Y (1

(A-20)
) ]

(n);
where the second line de…nes

(n).

For any solution to (A-18) to be an interior subcoalition choice, we need the second-order condition (A-19) to be satis…ed. The following condition is then su¢ cient for this second-order condition
to be violated whenever (A-18) holds and to ensure that there exists no local maximum:
2h1 Y (k (h1
+ (2n

1) kh21

(n)Y
2

Y 2 (1

1)

(n)) (1
)2

2

41

)

+ 2 (n)kh21

2

Y 2 (1

)

> 0:

Substituting from (A-20) and rearranging, this can be written as

<

(n)k(h1

(n)Y

1) + [nk(h1

(n)k(h1
1
+ n
2

(n)Y

1) + k(h1

(n)kh1 Y (1

(n)Y

1) + h0 ](1

) + (n

1)n(1
)
1
) +n n
kh1 Y (1
2

1) (n)kh1 Y (1

)

(n)Y

+ (n)2 kh1 Y + (n)kh1 Y n(1

)2

2

) :

Now canceling the …rst term on the left-hand side with the …rst term on the right-hand side, the …rst
part of the second term (excluding h0 ) with the second term on the right-hand side, and moving the
third term on the left-hand side to the right-hand side and collecting terms with the third term and
the last term on the right-hand side, we obtain the following su¢ cient condition:
h0 (1

) < (n)kh1 Y (1

)

n+

1
2

1
+ (n)2 kh1 Y + n n
2

kh1 Y (1

From the assumption that we have a symmetric uniform distribution, h0 =
part of Assumption

200 ,

1
2h1 ,

)2

2

: (A-21)

and from the last

Y h1 > 1, and thus
Y > 2h0 :

Since

(n)

1, n > 1, and (1

side is no less than

5
2 kh1

Y (1

) < 1, the combination of the …rst two terms on the right-hand
) > 5kh1 h0 (1

) , and in view of the fourth part of Assumption

200 , (A-21) is satis…ed. This establishes:
Proposition A-2 Suppose Assumptions 1 and 200 are satis…ed. Then there will never be subcoalition
formation of citizens, and the results from the text apply identically.
Suppose next that the cost function is not quadratic, but satis…es the condition that
for all

e

0(

)<1

+ " for some " > 0 (whereby this condition simply requires that citizens’investment

in con‡ict capacity exceed

e

), while H is still uniform. The analysis is similar in this case, except

that we have
( (n)) =
and thus

In fact,

0 1

(h1 (n) Y );

h1 Y 0 (n)
h1 Y (1
)
= 00
:
00 (h
(n)
Y
)
(h
(n)
Y
)
1
1

d ( (n))
=
d (n)

( (n)) is everywhere strictly increasing in
e

( (n)) >

(N ), and for

(N ) su¢ ciently large,

.

Now rearranging the …rst-order condition of workers from region 1 for subcoalition formation,
(A-18), we obtain
e

=

1
(n) + n(1
+(n

)

1) (n)(1

[ (n)
)

0 1

(h1 (n) Y ) + n

h1 Y (1
)
+ h0 (1
00 (h
(n)
Y
)
1

(n):

42

0 1

(h1 (n) Y )(1
) ]

)

We can no longer rule out an interior subcoalition, but we can still show that lack of state centralization can emerge for a wide range of parameter values in this case. To do this, note that for an
interior solution to exist, we need
e

(n)

for some n 2 (1; N ) (since otherwise (A-18) cannot be satis…ed for any interior subcoalition, and
we are back to the conclusion of Proposition A-2). Next, it is straightforward to verify that

(n)

is increasing for n su¢ ciently large. This implies that there exists a maximal n such that any
subcoalition will be less than n (where n is de…ned such that

e

<

(n) for all n > n). Note that

this n is independent of N .
Suppose this condition does not hold, so that there is a choice of interior coalition at n
~ 2 (1; n]

(where the fact that the size of the subcoalition is less than n follows from the previous paragraph).
Then the question is whether the elites will still choose a non-centralized state. The condition for
that is now

n
~
H (~
n ( (~
n)) n
~ e ) Y > (1
H (N ( (N )) N e ))Y;
N
for some choice of intermediate subcoalition n
~ . Rearranging this condition, we obtain
(1

(N 2

n
~2)

e

< h1 Y [N 2

0 1

(h1 (N ) Y )

n
~2

0 1

(h1 (~
n) Y )]:

But since n
~ is less than n, which is independent of N , and because
will exceed

e

for

(A-22)

( (N )) =

0 1 (h
1

(N ) Y )

(N ) su¢ ciently large, we have that this condition will necessarily be violated

for N su¢ ciently large. Thus we have proved:
Proposition A-3 Suppose Assumption 1 is satis…ed, and let H( ) be uniform and suppose that there
exists " > 0 such that

0(

) < 1 for all

e

+ ". Then, there exists N such that for all N > N ,

the elites will choose a non-centralized state (s = 0) even if citizens form a subcoalition of size less
than N .
In contrast to Proposition A-2, which generalizes the results from the text by establishing that
citizens will not form an intermediate coalition, this result shows that, when the size of society (in
terms of the number of regions or di¤erent groups) is su¢ ciently large, a non-centralized state will
emerge as an equilibrium phenomenon even when citizens prefer to form an intermediate coalition.

Removing the Free-rider E¤ect
We now extend our baseline model by allowing citizen coalitions to jointly decide their investments
in con‡ict capacity, which will remove the free-rider e¤ect in investment decisions of citizens. Hence,
the equivalent of (3) in the text now becomes
0
1
X
c
n e A (n) nY
max H @
i
c
f

where recall that N z

i gi2N z c =1

c =1

j2N zc =1

X

( ci );

i2N zc =1

= n.

Notice two di¤erences relative to (3). First, the value of victory in this con‡ict is now multiplied

by n, which is the size of the coalition of citizens, N z
43

c =1

. This re‡ects the fact that the maximization

is now from the viewpoint of the coalition, thus the return to winning the con‡ict is the total
resources that the coalition will control following such a victory, nY . Second, the coalition also
directly controls the decisions of all regions that are part of the coalition, as re‡ected by the fact
that the maximization is over f ci gi2N zc =1 , and the total cost of investment of all of these groups

is subtracted from the gross return. These two di¤erences together imply that there is no longer
the free-rider e¤ect in the investment decisions (which was present in the text because each group
of citizens in the coalition failed to internalize the bene…t that it would create on other members of
the coalition). As a consequence, the level of investment in con‡ict capacity by citizens in this case
is always greater than the one in the text. More formally, denoting the level of investment in this
case by

(n; n; (n)), we have the equivalent of (4) in the text — the …rst-order condition that this

investment satis…es — as
h n

(n; n; (n))

n

e

0

(n) Y n

(

(n; n; (n))) = 0:

(A-23)

The comparison of this equation to (4) immediately yields
(n; n; (n)) >

(n; n; (n)) :

The rest of the analysis proceeds as before, and the relevant choice for citizens from region 1 is
once again to engage in con‡ict by themselves vs. to form the grand coalition. Which one they will
prefer will again depend on whether

(N ) is above a critical threshold, which is now denoted by

(N ). Moreover, this threshold is again given by a condition that is essentially identical to (11),
except that

replaces

; this captures the fact that the investment decisions of di¤erent coalitions

will now satisfy the …rst-order condition (A-23) rather than (4). Namely:
H N

N; N;

(N )
=H(

N

e

(N ) Y

(1; 1; 1)

(where we have also incorporated the fact that

e

N; N;

) Y

(1; 1; 1) =

(

(N )

(1; 1; 1))

(1; 1; 1), since there was no free-rider

problem when citizens from region 1 were acting by themselves).
Since the monotonicity arguments are identical to those in the text, this condition then immediately shows that citizens from region 1 will choose to form their grand coalition whenever
(N ) >

(N ). Since

(N; N; (N )) >

(N; N; (N )), we also have

(N ) <

(N ), which

simply re‡ects the intuitive idea that when the free-rider problems are not present, citizens will
invest more in a coalition, and thus forming the grand coalition becomes more attractive. A similar
argument can also be used to de…ne the analog of threshold

(N ),

(N ). Because the grand

coalition of citizens is now investing more in their con‡ict capacity, state centralization becomes less
attractive to elites. As a consequence, this new threshold satis…es

(N ) <

(N ). Using these

thresholds and following identical steps to the proof of Proposition 3, we establish:
Proposition A-4 Suppose that citizen coalitions are not subject to the free-rider problem in their
investments in con‡ict capacity. Then Proposition 3 holds with
replaced by

(N ) replaced by

(N ) and

(N )

(N ).

This proposition thus shows that, qualitatively, all of the results from the text apply in this case
as well. Corollary 3 also applies identically.
44

References
Abinales, Patricio N. (2000) Making Mindanao: Cotabato and Davao in the Formation of the
Philippine Nation-State, Manila: Ateneo De Manila Univ Press.
Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 52, 1199-1226.
Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo Garcia-Jimeno and James Robinson (2015) “State Capacity
and Economic Development: A Network Approach,”American Economic Review, 105(8), 2364-2409.
Acemoglu, Daron, Jacob Moscona and James A. Robinson (2016) “State Capacity and
American Technology,” forthcoming in the American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail, New York: Crown.
Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Rafael Santos (2012) “The Monopoly of
Violence: Evidence from Colombia,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(1), 5-44.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2010) “Persistence of Civil
Wars,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(2–3), 664–676.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2011) “Emergence and Persistence of Ine¢ cient States,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(2), 177-208.
Amsden, Alice H. (1989) Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Andaya, Barbara W. and Leonard Y. Andaya (1982) A History of Malaysia, London:
Macmillan.
Anderson, Benedict R. O’G. ed. (2001) Violence and the State in Suharto’s Indonesia,
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Anderson, Perry (1974) Lineages of the Absolutist State, London: Verso.
Anderson, Siwan, Patrick François and Ashok Kotwal (2016) “Clientelism in Indian
Villages,” forthcoming American Economic Review.
Arguillas, Carolyn O. (2011) “Maguindanao: The Long Shadow of the Ampatuans,” in
Yvonne T. Chua and Luz D. Rimban eds. Democracy at Gunpoint, Makati City: The Asia Foundation.
Bates, Robert H. (1981) Markets and States in Tropical Africa, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Berman, Sheri (2006) The Primacy of Politics: Social Democracy and the Making of Europe’s
Twentieth Century, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson (2009) “The Origins of State Capacity: Property
Rights, Taxation and Politics,” American Economic Review, 99(4), 1218-44.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson (2011) Pillars of Prosperity, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Brewer, John (1990) The Sinews of Power: War, Money and the English State, 1688-1783,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Dincecco, Mark (2010) “Fragmented Authority from Ancien Régime to Modernity: A Quantitative Analysis,” Journal of Institutional Economics, 6, 305-28.

45

Dincecco, Mark and Gabriel Katz (2016) “State Capacity and Long-Run Economic Performance,” Forthcoming, Economic Journal.
Emerson, Rupert (1937) Malaysia: A Study in Direct and Indirect Rule, New York: The
Macmillan Company.
Epstein, S. R. (2000) Freedom and Growth, London: Routledge.
Esping-Anderson, Gøsta (1985) Politics against markets: the social democratic road to
power, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Evans, Peter B. (1995) Embedded Autonomy, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Evans, Peter B. and James E. Rauch (1999) “Bureaucracy and Growth: A Cross-National
Analysis of the E¤ects of ‘Weberian’State Structures on Economic Growth,”American Sociological
Review, 64, 748-765.
Evans, Peter B. and James E. Rauch (2000) “Bureaucratic Structure and Bureaucratic
Performance in Less Developed Countries,” Journal of Public Economics, 75, 49-71.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Ilia Rainer (2007) “The Modern Impact of Pre-Colonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of Economic Growth, 12(3), 185-234.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Hans-Joachim Voth (2015) “State Capacity and Military Con‡ict,”
Review of Economic Studies, 82 (4), 1409-1448.
Gourevitch, Peter A. (1986) Politics in Hard Times: Comparative Responses to International
Economic Crises, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Habermas, Jürgen (1991) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry
into a Category of Bourgeois Society, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hardling, Philip (1996) The Waning of “Old Corruption”: The Politics of Economical Reform
in Britain, 1779-1846, New York: Oxford University Press.
Harper, T.H. (1999) The End of Enpire and the Making of Malaya, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hechter, Michael and William Brustein (1980) “Regional Modes of Production and Patterns of State Formation in Western Europe,” American Journal of Sociology, 85(5), 1061-1094.
Hooper, Virginia M. (2003) A Short History of Malaysia, London: Allen & Unwin.
Human Rights Watch (2010) “They Own the People: The Ampatuans, State-Backed Militias, and Killings in the Southern Philippines,”https://www.hrw.org/report/2010/11/16/they-ownpeople/ampatuans-state-backed-militias-and-killings-southern-philippines
Johnson, Chalmers A. (1982) MITI and the Japanese Miracle, Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Johnson, Noel D. (2015) “Taxes, National Identity, and Nation Building: Evidencefrom
France,” http://noeldjohnson.net/noeldjohnson.net/Home.html
Katznelson, Ira (1985) “Working Class Formation and the State: Nineteenth Century England in American Perspective,” in Peter B. Evans, Dietrich Rueschemeter and Theda Skocpol eds.
Bringing the State Back In, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kitschelt, Herbert (2000) “Linkages between Citizens and Politicians in Democratic Polities,”
Comparative Political Studies, 33(6/7), 845-879.
Kitschelt, Herbert and Steven I. Wilkinson eds. (2007) Patrons, Clients and Policies:
Patterns of Democratic Accountability and Political Competition, New York: Cambridge University
46

Press.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2001) “The Provision of Public Goods under
Alternative Electoral Incentives,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 225-239.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2004) “Why Did the Elites Extend the Su¤rage?
Democracy and the Scope of Government, With an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of Reform’,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 707 –765.
McAdam, Douglas, John D. McCarthy and M.N. Zald (1988) “Social Movements,” in
Neil J. Smelser ed. The Handbook of Sociology, Beverly Hills: Sage.
McKenna, Thomas M. (1998) Muslim Rulers and Rebels: Everyday Politics and Armed
Separatism in the Southern Philippines, Berkeley: University of California Press
Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou (2013) “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions
and Contemporary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113–152.
Migdal, Joel (1988) Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State
Capabilities in the Third World, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Migdal, Joel (2001) State-in-Society: Studying How States and Societies Transform and Constitute One Another, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Moene, Karl Ove and Michael Wallerstein (2006) “Social Democracy as a Development
Strategy,” in Pranab Bardhan, Samuel Bowles and Michael Wallerstein eds. Globalisation and
Egalitarian Redistribution, New York: Russel Sage Foundation.
North, Douglass C. (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, New York: W.W.
Norton & Co.
Nye, John (2007) War, Wine, and Taxes: The Political Economy of Anglo-French Trade,
1689– 1900, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Osafo-Kwaako, Philip and James A. Robinson (2013) “Political Centralization in PreColonial Africa,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 41 (1), 534-564.
Robinson, James A, and Thierry Verdier (2013) “The Political Economy of Clientelism,”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115, 260-291.
Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent (1990) “The Development of Irrigation in Provence 1700-1860: The
French Revolution and Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic History, 50, 615-638.
Saylor, Ryan (2014) State Building in Boom Times: Commodities and Coalitions in Latin
America and Africa, New York: Oxford University Press.
Shefter, Martin A. (1977) “Party and Patronage: Germany, England, and Italy,” Politics &
Society, 7(4), 403-451.
Shefter, Martin A. (1993) Political Parties and the State: The American Historical Experience, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Slater, Daniel (2010) Ordering Power: Contentious Politics and Authoritarian Leviathans in
Southeast Asia, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tilly, Charles (1978) From Mobilization to Revolution, New York: Addison-Wesley.
Tilly, Charles (1990) Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD 990–1990, Cambridge:
Basil Blackwell.
Tilly, Charles (1995) Popular Contention in Great Britain, 1758-1834, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
47

