                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE FINANCIAL IMPACT OF SOCIAL
                           SECURITY BY COHORT UNDER
                      ALTERNATIVE FINANCING ASSUMPTIONS




                              Michael J. Boskin

                              Douglas J. Puffert




                            Working Paper No. 2225




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  April 1987




We wish to express our thanks to Jessica Primoff for invaluable research
assistance, the Stanford University Center for Policy Research for support
of this research, and Mary Ross for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2225
                                                    April 1987


                 The Financial Impact of Social Security by Cohort
                      Under Alternative Financing Assumptions


                                     ABSTRACT

     This paper analyses the financial impact of Social Security by age
cohort under alternative assumptions concerning future financing of Social
Security. It examines the Social Security Administration's intermediate
tIE and various combinations of optimistic and pessimistic assumptions
concerning fertility, mortality, and wage growth. Importantly, it examines
the implications of alternative potential resolutions of the long-term
financing deficit and scenarios concerning the planned systematic deviation
from pay-as-you-go finance in the retirement and disability funds.

     The results suggest that the Social Security retirement program offers
vastly different returns to households in different circumstances, and
especially to different cohorts. Most important, if Social Security does
not maintain the large retirement trust fund surplus currently projected
for the next 30 years, alternative scenarios for return to pay-as-you-go
finance differ dramatically in the taxes, benefits, transfers, and real
rates of return that can be offered to different birth cohorts. The
implications of cutting taxes, raising benefits or diverting the surplus to
other purposes have dramatic impact on the overall financial status of the
system, the time pattern of taxes, benefits and surpluses or deficits, and
therefore, the treatment of different age cohorts.

     Under the intermediate assumptions, the OASDI surplus is projected to
grow almost as large as a fraction of CNP as the current ratio of privately
held national debt to GNP. For example, if the OASDI surplus is used to
raise benefits, and they remained at higher levels thereafter during the
height of the baby-boom generation's retirement, the long-run actuarial
deficit will zoom from $500 billion to over $3 trillion. Correspondingly,
if benefits increase, financed by the OASDI surplus over the next 30 years,
the expected rate of return on lifetime contributions increases for those
currently about 40 years old from 1.9% to 2.7%, about a 40% increase.
Correspondingly, if the surplus is dissipated and the subsequent long-run
deficit is made up with a tax increase on a pay-as-you-go basis at the time
of the projected deficit, the rate of return relative to the intermediate
assumptions for those persons now being born will fall by about 15%, and in
this case, the overall system finances would move from a long-run actuarial
deficit of slightly under one-half percent of taxable payroll to actuarial
balance -


     Thus, as Social Security is projected to deviate systematically from
pay-as-you-go finance, the potential alternative scenarios with respect to
accruing the surplus and/or dissipating it in various ways have potentially
large intergenerational redistribution effects.


 Michael J. Boskin                                 Douglas J. Puffert
 NBER                                              NBER
 204 Junipero Serra Boulevard                      204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
 Stanford, CA 94305                                Stanford, CA 94305
                             1.       Introduction

      For most Americans, anticipated Social Security retirement benefits

have a value larger than the total value of their other financial

assets)- Likewise, more than half of the workers in the United

States pay more in Old Age, Survivors, Disability, and Hospital

Insurance (OASDHI) "contributions" than they pay in personal income

taxes. Because the program looms so large in the financial picture of

so many, it is reasonable to assume that there is a significant demand

for an investment evaluation of the "deal" it offers citizens.    However,

the program is extremely complex, with the expected benefits depending

on one's marital status, sex, age-earnings profile, length of career,

number of children, and other factors.

     In this paper we simplify the analysis by exclusively evaluating

the retirement portion of the program. We examine it from the

perspectives of the individual household, entire cohorts and aggregate

system finances. Our study is partial equilibrium in the sense that we

do not tackle the consequences of the program for labor force

participation, private saving behavior or funding the federal debt. We

compute present values of taxes and benefits using a two percent real

discount rate.2 We also calculate what individuals receive from Social

Security as transfers -   the difference between the present values of



1. This value may very well be enhanced by the fact that the benefits are
paid out as an inflation adjusted life annuity.

2. See Boskin, icotlikoff, Puffert and Shoven (1987) for a discussion of the
choice of discount rate and sensitivity analyses.




                                  1
benefits and taxes. One's transfer is thus the surplus or gain one

receives from participating in the system (if the figure is positive).

Finally, we compute the internal rate of return offered by the

retirement portion of Social Security. That is, we calculate the rate

of discount which equates the expected present value of benefits with

the expected present value of taxes. Throughout the analysis, we assume

the participant bears the burden or effectively pays both the employer

and the employee contributions to the system.

     The long-run financial status of Social Security is quite

uncertain. First, future economic and demographic trends heavily affect

revenues and outlays. Second, except under the Social Security

Administration's optimistic scenario, the retirement part of the system

is projected to be in long-run actuarial deficit: small under the

intermediate assumptions; large under the pessimistic ones.   Hospital

Insurance (HI) is projected to run a large deficit beginning in the

l990s. Finally, the OASDI system is projected to accrue (under the

intermediate assumptions) a very large surplus over the next thirty

years. This surplus is projected to cumulate to almost 30% of CNP,

close to the current size of the national debt to CNP ratio. This

surplus is "designed" to reduce the need for still larger tax increases

or benefit reductions during the baby boom generation's retirement.

Figure 1 presents estimates of these average annual (not cumulative)

surpluses and deficits in Social Security, including and excluding HI

over the next 75 years to highlight this projected movement away from

pay-as -you-go finance.

     We have never been able to accrue a surplus this large in Social

Security; the retirement surplus may well be dissipated for other

purposes (to bail out HI, fund other programs, raise benefits, cut



                                2
     taxes, etc.) These possibilities involve major inter-cohort transfers

     relative to the intermediate assumptions, as do, of course, the

    alternative methods of dealing with the long-run deficit (see Boskin

     (1986)). We analyze these in detail below.

            The emphasis of the paper is to calculate the financial terms of

    Social Security's Old Age and Survivors Insurance for households from

    different birth cohorts under alternative possible futures. Our results
-


    indicate    that the "deal" varies substantially by cohort and that

    trillions of (real discounted) dollars are at stake for difference

    cohorts both in the economic and demographic future of the United States

    and in the use of the projected temporary surplus in the OASI trust

    fund.

            The remainder of the paper is as follows: the next section

    contains a brief survey of related literature. Section 3 describes our

    methodology and data. Section 4 presents results using intermediate

    assumptions for the overall financial status of the system, the

    situation to be faced by successive ten year birth cohorts (from before

    1912 through 1992) and that facing middle income single-earner families

    born in each of four years: 1945, 1960, 1975 and 1990. Section 5

    analyzes the effects of alternative future economic and demographic

    patterns. In addition to the standard optimistic and pessimistic Social

    Security Administration packages, we also present marginal changes for

    fertility, mortality and real wage growth. Section 6 estimates the

    implications of alternative uses of the large surplus which is projected

    to accrue in OASI's trust fund: what difference it makes, in the

aggregate and to specific cohorts if the surplus is used to raise

benefits or reduce taxes, or is spent on other programs.




                                     3
     Section 7 presents a brief conclusion which offers a short summary

and repeats some caveats concerning interpretation of the results.

     The Appendix presents tables which provide detailed data on the

taxes, benefits, transfers and rates of return by cohort and to a

"typical" family for the alternative scenarios considered.




                         2.   Literature Review

     Several studies analyze the long-run financial solvency of Social

Security under alternative economic and demographic assumptions. The

most important, of course, are the annual Social Security trustees'

reports (formally, the Annual Reports of the Board of Trustees of the

Old Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds).

They present both short- and long-term actuarial projections of Social

Security trust fund finances under alternative assumptions. The reports

certainly have valuable information, but these data are presented only

as fractions of taxable payroll (except, in one table, as fractions of

GNP); dollar figures (whether discounted or not) are not presented for

long-term projections. More importantly, the reports do not in fact

consider what the state of the retirement (OASI) trust fund might be at

the end of the report's 75 year horizon. Rather it presents the simple

average. over 75 years, of each year's surplus or deficit (that is, tax

receipts minus benefit payments) as a fraction of that year's taxable

payroll. The calculation considers neither the increase over time in

taxable payroll nor the interest earned on the cumulated trust fund

surplus. Thus, the 1986 report's claim that the OASI trust fund is in

"close actuarial balance" because the average annual deficit is only

0.29 percent of taxable payroll is based on a fundamental



                               4
misunderstanding of what that figure means. The report presents no

sufficient basis for evaluating the long-run financial solvency of Old

Age and Survivors Insurance.3

     Boskin's (1986) estimates of the long-run financial solvency of

OASI avoids these inadequacies by considering annual flows of dollars

and by projecting the actual accumulation and decumulation of the OASI

trust fund. He also considers what will happen if the expected

cumulative surplus of the next three decades is dissipated (for example,

by raising benefits) or if reforms are instituted in retirement age and

other features.

     Several studies have attempted to estimate the "deal" various

households. have received or can expect to receive from Social Security's

retirement program. The general conclusion is that the early cohorts of

retirees had very large rates of return on their taxes and that future

retirees, especially well-off ones, are likely to fare poorly, with a

rate of return below that available on private assets. Hurd and Shoven

(1985) document this pattern of rates of return for various cohorts and

earnings levels, but their analysis was made prior to the 1983

amendments and hence does not include consideration of the increased age

of eligibility for future retirees or the partial taxation of benefits.




3. In fact, if the report were to present the correct calculation, based on
the report's own assumptions and methodology, the resulting figures
would be more optimistic under each of the four sets of assumptions
used. A comparison of Tables 10 and F2 in the 1986 report shows that
taxable payroll is projected to rise at a rate slightly below the
assumed interest rate (under each alternative set of assumptions). This
means that the earlier positive annual balances should be given greater
weight than the later negative annual balances. Thus the long-run
actuarial balance should be reported as a little higher.




                                5
     Boskin, Avrin and Cone (1983) report the transfer both for

aggregate ten year age cohort and for average households in each cohort.

They also present estimates of how different cohorts and the system

finances as a whole would be affected by various policy changes, such as

increases in the retirement age. They conclude that those retiring

recently are receiving benefits which are about three times as large as

the sum of their employee and employer contributions plus three percent

real interest, i.e. ,   about two-thirds of their benefits are transfers.

     These results are updated to take account of the 1983 amendments in

Boskin (1986). The pattern of transfers remains qualitatively similar

to that mentioned above) but attention is called to the fact that OASDI

is unlikely to be financially solvent over the next 75 years, despite

the 1983 amendments. The financial solvency issue is much worse if HI

is included. Boskin emphasizes how and when the financial solvency

issue is addressed -    whether changes occur in the tax rates, benefit

formulae, the age of eligibility for full retirement benefits, or the

method of financing Social Security.

     Pellechio and Coodfellow (1983) examine the net impact of the 1983

amendments on various types of households. Our own analysis of typical

households is similar in spirit to theirs.

     Boskin, Kotlikoff, Puffert and Shoven (1987) present estimates,

ignoring long-run funding issues, for alternative family types and birth

cohorts. They conclude that the deal offered by Social Security varies

substantially, and has not always been better for poorer persons. The

transfers vary by (real discounted) $200,000 per family, amounts which

dwarf the redistributions debated in alternative income tax reforms.

They also note that the marginal linkage between taxes paid and benefits

received is quite low (often zero) and thus Social Security ought to be



                                  6
viewed as a tax with the concommitant distortions (e.g. ,    in   the labor

market). They also note that considering previously paid taxes a sunk

 cost creates a situation in which all but very young workers expect to

 receive back more in benefits than they expect to pay in taxes for the

remainder of their work life; thus most people have a stake in

preserving the Social Security system, even though their lifetime

transfers are negative.

     Finally, Bernheim (1986) notes an inconsistency in actuarial

discounting and maintaining the strong form of the life-cycle hypothesis

(an average propensity to consume over the lifetime of one). He argues

that simple discounting may be a good approximation for such

individuals. Since there is considerable evidence that many individuals

refuse annuities (e.g., TIA participants are well known to opt for a

certain pension of fixed duration rather than an annuity), and numerous

other studies suggest that lifecycle behavior cannot explain all --      or
perhaps most --   saving,   the applicability of this to the current paper

is questionable. Certainly, the population is heterogeneous, and for

some, perhaps simple discounting is appropriate. We discuss these

issues in the caveats in the conclusion.



                            3. Methodology and Data

     The results which we present here are based on computer simulations

of present and future American families covered by the Social Security

system. Our main simulation package derives aggregate discounted

figures for the taxes paid and benefits received by each of nine

successive decadal birth cohorts (a cohort is, for example, all those

born from 1943 to 1952). It simultaneously derives figures for annual




                                   7
income to and expenditure from the Social Security Administration's

retirement (that is, OASI) trust fund over the next 75 years.4

     This simulation begins with earnings records and other data

concerning Social Security participants who were surveyed in l973.

For subsequent years we estimate participants' earnings based on

demographic characteristics, we derive benefits based on legislated

benefit formulas, and we determine each participant's year of death

through a random process based on mortality tables published by the

Social Security Administration.6

     Cohorts born beginning in 1953 are simulated differently. In

considering typical male and female wage earners born each year, we

derive their expected tax and benefit futures based on mortality

probabilities and the proportion that can be expected to marry. We

multiply by the number born each year (plus the number born that year

who later immigrate as children) who will enter covered employment and

thus derive figures for entire cohorts. To derive income and

expenditure for the trust fund as a whole we make a further adjustment

for taxes paid and benefits received by adult immigrants; the totals for

cohorts, however, considers only those covered their entire lives.7



4. For further information on this simulation, or rather on an earlier
version of it, see Boskin, Avrin, and Cone. (1983)

5. The 1975 Social Security Exact Match File merged individual records from
the 1973 Current Population Survey with records of covered earnings.

6. Social Security Administration, Actuarial Study No. 92 (1984).

7. It will be noted that our simulation shows the 1943-1952 cohort faring
rather worse than its successor, although the general pattern is that
succeeding cohorts until about 1960 do progressively worse. The reason
for this is that this cohort is the youngest one for which survey data
are used, and many in this cohort are not yet married. It is well known
that singles fare rather poorly under Social Security, since they have
no option to receive a spouse or survivor benefit rather than a benefit



                                8
        The discussion is based on a version of our simulation which

assumes the tax law effective at the time of the Trustees' Report.

Results presented below use the recently enacted income-tax law. Thus,

we project small annual deficits for the trust fund in 1986 and 1987,

while the trust fund is actually now running a small surplus.8

        Our simulation goes beyond that of the Social Security

Administration in highlighting not only the financial evolution of the

trust fund but also the impact on successive cohorts of Old Age and

Survivors Insurance, both as currently legislated and as it may have to

be changed in the future in order to maintain the solvency of the trust

fund.

        A second simulation9 looks at the financial impact of Old Age

and Survivors Insurance for a variety of typical families. We use this

simulation to derive the expected value (in an ex-ante calculation which

recognizes the possiblity of death at any age) of a household's social



based on their own   earnings.
8. Our calculation is certainly rougher than that undertaken by the
actuarial staff of the Social Security Administration. As a result, we
generate projections of aggregate taxes and benefits which vary from
those of the 1986 Trustee's Report. Between now and 2010 we dervive
less in annual and cumulative surpluses (due to deriving less in tax
receipts) than what the Trustees' Report suggests is likely. Our
figures are close to those of the Trustee's Report in the early 2O1O's
but thereafter until about 2040 we derive greater annual surpluses or
lower deficits than those projected in the Trustee's Report. After 2040
we again generate higher annual deficits.

9. More extensive results from this simulation, but based on the income tax
law in effect until 1986, are presented in Boskin, Kotlikoff, Puffert
and Shoven (1987) and Boskin and Puffert (1987). The former article
also contains a more extensive description of our methodology.




                                  9
security taxes and benefits, and thus its net transfer and real rate of

return.

     In the main simulation we rely on Social Security Administration

projections for the proportion of Social Security benefits which are

recovered for the trust fund through income taxation. These estimates

are that this proportion will rise from less than two percent in 1986 to

about five percent in the mid-twenty-first century. Because legislated

marginal tax rates have been reduced since the Social Security

Administration made its projections we assume that, from 1988 on, 20

percent less will be collected in taxes on benefits. In 1987, the

transition year, we assume that 10 percent less will be collected.

     In the second simulation we calculate income taxation for each

case, based on the new tax law and data from the Internal Revenue

Service about taxable income of the elderlyJ0

     Both of these simulations are parameterized by economic,

demographic, and legal assumptions. The most important economic

assumption is future growth of real wages. The chief demographic

assumptions are mortality probabilities by age and fertility rates. The

legal assumptions are tax rates on payroll and formulae for the

calculation of benefits. In the scenarios below we consider the

alternative economic and demographic assumptions that the Social

Security Administration itself uses for the scenarios in its annual

trustees' reports11, and we consider fixed multiples of the payroll taxes



10. For details, see Boskin, Kottlikof, Puffert and Shoven (1987).

11. We do not consider alternative assumptions for unemployment, female
labor force participation, immigration or real interest rates.




                               10
 and the benefits currently legislated.

      The present values which we derive assume a real discount rate of

 two percent. This is the rate which the Social Security Administration

 assumes (in its intermediate assumption) will be realized on its trust

 fund. We apply this rate not only to the system's finances, however,

but also to participants in Social Security. A subsequent section will

discuss arguments that this rate is either too low or too high when

applied to individualsj2 but we note here one advantage of this figure.

When participants can expect a higher rate of return from Social

Security than that received by the trust fund, it must be the case that

their participation raises the trust fund's unfunded liabilities by the

excess of claims on the trust fund over assets. The amount of a

cohort's net transfer (discounted benefits minus discounted taxes) is

the amount by which the trust fund's unfunded liabilities rise.

Conversely, a cohort real rate of return below two percent Indicates a

decrease in the trust fund's unfunded liabilities.




               4.   Results for Intermediate Assumptions

     Table 1 presents the results of our main simulation using the

Trustees' Report's intermediate assumptions about future economic and

demographic trends. Panel A shows the basic trends, well known by now,

that are expected to develop in the finances of the OASI trust fund.



12. In previous work (Boskin, Kotlikoff, Puffert and Shoven (1987)) we and
our colleagues argue for a rate of three percent.




                              11
The trust fund will run a substantial surplus over the next 25 years

while the baby-boom generation is in its peak earnings years. In the

following 25 years (more precisely, in the mid 2020's) when the baby-

boom generation retires, benefit payments will begin to exceed payroll-

tax revenues. In the third 25-year period there will be a still higher

proportion of retirees to workers, and annual deficits will equal a

fourth of tax receipts, or a fifth of next benefits.

     For the whole 75-year period we project a deficit of nearly $500

billion in 1986 dollars discounted to 1986. This is equal to about 0.44

percent of (discounted) taxable payroll)-3 Thus a rise in the Social

Security payroll tax rate of 0.44 percent effective now, or

substantially more later, would be needed to close the long-run OASI

trust fund deficit if the intermediate assumptions prove to be the case.

     It is worth noting at this point why we present our figures in

discounted terms. First, this enables us to consider the present value

of potential futures of the OASI trust fund. This is especially

valuablee as we compare scenarios with different time paths of surpluses



13. This is slightly more than the 0.29 percent long-ten actuarial deficit
presented in the Trustees' Report. We discussed above how the latter
figure is not very meaningful, and how a calculation comparable to ours
would yield a deficit that is lower in magnitude. A further difference
is that our calculation asssuntes the new, lower marginal tax rates.
Under the old tax law our simulated deficit is about 0.34 percent of
taxable payroll. Finally, it should be noted that we make no effort to
calculate the future deficit in disability insurance (DI). The Social
Security Administration calculates this deficit as averaging 0.15
percent of taxable payroll, or half as large as the OASI deficit. The
Social Security Administration total projected OASDI deficit is thus
0.44 percent of taxable payroll. The projected deficit in Hospital
Insurance is another 3.5 percent.




                              12
and deficits. Secondly, it obviates the need to give explicit

consideration to the interest received (or paid out) by the trust fund

on its calculated surplus (or deficit), since we assume that the

interest and discount rates are identical. The present (1986) value of

the surplus or deficit in 2060 will equal the sum of the present values

of annual surpluses and deficits until then. As a corollary, it becomes

very simple to compute how taxes or benefits can or must be changesd to

bring the trust fund into actuarial balance.

     The system finances are also presented in Figure 1, where the

discounted surplus both annually and on a cumulative basis for the

system are shown. On a cumulative basis the system starts to run a

deficit (assuming the surplus accrues and real interest is 2 percent)

around 2048, and on an annual basis, around 2025. We present below some

hypothetical scenarios of the surplus being dissipated or alternative

economic and demographic projections which alter these conclusions

substantially.

     Table 2 presents results from our simulation of various typical

three different levels of earnings, two division of earnings between

the family members. The figures include expected present value of taxes,

benefits and transfers, and rates of return discounted both to the age

when the couples are 25 (for the purposes of comparision) and to 1986.

The discounted present value of transfers (and therefore, taxes and

benefits in general) varies markedly within each age cohort for

different levels of earnings (reflecting the progress ivity of the

benefit formulae) and income splits (with respect to the spousal

benefit), and to a lesser extent, the ceiling on taxable earnings. For

example, persons recently entering the system, born in 1960, have a




                               13
present value of transfers that ranges from a slight positive transfer

for low income earners to a substantial negative transfer for high-

income earners. The rates of return for taxes paid range from 3.4% for

the low-income single-earner family to 0.4% for the high income two-

earner family. The same pattern is repeated within each cohort. The

intragenerational redistributions are explored in much greater detail in

Boskin, Kotlikoff, Puffert and Shoven (1987).

     The financial patterns for successive decadel cohorts born through

1992 are presented in panel b of Table 1. Retiree taxes, net benefits

(i.e., net of income taxation), the transfer received by those who live

to retire, and the taxes paid by nonsurvivors, together with the real

rates of return are presented. As can be seen, even those due to be

born in the immediate future are likely to get a slightly positive

transfer, computed at a 2 percent real rate of return. Thus, the rates

of return which are about 2 percent or more, indicate positive

transfers. Were we to use 3 percent, cohorts born after 1933 would be

receiving negative transfers.

     Of course, since there is a long-run actuarial deficit of 0.44% of

taxable payroll, amounting in present value to approximately 500 billion

dollars, someone will have to pay it. The base case assumes that it is

paid by persons born after 1992, whose situation will be correspondingly

worse. We present information on how this varies for different rates of

return.

     Thus, while we will primarily be dealing in the sequel with system

totals and aggregates by age cohorts, substantial variation remains

within each age cohort, and that variation will vary systematically as

we change economic and demographic assumptions and consider alternative

scenarios for dissipation of the surplus. In what follows we will



                                14
present only the situation for a typical middle income family with one

earner, a group which systematically earns a rate of return very close

to 2% cohort by cohort (see Table 2), rather than present a large string

of negative numbers for the well-off two-earner couple or a long string

of substantial positive numbers for low income one-earner couples. We

will focus on this case to see how one-earner middle income couples'

situations vary depending on the alternative scenarios. We do this to

reduce the system aggregate finances and the aggregate cohort amounts

for the cohorts to a per family basis. The heterogeneity that certainly

lies behind each of these scenarios should be borne in mind.




5.   Financial Impacts of Alternative Future Economic and Demographic
      Patterns

     The Social Security Administration's intermediate economic and

demographic assumptions are perhaps as reasonable as any, but we can be

sure that they will not be realized with great accuracy.14 It is thus

important to consider the impacts of a range of possible futures both on

the Social Security system's finances and on participants.

     Tables 3 and 4 summarize the effects of using the Social Security

Administration's optimistic and pessimistic assumptions for future wage

growth, future mortality (and hence, life expectancy), future fertility

and various combinations of these parameters. Table 4 shows the wide




14. For an analysis of the inaccuracy of the economic and demographib
assumptions used in the past, see United States General Accounting
Office (1986).




                              15
variation in results for the financial solvency of the retirement trust

fund. The present (1986) value of the trust fund surplus (or deficit)

in 2060 ranges from +$3.4 trillion to -$2.6 trillion, for the combined

optimistic and pessimistic assumptions respectively.15 We see in the

column headed "year annual deficit begins" that only when the optimistic

assumptions are combined do tax receipts exceed benefit expenditures in

each year through 2060; otherwise current-flow deficits begin between

2014 and 2030. In the next column we see that the cumulative surplus

suffices, however, to cover benefit expenditures until 2024 in the most

pessimistic scenario and beyond 2060 in several of the optimistic

scenarios.

     Table 4 compares the rates of return realized by each of the nine

decadal birth cohorts under the alternative scenarios. We note first

that, for later cohorts, the derived real rates of return vary among

scenarios from about one and one-half percent to over three percent.

     In order to understand more closely how taxes, benefits, transfers,

and rates of return vary by scenario and cohort, let us now consider in

detail how each of our economic and demographic assumptions affects both

the finances of the Social Security retirement trust fund and the taxes

and benefits of those covered by Social Security. The figures discussed

below concerning the Social Security Administration's optimistic and

pessimistic scenarios are presented in still greater detail in Appendix




15. lJndiscounted, but still in 1986 dollars, the respective figures are
+$l4.7 trillion and -$11.1 trillion. Subsequent figures are also
presented in discounted terms. To remove discounting, multiply by 4.33.




                              16
Tables A.l and A.2.

     The Social Security Administration's intermediate (Il-B) assumption

for growth in real wages, used in our base case, is that there will be

an annual gain of one and one-half percent (with some fluctuation in the

very short run). The optimistic assumption considers a gain of two and

one-half percent annually, and the pessimistic assumption considers a

gain of one percent.

     Interestingly, higher wage growth is better both for the system's

finances and for participants in the system. An increase in the trust

fund's annual surplus (taxes minus benefits) proves consistent with a

higher ratio of benefits received to taxes paid for the participants.

The reason for this is that increases in taxes, which vary with total

wages, precede the increases in benefits to which wage growth leads.

The wage index is used in the formula for determining benefits, and so a

faster rise in this index provides a higher rate of return for

participants. What "balances the books" is a growth in the unfunded

liabilities of the retirement trust fund. These liabilities could

become quite burdensome if wage growth slows in the future.

     We see in Table 3 that variation in wage growth changes taxes and

benefits in the same direction, but that taxes change to.a greater

extent. High wage growth increases the long-run surplus by $1.37

trillion, more than offsetting the long-run deficit expected under the

base case. Low wage growth deepens the long-run deficit by about $450

billion.

     Higher (lower) wage growth increases (decreases) both taxes and

benefits. It increases (decreases) annual flows of taxes more than

benefits but, for a given cohort, increases (decreases) discounted

benefits more than discounted taxes. Rates of return for later cohorts



                              17
(also presented in Table 4) vary from about 2.2 percent under

intermediate wage growth to about 2.8 percent under high wage growth and

1.9 percent under low wage growth.

     In assumptions about mortality, what is "optimistic" for the

solvency of the retirement trust fund is "pessimistic" for participants,

and vice versa. The trust fund is more solvent when people die sooner

and collect less in benefits. Table 3 shows that under the Social

Security Administration's high mortality (low life expectancy)

assumption the trust fund is better off by $963 billion over the 75-year

horizon, but that under the low mortality assumption the system is worse

off by $1.20 trillion. In Table 4 we see that for later cohorts the

rates of return are about 1.9 percent for high mortality and 2.7 percent

for low mortality. Higher (lower) mortality reduces (raises) benefits

much more than taxes for any cohort, as indeed for the trust fund's

annual flow as well.

     Alternative assumptions about fertility matter only for those cohorts

not yet born, which are not presented in our tables. However, because

Social Security participatits begin paying taxes some forty years before

they receive benefits, fertility rates will have a big impact on trust

fund finances in the next century)6 Indeed, today's low fertility

rates are the most widely cited source of probable future problems in

Social Security finance. Current fertility rates are about 1.9 children

per woman over her child-bearing years. The Social Security




16. The level of immigration, especially of young people, will have an
impact for the same reason. We leave this matter for future
investigation.




                               18
 Administration's intermediate assumption is that this will rise within

 the next two decades to 2.0 children   per woman. The optimistic and

pessimistic assumptions are 2.3 and 1.6 respectively.17 The results of

 our simulation, shown in Table 3, are that high fertility would add $694

billion to the trust fund surplus, more than eliminating what is

otherwise a deficit, while low fertility would add $837 billion to the

deficit.

     We also derived results for scenarios which combine sets of

optimistic and pessimistic assumptions. The assumptions which are

optimistic for participants are high wage growth and low mortality

(fertility being irrelevant), while the assumptions which are optimistic

for trust fund finances are high wage growth, high mortality, and high

fertility. In the scenarios which are optimistic and pessimistic for

participants, rates of return for later cohorts are about 3.3 percent

and 1.6 percent respectively. Comparing Appendix Tables A.9 and A.lO,

we see that under the combined optimistic assumptions today's
                                                                young
children will pay a little more than twice as much in taxes as they

would under the combined pessimistic assumptions, but they will receive

nearly four times as much in benefits. The effects on system finances

are offsetting and do not differ greatly from the base case.



17. In our simulation we use the Social Security Administration's figures
for number of births each calendar year, which are derived from these
fertility rates. It should be noted that the fertility rates used by
the Social Security Administration refer to "the average number of
children who would be born to a woman in her lifetime if she were to
experience the birth rates by age observed in, or assumed for, the
selected year and if she were to survive the entire child-bearing
period."




                              19
      Under the combined optimistic and pessimistic assumptions for trust

 fund finances the differences from the intermediate scenario for long-

 run surplus are +$3.88 trillion and -$2.07 trillion (Table 3). The

 present value of taxes differs between these extreme scenarios by a

 factor of nearly two, while benefits vary by a factor of about 1.3.

      Figure 3 shows how the size of the accumulated trust fund varies

 over the next 75 years for the overall optimistic, intermediate (base

 case), and pessimistic scenarios. Note that the continuing increase in

 the trust fund occurs only when the optimistic assumptions occur

simultaneously. For any one of the optimistic assumptions alone,

interest on the trust fund is eventually insufficient to cover the

difference between current benefits and current taxes, and the principal

itself is exhausted before 2090 (Table 3, last column).



6.   Financial Impact of Alternative Uses of the Potential Trust Fund
      Surplus

     We noted in the previous section that only under the combined optimistic

assumptions for wage growth, mortality, and fertility all together can

we hope that the retirement trust fund will take in at least as much

each year in taxes as it pays out in benefits. In all other cases an

accumulation in the trust fund is vital in order to forestall the time

when taxes must be raised or benefits reduced)8 Under intermediate



18. Of course, the consumption of the economy as a whole is limited by what
is produced, by those still living. Thus, in some sense Social Security
benefits must always be funded at the time they are paid. Still, the
method of financing Social Security determines who has what claims, and
this has important implications both for equity and efficiency.




                               20
assunptions, for example, an annual deficit will begin in 2025 but the

accumulated surplus will keep the trust fund solvent until 2048.

     Unfortunately it has always proved difficult, for political

reasons, to accumulate a trust fund surplus. It is in the interest of

each session of Congress, and each administration, to raise benefits (or

perhaps to lower taxes, although that has not yet been tried) if

possible. Raising benefits conveys transfers to those receiving, or

soon to receive, benefits while imposing much of the cost of the action

on future generations which do not yet vote. Lowering taxes, similarly,

helps a current generation of workers while requiring higher taxes from

future generations than would otherwise be necessary.

     The situation is now particularly acute for a major demographic

reason: in less than 30 years the baby-boom generation will begin to

retire. If we do not preserve the accumulation of a trust fund surplus

before then, future adjustments in payroll-tax rates or in benefits will

have to be much greater than would otherwise be necessary.

     Figure 4 depicts the combined (employer and employee) tax rates

which would be required each year to fund currently-legislated benefits

(given intermediate assumptions) without adding to or drawing upon an

accumulated surplus. Until 202519 tax rates could be lowerthan

those currently legislated, but thereafter they would rise drastically.




19. The higher tax rate shown for 2022 is a quirk resulting from the way our
simulation handles the rise in retirement age, from 66 to 67, which
occurs around that time. We stimulate the change as occuring all at
once rather than phased in over several years.




                               21
      Conversely, Figure 5 shows the level of benefits which could be

 funded by each year's tax receipts. This level is presented in the form

 of a ratio to benefits as provided for under current legislation. We

 see that benefits could be raised intermittently through 2009, to a

 level 30 percent higher than that now legislated, but that thereafter

 they must either decline or, perhaps more plausible politically, be

maintained through increases in payroll tax rates. The tax rates

required to finance these increased benefits are depicted in the

broken line of Figure 4.

     Tables 5 and 6 summarize the financial impacts of several
                                                                 ways of
dissipating the trust-fund surplus which is projected to grow over the

next 35 to 40 years. "Pay-as-you-go tax rates" considers the scenario

in which, beginning in 1990, tax rates are set each year at a level

which exactly covers that year's benefit
                                           payments. Similarily, "pay-as-
you-go benefits" considers, also for 1990 on, the adjustment of benefit

levels to match projected tax receipts. The tax rates and benefits

levels of these scenarios thus follow the hea-vy lines depicted in

Figures 4 and 5 respectively.

     We consider 1990 a plausible starting date for these scenarios

because the party that takes office in 1989 will be glad to endear

itself to the voters before the 1990 congressional election.   By this
time the annual surplus in the trust fund will be an inviting target.

     The "benefit ratchet" scenarios consider the cases in which

benefits rise to their pay-as-you-go peak in 2009 but do not

subsequently decline. The first of these scenarios notes the enormous

deficit ($3.69 trillion cununulative by 2060) generated when the higher

benefit level is not funded with taxes, while the second considers the

case of taxes rising, in a pay-as-you-go fashion, to fund the increased



                                22
benefits.

       The last two of these scenarios consider what will happen if the

surplus which would accumulate over the next forty years is dissipated,

or directed to other purposes. Two very plausible possibilities for

this are that the surplus could be used to cover some of the massive

deficit in Social Security Hospital Insurance which will (absent a major

reform) develop within a few years2° or that the surplus will, in the face

of federal budget deficits, be used to fund other expenditures. The

first of these scenarios raises taxes in a pay-as-you-go fashion

beginning in 2025, the first year in which current benefit payments

exceed current tax receipts. The second of these scenarios reduces

benefits in a pay-as-you-go fashion from 2025 on. Thus these scenarios

are equivalent to the earlier pay-as-you-go scenarios from 2025 on; they

only lack the period in which tax or else benefit levels are more

favorable for participants than the levels currently legislated.

      The chief result for system finances (Table 5) under all these

scenarios --   except, of course, the unfunded ratcheting of benefits --
is   that the long run surplus is, by construction, essentially

zero.21 The story for the successive cohorts, as we see in Table 6

and more extensively in Appendix Tables A.3 through A.8, is that some

gain and some lose as a result of these changes.

      Thus under pay-as-you-go tax rates, those born until the 1980's



20. In practice, it is more likely that part of OASI's portion of payroll
tax will be reallocated to HI. The analysis of OASI finances would then be
similar to that of our pay-as-you-go taxrate scenario.

21. A deficit of $8 billion appears for some scenarios due to our simulation
showing a slight overall deficit between 1986 and 1989.




                                23
 gain; the bulk of their working lives take place before 2025, when tax

 rates must rise above those currently legislated. The big losers under

 this scenario are those born in the next century, who will be subject to

payroll tax rates of over 13 percent by 2033 (and later over 14

percent), rather than the 10.98 percent currently legislated.

     Under pay-as-you-go benefits, those who receive benefits mostly

before 2025 gain. Those born from the l950's on, who collect their

benefits after 2025, will do worse than projected under current

legislation. Those born today can expect a benefit reduction of 23

percent, for a rate of return of only about 1.5 percent.

     With a ratcheting of benefits financed by tax increases, those born

until the present decade gain, as their increase in benefits more than

offsets the increase in taxes which they pay during part of their

working lives. But later cohorts bear the full brunt of these increased

tax rates (17 percent by 2033, and higher later, compared to 10.98

percent currently legislated) and hence do substantially worse overall.

     When the surplus is dissipated, there are no gaining cohorts.

But those who pay taxes or collect benefits after 2025 suffer the same

losses as in the first two pay-as-you-go scenarios.



                      7.   Conclusion and Caveats

     The results reported in this research suggest that Social

Security's retirement program offers vastly different terms to

households in different circumstances and in different cohorts. More

importantly, (net of any private intrafamily intergenerational transfers

which offset Social Security benefit payments, which we believe to be a

modest fraction of the total benefits) if we do not maintain a large




                               24
OASI trust fund, the alternative scenarios for return to
                                                                 pay-as-you-go

finance differ dramatically in the taxes, benefits, transfers and real

rates of return which can be offered to different birth cohorts.

       While it appears that the retirement part of Social Security       -   -

but   not hospital insurance -   - is   in sound short-run financial shape and

indeed, is projected to accummulate a very substantial surplus over the

next 35 to 40 years under intermediate economic and demographic

assumptions, various factors could intervene in this relatively rosy

short-run scenario. We have attempted to explore some plausible

alternatives to the surplus accruing: tax could be cut, benefits

increased, or the surplus diverted to other purposes. We have traced

their implications for the overall financial status of the system, the

time pattern of taxes, benefits and surpluses or deficits, and

therefore, the treatment of different age cohorts. Under the

intermediate   assumptions, the Social Security surplus is proj ected to
become almost as large as today's regular national debt. Obviously,
well before this would occur, enormous pressure would be placed on

financial markets. Since Hospital Insurance is scheduled to be accruing

a substantial deficit well before the surplus peaks, one likely scenario

is that Social Security will "borrow" from the retirement fund to bail

out the hospital insurance fund. The retirement surplus also could be a

signal to fiscal authorities that additional spending could be financed

on other programs, ignoring the simultaneously accruing future

liabilities in Social Security. The surplus could be dissipated if the

prospective increase in the retirement age is reduced, eliminated, or

postponed; and/or if the tax exempt amount is indexed. In all of these

situations, the short-run surplus would decrease substantially, and the

subsequent long-run deficit would worsen. The exact pattern of tax



                                   25
 collections and benefit payments might take a variety of forms, but each

 of these would lead to a much worse deal for retirees in the distant

 future versus current retirees or those retiring in the near future.

       The Social Security retirement system finances are quite sensitive

 to alternative economic and demographic events. We have presented

estimates based upon the Social Security Administration's pessimistic

and optimistic packages, but also "unpackaged" them so that we may

examine the marginal effect of changing mortality, fertility, and wage

growth assumptions. Again, the patterns are revealing. Except in the

optimistic package, the discounted value of the Social Security

retirement system fund over the next 75 years is negative, and is

subject to substantial potential negative shocks for the reasons

discussed above.

       We have mentioned a number of caveats to our results throughout the

paper. First, the new income tax law is certain to change over the time

horizon we examine and probably sooner rather than later.
                                                             Marginal
rates may change, Social Security benefits may be taxed fully, some or

all of the tax collections from the taxation of Social Security benefits

may accrue to general funds to help pay for deficits rather than be

credited to Social Security at the time of surplus, etc.    Second, we
mentioned that the value of Social Security benefits may exceed their

expected present value because they are paid as inflation-adjusted joint

survivor life annuties. Exactly how to make the adjustments is unclear.

Bernheim (1986) argues that a strict adherence to the life-cycle model -

- at   least the aspect of it that implies an average propensity to

consume, over one's lifetime, of one -- and imperfections in annuity

markets imply that actuarial discounting is inappropriate, and argues




                                26
that simple discounting may be desirable. While we do not hold to this

extreme form of the life-cycle model in this paper and there is

substantial evidence that if individuals are given the option, they

refuse to annuitize their wealth (for example, college professors

covered by TIA usually decline annuitization in favor of some years

certain in their retirement pension), we do not believe that simple

discounting is a sensible alternative to actuarial discounting for the

whole population. However, to the extent that a fraction of the

population we consider is appropriately considered as pure life-cycle

savers and subject to the imperfections in annuity markets, some method

of aggregating heterogeneous individuals within cohorts is desirable and

perhaps some convex combination of actuarial and simple discounting

would be necessary. Simple discounting would alter the benefits and

taxes only a few percentage points, given a real discount rate of 2

percent or 3 percent. Again, we would argue that these factors should

be applied only to some fraction of the population, not the entire

population. For the system totals, such adjustments are unnecessary;

indeed, they only make sense for examining the individual cases rather

than the system aggregate totals.

     Related questions revolve around comparing taxes paid earlier in

life and benefits received later in life. Taxes might be paid at a time

in life when households are constrained in liquidity; Social Security

benefits may be systematically subject to different types of risks than

labor earnings or returns from assets. Hence, the taxes may be

differentially risky since they are paid on realized earnings during

working years relative to Social Security benefits. Again, these issues

have been discussed in more detail elsewhere (see Boskin and Shoven

(1985)).




                               27
      Thus, some risk adjustment may be necessary. Some have even

suggested that the appropriate discount rate should be zero because

Social Security benefits really are a safe asset and that is close to

the real return on government securities (safe assets) over the long-

term (Henry Aaron, Alicia Munnell and others have made this argument).

First, adjusting for differences in risk other than mortality risk by

adjusting discount rates is inappropriate. Modern finance theory

teaches that a charge for risk should be assigned in the appropriate

period and the appropriate measure of net adjusted benefits should then

be discounted at the rate of time preference. Second, it is unclear

whether Social Security benefits or earnings or the returns to other

assets are differentially risky. Indeed, it is not just their inherent

risk but their covariance with other components of income for households

which would determine the nature of the risk charge to be applied. For

persons already retired, one would expect that uncertainty would be

relatively modest; for those due to retire in the distant future, there

is substantial uncertainty regarding the level of such Social Security

payments. This stems from the Social Security system's long-ten

financial solvency problems as well as the desire of many to means-test

the program fully. Thus, well-off individuals may wind up getting

nothing in the future as the way to deal with the financial solvency

problem. We merely point these issues out for the interested reader and

refer them to the other papers mentioned for further discussion, but

these caveats should be borne in mind in interpreting the results

reported here.




                              28
                                References

 Beruheim, B.D. (1986), "The Economic Effects of Social Security: A
 Reconciliation of the Theory and the Evidence," Stanford University,
 mimeo.

 Boskin, N.J. (1986), Too Many Promises: The Uncertain Future of Social
 Security, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin.

 Boskin, N.J., N. Avrin and K. Cone (1983),
                                             "Modeling Alternative
 Solutions to the Long-Run Social
                                   Security Funding Problem," in N.
 Feldstein (ed.), Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis,
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Boskin, M. J., L.J. Kotlikoff, D.J. Puffert, and J.B. Shoven (1987),
"Social Security: A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations,"
National Tax Journal, March.

Boskin, N.J., L.J. Kotlikoff, and J.B. Shoven (1985), "Personal Security
Accounts: A Proposal for Fundamental Social Security Reform," Policy
Paper, Center for Economic Policy Research, Stanford
September.                                            University,


Boskin, N.J., and D.J. Puffert (1987), "Social
                                               Security and the American
Family," NBER Working Paper No. 2117, January.

Hurd, M.D. and J.B. Shoveri (1985), "The Distributional
                                                        Impact of Social:
Security," in D.A. Wise (ed.), Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Pellechio, A.J. and G.E. Goodfellow (1983), "Individual Gains and Losses
from Social Security Before and After the 1983 Amendments," Cato
Journal, Fall.

United States General Accounting Office
                                         (1986), Social Security: Past
Projections and Future Financing Concerns.
                                             Washington, DC, March.
                          2••                       i rt I
                                                         ii
                                       Projected Social Security Finances

                          1•




                          0•




                         —1
                                                                       •    Surplus
                                                                            (Deficit) as   a
                                                                              of Taxable
                         —2                                                 Payroll
Surplus (Deficit) as
  z   Taxable   Income                                                 U    Surplus
                         —3                                                 (Deficit) as .4
                                                                            of Taxable
                                                                            Payro 11
                                                                            (including I-lI)
                         —4.



                         —S.



                         —6


                         _7..



                         —8
                                1986       2811          2036   2861
                                                  year
                                                            Figure    2
                                                                          —
                                                 Discounted Surplus           Annual and
                                                                  —
                                                     Cunulative       Base     Case

Billions     of $

         -
880
                                                                                                 — Annual

600    - -                                                                                         Cumulatlue

                                          SI,,
                                                                                •I,

         —                            1                                               'I
400
                                  I
                                                                                           •I.
         -                  "
208

                    •55.'




—280--



         -
—408



—600- -
   1986      1991   1996 2801   2006 2811          2016 2021 2026          2031 2036         2041 2046   20S1   2056
                                                           Year
                                                              Figure 3

                                                  Discounted Cumulative Surplus For
Billions        of'   $                                 Alternative Scenarios
        -   -
4088



        -   -
3008



zone



 ieee-
                                                                           —
                                                    —
                                  d
                                      •       F                                  —




                                                                         11111111111                       11111



        -
—1888
                          — Pessimistic

                            Optinistic
                            Base



—3088-
    1986        1991       1996   2081    2086 2011     2816 2821 2026 2031 2036       2841 2846   2851   2856
                                                                                                                   S
                                                               Year
                                                    Figure 4
                                  Tax Rates,             Current   Law and
                                              Pay—As— You—Co
      '.   of   Taxable Payroll

20    -



18-

16-

14-                                                 I,
                                               •5
                                       S...
                                   S
12-

10-

                                                                     — Pay—As—You--Co Tax Rates
 8-

 6--                                                                   Tax Rates   to   Pay   for
                                                                       Benefit Ratchet

 4.-                                                                   Current   Law

 2-

 0   —IIIIIIIIIIIIIIlIItIIIIIIIIIIIIIfIIIIlII$tIIIlpIIIIfIIIIIjiiiiiiiiiiiii,iij
 1986 1991 1996 2881 2006 2011 2816 2821 2826 2831 2036 2841 2846 2851 2056
                                                     Year
                                          Figure   5
                              Pay—As—You—Go Benefit Ratio, Given
                               Taxes, To Naintain Annual Balance
1.4-




1.2-




  1




0.8-




6.6 11111111111111111111111 I 11111111
                                       11111111111111111111111111111111111111111
  1986 1991 1996 2801 2866 2811 2016 2021   2026 2831 2036 2041 2646 2851 2056
                                        Year
                                         Table 1
                          Base Case (Intermediate Assumption)
                            A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                                  1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                           SURPLUS/
  TIME PERIOD         PAYROLL          TAXES     BENEFITS   BEN TAXESa      SURPLUS        PAYROLL

  1986 TO 2010          39584           4366         3997   114 (141)            483        1.22%
  2011 TO 2035          38540           4232         4422   158 (198)         -31          -0.08%
 2036 TO 2060           34460           3784         4925   196 (244)        -946          -2.74%
 1986 To 2060          112584          12381        13344   468 (584)        -495          -0.44%



                        B. FINANCIAL PATTERNS FOR BIRTH-YEAR COHORTS
                                1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                           NET              NONSURVIVOR           REAL RATE
                      RETIREEb
 Year of Birth          TAXES      BENEFITSC     TRANSFER         TAXESd          OF RETURN

 BEFORE 1912              385          3671          3286            186               11.61%
 1913 TO 1922             489          1582          1093            121                5.74%
 1923 TO 1932             776          1508           732            149                3.72%
 1933 TO 1942             952          1446           495            193                2.75%
 1943 TO 1952            1378          1695           316            340               1.96%
 1953   TO   1962        1525          2040          515             350               2.31%
 1963   To   1972        1414          1809          395             325               2.17%
 1973   TO   1982        1287          1660          373             283               2.22%
 1983   To   1992        1337          1751          413             282               2.28%

                C.   EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE- INCOME SINGLE- EARNER COUPLES
                             (1986 dollars, discounted to 1986)

                                                  Year of Birth of Couple

                                    1945          1960               1975                1990

Present Value Benefits              161,460       140,255            133,714             122,097
Present Value Taxes                 144,950       149,825            139,859             128,581
Present Value Transfer               16,510        -9,510              -6,145             -6,484

Rate of Return                        2.34%         1.80%                1.87%             1.85%

Notes: a. Income taxation of benefits. Figures in parentheses refer to old tax law.
        b. Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
        c. Benefits net of income taxation.
        4. Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
                                        Table 2


              Financial Patterns for Various Typical Families - Base Case
           (Expected values in 1986 dollars, discounted at real rate of 2%)

 Family Earnings Level:
 Division of Earnings;
                             Low ($10,000)      Middle ($30,000)
                             1-0                                       High ($50,000)
                                      1/2-1/2      1-0      1/2-1/2    1-0     1/2-1/2
 I. 1945 Cohort
 Discounting to 1970:
 Present Value Benefits    65,455   52,881      117,616      96,723   113,314 119,920
 Present Value Taxes       37,015   36,171      105,589     108,514   112.421 178,237
 Present Value Transfers   28,440   16,710       12,027     -11,791       893 -58,317
Discounting to 1986:
Present Value Benefits     89,854   72,594      161,460    132,778    155,554 164,624
Present Value Taxes        50,813   49,655      144,950    148,965    154,329 244,679
Present Value Transfers    39,041   22,939       16,510    -16,187      1,225 -80,055
Rate of Return              3.73%    3.17%         2.34%     1.64%      2.03%   0.75%

II. 1960 Cohort
Discounting to 1985:
Present Value Benefits     78,403   62,949      137,505    112,811    137,129 141,828
Present Value Taxes        48,963   47,833      146,888    143,499    170,004 239,165
Present Value Transfer     29,440   15,116        -9,383   -30,688    -32,875 -97,337
Discounting to 1986:
Present Value Benefits     79,971   64,207      140,255    115.067    139,871 144,664
Present Value Taxes        49,942   48,790      149.825    146,369    173,404 243,949
Present Value Transfer     30,029   15,417       -9,570    -31,302    -33,533 -99,285
Rate of Return              3.39%    2.82%        1.80%      1.27%      1.37% 0.40%
                                      cont. of Table 2
             Financial Patterns for Various Typical Families - Base Case
          (Expected values in 1986 dollars, discounted at real rate of 2%)

Family Earnings Level:
Division of Earnings:
                              Low ($10,000)     Middle ($30,000)     gh ($50,000)
                           1-0      1/2-1/2     1-0      1/2-1/2    1-0
III. 1975 Cohort                                                              1/2-1/2
Discounting to 2000:
Present Value Benefits     96,616   77,388    176,432   144,978     175,842 182,174
Present Value Taxes        61,614   60,078    184,540   180.232     214,567 300,387
Present Value Transfers    35,102   17,310     -8,108   -35,254     -38,725 -118,213
Discounting to 1986:
Present Value Benefits     73,224   58,651    133,714   109,876     133,267 138,066
Present Value Taxes        46,620   45,532    139,859   136,594     162,616 227,657
Present Value Transfers    26,604   13,119     -6,145   -26,718     -29,349 -89,591
Rate of Return              3.31%    2.75%      1.87%     1.35%       1.43%     0.49%


IV. 1990 Cohort
Discounting to 2015:
Present Value Benefits    123,218   98,859    216,823   177,840     221,189 229,261
Present Value Taxes        76,112   74,285    228,337   222,856     265,328 371,427
Present Value Transfer     47,106   24.574    -11,514   -45,016     -44,139 -142,166
Discounting to 1986:
Present Value Benefits    69,387    55,669    122,097   100,145    124,556 129,102
Present Value Taxes       42,860    41,832    128,581   125,495    149,412 209,158
Present Value Transfer    26,527    13,837     -6,484   -25,350    -24,856 -80,056
Rate of Return             3.40%    2.84%      1.85%      1.33%       1.48% 0.55%
                                                          Table   3


             System Finances, Various Economic      Demographic Scenarios — 75 Year Totals (1986—2060)
                                         (1986 hill ions, discounted to 1986)


 Scenarios               Taxes    Benefits      Benefit      Surplus          Variation
                                     .
                                                                                          Surplus as   Tear MinI Year Cumu.
                                                 T.xes                        of Surplus % of Tax.      Deficit    Deficit
                                                                             fr Base Case   Payroll     Begins     Begins
 Base Case              *12,381    113,344         *468               *495           0       —0.44%      2025       2048

 High Wage Growth       $18,021   $17,781          $639               $878    +*1.373         0.54%      2030     By 2090
 Low Wage Growth        $io.iio   *ii,si           *398           —*948         —*453       —1.03%       2020      2035

 High Mortality         *12.306   112,267          *429               *468      +1963         0.42%      2027           2080
                                                                                                                  By-

 Low Mortality          *12,522   *14,743          *521      —*1.700          —*1,205       —1.49%      2018       2035

 High Fertility         *13.095   *13,365          *469               *199       +694        0.17%      2026      By 2080
 Low Fertility          *11,516   *13,315          *467      —*1,332            —*837       —1.27%      2021       2040
 Overall Optimistic
 for Participants       118.235   *19,757          *715           —*807         —*312       —0.49%      2025       2051
 Overall Pessimistic
 for Participants      *10,112    *10,590          *365           —*113         +*382       —0.12%      2025       2056
 Overall Optimistic
 for Trust Fund        *19,177    *16,376          *587       *3.389          +13,884        1.94%
 Overall Pessimistic
 for Trust Fund         *9,644    112.653          *441      —12,567          —*2,072       —2.93%      2014       2024


•Remains Positive Indefinitely.
                                                          Table    4

                          Rates of Return   (%)   for Various Economic   I    Demographic Scenarios


         Scenario                                          Year of Birth

Scenario               Bef.1912   1913—22     1923—32     1933—42                    1953—62    1963—72   1973—1982   1983—92
                                                                       1943—521
Base    Case           11.61        5.74          3.72      2.75             1.96      2.31       2.18       2.22      2.28         I




High Wage Growth       11.61        5.74          3.88      3.14         2.48          2.91       2.79       2.84      2.90
Low Wage Growth        11.61        5.74          3.60      2.48         1.65          2.00       1.87       1.92      1.98
High Mortality         11.50       5.59           3.60      2.59         1.65          2.02       1.86       1.88      1.93         I

Low    Mortality       11.66       5.78           3.81      2.97         2.36          2.69       2.59       2.67      2.76         I


Sigh    Fertility      11.61       5.74           3.72      2.75         1.96          2.31       2.18      2.22       2.28     I

Low    Fertility       11.61       5.74           3.72      2.75         1.96          2.31       2.18      2.2.2      2.28     I

Overall Optimistic
                                                                                                                                I
for Participants       11.66       5.79           3.97      3.35         2.87          3.27       3.21      3.29       3.38     I


Overall Pessimistic
                                                                                                                                I
for Participants       11.50       5.59           3.47      2.31         1.35          1.71       1.55      1.58       1.63     I


Overall   Optimistic
                                                                                                                                I
for Trust      Fund    11.50       5.60           3.77      2.98         2.18          2.62       2.48      2.50       2.55     I


Overall. Pessimistic
for Trust Fund                                                                                                                  I
                       11.66       5.78           3.69      2.70         2.06          2.37       2.29      2.37       2.46     I
                                                         Table 5

                      Various Scenarios for Trust Fund Surplus — 75 Year Totals (1986—2060)
                                      (1986 *billions, discounted to 1986)


 Scenarios               Taxes      Benefits   Benefit       Surplus      Variation   Surplus as    Year Annl Year Cuinu.
                                                Taxes                     of Surplus % of Tax.       Deficit    Deficit
                                                                         ft Base Case   Payroll      Begins     Begins

Base Case               112,381     *13.344       $468        —*495             0        —0.44%      2025        2048

Pay—As—You—Go
 Tax Rates              112,868      113,344      $468             —*8      + 1487        0 • 00%    n.a.        n.e.

Pay—As—You—Go
 Benefits               *12, 3 81   $12,832       *443             —*8      + 1487        0.00%      n.a.        n.a.
 Benefit Ratchet,
  Unfunded              *12, 381    *16, 662      *591      —*3,690        —*3195         3.28%      2010        2010
 Benefit Ratchet,
  Funded by taxes       *16,064      *16,662      *591             —*8      + *487        0 • 00%    n.a.        n.a.

 Surplus Dissipated
  Funded by taxes       *13,565      113.344      *468             0a       +1495         0.00%      n. a        n.e.

 Surplus Dissipated
  Adjusted benefits     *12. 3 81   *12.112       *420             0a       *495          0.00%      D.C.        n.e.

a1689 billion surplus through 2025 has been dissipated.
                                                         Table 6

                           Rates of Return   (%)   For Various Trust Fund Surplus Scenarios


         Scenario                                         Year of Birth

Scenario              Bef.1912   1913—22     1923—32      1933—42   1943—52    1953—62    1963—72    1973—1982   1983—92

Base Case             11.61        5.74        3.12        2.75       1.96       2.31         2.18     2.22       2.28

Pay—As—You—Go
 Tax Rates            11.61        5.74        3.73        2.84       2.17       2.56         2.37     2.26       2.09

Pay—As—You—Go
 Benefits             11.62        5.94        4.16        3.18       1.96       1.89         1.56     1.54       1.54
Benefit Ratchet,
 Unfunded             11.62        3.95       4.25         3.50       2.75       3.07         2.92     2.96       3.02

Benefit Ratchet,
 Funded by taxes      11.62        3.95       4.25         3.50       2.73       2.95         2.58     2.34       2.09

Surplus Dissipated/
 Pay—As—You—Go
 taxes                11.61        5.74        3.72        2.75       1.96       2.31         2.11     2.04       1.96
Surplus Dissipated,
 Pay-As—You—Go
 benefits             11.61       3.74        3.11         2.71       1.80       1.89         1.56     1.54       1.54
                                                 Table A.1

                                   Overall Optimistic Scenario for Trust Fund




                           A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                            1986 $RILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                               SURPLUS
 TIME PERIOD          PAYROLL            TAXES      BENEFITS       BEN TAXE?       SURPLUS     PAYROLL

 1986 TO 2010          44698              4930             3909          112          1133       2.54%
 2011 TO 2035          57150              6275             5328          191          1139       1.99%
 2036 TO 2060          72604              7972             7138          284          1117       1.54%
 1986 TO 2060          174452            19177         16376             587          3389       1.94%



                       B. FINANCIAL PATTERNS FOR BIRTH-YEAR COHORTS
                            1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                           NET                    NONStJRVIVORd REAL RATE
                      RETIREEB
 Year of Birth          TAXES          BENEFITSC     TRANSFER           TAXES     OF RETURN

 BEFORE 1912             389             3477              3087          180       11.50%
 1913 To 1922            493             1497              1004          116        5.60%
 1923   To   1932        750             1514               764          168        3.77%
 1933   To   1942        963             1580               617          214        2.98%
 1943   To   1952       1517             2001               484          377        2.18%
 1953   TO   1962       1716             2585               869         451         2.62%
 1963   TO   1972       1724             2498               774         462         2.47%
 1973   TO   1982       1730             2520               789         452         2.50%
 1983   TO   1992       2055             3022               967         523         2.55%


                C. EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE-INCOME SINGLE-EARNER COUPLES
                               (1986   dollars, discounted to 1986)

                                         Year of Birth of Couple

                                 1945               1960                1975                  1990

Present Value Benefits           177,382            175,680             189,049               206,122
Present Value Taxes              153,492            176,518             190,083               202,926
Present Value Transfer            23,890               -838              -1,034                 3,196

Rate of Return                     2.48%              1.98%               1.98%                 2.05%

Notes: a.     Income taxation of benefits.
        b.    Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
        c.    Benefits net of income taxation.
        d.    Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
                                             Table A.2

                                 Overall Pessimistic Scenario for Trust Fund



                           A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                            1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                                  SURPLUS
 TIME PERIOD        PAYROLL          TAXES      BENEFITS      BEN TAXESa      SURPLUS             PAYROLL

 1986 TO 2010         36597           4036          3987            114              163            0.44%
 2011 TO 2035         30288           3326          4232            152             -755           -2.49%
 2036 TO 2060         20795           2283          4434            176            -1975           -9.50%
 1986 TO 2060         87679           9644         12653            441            -2567           -2.93%



                      B. FINANCIAL PATrERNS FOR BIRTH-YEAR COHORTS
                              1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986


                                       NET                  NONSURVIVORd REAL RATE.
 Year of Birth      RETIREE.,
                      TAXES       BENEFITSC     TRANSFER         TAXES   OF RETURN

 BEFORE 1912            401           3729          3329           174            11.66%
 1913 TO 1922           522           1646          1123           103             5.78%
 1923 TO 1932           749           1509           759           175             3.69%
 1933 TO 1942           941          1400            458           179             2.70%
 1943 TO 1952          1423          1706            283           251             2.06%
 1953 TO 1962          1457          1924            466           264            2.37%
 1963 TO 1972          1303          1662            359           222            2.29%
 1973 TO 1982          1135          1474            338           175            2.37%
 1983 TO 1992          1073          1424            351           149            2.46%


               C. EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE-INCOME SINGLE-EARNER COUPLES
                              (1986 dollars, discounted to 1986)
                                                  Year of Birth of Couple

                                   1945           1960               1975                  1990

Present Value Benefits             156,901        134.791            118,899               107,208
Present Value Taxes                139,419        135,729            117,675               100,761
Present Value Transfer              17,482           -938              1,225                 6,447

Rate of Return                       2.36%          1.98%                 2.03%              2.17%


Notes: a. Income taxation of benefits.
        b. Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
        c. Benefits net of income taxation.
        d. Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
                                                    Table A.3

                                         Pay-As-You-Go Tax Rates




                                 A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                                  1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                                    SURPLUS
 TIME PERIOD               PAYROLL       TAXES         BENEFITS         BEN TAXE?      SURPLUS      PAYROLL

 1986 TO 2010                39584           3875          3997              114               -8    -0.02%
 2011 TO 2035                38540        4263             4422              158                0     0.00%
 2036 TO 2060.               34460        4730             4925              196                0     0.00%
 1986 TO 2060               112584       12868            13344              468               -8    -0.01%



                             B. FINANCIAL PATTERNS FOR BIRTH-YEAR COHORTS
                                  1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986


                                           NET                     NONSURVIVORd REAL RATE
                           RETIREEb
 Year of Birth               TAXES    BENEFITSC        TRANSFER        .   TAXES     OF RETURN

 BEFORE 1912                   385           3671          3286              186           11.61%
 1913 TO 1922                  489           1582          1093              121            5.74%
 1923 TO 1932                  770           1508           739              149            3.73%
 1933 TO 1942                  917           1446           529              190           2.84%
 1943   TO   1952             1277           1695           418              324           2.17%
 1953   TO   1962             1398           2040           642              321           2.56%
 1963   TO   1972             1332           1809           477              296           2.37%
 1973   TO   1982             1284           1660           376              270           2.26%
 1983   TO   1992             1441           1751           309              293           2.09%

                    C.   EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE- INCOME SINGLE EARNER COUPLES
                                  (1986 dollars, discounted to 1986)
                                                         Year of Birth of Couple

                                      1945               1960                 1975                  1990

Present Value Benefits
                                              *                    *                   *                      *
                                      161,460            140,255             133,714                122,097
Present Value Taxes                   135,689            136,580             136,663                143,260
Present Value Transfer                 25,771              3,675              -2,947                -21,163

Rate of Return                          2.53%              2.08%               1.93%                  1.51%

Notes: a: Income taxation of benefits.
        b: Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
        c: Benefits net of income taxation.
        : Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
             Same   as Base Case.
                                                 Table A.4
                                    Pay-As -You-Go Benefits


                             A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                              1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                                SURPLUS
 TIME PERIOD          PAYROLL        TAXES          BENEFITS       BEN TAXESa      SURPLUS      PAYROLL

 1986   TO    2010      39584         4366              4504             130               -8    -0.02%
 2011   TO    2035      38540         4232              4388             156                O     0.00%
 2036   TO    2060      34460         3784              3940             156                O     0.00%
 1986   TO    2060     112584        12381             12832             443               -8    -0.01%


                        B. FINANCIAL PATTERNS FOR BIRTH-YEAR COHORTS
                             1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986


                                       NET                        NONSURVIVOR     REAL RATE
 Year of Birth         RETIREEb
                         TAXES    BENEFITSc          TRANSFER          TAXESd OF RETURN
 BEFORE      1912         385        3729               3344            186            11.62%
 1913 TO     1922         489        1702               1213            121             5.94%
 1923 To     1932         776        1722                 946           149             4.16%
 1933 TO     1942         952        1640                 688           193             3.18%
 1943 tO     1952        1378        1696                 317           340             1.96%
 1953 TO     1962        1525        1768                 244           350             1.89%
 1963 TO     1972        1414        1463                    49         325             1.56%
 1973 TO     1982        1287        1308                    21         283             1.54%
 1983 TO     1992        1337        1348                    11         282


                 C. EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE -INCOME SINGLE- EARNER COUPLES
                              (1986 dollars, discounted to 1986)
                                                      Year of Birth of Couple

                                   1945               1960                1975                   1990

Present Value Benefits             1671 542k          117, 851k           106, 195k              93,
Present Value Taxes                144 • 950          149,825             139,859               128,581
Present Value Transfer              22 ,   592        -31 • 974           -33,664               -34,844

Rate of Return                       2 .47%             1.27%                  1.17%              1.06%

Notes: a: Income taxation of benefits.
        b: Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
        c: Benefits net of income taxation.
         g:     Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
             Same as Base Case.
                                            Table A.5

                                  Benefit Ratchet-Unfunded




                         A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUN!)
                           1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                    SURPLUS
 TIME PERIOD        PAYROLL         TAXES      BENEFITS     BEN TAXESa   SURPLUS    PAYROLL

 1986 TO 2010        39584           4366          4511          130         -15     -0.04%
 2011 TO 2035        38540           4232          5748          206       -1311     -3.40%
 2036 TO 2060        34460           3784          6403          254       -2365     -6.86%
 1986 TO 2060       112584          12381          16662         591       -3690     -3.28%



                     B. FINANCIAL PATTERNS FOR BIRTh-YEAR COHORTS
                             1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986


                                      NET                  NONSURVIVORd REAL RATE
                    RETIREE.0
 Year of Birth        TAXES      BENEFITSC      TRANSFER        TAXES   OF RETURN

 BEFORE 1912           385          3730           3346          186      11.62%
 1913 TO 1922          489          1713           1224          121       5.95%
 1923   TO   1932      776          1782           1006          149       4.25%
 1933   TO   1942      952          1840            889          193       3.50%
 1943   TO   1952     1378          2203            825          340       2.75%
 1953   To   1962     1525          2652           1127          350       3.07%
 1963   TO   1972     1414          2351            937          325       2.92%
 1973   TO   1982     1287          2158            871          283       2.96%
 1983   TO   1992     1337          2276            939          282       3.02%


Notes: a: Income taxation of benefits.
        b: Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
        C: Benefits net of income taxation.
        d: Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
                                                  Table A.6

                                    Benefit Ratchet1 Funded by taxes



                               A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                                1986 $BILLIOHS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                               SURPLUS
  TIME PERIOD         PAYROLL             TAXES       BENEFITS    BEN TAXESa      SURPLUS      PAYROLL

  1986 TO 2010          39584              4373          4511           130               -8     -0.02%
  2011 TO 2035          38540              5542          5748           206                0      0.00%
  2036 TO 2060          34460              6149          6403           254                0      0.00%
  1986 TO 2060         112584             16064          16662          591               -8    -0.01%




                        B.    FINANCIAL PATTERNS FOR BIRTH-YEAR COHORTS
                                   1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                              NET                NONSURVIVOR REAL RATE
                       RETIREE.0
 Year of Birth           TAXES         BENEFITSC      TRANSFER        TAXESd OF RETURN
 BEFORE 1912                 385          3730           3346          186            11.62%
 1913 TO 1922                489          1713           1224          121             5.95%
 1923 TO 1932             776             1782           1006          149            4.25%
 1933   TO   1942         952             1840            889          193            3.50%
 1943   TO   1952        1390             2203            813          341            2.73%
 1953   TO   1962        1611             2652           1041          359            2.95%
 1963   TO   1972        1622             2351            730          354            2.58%
 1973   TO   1982        1634             2158            524          342            2.33%
 1983   TO   1992        1871             2276            405          380            2.09%


                C.   EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE-INCOME SINGLE-EARNER COUPLES
                               (1986 dollars, discounted to 1986)
                                                       Year of Birth of Couple
                                       1945            1960              1975                  1990
Present Value Benefits                 209,904         182,337           173,834               158,731
Present Value Taxes                    145,058         159,960           173,405               186,244
Present Value Transfer                  64,846          22,377               429               -27,513

Rate of Return                           3.16%           2.40%                2.01%              1.51%

Notes: a: Incone taxation of benefits.
        b: Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
        c: Benefits net of income taxation.
        d: Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
                                           Table A.7

                 Surplus Dissipated, Funded by Tax Increase After 2025



                           A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                            1986 $BILLI0NS, DISCOUNTED To 1986


  TIME PERIOD                                                                                SURPLUS
                   PAYROLL        TAXES        BENEFITS     BEN TAXE?       SURPLUS          PAYROLL
  1986 TO 2010         39584       4366           3997            114               483
  2011 TO 2035                                                                                   1.22%
                       38540       4470           4422            158               206          0.54%
  2036 TO 2060         34460       4730           4925            196                 0          0.00%
  1986 TO 2060        112584      13565          13344           468                689          0.61%


                      B. FINANCIAL PATrERNS FOR BIRTH-YEAR COHORTS
                           1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986


                                       NET              NONSURVIVOR        REAL RATE
                  RETIREE.b
 Year of Birth        TAXES     ZENEFITSC       TRANSFER      TAXES        OF RETURN
 BEFORE 1912            385         3671          3286           186        11.61%
 1913 TO 1922           489        1582           1093           121         5.74%
 1923 TO 1932           776        1508            732           149         3.72%
 1933 TO 1942           952        1446            495           193         2.75%
 1943 TO 1952          1378        1695            316           340         1.96%
 1953 TO 1962          1527        2040            513           350         2.31%
 1963 TO 1972          1450        1809            359           328         2.11%
 1973 TO 1982          1378        1660            283           296         2.04%
 1983 TO 1992          1500        1751            251           308         1.96%

             C. EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE- INCOME SINGLE - EARNER COUPLES
                           (1986 Dollars, discounted to 1986)
                                               Year    of Birth of Couple

                                1945           1960                 1975                  1990
Present Value Benefits                     *
                                               140,255
                                                       *                        *                  *
Present Value Taxes
                                16l,46O                             133,714               122,097
                                144,95O        150,028              147,709               146,518
Present Value Transfer           16,510         -9,773              -13,995               -24,421
                                           *
Rate of Return                    2.34%          1.80%                  1.70%              1.44%
Notes:   a: Income taxation of benefits.
         b: Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits.
         c: Benefits net of income taxation.
         : Payroll taxes paid by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
          Same as Base Case.
                                                Table AM

                     Surplus Dissipated -        Benefits   Reduced After 2025



                           A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
                            1986 $BILLIoN5, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                                                                                     SURPLUS
 TIME PERIOD        PAYROLL           TAXES        BENEFITS     BEN TAXE?           SURPLUS          PAYROLL

 1986 TO 2010         39584            4366            3997           114             483            1.22%
 2011 TO 2035         38540            4232            4175           149             206            0.54%
 2036 TO 2060         34460            3784            3940           156               0            0.00%
 1986 TO 2060        112584           12381           12112           420             689            0.61%


                      B. FINANCIAL PATTERNS FOR BIRTh-YEAR COHORTS
                               1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986

                                          NET                 NONSURVIVOR     REAL RATE
                    RETIREE.0
 Year of Birth        TAXES       BENEFITSC         TRANSFER        TAXESd OF RETURN
 BEFORE 1912             385          3671            3286            186          11.61%
 1913 TO 1922            489          1582            1093            121           5.74
 1923 TO 1932            776          1506             730            149          3.71%
 1933 TO 1942            952          1425             473            193          2.71%
 1943 TO 1952          1378           1609             231           340           1.80%
 1953 TO 1962          1525           1767             242           350           1.89%
 1963 TO 1972          1414           1463              49           325           1.56%
 1973 TO 1982          1287           1308              21           283           1.54%
 1983 TO 1992          1337           1348              11           282           1.54%

               C. EXPECTED VALUES FOR MIDDLE- INCOME S INCLE- EARNER COUPLES
                               (1986 Dollars, discounted to 1986)
                                                     Year of Birth of Couple
                                   1945              1960                   1975              1990
Present Value Benefits             155,297k          l17,851                1O6,195
Present Value Taxes                144,950           149,825                139,859           128,581
Present Value Transfer              10,347           -31,974                -33,664           -34,844
Rate of Return                       2.22%             1.27%                 1.17%              1.06%

Notes: a. Income taxation of benefits
        b. Payroll taxes paid by those who survive to collect benefits,
        c. Benefits net of income taxation.
        .SamePayroll taxes paid
              as Base Case.
                                    by those who do not survive to collect benefits.
