NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GREAT ESCAPE? A QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF THE FED´S LIQUIDITY
FACILITIES
Marco Del Negro
Gauti Eggertsson
Andrea Ferrero
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Working Paper 22259
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22259

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The first draft of this paper (2010) circulated with the title "The
Great Escape?A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed's Non-Standard Policies." We thank Sonia
Gilbukh and Micah Smith for outstanding research assistance, and several colleagues at the
FRBNY for help in obtaining and constructing financial data and for valuable suggestions (Nancy
Duong, Michael Fleming, Domenico Giannone, Ernst Schaumburg, Or Shachar, Zachary
Wojtowicz). We also thank for their helpful comments Pierpaolo Benigno, Luis Cespedes, Isabel
Correia, Jesús Fernandez-Villaverde, James Hamilton, Thomas Laubach, Zheng Liu, John Moore,
Diego Rodriguez, Cedric Tille, Oreste Tristani, Jaume Ventura, as well as participants in various
seminars and conferences.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22259.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marco Del Negro, Gauti Eggertsson, Andrea Ferrero, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Great Escape? A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed´s Liquidity Facilities
Marco Del Negro, Gauti Eggertsson, Andrea Ferrero, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
NBER Working Paper No. 22259
May 2016
JEL No. E44,E58
ABSTRACT
We introduce liquidity frictions into an otherwise standard DSGE model with nominal and real
rigidities and ask: Can a shock to the liquidity of private paper lead to a collapse in short-term
nominal interest rates and a recession like the one associated with the 2008 U.S. financial crisis?
Once the nominal interest rate reaches the zero bound, what are the effects of interventions in
which the government provides liquidity in exchange for illiquid private paper? We find that the
effects of the liquidity shock can be large, and show some numerical examples in which the
liquidity facilities prevented a repeat of the Great Depression in 2008-2009.

Marco Del Negro
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Macroeconomic & Monetary Studies Function
Research and Statistics Group
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045-0001
marco.delnegro@ny.frb.org

Andrea Ferrero
Office 241
Manor Road Building
Manor Road
Oxford OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
andrea.ferrero@economics.ox.ac.uk

Gauti Eggertsson
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu

Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
kiyotaki@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

In December 2008, the federal funds rate collapsed to zero. Standard monetary policy through
interest rate cuts had reached its limit. Around the same time, the Federal Reserve started to
expand its balance sheet. By January 2009, the overall size of the Fed’s balance sheet exceeded
$2 trillion, an increase of more than $1 trillion compared to a few months earlier (Figure 1).
This expansion mostly involved the Federal Reserve exchanging government liquidity (money
or government debt) for private financial assets through direct purchases or collateralized shortterm loans. These direct interventions in private credit markets were implemented via various
facilities, such as the Term Auction Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the Term
Securities Lending Facility.1 In broad terms, these facilities can be thought of as non-standard
open market operations, whereby the government exchanges highly liquid government paper
for less liquid private paper. Alternatively, one can think of them as non-standard discount
window lending, which provides government liquidity using private assets as collateral. This
paper studies the quantitative effects of these liquidity policies on macroeconomic and financial
variables.
Ever since the irrelevance result of Wallace (1981), the benchmark for many macroeconomists is that non-standard open market operations in private assets are irrelevant. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) show that this result extends to standard open market operations
in models with nominal frictions and money in the utility function, provided that the nominal
interest rate is zero. Once the nominal interest rate reaches its lower bound, liquidity has no
further role in this class of models, or in most other standard models with various types of
frictions, such as Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) or Christiano et al. (2005).
In this paper, we depart from such an irrelevance result by incorporating a particular form
of credit frictions proposed by Kiyotaki and Moore (2012) (henceforth, KM). The KM credit
frictions are of two distinct forms. First, a firm that faces an investment opportunity can
borrow only up to a fraction of the value of its current investment. This friction is a relatively
standard financing constraint.2 Second, a firm that faces an investment opportunity can sell
1

See Armantier et al. (2008), Adrian et al. (2009), Fleming et al. (2009), Adrian et al. (2011), and Fleming

and Klagge (2010) for details about the various facilities, and Madigan (2009) for a summary.
2
This constraint is similar to the collateral requirement in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). Kocherlakota (2000)
and Cordoba and Ripoll (2004) argue that collateral constraints have a limited quantitative role in explaining
macroeconomic fluctuations. This result is, however, conditional on the fundamental shocks that drive the

1

Figure 1: Federal Reserve’s Assets between July 2007 and July 2011.
3
Short-Term Treasuries
Liquidity
Agency Debt and MBS
Long-Term Treasuries

2.5

Trillions of Dollars

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

Jan-11

Note: The figure plots the evolution of the asset side of the Federal Reserve balance sheet between July 2007 and July
2011, decomposed in short-term Treasury securities (purple), lending to financial institutions and liquidity to key credit
markets (cyan), Agency debt and MBS (green), and long-term Treasury securities (yellow). Source: Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland.

only up to a certain fraction of the “illiquid” assets on its balance sheet in each period. In the
model, these illiquid assets correspond to equity holdings of other firms. More generally, we
interpret these illiquid assets as privately issued paper such as commercial paper, bank loans,
mortgages, and so on. This friction is a less standard “resaleability” constraint.
In contrast to private assets, we follow KM and assume that government paper, i.e. money
and bonds, is not subject to the resaleability constraint. This assumption gives government
paper a primary role as liquidity. In this world, open market operations that change the
composition of liquid and illiquid assets in the hands of the private sector affect the allocation
of resources. The assumption of limited resaleability of private paper and the role of government
paper as liquidity give a natural story for the crisis of 2008 and the ensuing Fed’s response.
In our study, the source of the crisis of 2008 is a shock to the resaleability of private paper.
Suddenly, secondary markets for private papers (such as privately-issued mortgage-backed
securities) froze. This shock led to a general decline of funding for investment and aggregate
production through the interaction between the markets for assets, goods and labor. We think
business cycle. Liu et al. (2013) and Nezafat and Slavik (2010) show that financial constraint do amplify the
effects of shocks that shift the demand of collateral, capable of generating fluctuations of asset prices and
aggregate production observed in data.

2

of this propagation as capturing a central aspect of the crisis.
We embed the KM credit frictions in a relatively standard dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) model along the lines of Christiano et al. (2005) and Smets and Wouters
(2007). The model features nominal and real frictions, such as price and wage rigidities and
aggregate capital adjustment costs. Conventional monetary policy is implemented via variations in the nominal interest rate according to a standard interest rate policy rule that is
constrained by the zero bound. Non-conventional policy consists of open market operations in
private assets that increase the overall level of liquidity in the economy. We use the expansion
in the Fed’s balance sheet after Lehman’s bankruptcy to calibrate the non-standard policy
reaction function of the government.
Our main result is that both the financial shock and the liquidity policy can have a quantitatively large effect. A shock to the resaleability constraint, calibrated to match the increase
in the premium associated with very liquid assets during the crisis (what Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) call the “convenience yield”), accounts for more than half of the drop
in output observed in the data and all of the drop in inflation. As a response, the nominal
interest in the model hits the zero lower bound. The impact of the policy intervention is substantial. In our baseline scenario, absent non-standard open market operations, output and
inflation would have dropped by an additional 30% and 40% respectively. Our quantitative
results depend crucially on the expected duration of the crisis. Had private agents expected a
more persistent freeze in the private paper market, the economy may have suffered a second
Great Depression in the absence of interventions. With intervention, in some of our numerical
examples, the economy “escapes” from a repeat of the Great Depression (hence, the title of the
paper). The reason is that liquidity policies can have especially large effects at zero interest
rates—a result reminiscent of the case of the multiplier of government spending in Eggertsson
(2011) and Christiano et al. (2011).
Nominal rigidities and the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates (henceforth, ZLB)
play a crucial role in our analysis. Under flexible prices, the KM financial frictions can only
account for a drop in investment. In this case, aggregate output is almost unchanged because
consumption makes up for the fall in investment. The consumption boom requires the real
interest rate to fall in order to induce people to spend more. Thus the real rate of interest
on liquid paper absent nominal frictions—the so-called natural rate of interest—needs to fall

3

substantially. Furthermore, the loss of liquidity of private paper drives up the premium people
are willing to pay for holding liquid government paper. This additional channel leading to a
decline in the natural rate of interest during financial stress is absent in standard DSGEs.3
But the real interest rate can hardly fall if the nominal interest rate cannot turn negative and
prices are sluggish. As a consequence the freeze in the private paper market triggers a drop
not only in investment, but also in consumption and aggregate output.
Unconventional policy can alleviate the crisis by targeting directly the source of the problem, which is the loss of liquidity of private paper. By swapping partially illiquid private
paper for government liquidity, thus making the aggregate portfolio holdings of the private
sector more liquid, the intervention lubricates financial markets, reducing the fall in investment and consumption. Importantly, we are not assuming that the policy intervention violates
the private sector resaleability constraint. Instead, the intervention only increases the supply
of government paper by purchasing private paper in the open market.
Our paper belongs to the strand of literature that studies the effect of financial disturbances in monetary DSGE models, such as Bernanke et al. (1999), Christiano et al. (2003),
Christiano et al. (2010), Goodfriend and McCallum (2007), Curdia and Woodford (2015),
Curdia and Woodford (2010), among many others, and is particularly close to the papers by
Ajello (forthcoming), Gertler and Karadi (2011), and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).4 What
distinguishes our paper from the rest of the literature is both the friction and the nature of
the shock. Ajello constructs a model featuring resaleability constraints as in KM, estimated
using standard U.S. macro time series and a measure of financial spreads. His main finding
is that financial intermediation shocks are key drivers of business cycles and played a large
role during the Great Recession. One important difference with our work is that the exoge3

Fisher (2015) and Anzoategui et al. (2015) analyze the fall of the natural rate by assuming the that the

household derives utility from holding Treasuries that shows up in the utility function, building on Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012).
4
The work of Garleanu and Pedersen (2011) and Ashcraft et al. (2010) on the implications of margin requirements is also very related to ours. Margin requirements represent a constraint on the agents’ ability to leverage
when buying assets. An increase in the shadow value of the constraints, which captures a funding-liquidity
crisis, is akin to a liquidity shock in our model, in that it causes a sharp drop in investment and an increase
of the spread between high-margin (“illiquid”) and low-margin (“liquid”) assets. These authors also study the
effect of the liquidity facilities. Both papers mainly focus on the asset pricing implications of margin constraints
and liquidity crisis, and have limited quantitative implications for macroeconomic variables.

4

nous financial shock in Ajello affects the intermediation technology as in Curdia and Woodford
(2015). As such, this shock would have an effect on the economy even in absence of resaleability constraints, and hence bears more resemblance to the exogenous component of spreads in
the model of Bernanke et al. (1999) than to the liquidity shock in KM. Furthermore, Ajello
investigates neither the importance of the liquidity facilities nor the role of the ZLB, which are
at the center of our analysis.
Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) have also analyzed the role of
non-conventional central bank policies during the Great Recession. The key difference with
our paper is that in our model the source of the disturbance is financial, while in these other
papers the recession is triggered by a real shock. Specifically, we characterize the crisis as
a reduction in the resaleability of private paper—a drying-up of liquidity in the secondary
markets for privately issued securities in the spirit of Gorton and Metrick (2010) and Gorton
and Metrick (2012)—which in turn triggers the under-utilization of the factors of production.
In contrast, in Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), the shock that
triggers a recession is an exogenous reduction in the quality of the capital stock. Our shock
need not imply any reduction in output if the existing capital and labor were utilized at the
same rate as pre-crisis. It is the interaction of the financial and nominal frictions, and the
inability of the central bank to accommodate this shock due to the ZLB, that gives rise to our
account of the crisis. Also, in these papers the intervention subsidizes financial intermediaries
and improves their balance sheet by preventing asset prices from falling significantly. In our
model the liquidity interventions are not a subsidy to financial intermediaries. In fact, the
government “makes money” during the intervention, at least in expectations, as it did ex-post
in the financial crisis.
Our main focus is on the Great Recession, which according to the National Bureau of
Economic Research dates began in December 2007 and ended in June 2009, with the focal
point being the default of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Although the market for
mortgage-backed securities stopped working well in August 2007, our paper concentrates on
the events that followed the default of Lehman Brothers. The Fed facilities that we evaluate
in this paper were started in December 2007 and were escalated with the collapse of Lehman
in the fall of 2008, when the fed funds rate ultimately reached zero.5
5

Our analysis does not extend to the large-scale asset purchase program implemented during the fall of 2010

in response to the further weakening of economic activity, because this quantitative easing program (at least

5

Before going further, we should emphasize a few important limitations of our analysis.
The liquidity constraints proposed by KM are reduced form. Recently, Kurlat (2013) and
Bigio (2015) explain these liquidity constraints as arising endogenously in a model in which
entrepreneurs have asymmetric information about the quality of existing assets.6 An advantage of taking a reduced-form approach is that one does not have to take a stand on the specific
mechanism behind the fall in liquidity in financial markets, whether due to asymmetric information or sunspots.7 The cost is that our model is silent on whether the Fed’s interventions
can affect the incentive structure of the private sector. This aspect is certainly important, as
the private sector response may lead to an endogenous change in the liquidity constraints that
we currently take as given. More generally, we abstract from the costs of intervening, which can
take many different forms. Therefore, our paper has only positive, not normative, content: We
show that liquidity interventions can be quantitatively important for macroeconomic stability
in the short-run. Our findings suggest that understanding the consequences of these policies
for the incentives of the private sector should be a high priority on the research agenda.
Sections 2 and 3 describe the model and its calibration. Section 4 discusses the results,
and Section 5 concludes.

2

The Model

The model can be described as KM augmented with both nominal and real frictions. The
economic actors in the model are households, whose members are entrepreneurs and workers,
the government, intermediate and final goods firms, labor agencies, and capital producers.
when implemented via purchases of long term Treasuries) involves swapping one liquid asset for another type
of liquid asset. The “preferred habitat” theory (studied in Vayanos and Vila (2009) and in Chen et al. (2012)
in the context of an estimated DSGE model) can provide a rationale for this type of asset purchase program.
6
In Kurlat (2013), for instance, markets for existing assets can shut down as a consequence of large enough
investment-specific productivity shocks. More generally, the combination of shocks to fundamentals and adverse
selection can induce large drops of price and trading volume in secondary markets. Cui and Radde (2014)
construct a model in which private papers are traded subject to matching frictions in which shocks to the
matching efficiency change the resaleability of private papers endogenously.
7
One interpretation of our shock to the resaleability constraint is that the economy switches from a high
resaleability to a low resaleability equilibrium due to “sunspots,” i.e., without a change of the other fundamentals.

6

2.1

Households

The economy is populated by a continuum of identical households of measure one. Each
household consists of a continuum of members indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. In every period, household
members receive an i.i.d. draw that determines whether they are entrepreneurs or workers.
The probability of being an entrepreneur is κ, which, by the law of large numbers, is also the
fraction of entrepreneurs in the household. Each entrepreneur j ∈ [0, κ) has an opportunity
to invest but does not work. Each worker member j ∈ [κ, 1] supplies differentiated labor of
type j but does not invest.8 The friction in our model described below affects the transfer of
funds from those who do not have an investment opportunity (the workers) to those who do
(the entrepreneurs).
Let Ct (j) denote the amount of the consumption good each member of the household
purchases in the market place in period t. An assumption of the representative household
structure is that, at the end of the period, all members bring the consumption purchases back
to the household, and these goods get distributed equally among all members. Utility thus
depends upon the sum of all the consumption goods bought by the different household members
Z 1
Ct ≡
Ct (j) dj.
(1)
0

Let Ht (j) be hours worked by worker member j. The household’s objective is
Et

∞
X
s=t

β s−t



Cs1−σ
ω
−
1−σ 1+ν

Z

1


Hs (j)1+ν dj ,

(2)

κ

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor, σ > 0 is the coefficient of relative risk
aversion, ν > 0 is the inverse of Frisch elasticity of labor supply, and ω > 0 is a parameter that
pins down the steady-state level of hours. This construction of the representative household
permits us to study a situation in which people face idiosyncratic investment opportunities,
while at the same time retaining the tractability of the representative household structure,
thus abstracting from consumption heterogeneity across different types of agents.
8

Although each member randomly becomes an entrepreneur or a worker, we re-number household members

every period so that a member j ∈ [0, χ) is an entrepreneur and a member j ∈ [χ, 1] is a worker who supplies typej labor. The original KM model features heterogeneity. Each entrepreneur occasionally receives an opportunity
to invest while workers never do. Aggregation is obtained by imposing a few additional assumptions. In
this paper, we adopt a modified version of the KM model based on Shi (2015), which is more amenable to
modifications, allowing us to perform a more extensive sensitivity analysis.

7

At the end of each period, the household also shares all the assets accumulated during
the period among members. Entering the next period, therefore, each member holds an equal
share of the household’s assets. An important assumption is that, after the idiosyncratic shock
is realized and each member knows its type, the household cannot reshuffle the allocation of
resources among its members. Instead, those household members who would like to obtain
more funds need to seek the money from other sources. The assets available to household
members are described in the table below, which summarizes the household’s balance sheet at
the beginning of period t (before interest payments), expressed in terms of the consumption
goods. Households own government-issued nominal bonds Bt , where Pt is the price level, Kt is
physical capital, and NtO represents claims on other households’ capital. Households’ liabilities
consist of claims on own capital sold to other households NtI , and net equity Nt is defined as
Nt = NtO + Kt − NtI .

(3)

Capital is homogeneous, earns per-unit rental income rtk , and has a unit value qt in terms of
consumption goods. A fraction δ of capital depreciates in each period. Bonds pay a gross
nominal interest rate Rt . Note that all households liabilities—all claims to the assets of the
private sector in the model—are in the form of equity.
Household’s Balance Sheet (Tradable Assets)
Assets

Liabilities

nominal bonds

Bt /Pt

others’ equity

qt NtO

capital stock

qt Kt

equity issued

qt NtI

net worth

qt Nt + Bt /Pt

The owner of capital receives the rental income as well as profits of intermediate goods
producers and capital goods producers as dividend in proportion of capital ownership.9 Define
per-period real profits of all the intermediated goods producers and capital good producers as
R1
Dt = 0 Dt (i) di and DtI respectively. The dividend per unit of capital ownership is
Rtk = rtk +
9

Dt + DtI
.
Kt

Here we consider an economy in which equity holders receive the returns from all the fixed factors of

production, including physical capital, intangible capital (knowledge and patent to produce differentiated goods)
and the fixed factor to limit investment goods production. Hall (2001) argues that intangible capital is essential
for understanding stock market fluctuations.

8

Finally, households pay lump-sum taxes τt to the government.
During the operation of the market, members decide how to allocate their resources between purchases of the non-storable consumption good, savings in the different assets, and,
if entrepreneurs, investment in new capital. Those members who are workers also supply the
hours demanded by firms at the wage contracted by the labor unions (as we shall see, workers
have some monopolistic power and wages are sticky) and can therefore include their salaries
among the available resources. Specifically, each household member’s flow of funds is
Ct (j) + pIt It (j) + qt [Nt+1 (j) − It (j)] +

Bt+1 (j)
Pt

h
i
Rt−1 Bt Wt (j)
= Rtk + (1 − δ) qt Nt +
+
Ht (j) − τt , (4)
Pt
Pt
where Ht (j) = 0 for entrepreneurs (j ∈ [0, κ)) and It (j) = 0 for workers (j ∈ [κ, 1]), Wt (j) is
the nominal wage for type-j labor and pIt is the price of new capital in terms of the consumption
good, which differs from 1 due to capital adjustment costs.
Most of the action in the model is a consequence of the financial frictions, which translate
into constraints on the financing of new investment projects by entrepreneurs and on the
evolution of the balance sheet.10 The key frictions proposed by KM that we adopt here are
of two forms. First, a borrowing constraint implies that any entrepreneur can only issue new
equity up to a fraction θ of her investment. Second, a resaleability constraint implies that in
any given period a household member can sell only a fraction φt of her existing equity holdings.
An important simplification in KM is that the equity issued by the other households is a perfect
substitute for the equity position in the household’s own business (capital stock minus equity
issued) and thus subject to exactly the same resaleability constraint.11 As a consequence,
the borrowing constraint and the two resaleability constraints (on claims on capital of other
10

These frictions are also front and center in the original KM formulation. We assume a slightly different asset

market structure in which government-issued paper, rather than money (effectively a “bubble asset”), serves
as the liquid asset and pays a nominal interest rate Rt . We make this assumption because we characterize
conventional monetary policy in terms of nominal interest rate setting, as standard in the New Keynesian
literature (e.g. Woodford, 2003) and we study issues related to the ZLB.
11
Thus, in addition to selling a fraction φt of the equity holdings of the other households, each household can
remortgage a fraction φt of capital stock that has not been borrowed against previously. This simplification
is essential for aggregation in KM. While not indispensable in our model with a representative household, we
continue to use this assumption in order to simplify the algebra.

9

households and on claims on own capital) can be consolidated (see Appendix B.4 for the explicit
derivation) and written in terms of net equity Nt as
Nt+1 (j) ≥ (1 − θ)It (j) + (1 − φt ) (1 − δ) Nt .

(5)

The first part of the right-hand side of the inequality, (1 − θt )It (j), represents a constraint on
borrowing to finance new investment for those agents who have an investment opportunity. If
θ were equal to 1, the entrepreneur would be able to finance the entire investment by selling
equity in financial markets. When θ < 1, the entrepreneur is forced to retain 1 − θ fraction
of investment as own equity and use her own fund to partly finance the investment cost. The
second part of the right-hand side, (1 − φt ) (1 − δ) Nt , represents the resaleability constraint.
In period t, household members can sell only a fraction φt of their existing equity.
While literally φt represents a restriction on transactions, we follow KM in interpreting
changes in φt as “liquidity shocks.” These shocks capture, in reduced form, changes in market
liquidity. Alternatively, φt can also be thought of as one minus the haircut in the repo market—
a measure of how much liquidity entrepreneurs can obtain for one dollar worth of collateral.
Under this interpretation, shocks to φt would capture changes in funding conditions in the
repo market.12 The purpose of this paper is to investigate whether this shock alone can be
responsible for the bulk of the Great Recession, and the extent to which unconventional policy
was successful in mitigating the impact of this shock.
Another significant feature of the model is that the asset Bt is not subject to any resaleability constraint and is therefore “liquid.” Obviously, household members for whom constraint
(5) is binding would like to acquire resources from the market by issuing liquid assets. We
rule out this possibility by assuming that only the government can issue the liquid asset while
households can only take a long position in it:
Bt+1 (j) ≥ 0.

(6)

Broadly speaking, we think of equity in the model as comprising all claims on private
assets, which in reality take the form of equity or debt, while Bt represents any form of
government paper. We abstract from private banks as separate agents who supply liquid
12

Gorton and Metrick (2012) argue that a run on the repo market is at the origin of the collapse of financial

markets in the fall of 2008.

10

paper. Instead, all private assets are partially liquid in the same measure, and all private
agents serve as financial intermediaries by simultaneously providing funds for others’ capital
investment and raising funds for their own investment. Indeed, even the investing entrepreneurs
continue providing funds to the others due to the resaleability constraint. In an abstract way,
the fall of the resaleability corresponds to the disruption of the financial system.13 The two
constraints (5) and (6) are central to the analysis. The next section argues that, in equilibrium,
both constraints are binding for entrepreneurs and studies the consequences for the household
decision problem as a whole.
At the end of the period, household equity, bond holdings, and capital are given, respectively, by
Z
Nt+1 =

Nt+1 (j) dj,

(7)

Z
Bt+1 =

Bt+1 (j) dj,
Z
= (1 − δ) Kt + It (j) dj.

(8)

Kt+1

(9)

We now move to the actual decisions of each type of household member. An important assumption is that each member of the household acts in the interest of the whole family.

2.1.1

Entrepreneurs

The flow of funds for entrepreneur j ∈ [0, κ) is given by expression (4), with Ht (j) = 0. That
constraint clarifies that, as long as the market price of equity qt is greater than the price of
newly produced capital pIt , entrepreneurs trying to maximize the household’s utility will use
all available resources to create new capital. In the rest of the paper, we focus on constrained
equilibria in which the condition qt > pIt is satisfied.14 In these equilibria, entrepreneurs sell all
holdings of government bonds because the expected return on new investment dominates the
13

We assumed all the private paper is equity in our model. Even if some private papers were debt, because

all members are identical ex-ante, each member’s private net debt position would be zero at the beginning of the
period. Thus, the equilibrium would not change unless we change the borrowing and resaleability constraints.
This consideration is behind the idea of using of yield spreads between Treasury bonds and private bonds in
zero net aggregate supply to calibrate the time series of liquidity in the next section.
14
We first ensure that the condition qt > pIt holds at steady state, and then check that it is satisfied in our
numerical experiments.

11

return on the liquid asset. Furthermore, the entrepreneur also sells as much existing equity as
possible and issues the maximum amount of new equity to take full advantage of the investment
opportunity. As a consequence, the constraints arising from financial frictions (5) and (6) are
both binding, and entrepreneurs spend no resources on consumption goods:
Nt+1 (j) = (1 − θ)It (j) + (1 − φt ) (1 − δ) Nt (j) .

(10)

Bt+1 (j) = 0,

(11)

Ct (j) = 0,

(12)

for j ∈ [0, κ).15
Substituting (10) through (12) into the flow of funds (4) and setting Ht (j) = 0, we obtain
the amount of investment by each entrepreneur:
 k

Rt + (1 − δ) qt φt Nt +
It (j) =
pIt − θqt

Rt−1 Bt
Pt

Therefore, aggregate investment in the economy equals
 k

Z κ
Rt + (1 − δ) qt φt Nt +
It =
It (j) dj = κ
pIt − θqt
0

− τt

.

Rt−1 Bt
Pt

(13)

− τt

.

(14)

The denominator represents the liquidity needs for one unit of investment—the gap between
the investment goods price and the amount the entrepreneur can finance by issuing equity
(θqt ). The numerator measures the amount of liquidity available to entrepreneurs. Clearly, a
drop in φt reduces the amount of liquidity available to finance investment.16

2.1.2

Workers

The flow of funds for worker j ∈ [κ, 1] is given by expression (4), with It (j) = 0. Workers do
not choose hours directly. Rather, the union who represents each type of worker member sets
15

Since entrepreneurs are constrained and the consumption good is jointly consumed at the end of the period,

it is optimal for workers to buy all the consumption goods, directing all of the liquidity of entrepreneurs to
investment.
16
The entrepreneurs should not be thought of as the same characters populating the entrepreneurship literature in macroeconomics (see Quadrini (2009) for an extensive review). Instead, entrepreneurs here are best
thought as capturing the broad functions of financial markets—funneling resources from savers to the production sector of the economy. The key friction in the model consists of an impediment to this “funneling”, which
intensifies in the event of a financial crisis.

12

wages on a staggered basis. As a consequence, the household supplies labor as demanded by
firms at the posted wages.
In order to find the workers’ decisions in terms of asset and consumption choices, we derive
the household’s decisions for Nt+1 , Bt+1 , and Ct as a whole, taking wages and hours as given.
Since we know the solution for entrepreneurs from the last section (that is, Nt+1 (j) , Bt+1 (j)
and Ct (j) for j ∈ [0, κ)), constraints (1), (7), and (8) determine Ct (j), Nt+1 (j), and Bt+1 (j)
for workers. We then check that these choices satisfy the financing constraints (5) and (6) for
workers.
The aggregation of workers’ and entrepreneurs’ budget constraints yields
Bt+1
Pt
Z 1
h
i
Rt−1 Bt
Wt (j) Ht (j)
= Rtk + (1 − δ) qt Nt +
+
dj − τt . (15)
Pt
Pt
κ

Ct + pIt It + qt (Nt+1 − It ) +

Households choose Ct , Nt+1 , and Bt+1 in order to maximize utility (2) subject to (14) and
(15). As long as qt > pIt , the first-order conditions for bonds and equity are, respectively,
#)
"
(
I )
κ(q
−
p
R
t+1
t
t+1
−σ
,
(16)
Ct−σ = βEt Ct+1
1+ I
πt+1
pt+1 − θqt+1
where πt is the gross inflation rate, and
(
Ct−σ = βEt

−σ
Ct+1

"

k
Rt+1
+ (1 − δ)qt+1 κ(qt+1 − pIt+1 )
+ I
qt
pt+1 − θqt+1
k
Rt+1
+ (1 − δ)φt+1 qt+1
qt

#)
. (17)

Equations (14), (16), and (17) describe the household’s choice of investment, consumption and
portfolio for a given price process.
The payoff from holding paper, either bonds or equity, consists of two parts. The first is
the standard return:

Rt
πt+1

for bonds and

k +(1−δ)q
Rt+1
t+1
qt

for equity. The second is the premium

associated with the fact that this paper, when in the hand of entrepreneurs, relaxes their
investment constraint. The value of this premium is

κ(qt −pIt )
.
pIt −θqt

κ
measures
pIt −θqt
1
and pI −θq
capture
t
t

The quantity

the increase in investment afforded by an extra dollar of liquidity, where κ

the fraction of liquidity going to entrepreneurs and the extent to which the investment increases
by an extra unit of liquidity, respectively. The magnitude qt − pIt measures the marginal value
13

to the household of relaxing the constraint. The larger the difference between qt and pIt , the
more valuable for the household to acquire capital by investing and pay pIt per unit, rather
than pay qt on the market. This premium for liquidity applies to the entirety of bond returns,
but only to the liquid part of the equity return

k +(1−δ)φ
Rt+1
t+1 qt+1
,
qt

if φt+1 is less than 1. Hence,

equity pays a premium in the expected rate of return relative to bonds because of its lower
liquidity.

2.2

The Convenience Yield

At the heart of our model is the idea that government paper is more liquid than privately issued
papers: agents are willing to pay a premium for holding Treasuries—what Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) (henceforth KVJ) call the convenience yield. In our model the
convenience yield arises because liquid assets relax the financing constraint in the next period.
It is then natural to define it as
"
CYt ≡ Et

where

κ(qt+1 −pIt+1 )
pIt+1 −θqt+1

#
κ(qt+1 − pIt+1 )
,
pIt+1 − θqt+1

(18)

is the premium due to the relaxation of the investment constraint.

Because what we observe in financial markets are spreads, we find it convenient in terms of
our calibration described below to express CYt as a spread. As shown above, the gross nominal
interest rate Rt on a perfectly liquid one-period Treasury security satisfies Euler equation (16).
The Euler equation for an otherwise identical security offering no convenience services is17


0
−σ
−σ Rt
,
(19)
Ct = βEt Ct+1
πt+1
where Rt0 is its gross nominal interest rate. The spread between these two securities is given
by
CY t =

[Rt0


− Rt ]Et

1



πt+1

We show in Appendix B.7 that CY t is approximately equal to CYt .18
17

Imagine this illiquid bond repays to the holder at the end of the next period. It is too late for the bond

holder to finance investment even though it is not late for consumption. In our model we assume that these
securities are small enough supply that they can be ignored. Nonetheless we can price them.
18
Appendix B.7 shows how the convenience yield is related to the yield spread between a pair of longer
maturity zero-coupon bonds, one perfectly liquid and the other perfectly illiquid.

14

2.3

Final and Intermediate Good Firms, Capital Producers, and Labor
Markets

The remainder of the production side is standard along the lines of Christiano et al. (2005) and
Smets and Wouters (2007). We refer the details to Appendix B.1 through B.3, and sketch the
framework below. Perfectly competitive final good producers combine intermediate goods, Yit ,
to sell a homogeneous final good Yt to households and capital producers. Each intermediate
good producer pays a fixed cost, and hires capital and a composite labor to produce output.
Facing a downward sloping demand curve with monopoly power parameter λp for its product,
each producer sets its price on a staggered basis, where 1 − ξp is the probability of resetting
the price in each period. As in Erceg et al. (2000), we introduce wage rigidities assuming
labor unions represent each type of imperfectly substitutable labor inputs Ht (j), which are
combined into a homogeneous composite sold to the intermediate firms. Facing a downward
sloping demand curve with monopoly power λw , each union sets the wage of each type of labor
on a staggered basis so that in each period a new wage is set for a particular type of labor with
probability 1 − ξw . Finally, perfectly competitive capital producers produce investment goods,
sold to the entrepreneurs at price pIt , under decreasing returns to scale technology. The total
cost of producing It investment goods equals It [1 + S(It /I)] , where I is investment in steady
state. We assume S(1) = S 0 (1) = 0 and S 00 (It /I) > 0 so that the price of investment goods
differs from the price of consumption goods in the short run.

2.4

The Government

The government conducts conventional monetary policy, unconventional credit policy, and
fiscal policy. Conventional monetary policy consists of the central bank setting the nominal
interest rate following a standard feedback rule subject to the ZLB
(
 ψy )
Yt
ψπ
Rt = max Rπt
,1 ,
Y

(20)

where ψπ > 1 and ψy > 0. Unconventional credit policy corresponds to government purchases
g
of private paper (denoted by Nt+1
) as a function of its liquidity
g
Nt+1
= ψk (φt − φ) ,

15

(21)

where ψk < 0. Rule (21) captures the behavior of the Federal Reserve in terms of the liquidity
facilities, as shown in Figure 1. According to this rule, the government intervenes when the
liquidity of private paper is abnormally low. When the liquidity returns to normal, the facilities
are discontinued. Since we consider a crisis state as low resaleability φt state, we believe that
this description of the intervention captures the behavior of the Fed during the financial crisis
of 2008. We calibrate the parameter ψk to deliver a balance-sheet increase in line with the
data.
We stress that the government intervenes in the open market. Therefore, the intervention
does not directly relax any agents’ resaleability constraint (5).19 The intervention affects
macroeconomic outcomes by changing the aggregate portfolio composition of the private sector,
skewing it toward liquid assets. Therefore, even if the economy is subject to a liquidity shock,
entrepreneurs can muster resources to finance investments (see expression 14). In the first
period, the portfolio composition of the private sector is predetermined, however. Hence, on
impact, the intervention is effective only via its impact on expectations and prices.
The government budget constraint is
g
+
qt Nt+1

h
i
Rt−1 Bt
Bt+1
= τt + Rtk + (1 − δ) qt Ntg +
.
Pt
Pt

(22)

The government purchase of equity and debt repayment is financed by a net tax (primary
surplus), returns on equity holdings, and the new debt issuances. We assume that the government ensures intertemporal solvency by following a fiscal rule, written in deviations from steady
state, according to which net taxes are proportional to the beginning-of-period government net
debt position

τt − τ = ψτ
where ψτ > 0, and where τ and

RB
P

Rt−1 Bt RB
−
Pt
P


−

qt Ntg


,

(23)

are steady-state taxes and beginning-of-period government

debt, respectively (the steady-state value of Ntg is zero by assumption). Because the adjustment
of taxes to debt is gradual (to the extent that ψτ is small), the government has to finance
emergency private paper purchases almost entirely by issuing debt.
19

Hence our policy intervention is somewhat different from that in Ashcraft et al. (2010), where the government

directly relaxes the margin requirements.

16

2.5

Equilibrium and Solution Strategy

In equilibrium, households and firms maximize their objectives subject to their constraints.
Aggregate capital evolves according to
Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It ,
where the capital stock is owned by either households or government according to
g
Kt+1 = Nt+1 + Nt+1
.

Finally, the aggregate resource constraint requires that

 
It
Yt = Ct + 1 + S
It .
I
We consider an economy in which the liquidity constraints are always binding. A formal
definition of the equilibrium, with a detailed list of the set of equations, is relegated to the
appendix. We assume φt follows a stationary AR(1) process, and consider a crisis as a large
negative shock to φt . Specifically, we assume that a large negative shock to φt unexpectedly
hits the economy at time t, starting from a steady state in period t − 1, and that no more
shocks occur afterwards. We use a Newton-Raphson algorithm to examine the non-linear
perfect foresight path, taking into account that the nominal interest rate may be constrained
endogenously by the zero bound in the early stage.20

3

Calibration

We calibrate the model at quarterly frequency and use a post-war/pre-Great Recession sample
(1953Q1-2008Q3) in the United States to compute our targets. Table 1 shows the calibrated
values of the parameters.
20

We implement the solution by using Dynare. We have also experimented with several other solution meth-

ods, such as the two-state stochastic Markov process approach in Eggertsson (2008), which uses perturbation
methods, in earlier variations of the paper, finding similar results. The current approach has the advantage of
capturing the full non-linear dynamics of the model, although at the expense of abstracting from uncertainty.

17

Table 1: Parameters
Steady State Parameters
β
κ

δ

γ

Probability
of investment
opportunity

Depreciation
rate

Capital
share

B/P
4Y
Annualized
s.s. liquidity

0.009

0.024

0.340

0.400

Wage Calvo
probability

λp
Price s.s.
markup

λw
Wage s.s.
markup

0.750

0.100

0.100

φ

θ

Resaleability
constraint

Borrowing
constraint

Discount
factor

0.309

0.792

0.993

σ

ν

Relative
risk aversion

Inverse Frisch
elasticity

Investment
adjustment cost

Price Calvo
probability

1.000

1.000

0.750

0.750

ψπ
Taylor rule
inflation
response

ψy
Taylor rule
output
response

Tax rule
response

1.500

0.125

0.100

∆φ

Baseline
ρφ

Parameters Characterizing the Dynamics
S 00 (1)
ζp
ζw

ψτ

Liquidity Shock and Policy Response
ψk

∆φ

Great Escape
ρφ

Size of
liquidity shock

Shock
persistence

Policy
intervention

Size of
liquidity shock

Shock
persistence

ψk
Policy
intervention

-0.218

0.953

-4.801

same

0.984

same

Notes: The table shows the parameter values of the model for the baseline calibration. The last three rows also report
the size and the persistence of the shock, and the coefficient in the government rule for purchases of private assets in the
Great Escape calibration.

3.1

Steady State Parameters

The centerpiece of our calibration strategy for the parameters characterizing the degree of
steady state financial frictions is based on the work of KVJ, who provide us with an empirical
estimate of the convenience yield. Specifically, KVJ model the convenience yield as a piecewise

linear function b1 max b2 − PBY , 0 , and estimate b1 and b2 (in their regression PBY is measured
by the ratio of Treasuries over GDP). Also in our model CYt depends on the supply of liquid
assets. In fact, KVJ’s functional form is consistent with our framework: As the amount of
liquidity in the economy increases, the liquidity premium drops because the entrepreneurs’
constraint become less binding. After some threshold

B
PY

, the constraint is no longer binding,

q drops to 1 (the steady state value of pI ), K approaches the efficient level, and the convenience
yield becomes zero.
Figure 2 shows that the model can replicate the results of the KVJ’s regressions shown in

18

the first two columns of Table 3 of their paper and reproduced by the dashed lines.21 The solid
line plots the convenience yield in the model as a function of

B 22
PY .

The average value of

B
PY

in our sample, which is 40% and is indicated by the vertical line in Figure 2, implies a steady
state convenience yield of 0.455%.23
Figure 2: Two-parts KVJ Demand Curve
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
KVJ 2

1 KVJ 1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

n
Notes: The figure plots the regressions line CY = b1 max b2 −

0.5

B
PY

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

o
, 0 where the estimates of b1 and b2 come from the

first two columns of Table 3 of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) (dashed lines). The average value of
our sample (40%) is indicated by the vertical line.

B
PY

in

The three parameters that characterize the degree of financial frictions in the model are
θ (the borrowing constraint), φ (the resaleability constraint), and χ (the fraction of entrepreneurs). These parameters directly affect the tightness of the financing constraint in
the steady state. Replicating the two-piece linear KVJ regression provides two targets for the
calibration—the steady state convenience yield and the threshold
21

B
PY

. An additional target is

The two regressions are from slightly different samples. We chose to replicate the results in column (2) (the

sample closest to ours) but the two sets of coefficients are very close.
22
Two comments are in order. First, since KVJ’s regressions are obtained using annual data and capture
secular movements in the liquidity premium, we compute the mapping between liquidity

B
PY

and the convenience

yield the steady state relationships. Second, because KVJ use spreads to measure the convenience yield, we use
CY as opposed to CY (see Section 2.2) in computing this mapping. Appendix B.7 shows that at steady state
CY and CY are the same regardless of the maturity of the security.
23
In order to be consistent with KVJ, we measure PBY as the amount of Treasury securities relative to GDP.
If we adopt the notion of liquid assets in the hands of the public used in the construction of the liquidity share
(essentially subtracting assets in the balance sheet of the central bank, and adding its liabilities) we obtain a
very similar number, namely 38.1%.

19

provided by the average “liquidity share” in our sample, defined as
LSt =

Bt+1
.
Bt+1 + Pt qt Kt+1

(24)

The liquidity share provides indirect evidence on the value of capital q, and hence on the
stringency of financial constrains. As the financing constraint gets tighter with smaller θ, φ,
and χ, the gap between q and one (the steady state value of pI ) expands for a given supply
of government liquid asset B/P Y , and the liquidity share drops (see Figure A-5 in the online
appendix). We construct the empirical counterpart of this variable using U.S. Flow of Funds
data, and obtain an average of 12.55% in our sample.24
Table 2: Targets and Model-Implied Values in Loss Function-Based Calibration of Steady State
Parameters
Targets CY

B
PY

Real rate Liquidity
Share

Labor
Share

Investment/GDP
Ratio

Data

0.455 0.548

2.200

12.55

0.65

0.260

Model

0.455 0.548

2.200

12.55

0.66

0.264

Notes: The table shows the empirical targets and the model-implied values in the loss function-based calibration of the
six steady state parameters. The first two targets are obtained from the
n regressions
o in the second column of Table 3
of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). We set CY = b1 max b2 − PBY , 0 , where PBY is the average value of
government debt in our sample, and PBY = b2 . The construction of the liquidity share is described in section A.1 of the
appendix, and the construction of the remaining three data counterparts—which is standard—is described in footnote 25
of section 3.1. The sample used to compute the data counterparts of the targets is 1953Q1-2008Q3.

The remaining targets are chosen to pin down the other steady state parameters. Loosely
speaking, the average real rate of return in the economy (for given convenience yield), the
labor share, and the investment to output ratio pin down the discount rate β, the capital
share in the production function γ, and the depreciation rate δ.25 Of course, all steady state
parameters affect all targets, so we choose them as to minimize the squared deviations of
model implied values from the data—both of which are shown in Table 2. Our calibration
24
25

Section A.1 in the Appendix describes the details, and Figure A-4 shows the data over our sample.
We target a real interest rate of 2.2%, which is in between the average ex-post real returns (nominal

yield minus realized CPI inflation rate) over the period 1953Q1-2008Q3 on one-year Treasury bills (1.72%) and
ten-year Treasuries (2.57%). The source for the labor share is the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis FRED
database, while the investment to output ratio is measured from NIPA data, and our notion of investment
includes both NIPA investment and durable consumption, consistently with most of the RBC/DSGE literature
(e.g., Justiniano et al., 2010) and the empirical counterparts in the reminder of the paper.

20

yields values of 0.31, 0.79 and 0.9% for φ, θ, and χ, respectively. Our calibrated value for θ
is in line with that assumed by many papers using borrowing constraints á la Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997). The value for χ is smaller than the existing literature on lumpy investment
(e.g. Doms and Dunne, 1998; Gourio and Kashyap, 2007). However, we should stress that we
choose to calibrate χ using financial data, rather than technological data on lumpy investment,
as we broadly consider entrepreneurs as those who are involved in funneling resources from
saving to investing agents and face the financing constraint.26
As a sanity check on our assumed steady state value for the convenience yield—and the
associated value for φ—the left panel of Table A-2 of the Appendix computes the implied
value of the liquidity parameter for a cross-section of spreads between pairs of bonds which
have almost identical payout and different liquidity. These are the same spreads that we will
use in Section 3.3 to extract a time series of the convenience yield and measure its increase
during the crisis (we describe these spreads below in footnote 30 and more in detail in Appendix
A.2). For each security j, we measure its average spread for the pre-crisis period using daily
data from 2004/07/21 to 2007/06/29—the common pre-crisis sample for which we have data
for almost all of these securities—and compute its associated degree of liquidity φj using the
steady state formula derived in Appendix B.7
1 − φj =

1 + CY (ytm(T, j) − ytm(T, l) )β(1 + CY )
,
CY 1 + (ytm (T, j) − ytm(T, l) )β(1 + CY )

(25)

where ytm(T, j) and ytm (T, l) are the steady state real yields to maturity for zero coupon bond
j with maturity T and the liquid security of the same maturity.27 The left panel of Table A-2
shows that for most of these securities, which are relatively liquid, the associated φj is not
far from one. This is what we would expect for instance for short-dated Refcorp bonds, offthe-run Treasury bonds, and high-grade CDS-covered corporate bonds. Longer-dated Refcorp
26

Because our entrepreneurs perform both capital and financial investment, it may not be unrealistic that

entrepreneurs may not have much time to liquidate private paper before loosing the investment opportunity,
and that the fraction of critical entrepreneurs who are financially constrained is small at each point in time. Of
course, in a richer setup with technological and financial investment opportunities, an investment function like
(14) may be too simplistic. Using a higher value of χ, consistent with the literature on lumpy investment, we
could still match the KVJ value of the convenience yield as well as the average liquidity share, but we would
not longer be able to match the value of the threshold PBY .
27
While our model accommodates only one representative illiquid security, we can price any illiquid security
j whose associated liquidity is φj as long as its net aggregate supply is small enough that it does not affect the
aggregate equilibrium conditions. See footnote 13.

21

bonds, and especially inflation-swapped TIPS, and non-covered Aaa corporate tend to have
substantially lower values of φj .28

3.2

Parameters Characterizing the Dynamics

The parameters characterizing the dynamics of the model correspond to standard values in
the business cycle literature. We set the CRRA parameter σ to 1, the inverse Frisch elasticity
of labor supply ν to 1, and S 00 (1) = 0.75 so that the price elasticity of investment is consistent
with instrumental variable estimates in Eberly (1997). The average duration of price and
wage contracts is 4 quarters (ζp = ζw = 0.75), in line with the recent estimates in Nakamura
and Steinsson (2008).29 We calibrate symmetrically the degree of monopolistic competition in
labor and product markets, assuming a steady-state markup of 10% (λp = λw = 0.1), which are
commonly assumed values in the literature. Finally, we set the feedback coefficient on inflation
(ψπ ) and the output gap (ψy ) in the interest rate rule (20) to 1.5 and 0.125, respectively—
the values in line of literature which follows Taylor (1993). Transfers slowly adjust to the
government net wealth position after intervention (ψτ = 0.1) so that government debt finances
most of the intervention in the short run and transfers follow a smooth path.
In Appendix D we study the robustness of our results to alternative values for some of the
parameters. As a further check on the reasonableness of our benchmark calibration (and the
model), we also consider in Appendix C the impulse response function of the variables of the
model to other shocks often studied in the literature, such as technology, government spending,
and conventional monetary policy shocks. Broadly speaking, the effect of these shocks is similar
in our model with what has been observed elsewhere in the literature.
28

The reader should bear in mind that there may be measurement issues for any specific security, as well as

micro-structure factors other than liquidity affecting the average spread, so one should not take the φj ’s shown
in Table A-2 at face value. Note that when constructing the time series of the convenience yield in Section 3.3
we address these measurement issues (and other factors, assuming they are security-specific) by taking the
principal component. For Aaa corporate bond (without CDS cover), the spread may have some residual credit
risk. When KVJ regress the Aaa corporate-Treasury spread on the ratio of treasury supply to GDP, they obtain
a significant positive intercept (equal to 0.347%), which they considered as the non-liquidity component of the
Aaa spread.
29
A lower degree of price rigidities (more in line with the evidence in Bils and Klenow, 2004) would deliver
the same value for the reduced-form slope of the Phillips curve if we were to incorporate real rigidities in the
model.

22

3.3

Liquidity Shock and Policy Response

We calibrate the size of the post-Lehman crisis liquidity shock from financial data. Because we
do not know if any traded security corresponds to our representative illiquid asset, we adopt a
strategy that mirrors the one we undertook in the calibration of the steady state parameters:
instead of trying to match a specific spread, we target the change in the convenience yield.
Unlike in the case of the steady state value of CY , we cannot rely on existing work to obtain
a time series of the convenience yield. The remainder of this section describes how we do so.
The bottom line is that an arguably conservative estimate of the post-Lehman increase in the
convenience yield is 180 basis points. We use this measure to calibrate the size of the liquidity
shock.
We take a panel of 18 different financial markets spreads, which differ by assets type and/or
maturity, and which the literature argues are mostly—if not solely—driven by liquidity.30 We
measure the extent of their co-movement over time, that is, we extract the common factor,
using a sample of almost ten years of daily data (from July 21 2004 to December 31 2014). We
use this sample because it includes data for most of our series, and address the fact that we do
30

The set of spreads includes: 1) The Refcorp/Treasury yield spreads at various maturities (6 months, 1, 2, 3,

4, 5, 7, 10, and 20 year). Longstaff (2004) suggests that the Refcorp/Treasury spread is mostly due to liquidity as
Refcorp bonds are effectively guaranteed by the U.S. government, and are subject to the same taxation. 2) The
TIPS-Treasury spreads, which we measure by taking the differences between the constant maturity yield curves
for TIPS and Treasury zero-coupon bonds at various maturities (5, 7, 10, and 20 year), adjusting the former
using the inflation swap spreads for the same maturities. Fleckenstein et al. (2014) provide evidence of a “TIPSTreasury bond puzzle,” that is, of differences in prices between Treasury bonds and inflation-swapped TIPS
exactly replicating the cash flows of the Treasury bond, and argue that this difference is orders of magnitude
larger than the transaction costs of executing the arbitrage strategy. 3) The CDS-Bond basis spread, constructed
as the difference between the yield on corporate bonds whose credit risk is hedged using a credit default swap
(CDS) and a Treasury security of equivalent maturity. Bai and Collin-Dufresne (2013) find that measures of
funding liquidity are the main drivers of the CDS-Bond basis. Similarly, Longstaff et al. (2005) find that the
non-default component of corporate spreads (essentially, the CDS-Bond basis) is strongly related to measures
of bond-specific illiquidity as well as to macroeconomic measures of bond market liquidity. We do not know the
exact maturity of the underlying contracts in each index, but we suspect it is approximately five-year (Choi and
Shachar, 2013). 4) The spread between the most recently issued and older 10-year Treasury bonds of the same
maturity, called the on-the-run/off-the-run or the bond/old-bond spread, which is a commonly used measure
of market liquidity (Krishnamurthy, 2002). 5) The Aaa-Treasury spread, which Krishnamurthy and VissingJorgensen (2012) argue is primarily driven by liquidity given the low default rate on Aaa bonds. Section A.2 of
the online appendix provides a detailed description of the data.

23

not have a fully balanced panel by using a principal component approach that allows for missing
observations (Stock and Watson, 2002). Figures A-6 and A-7 in the online appendix show time
series of the individual spreads as well as their the projection on the common factor for each
spread, and document that for the vast majority of the spreads the common factor captures
the bulk of fluctuations following the Lehman episode, except for some shorter-maturity TIPSTreasury spreads.
The gist of our strategy for measuring the change in the convenience yield rests on the
assumption that this common component is proportional to the convenience yield, that is,
that CYt = a + bft , where ft is the common factor. This is approximately true in our model,
and is a reasonable assumption in the data as well, as long as the spreads we use mostly
capture liquidity.31 Even with the factor at hand, in order to obtain a time series for CYt we
need to know the parameters a and b. We do so by making two assumptions. The first is
that the average convenience yield from the beginning of the sample (2004/07/21) to the very
beginning of the financial crisis (2007/06/29) equals the steady state value assumed in Section
3.1, namely 0.46%. The second is that the asset with the highest spread in 2008Q4 (this is
the BBB CDS-Bond basis) is essentially illiquid at the height of the financial crisis. Since the
convenience yield is the yield spread between a completely illiquid and fully liquid security,
under this assumption the average of CYt in 2008Q4 approximately coincides with this spread,
and equals 3.42% annualized (see Appendix B.7 for a more formal discussion).
There are two reasons why this value can be viewed as a conservative estimate of CYt
in 2008Q4. First, even at the height of the crisis the BBB CDS-Bond basis may still have
31

In our model, the endogenous variables including the convenience yield is a function of the state variables

Kt , Ntg , Rt−1 Lt , wt−1 , ∆t−1 , At , φt (where Lt = Bt−1 /Pt−1 , wt = Wt /Pt and ∆t is a distortion measure
due to price dispersion—see the Appendix for details). Because these state variables are either approximately
linear function of φt (such as Ntg and Rt−1 Lt ), or slow moving (Kt , wt−1 , ∆t−1 ) with constant TFP shock as
in our main calibration, the convenience yield is approximately a linear function of φt and a common factor ft
proportional to φt . Empirically though it is an open question whether CYt and φt are perfectly correlated—that
is, whether spreads follow a one factor model or a multi-factor model, where the other factors capture drivers of
the convenience yield that are not related to φt . In order to address this issue, we estimated a two factor model.
Figures A-8 and A-9 in the online appendix show that the projections of spreads on the two factors are very
similar to those from the one factor model, suggesting that at least in the sample under consideration using
one factor only is reasonable. Finally, the spreads under consideration are associated with different maturities.
Appendix B.7 shows that under some assumptions the spreads still follow a one factor model, where the loading
on the factor—for given φj —depends on the maturity of the asset.

24

retained some liquidity premium, implying that the convenience yield is higher than its spread.
Second, the securities underlying this spread are long-term (their maturity is approximately
five years), so the spread in 2008Q4 should reflect the average expected CYt over the duration
of the contract, as opposed to the value in that period. To the extent that CYt was expected
to decline in the following quarters, the value of 3.42% is a lower bound.
These two assumptions allow us to translate the common factor into a daily time series
of the convenience yield CYt , which we plot in Figure 3. Once we have this time series, we
can compute the average convenience yield for the pre-Lehman period (that is, the average
for 2008/Q2-Q3 excluding the month of September), which is 1.33%. This value suggests that
the change in CYt due to the Lehman shock was roughly 210 basis points. However, in the
weeks preceding the Lehman crisis, the convenience yield had already begun to rise, reaching
for instance 1.56% on September 1st. Therefore, in order to be conservative, we calibrate the
size of the shock to achieve an increase of 180 basis point in the convenience yield.32
Figure 3: A Time-Series for the Convenience Yield
4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

Notes: The figure plots a daily time series of the convenience yield from July 21 2004 to December 31 2014, constructed
using a panel of 18 liquidity-related spreads as described in 3.3.

We choose the persistence of the shock ρφ = 0.953 so that the implied expected duration of
the ZLB episode is six quarters. This value falls close to the midpoint between survey evidence
of market participants (Moore, 2008) and the predictions of an estimated interest rate rule
(Rudebusch, 2009). Later, we present results based on expectations of more severe financial
disruption.
32

The fall in the resaleability constraint that we obtain—about 70%—is broadly consistent with the increase

in haircuts after Lehman’s failure documented by Gorton and Metrick (2012).

25

Finally, the parameter ψk is calibrated to generate a government intervention of about $1.4
trillion (10% of GDP), consistent with the increase in the asset side of the Fed’s balance sheet
after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, as displayed in Figure 1.33

4

Results

4.1

Simulating the Financial Crisis: The Impact on Macroeconomic and
Financial Variables

Figure 4 shows the response of output, inflation, and the nominal interest rate to the calibrated
liquidity shock φt in the model, and compares it to the dynamics in the data during the Great
Recession. Specifically, the right-hand column plots the predicted path of variables for sixteen
quarters, conditional on the shock hitting at the beginning of the first period under perfect
foresight. The left-hand column shows the changes in the data also for sixteen quarters (i.e.,
until 2012Q3) relative to 2008Q3, when the Lehman bankruptcy occurred. We measure output
as the log of the sum of consumption and investment from the NIPA tables. We report the
percentage deviation from a linear trend estimated from 2000Q1 to 2012Q3, normalized to
zero in 2008Q3. For inflation, we use the annualized percentage change in the GDP deflator,
and express it in deviation from the two percent inflation long run objective of the Fed. The
nominal interest rate is the effective federal funds rate.
33

We include currency swaps with foreign central banks in computing the size of the intervention. The

rational for this choice lies in the fact that a key purpose of the currency swaps was to provide dollar liquidity
to foreign banks that needed funding for dollar-denominated assets, as discussed in Fleming and Klagge (2010).
While it is hard to know for sure what these dollar denominated assets represented, arguably they were mostly
claims originated in the U.S., such as mortgage-backed securities. We exclude however many other important
policy during this period, such as expansion of FDIC insurance, Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program and
Federal Home Loan Bank System Loan Facilities. We do so to stay on the conservative side in our counterfactual
experiment. Because we calibrate the size of liquidity shock to the increase in convenience yield observed in
the data, the difference between intervention and no intervention would be larger with a larger size of the
intervention. The second reason for not incorporating these policies into our analysis is that they are harder to
quantify as they largely consist in providing insurance rather than the actual liquidity injections done by the
central bank, which we can measure in the data. Moreover, our framework is best suited to analyze the effects
of policy which directly changes the compositions of private holdings of assets of different liquidity. Concerning
policies which may indirectly improve the working of private financial intermediaries, our framework has less to
say.

26

Figure 4:
Shock

Response of Output, Inflation, and the Nominal Interest Rate to the Liquidity
Data

percentage points

0

0

Deviations from St.St.

-1
-2

-4
-3
-6

1

annualized p.p.

Deviations from Trend

-2

-8
08q3

-4
09q3

10q3

11q3

Deviations from 2%

12q3

-5

Inflation
0

5

10

15

Deviations from St.St.

0
-1
-1
-2
-2
-3
08q3

09q3

10q3

Level

2.5

annualized p.p.

Model
Output

11q3

12q3

-3

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
08q3

09q3

10q3

5

Federal Funds Rate

11q3

12q3

0

5

10

15

10

15

Level

Notes: The figure compares the evolution of output, inflation, and the nominal interest rate in the data (left column)
and in the model in response to the calibrated liquidity shock (right column). The data start in 2008Q3. Both data and
model are plotted for 16 quarters. Output in the data (top-left) is the sum of consumption and investment, in percentage
log-deviations from a linear trend estimated from 2000Q1 to 2012Q3, and is normalized to zero in 2008Q3. Inflation
in the data (middle-left) is the annualized quarterly inflation rate of the GDP deflator. The interest rate in the data
(bottom-left) is the annualized effective Federal Funds Rate. Output in the model (top-right) is the log-deviation from
steady state in percentage points. Inflation in the model (middle-right) is expressed in annualized percentage points. The
interest rate in the model (bottom-right) is the annualized level of the nominal interest rate in percentage points (the
horizontal line is its steady state value).

The liquidity shock explains a large component of the response of the macroeconomy to
the Lehman episode. The model explains more than fifty percent of the output reduction
(-4.4% in the model versus -7.8% in the data); it also accounts for a two and a half percent
drop in the inflation rate, which corresponds to the entire fall of inflation relative to target in
the data, and to three quarters of the change from its value in 2008Q3; finally, it shows the
nominal interest rate hitting the zero lower bound following the crisis and remaining there for
a considerable period. Note that the model expects the recovery of real activity after the shock
to be sluggish, which was indeed the case in the data.
The first row of Figure 5 shows the decomposition of the output drop in the relative

27

Figure 5: Response of Consumption, Investment, the Nominal Value of Capital, and Convenience Yield to the Liquidity Shock

percentage points

0

Deviations from Trend

Model
Consumption
0

Data

Deviations from St.St.

5

percentage points

Data

-1
-0.5

-2
-3

-1
-4
-5
08q3

09q3

10q3

11q3

-1.5
12q3

5

10

0

150

200
150

100

100
50

50

0
-50
08q2

09q2

10q2

11q2

12q2

0

5

10

-5

-10
-15

-10

-20

0

300
250

Deviations from St.St.

09q3

10q3

11q3

12q3

-15

5

10

Deviations from Trend

-5

-1

-10

-2

-15

-3

-20

-4

-25
08q3

15

0

09q3

10q3

11q3

12q3

-5

Deviations from St.St.

5

10

Note: The figure compares the evolution of consumption, investment, nominal value of capital, and convenience yield in
the data (left column) and in the model in response to the calibrated liquidity shock (right column). The data start in
2008Q3. Both data and model are plotted for 16 quarters. Consumption in the data (top-left) is total consumption minus
durable consumption. Investment in the data (top-middle-left) is investment plus durable consumption. The nominal
value of capital in the data (bottom-middle-left) is the value of illiquid assets from the flow of funds as defined in the text.
These three variables are expressed in percentage log-deviations from a linear trend estimated from 2000Q1 to 2012Q3,
and are normalized to zero in 2008Q3. The convenience yield in the data (bottom-left) is in annualized basis points (its
computation is described in section 3.2). Consumption (top-right), investment (top-middle-right), and the nominal value
of capital (bottom-middle-right) in the model are log-deviations from steady state in percentage points. The convenience
yield in the model (bottom-right) is the annualized absolute deviation from steady state expressed in basis points.

contribution of consumption (left panels) and investment (right panels) in the model and in
the data.34 The model explains about two-thirds of the actual fall in investment (-14.2% versus
-22.3%), and almost one half of the fall in consumption (-1.3% versus -3.0%). The model underpredicts the fall investment, possibly because of the absence of an explicit residential sector.
Nevertheless, the broad empirical patterns are correct, in that investment drops substantially
more than consumption in percentage terms both in the model and the data.
The bottom row of Figure 5 shows the behavior of the convenience yield CYt (left panels),
which is the quarterly average of the time series shown in Figure 3 and is expressed in deviations
from the KVJ steady state value of 0.46%, and the total nominal value of capital, measured
34

15

Value of Capital

Deviations from St.St.
percentage points

annualized basis points

200

0

-5

Convenience Yield

Deviations from pre-Crisis Level

350

Deviations from Trend

-25
08q3

15

Model
Investment

Our empirical counterpart of consumption excludes durable goods, which instead we treat as part of invest-

ment, consistently with much of the literature (Justiniano et al., 2010). As for output, both the variables are
measured in logs, and are shown in percentage deviation from a linear trend estimated from 2000Q1 to 2012Q3
(separately estimated for each variable), and are normalized to zero in 2008Q3.

28

15

in the data using the Flow of Funds (see Appendix A.1) and in the model as Pt qt Kt .35 By
construction, the rise in CYt in the model matches the change in the convenience yield between
the pre-Lehman period and the 2008Q4 average. In the data CYt rises again between 2008Q4
and 2009Q1, and then falls faster than the model would have predicted in the second half of
2009, possibly because of a number of other factors and policy interventions (e.g., the stress
test and the first round of large-scale asset purchases) that are not incorporated in the model.
Bear in mind that the model impulse responses capture ex-ante expectations as on 2008Q4,
while the data measure ex-post outcomes. We should also recognize that our deterministic
simulations are set to match the modal expectations of the duration of the ZLB as of 2008Q4
(six quarters), but do not capture the uncertainty concerning the expected duration of the
crisis, which was pervasive.
The model can only account for about one fifth of the observed decline in the value of
capital.36 Shi (2015) discusses the reason why, in the absence of other frictions, a liquidity
shock in the KM model generally leads to a rise in the real value of equity. As the resaleability
constraint tightens, the demand for assets increases relative to the supply (including the equity
with limited resaleability), which tends to push up equity prices ceteris paribus. Our results
indicate that incorporating nominal frictions and the ZLB does generate a fall in the value
of equity, even though such a fall is smaller than observed in the data. One way in which
this limitation could be addressed is to explain the liquidity shock endogenously. Cui and
Radde (2014) embed a search-and-matching framework into the KM model and argue that
this approach addresses Shi’s critique.37
In short, our simulated crisis generates movements in macroeconomic variables following a liquidity shock that are not far from their empirical counterparts following Lehman’s
bankruptcy. Apart from the insufficient drop of equity prices, the model does not fully account for two aspects of the data, which we believe are related. The first is that the model
35

The convenience yield is computed as the spread CY t (the spread between a perfectly illiquid and a perfectly

liquid bond, see the discussion in section 2.2), and is expressed in annualized basis points. The value of capital
is measured in logs, and like the other variables is shown in percentage deviation from a linear trend estimated
from 2000Q1 to 2012Q3, normalized to zero in 2008Q3.
36
The model predicts the real value of capital qt to fall, as shown in Figure A-10 in the Appendix. The Figure
shows that nominal rigidities and the ZLB are essential for this result.
37
Other natural candidates include mechanisms that relate the fall in resaleability to a concurrent drop in
current or expected future total factor productivity. See Guerron-Quintana and Jinnai (2015).

29

only explains a little bit more than half of the observed fall in output. The second is that in
the model, the nominal interest rate starts increasing 6 quarters after the onset of the shock,
while in the data the duration of the ZLB was much longer.
Obviously, several other shocks played an important role in the crisis in addition to the
negative shock to the liquidity of private paper, such as the debt-deleveraging process at the
household level, studied theoretically in Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and documented empirically in Mian and Sufi (2014), or slow-moving secular factors (e.g. Eggertsson and Mehrotra,
2014)). These additional forces can account for both the drop in output our model does not
explain, as well as the delay in the interest rate liftoff in the data relative to our model’s forecast, which is only conditioned on the shock to the liquidity of private paper. Our paper only
focuses on the macroeconomic consequences of the disruption in the financial system following
Lehman’s bankruptcy, and on the effect of the Federal Reserve’s policies to mitigate such a
disruption.

4.2

The Great Escape? What Would Have Happened in the Absence of the
Liquidity Facilities?

What would have happened after the liquidity shock in the absence of unconventional policy?
This is the central question of the paper, which we can address using our model with liquidity
constraints. The left panel of Figure 6 shows the gain in output and inflation in the baseline
scenario due to the intervention. The model suggests that, without the facilities, the drop
in output would have been significantly larger, -5.8% instead of -4.4%, that is, the output
contraction would have been 30% more severe in the absence of the intervention. In addition,
inflation would have declined by almost three and half percentage points, compared to two
and a half with intervention. Figure 6 also makes the point that looking at the first period
understates the importance of unconventional policy. Given our assumption that, on impact,
the facilities do not relax the entrepreneurs’ resaleability constraint, entrepreneurial investment
cannot avoid the direct hit due to the fall in resaleability. The policy effect in the first period
is still significant because it affects asset prices and consumption through expectations. From
the second period onward, the effect is larger, as the policy changes the aggregate amount of
liquidity in the economy by changing the household portfolio towards the liquid asset.

30

Figure 6: The Effect of the Liquidity Facilities on Output and Inflation in the Baseline and
in the Great Escape Experiment
Baseline
Great Escape
percentage points

2

Deviations from St.St.

10

Output
Inflation

Deviations from St.St.

8

1.5

Output
Inflation

6
1
4
0.5
2
0

0
5
10
15
5
10
15
Notes: The figure shows the difference between counterfactual and actual response of output (solid blue) and inflation
(dashed red) in the model in response to the calibrated liquidity shock under the baseline persistence (left panel), and
with increased persistence such that the zero lower bound binds for twenty quarters (right panel).

The effect of the liquidity facilities on the convenience yield is not negligible (45 basis points
annualized—see Figure A-12 in the Appendix), but smaller as a fraction of the initial response
than in the case of the macro variables. Much of the early literature on the effect of the facilities
focused on the reduction in spreads as the main metric to interpret their success (McAndrews
et al., 2008; Taylor and Williams, 2009). Our model suggests that this metric may not be
entirely appropriate. Even if the reduction in spreads is limited, the macroeconomic impact
is substantial. In the model, not only is the private sector better off because of the liquidity
injection, but the government actually ends up making money off the transaction—$27 billion
in the first year in our baseline calibration.38
In the baseline scenario, we calibrate the persistence of the shock assuming that the private
sector expected the ZLB to bind for six quarters right after Lehman’s bankruptcy. Yet, given
the intensity of the crisis, and the degree of disruption in financial markets, the Great Recession
has often been compared to previous financial crises, such as the Great Depression and Japan’s
“Lost Decades.” These episodes, also characterized by downward pressure on prices and zero
nominal interest rates, lasted much longer than six quarters.
To capture the possibility that the public had expected a Depression-like crisis, we consider
the same shock but increase its persistence, so that the ZLB binds for twenty quarters (five
years). The right panel of Figure 6 shows the gain in output (solid) and inflation (dashed) due
38

Federal Reserve transfers to the U.S. Treasury (profits minus operating expenses) reached two consecutive

records in 2009 ($47.4 billion) and 2010 ($78.4 billion), largely as a result of the increased interest income on
security holdings.

31

to the intervention in this alternative scenario, calibrating the size of the intervention as before
at $1.4 trillion. Without the intervention, the drop in output (almost twenty percent) and
inflation (about fifteen percent) is of an order of magnitude not seen in the US since the Great
Depression. In this case, thus, unconventional credit policy becomes much more effective. The
policy response cuts the losses in output and inflation by roughly a half—generating a recession
of similar order as seen in the data.
This “divine coincidence” (Christiano et al., 2011), according to which the policy intervention becomes more effective as the economy approaches the “disaster area”, represents an
element of commonality with the literature on the multiplier of government spending in a
liquidity trap (see also Eggertsson, 2011). A key reason for the effectiveness of the policy intervention is the assumption of price rigidities and the presence of the ZLB. In the absence of
these two frictions, the intervention would have substantially less effect, as shown in Figure A14 in the Appendix, which shows the increase in output as a result of the policy under different
assumptions. With flexible prices, the intervention is almost irrelevant while in the absence
of the ZLB, traditional monetary policy (via interest cuts) largely substitutes unconventional
policy, hence making it much less necessary. We clarify the logic for these results in the next
two sections.
Finally, in Appendix D we consider several perturbation of the baseline parameters to
explore the sensitivity of the results. The overall tenor of the results remain unchanged: the
liquidity shock generates a recession, and the liquidity facilities are effective in mitigating the
consequences of the shock.

4.3

The Role of Nominal Frictions

The previous two sections showed that the KM liquidity shocks can rationalize the behavior of
macroeconomic and financial variables during the Great Recession, and that unconventional
credit policy might have prevented an even larger downturn. The next two sections shed some
light on the ingredients behind our main results. We start from the role of nominal rigidities.
Absent this friction, liquidity shocks would only affect the composition of output, decreasing
investment and increasing consumption, but would have had very little effect on aggregate
activity.

32

Figure 7: The Role of Nominal Rigidities
Output
Investment

percentage points

Deviations from St.St.

Deviations from St.St.

0

0

-1

-2
-4

-2

-6

-3

-8

-4

-10

-5
-6

Sticky
Flexible

5

10

15

-12
-14

Consumption

Sticky
Flexible

5

3

1

2

annualized p.p.

percentage points

Level

2

0
-1
-2

-4

Sticky
Flexible

5

10

15

Real Interest Rate

Deviations from St.St.

-3

10

1
0
-1
-2

15

Sticky
Flexible

5

10

15

Notes: The figure compares the response of output (top-left), investment (top-right), consumption (bottom-left), and the
real interest rate (bottom-right) to the liquidity shock under the baseline calibration in the absence of intervention with
(solid blue) and without (dashed red) nominal price and wage rigidities.

The four panels of Figure 7 show the response of output, investment, consumption, and
the real interest rates with (solid) and without (dashed) nominal rigidities under the baseline
calibration. For simplicity, but also to magnify the differences, we show the responses without
policy intervention. The top-left panel of Figure 7 shows that, with flexible prices and wages,
the response of output is indeed very small, even though the liquidity shock has still a large
impact on investment (top-right panel). The equilibrium condition for investment (14) shows
that when φt falls the amount of resources available to entrepreneurs for investment drops,
regardless of nominal rigidities. Clearly, the financial frictions are driving the fall in investment.
Nominal frictions exacerbate the effect of the shock by depressing current and future economic
activity and therefore equity prices. This channel explains why quantitatively the response of
investment is larger with nominal rigidities, but qualitatively the two impulse responses are
similar.
Conversely, consumption moves in opposite directions depending on whether prices and
wages are flexible or not (bottom-left panel). Consumption rises under flexible prices and
33

wages, instead of falling as in our simulation with nominal rigidities. Intuitively, consumption
needs to make up for the drop in investment since, in that case, output does not drop as much
without nominal frictions. The reason for small response of output absent nominal rigidities is
that the liquidity shock only affects the accumulation of the capital to be used for production
in the future, but has no effect on either productivity or the existing capital stock. Output
would drop substantially only if, for some reason, labor were to be used much less intensively
for production. If prices are flexible and the elasticity of labor supply is not too extreme,
however, the effect on hours is not very pronounced. Hence, aggregate output remains more
or less unchanged.
The mechanism of adjustment hinges upon the behavior of the real interest rate. To get
households to spend more, the real interest rate needs to decline. The bottom-right panel of
Figure 7 shows that the real interest rate absent nominal frictions (the so-called natural rate of
interest) becomes negative in response to the liquidity shock, so that consumption rises.39 This
fall in the real interest rate is hard to achieve, however, when prices are rigid. With some (but
not full) price flexibility, the private sector starts expecting some deflation in future periods
when the shock is still perturbing the economy, while the Taylor rule implies zero inflation as
soon as the shock is over. The interaction of the ZLB and price frictions leads to higher real
interest rates owing to expected deflation, which causes consumption to fall with investment.
The longer the private sector expects the shock to last, the stronger deflation is, and hence the
rise in real rates. The fact that the liquidity shock cannot generate much effect if all prices are
flexible is an important quantitative findings of this paper.

4.4

The Zero Lower Bound

Given the relevance of nominal rigidities stressed in the previous section, not surprisingly
conventional monetary policy also plays an important role in our results. But the presence of
the ZLB impairs full monetary policy stabilization.
Figure 8 shows the response of output, the nominal interest rate, and the real interest rate
ignoring the ZLB constraint, with (solid) and without (dashed) the liquidity facilities. In order
39

We note in passing that in our framework financial frictions have a direct effect on the natural rate of interest

via the convenience yield, as equation (16) highlights. The relationship between liquidity and the natural rate
of interest is a potentially important one for monetary policy. We leave its analysis for future research.

34

Figure 8: The Role of the Zero Lower Bound
Output

Nominal Interest Rate

Deviations from St.St.

Level
2

-2

annualized p.p.

-1

1
0
-1
-2
With intervention
Without intervention

-3
-3

5

10

15

Level
3

With intervention
Without intervention

annualized p.p.

percentage points

0

Real Interest Rate

5

10

15

2
1
0
-1
-2

With intervention
Without intervention

5

10

15

Notes: The figure compares the response of output (left), nominal interest rate (middle), and real interest rate (right) to
the liquidity shock under the baseline calibration when the zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate is ignored with
(solid blue) and without (dashed line) intervention.

to show that the ZLB works as an amplification mechanism for the liquidity shock, let us first
focus on the case without intervention—that is, the dashed lines. As we have seen in Figure
6, output drops by almost six percent without intervention when the ZLB is binding. In the
absence of the ZLB, even without intervention, output would have fallen only by half that
amount. The reason is that, in this case, a monetary authority following the Taylor rule (20)
would have lowered the nominal interest rates below zero, thereby inducing a fall in the real
interest rate from 2.2% percent (the steady state) into negative territory.
In contrast, under the ZLB the nominal interest rate is stuck at zero. The zero bound
amplifies the effect of the liquidity shock not only because the constraint is binding in a given
period, but especially because agents expect it to be binding in the future. This belief lowers
expected future income and generates deflationary expectations. Such expectations lead to a
rise in real rates (shown in Figure 7) and a decline in demand. In this situation, unconventional
policy stimulates demand by changing the portfolio composition of the private sector, thereby
enabling entrepreneurs to pursue more investment opportunities. The impact of the policy on
investment supports demand in all periods when the economy is in a crisis, indirectly boosting
consumption via its effect on inflation expectations, and hence lowering the real rate. In this
sense, unconventional policy can substitute for interest rate policy when the latter is hindered
by the ZLB.40 Yet, the actual liquidity facilities (as per our calibration) are less than a perfect
40

The “Great Escape” calibration forcefully illustrates the role of expectations in determining the effectiveness

of unconventional policy, as it shows that unconventional policy becomes very effective when ZLB is expected
to be binding for a long time.

35

substitute. At the ZLB, the size of the liquidity intervention necessary to achieve the same
output response to the crisis as when the nominal interest rate can go negative is almost 30%
of GDP—three times more than the baseline liquidity injection (see Appendix Figure A-13).
If the ZLB is not binding, unconventional policy is much less needed, simply because
conventional policy can do its job in boosting demand. Indeed, Figure 8 shows that the paths
of output with and without unconventional policy are not very different when the ZLB is not
binding.

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we have proposed an analysis of the economic and financial crisis of 2008 based
on shocks to the liquidity of private paper. We have incorporated a set of financial frictions into
a standard DSGE model to show that the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities made a material
difference in preventing the recession from becoming deeper, substituting for the conventional
interest rate policy that was constrained by the zero lower bound. Had market participants in
2008 expected the zero lower bound to last for as long as it did, the Fed may have prevented
the Great Recession from becoming a second Great Depression, although this hypothesis is
admittedly extreme. Our analysis does not deny the importance of other shocks in explaining
the crisis nor the importance of other policy intervention, such as fiscal policy.
Our results rely on the crucial distinction that the government can issue perfectly liquid
papers while the private sector cannot. The ability of governments to issue fiat currency and
raise taxes provides a rationale for this assumption. If government bonds become subject
to default risk and sensitive to information on a possible default, also their liquidity would
become much less than perfect, as in the recent cases of Greece, Portugal, and Ireland. In
this case, the government has only limited ability to conduct unconventional credit policy and
the expectations about future fiscal policy would affect both the valuation and the liquidity of
government bonds. We leave this topic for future research.41
41

We have also abstracted from the wealth distribution across heterogeneous agents by assuming complete

sharing of consumption and assets among family members at the end of every period. Absent this pooling
of resources, the distribution of net worth across heterogeneous producers and consumers affects aggregate
production and asset prices as in Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). Because the
balance sheet takes time to adjust, the recovery of aggregate production may be slow after a large financial

36

References
Adrian, Tobias, Christopher Burke, and James McAndrews, “The Federal Reserve’s
Primary Dealer Credit Facility,” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 2009, 15 (4).
, Karin Kimbrough, and Dina Marchioni, “The Federal Reserve’s Commercial Paper
Funding Facility,” Economic Policy Review, 2011, 17 (1), 25–39.
Ajello, Andrea, “Financial Intermediation, Investment Dynamics and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Anzoategui, Diego, Diego Comin, Mark Gertler, and Joseba Martinez, “Endogenous
Technology Adoption and R&D as Sources of Business Cycle Persistence,” 2015. New York
University working paper.
Armantier, Olivier, Sandra Krieger, and James McAndrews, “The Federal Reserve’s
Term Auction Facility,” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 2008, 14 (5).
Ashcraft, Adam, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, “Two Monetary Tools:
Interest Rates and Haircuts,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2010, pp. 143–180.
Bai, Jennie and Pierre Collin-Dufresne, “The CDS-Bond Basis,” in “AFA 2013 San Diego
Meetings Paper” 2013.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review, 1989, 79 (1), 14–31.
, , and Simon Gilchrist, “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle
Framework,” in John Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics,
Vol. 1, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999, chapter 21, pp. 1341–1393.
Bigio, Saki, “Endogenous Liquidity and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review,
2015, 105 (6), 1883–1927.
Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (5), 947–985.
Calvo, Guillermo, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1983, 12 (3), 383–398.
Chen, Han, Vasco Curdia, and Andrea Ferrero, “The Macroeconomic Effects of LargeScale Assets Purchase Programs,” Economic Journal, 2012, 122 (564), F289–F315.
Choi, Jaewon and Or Shachar, “Did Liquidity Providers Become Liquidity Seekers?,”
FRBNY Staff Report No. 650, 2013.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans, “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
2005, 113 (1), 1–45.
, , and Sergio Rebelo, “When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?,” Journal
of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 78–121.
, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno, “The Great Depression and the FriedmanSchwartz Hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 2003, 35 (6, Part 2), 1119–
1197.
crisis. In such an economy, the government purchase of illiquid private paper with government paper may not
be enough to avoid a deep and prolonged recession.

37

, , and
2010.

, “Financial Factors in Business Cycles,” ECB Working Paper Series No. 1192,

Cordoba, Juan Carlos and Maria Ripoll, “Credit Cycles Redux,” International Economic
Review, 2004, 45 (5), 1011–1046.
Cui, Wei and Soren Radde, “Search-Based Endogenous Illiquidity and the Macroeconomy,”
Available at SSRN 2432935, 2014.
Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, “Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 2010, 92 (4), 229–264.
and
2015.

, “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 21820,

Doms, Mark and Timothy Dunne, “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing
Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1998, 1 (2), 409–429.
Eberly, Janice, “International Evidence on Investment and Fundamentals,” European Economic Review, 1997, 41 (6), 1055–1078.
Eggertsson, Gauti, “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (4), 1476–1516.
, “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?,” in Daron Acemoglu and Michael
Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, Vol. 25, University of Chicago Press,
2011, pp. 59–112.
and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary
Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, 34 (1), 139–235.
and Neil Mehrotra, “A Model of Secular Stagnation,” NBER Working Paper No. 20574,
2014.
and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo
Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1469–1513.
Erceg, Christopher, Dale Henderson, and Andrew Levin, “Optimal Monetary Policy
with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2000, 46 (2),
281–313.
Fisher, Jonas, “On the Structural Interpretation of the Smets–Wouters Risk Premium
Shock,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2015, 47 (2-3), 511–516.
Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig, “The TIPS-Treasury
Bond Puzzle,” The Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (4), 2151–2197.
Fleming, Michael and Nicholas Klagge, “The Federal Reserves Foreign Exchange Swap
Lines,” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 2010, 16 (4).
, Warren Hrung, and Frank Keane, “The Term Securities Lending Facility: Origin,
Design, and Effects,” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 2009, 15 (2).
Garleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Heje Pedersen, “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations from the Law of One Price,” Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24 (6), 1980–2022.
Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook
of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3, Elsevier, 2010, chapter 11, pp. 547–599.
38

and Peter Karadi, “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 2011, 58 (1), 17–34.
Goodfriend, Marvin and Bennett McCallum, “Banking and Interest Rates in Monetary
Policy Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54
(5), 1480–1507.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, “Haircuts,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,
2010, 92 (6), 507–519.
and , “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of Financial Economics,
2012, 104 (3), 425451.
Gourio, Francois and Anil Kashyap, “Investment Spikes: New Facts and a General Equilibrium Exploration,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (Supplement 1), 1–22.
Guerron-Quintana, Pablo and Ryo Jinnai, “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Prices,” 2015.
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Hall, Robert, “Struggling to Understand the Stock Market,” American Economic Review,
2001, 91 (2), 1–11.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giogrio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Investment
Shocks and Business Sycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2010, 57 (2), 132–145.
Kara, Engin and Jasmin Sin, “The Fiscal Multiplier in a Credit-Constrained New Keynesian Economy,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
1997, 105 (2), 211–248.
and , “Liquidity, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No.
17934, 2012.
Kocherlakota, Narayana, “Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 2000, 24 (3), 2–10.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, “The Bond/Old-Bond Spread,” Journal of Financial Economics,
2002, 66 (2), 463–506.
and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt,” Journal
of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 233–267.
Kurlat, Pablo, “Lemons Markets and the Transmission of Aggregate Shocks,” American
Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1463–1489.
Liu, Zheng, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha, “Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic
Fluc,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (3), 1147–1184.
Longstaff, Francis, “The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in US Treasury Bond Prices,” The
Journal of Business, 2004, 77 (3), 511–526.
, Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, “Corporate Yield Spreads: Default Risk or Liquidity?
New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market,” Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (5),
2213–2253.
Madigan, Brian, “Bagehot’s Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies
to Combat the Financial Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Annual Economic
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2009, pp. 169–189.
39

McAndrews, James, Asani Sarkar, and Zhenyu Wang, “The Effect of the Term Auction
Facility on the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate,” FRBNY Staff Report No. 335, 2008.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment?,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2197–2223.
Moore, Randall, Blue Chip Economic Indicators, Aspen Publishers, 2008.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson, “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (4), 1415–1464.
Nezafat, Pedram and Ctirad Slavik, “Asset Prices and Business Cycles with Financial
Shocks,” 2010. Working Paper, Goethe University Frankfurt.
Quadrini, Vincenzo, “Entrepreneurship in Macroeconomics,” Annals of Finance, 2009, 5
(3), 295–311.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford, “An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Vol. 12, MIT Press, 1997, pp. 297–361.
Rudebusch, Glenn D., “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis,” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, 2009, 17.
Shi, Shouyong, “Liquidity, Assets, and Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
2015, 70, 116–132.
Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 586–606.
Stock, James H and Mark W Watson, “Macroeconomic Forecasting using Diffusion Indexes,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2002, 20 (2), 147–162.
Study Group-Committee on the Global Financial System, “Market-Making and Proprietary Trading: Industry Trends, Drivers and Policy Implications,” CGFS Papers 52, BIS
2014.
Taylor, John, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 1993, 39, 195–214.
and John Williams, “A Black Swan in the Money Market,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 58–83.
Vayanos, Dimitri and Jean-Luc Vila, “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure
of Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper No. 15487, 2009.
Wallace, Neil, “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,” American Economic Review, 1981, 71 (3), 267–274.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton University Press, 2003.

40

A-1

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Online Appendix for
The Great Escape? A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed’s
Liquidity Facilities

Marco Del Negro, Gauti Eggertsson, Andrea Ferrero, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki

A

Data Appendix

A.1

Construction of the Liquidity Share

The liquidity share in the model is defined as LSt =

Bt+1
Bt+1 +Pt qt Kt+1

(equation (24)). The two

quantities in the definition of the liquidity share are the dollar value of the amount of U.S.
government liabilities Bt+1 (by assumption, the empirical counterpart of the liquid assets in
the model) and of net claims on private assets (capital) Pt qt Kt+1 , respectively.
Recall that in the model, as in the actual economy, households hold claims on the capO and N I
ital held by other households (the Nt+1
t+1 terms mentioned in the discussion of the

household’s balance sheet). The term Pt qt Kt+1 , however, measures the net amount of these
claims – that is, the value of capital in the economy. We therefore consolidate the balance
sheet of households, the non-corporate and the corporate sectors to obtain the market value
of aggregate capital. For households, we sum real estate (B.100 line 3), equipment and software of non-profit organizations (B.100 line 6), and consumer durables (B.100 line 7). For the
non-corporate sector, we sum real estate (B.103 line 3), equipment and software (B.103 line
6) and inventories (B.103 line 9). For the corporate sector, we obtain the market value of the
capital stock by summing the market value of equity (B.102 line 35) and liabilities (B.102 line
21) net of financial assets (B.102 line 6). We then subtract from the market value of capital
for the private sector the government credit market instruments (B.106 line 5), TARP (B.106
line 10), and trade receivables (B.106 line 11).
Our measure of liquid assets Bt+1 consists of all liabilities of the federal government – that
is, Treasury securities (L.106 line 17) net of holdings by the monetary authority (L.106 line
12) and the budget agency (L.209 line 20) plus reserves (L.108 line 26), vault cash (L.108 line
27) and currency (L.108 line 28) net of remittances to the federal government (L.108 line 29).
Three qualifications are in order. First, no data are available for the physical capital stock
of the financial sector. Second, not all of the assets in the flow of funds are evaluated at

A-2

Online appendix for The Great Escape

market value. Specifically, the capital stock of households (consumer durable goods) and noncorporate firms (equipment and software owned by non-profit organizations) are measured at
replacement cost. Last, in our calculations we do not net out liquid and illiquid assets held by
the rest of the world. Even if we do, however, the numbers are not very different, since the
rest of the world, on net, holds both liquid (government liabilities) and illiquid (private sector
liabilities) assets in roughly the same proportion. The liquidity share calculated excluding the
foreign sector averages 10.56%, as opposed to 12.64%, over the sample period and exhibits
very similar dynamics.

A.2

Liquidity Spreads

We collect daily data on a number of spreads that the literature has identified as having to do
mostly with liquidity, broadly defined:
• The Refcorp/Treasury spread for various maturities, which Longstaff (2004) suggests is
mostly (if not entirely) due to liquidity as Refcorp bonds are effectively guaranteed by
the U.S. government, and are subject to the same taxation.42 As in Longstaff (2004), we
measure the spread by taking the differences between the constant maturity .50, 1-, 2-,
3-, 4-, 5-, 7-, 10-, and 20-year points on the Bloomberg fair value curves for Refcorp and
Treasury zero-coupon bonds.43 The Bloomberg mnemonics are ‘C091[X]Y Index’ and
‘C079[X]Y Index’, respectively, where [X] represents the maturity. We collect daily data
from 4/16/1991 to 9/06/2014.44
• Fleckenstein et al. (2014) provide ample evidence of what they call the “TIPS-Treasury
bond puzzle,” that is, of differences in prices between Treasury bonds of various maturities and inflation-swapped Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) issues exactly
replicating the cash flows of the Treasury bond of the same maturities. Specifically,
42

Refcorp bonds differ from most other agency bonds in that their principal is fully collateralized by Trea-

sury bonds and full payment of coupons is guaranteed by the Treasury under the provisions of the Financial
Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989.
43
We do not use the yield on the 30-year bond as it has a limited sample, and on the 3-month bill as our
model is quarterly.
44
Specifically, the Bloomberg description states:

C091[X]Y Index (BFV USD US REFCO Strips Yield

[X]). C079[X]Y Index (BFV USD US Treasury Strips).

The indices are composite yields derived

from BVAL -priced bonds.

The index ...

Quote type:

yield /mid.

are the zero coupon yields

derived by stripping the par coupon curve. We use the Bloomberg default setting (PX LAST), indicating
that the underlying security prices correspond to the mid point between the bid and ask values for the last
transaction in each day.

A-3

Online appendix for The Great Escape

they find that the price of a Treasury bond and an inflation-swapped TIPS issue exactly
replicating the cash flows of the Treasury bond can differ by more than $20 per $100 notional – a difference that, they argue, is orders of magnitude larger than the transaction
costs of executing the arbitrage strategy. We therefore collect TIPS-Treasury spreads,
which we measure by taking the differences between the constant maturity 5-, 7-, 10-,
20-, and 30-year points on the Bloomberg fair value curves for TIPS and Treasury zerocoupon bonds, and adjusting the former using the inflation swap spreads for the same
maturities. The Bloomberg mnemonics are ‘H15X[X]YR Index’, ‘H15T[X]Y Index’, and
’USSWIT[X] Curncy’ respectively for TIPS, nominal Treasuries, and inflation swaps,
where X represents the maturity. We collect daily data from 7/21/2004 to 12/31/2014.45
• The CDS-Bond basis spread is the difference between the yield on corporate bonds whose
credit risk is hedged using a credit default swap (CDS) and a Treasury security of equivalent maturity. Bai and Collin-Dufresne (2013) find that measures of funding liquidity
(i.e., the Libor-OIS, and the repo-Tbill spreads; see Garleanu and Pedersen (2011)) are
the main drivers of the CDS-Bond basis. Similarly, Longstaff et al. (2005) find that the
non-default component of corporate spreads (essentially, the CDS-Bond basis) is strongly
related to measures of bond-specific illiquidity as well as to macroeconomic measures of
bond market liquidity. We obtain indices of “Par Equivalent” CDS-Bond basis spreads
from the JP Morgan database for portfolios of corporate bonds of rating AA, A, and
BBB (the mnemonics are ‘High Grade AA CDS-Bond Basis’, ‘High Grade A CDS-Bond
Basis’, and ‘High Grade BBB CDS-Bond Basis’). We do not know the exact maturity
of the underlying contracts in each index, however five-year maturity CDS contracts are
the most prevalent (Choi and Shachar (2013)). We collect daily data from 9/5/2006 to
9/8/2014.
• A commonly used measure of market liquidity is the spread between the most recently
45

Specifically,

the Bloomberg description states:

H15X[X]YR Index (Federal Reserve US H.15 TII

Constant Maturity [X]). Yields on Treasury inflation protected securities (TIPS) adjusted
to constant maturities.

Index ...

are the par return on the zero coupon yields.

H15T[X]Y

Index (US Treasury Yield Curve Rate T Note Constant Maturity [X]). Yields on actively traded
non-inflation -indexed issues adjusted to constant maturities.
coupon yields derived by stripping the par coupon curve.

The index ...

are the zero

USSWIT[X] Curncy (USD Infl Zero

Coupon [X]) Inflation swap quoted as the zero coupon fixed rate leg necessary to build a par
swap against a leg on zero coupon CPI appreciation on CPURNSA Index [CPI-U NSA]. Quoted from
various contributors with standard defaults of LAG (3 months) and interpolation.

We use the

Bloomberg default setting (PX LAST), indicating that the underlying security prices correspond to the mid
point between the bid and ask values for the last transaction in each day.

Online appendix for The Great Escape

A-4

issued and older Treasury bonds of the same maturity, called the on-the-run/off-therun or the bond/old-bond spread. Krishnamurthy (2002) finds that the bond/old-bond
spread is highly correlated with the three-month commercial paper (CP) Treasury Bills
spread. We use a measure of the 10-year on-the-run/off-the-run spread constructed by
the FRBNY Research department for a recent BIS report (Study Group-Committee on
the Global Financial System (2014)), which is based on the difference between yields
of the 10-year on-the-run Treasury and a synthetic counterpart. The FRBNY data are
available from 11/4/2005 to 2/12/2014.
• Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) argue that the Aaa-Treasury spread is primarily driven by liquidity given the low default rate on Aaa bonds. We collect daily
data from FRED, the same sources of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), from
10/01/1993 to 12/31/2014 (the mnemonics are ’DAAA’ and ’DGS20’ for the and the
20-year Treasury, respectively).
Given that our model is quarterly we chose not to include very short term products (3-months)
to our cross-section of spreads. In robustness analysis (not shown) we added the 3-month
Refcorp spread and the spread between the 3-month safe CP and Treasury-Bill used in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and found the time series of CYt to be virtually the
same as that shown in Figure 3.46

46

We collect daily data from FRED from 01/02/1997 to 12/31/2014. The mnemonics are ’DCPN3M’ and

’DTB3’ for the safe Commercial Paper and the 3-month Treasury bill, respectively.

A-5

Online appendix for The Great Escape

B

Additional Model Details and Derivations

B.1

Final and Intermediate Goods Producers

Competitive final-goods producers combine intermediate goods Yit , where i ∈ [0, 1] indexes
intermediate-goods-producing firms, to sell a homogeneous final good Yt according to the
technology
1

Z
Yt =
0

1
1+λp

Yit

1+λp
di

,

(A-1)

where λp > 0. Their demand for the generic ith intermediate good is


Pit
Yit =
Pt

− 1+λp
λp

Yt ,

(A-2)

where Pit is the nominal price of good i. The zero profit condition for competitive final goods
producers implies that the aggregate price level is
Z
Pt =
0

1

− λ1

Pit

p

−λp
di

.

(A-3)

The intermediate goods firm i uses Kit units of capital and Hit units of composite labor
to produce output Yit according to the production technology
Yit = At Kit γ Hit 1−γ − Γ,

(A-4)

where γ ∈ (0, 1) is share of capital, Γ > 0 is fixed cost of production, and At is an aggregate
productivity shock. Intermediate-goods firms operate in monopolistic competition and set
prices on a staggered basis (Calvo (1983)) taking the real wage
rtk

Wt
Pt

and the rental rate of capital

as given. With probability 1 − ζp , the firm resets its price, while with the complementary

probability the price remains fixed. In the event of a price change at time t, the firm chooses the
price P̃it to maximize the present discounted value of profits (Dis = Pis Yis −ws His −rsK Kis −Γ,
s ≥ t) conditional on not changing prices in the future subject to the demand for its own
good (A-2). We assume that the profit is zero in the deterministic steady state.47
47

We choose the fixed cost of production so that the free entry in the long-run leads to a steady state in which

exactly a unit mass of intermediate goods producer continues production. In the short-run, there is no entry
nor exit so that the profit can be positive or negative.

A-6

Online appendix for The Great Escape

B.2

Labor Agencies and Wage Setting

Competitive labor agencies combine j-specific labor inputs into a homogeneous composite Ht
according to
"
Ht =

1
1−κ



λw
1+λw

Z

1

Ht (j)

1
1+λw

#1+λw
dj

,

(A-5)

κ

where λw > 0.48 Firms hire the labor input from the labor agencies at the wage Wt , which in
turn remunerate the household for the labor actually provided. The zero profit condition for
labor agencies implies that
1

Z
Wt Ht =

Wt (j)Ht (j)dj.

(A-6)

κ

The demand for the j th labor input is

 1+λw
1
Wt (j) − λw
Ht ,
Ht (j) =
1−κ
Wt

(A-7)

where Wt (j) is the wage specific to type j and Wt is the aggregate wage index that comes out
of the zero profit condition for labor agencies

Wt =

1
1−κ

Z

1

1

Wt (j)− λw dj

−λw
.

(A-8)

κ

Labor unions representing workers of type j set wages on a staggered basis, taking as given
the demand for their specific labor input (Erceg et al. (2000)). In each period, with probability
1 − ζw , a union is able to reset the wage Wt (j), while with the complementary probability the
wage remains fixed. Workers are committed to supply whatever amount of labor is demanded
at that wage. In the event of a wage change at time t, unions choose the wage W̃t (j) to
minimize the present discounted value of the disutility from work conditional on not changing
the wage in the future subject to (A-7).49

B.3

Capital-Goods Producers

Capital-goods producers are perfectly competitive. These firms transform consumption goods
into investment goods. Their problem consists of choosing the amount of investment goods
48

We add constant (1 − κ)−1 to the labor composite (A − 5) so that it is equal to the average labor used under

symmetry. Because there is no entry of new types of labor, it only simplifies the notation without changing the
substance.
49
Although each household supplies many types of labor, it is difficult for unions (which represent many
households) to cooperate. Thus, each union is monopolistically competitive, taking the wages of the other
unions as given.

A-7

Online appendix for The Great Escape

produced It to maximize the profits
DtI


=

pIt


 
It
− 1+S
It ,
I

(A-9)

taking the price of investment goods pIt as given. The price of investment goods differs from
the price of consumption goods because of the adjustment cost function, which depends on the
deviations of actual investment from its steady-state value I. We assume that, when evaluated
in steady state, the adjustment cost function and its first derivative are zero (S(1) = S 0 (1) = 0),
while its second derivative is positive (S 00 (It /I) > 0) globally.

B.4

Derivation of Liquidity Constraint

The household’s balance sheet (excluding human capital) is given in Table in Section 2.1 in
the text. The existence of two financial frictions constrains the evolution of both equity issued
and others’ equity. The entrepreneur cannot issue new equity more than a fraction θ of the
investment undertaken in the current period plus a fraction φIt ∈ (0, 1) of the undepreciated
capital stock previously not mortgaged (Kt − NtI ). Therefore, equity issued evolves according
to
I
Nt+1
(j) ≤ (1 − δ)NtI + θIt (j) + (1 − δ)φIt (Kt − NtI ).

(A-10)

Similarly, the entrepreneur cannot sell more than a fraction φO
t of holdings of the others’ equity
remained. Therefore, others’ equity evolves according to
O
O
Nt+1
(j) ≥ (1 − δ)NtO − (1 − δ)φO
t Nt .

(A-11)

The key assumption that allows us to derive a single constraint on the evolution of net
equity (Nt ≡ NtO + Kt − NtI ) is that the “resaleability” parameters are the same, that is
φIt = φO
t = φt . Then two constraints ( A-10) and (A-11) yield (5) in the text.

B.5
B.5.1

Optimality conditions
Household’s Optimality Conditions

Because each entrepreneur must satisfy the financing constraints on equity holdings (5), bond
holdings (6) and non-negativity constraint of consumption, the aggregate investment of the
representative household must satisfy:
Z
It ≡



χ

It (j)dj ≤ κ
0


Rtk + (1 − δ) qt φt Nt +
pIt

− θqt

Rt−1 Bt
Pt

− τt

.

(A-12)

A-8

Online appendix for The Great Escape

As explained in the text, we separate the wage setting from the consumption, investment
and portfolio decision. The household chooses Ct , It , Nt+1 and Bt+1 to maximize the utility (2)
subject to the budget constraint (15) and the financing constraint of investment (A-12). Let
ξt and ηt be the Lagrange multipliers attached to (15) and (A-12). The first order conditions
for consumption, investment, equity and government bond are respectively
Ct−σ = ξt ,

(A-13)

ξt (qt − pIt ) = ηt ,

(A-14)
(
k
ξt+1 [Rt+1
+ (1 − δ)qt+1 ] + ηt+1

qt ξt = βEt
"
ξt = βEt

Rt
πt+1

ξt+1 + ηt+1

pIt+1

k
κ[Rt+1
+ (1 − δ)φt+1 qt+1 ]
pIt+1 − θqt+1
!#

κ
− θt+1 qt+1

.

)
,(A-15)
(A-16)

We focus on equilibria in which financing constraint on investment is sufficiently tight so
that the equity price is bigger than its installation cost, i.e. qt > pIt in the neighborhood of the
steady state equilibrium. This condition is also always satisfied in our simulations outside the
steady state. Therefore, the Lagrange multiplier ηt on the financing constraint on investment
equation (A-12) is always positive. This implies that each entrepreneur satisfy the financing
constraints on equity holdings (5) bond holdings (6) with equality and his/her consumption
is zero Ct (j) = 0 for j ∈ [0, χ). Also (A-12) holds with equality, or we have (14) in the text.
Substituting the Lagrange multipliers from (A-13) and (A-14) into (A-15) and (A-16) gives the
Euler equations for bond and equity that characterize the household portfolio decisions (16)
and (17) . We first define the premium of liquidity from relaxing the investment constraint as
Λt = κ

qt − pIt
.
pIt − θqt

(A-17)

The convenience yield in our model is defined as the expected value of the premium of liquidity
of the next period as
CYt = Et (Λt+1 ) .

(A-18)

The Euler equations (16, 17) become


−σ Rt
(1 + Λt+1 )
Ct = βEt Ct+1
πt+1
(
"
#)
k
k
Rt+1
+ φt+1 (1 − δ)qt+1
−σ Rt+1 + (1 − δ)qt+1
= βEt Ct+1
1 + Λt+1
.
k
qt
Rt+1
+ (1 − δ)qt+1
−σ

Ct −σ

(A-19)

(A-20)

Let us Lt+1 be the real value of liquid assets at the end of period
Lt+1 ≡

Bt+1
.
Pt

(A-21)

A-9

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Together with the expression for dividends, aggregate investment (14) can be rewritten as

It = κ

B.5.2

Rt−1 Lt
πt


Rtk + (1 − δ) qt φt Nt +
pIt

− τt

(A-22)

− θqt

Wage Setting Decision

Competitive labor agencies chooses Ht (j) to maximize their profits
Z

1

Wt Ht −

Wt (j)Ht (j)dj
χ

subject to (A-5), taking wages Wt (j) as given. The first order condition determines the demand
for the j th labor input (A-7), where Wt (j) is the wage specific to type j and Wt is the aggregate
wage index that comes out of the zero profit condition for labor agencies (A-8).
Labor unions representing suppliers of type-j labor set wages on a staggered basis, taking
as given the demand for their specific labor input. In each period, with probability 1 − ζw ,
a union is able to reset the wage Wt (j), while with the complementary probability the wage
remains fixed. Household are committed to supply whatever labor is demanded at that wage.
In the event of a wage change at time t, unions choose the wage W̃t (j) to maximize
Et

∞
X
s=t

(βζw )

s−t



Cs1−σ
ω
−
1−σ 1+ν

Z

1
1+ν

Hs (j)


dj

χ

subject to (15) and (A-7) with Wt+s (j) = W̃t (j), ∀s ≥ 0.
The first order condition for this problem is
"
#
∞
ν
X
W̃
(j)
ωH
(j)
t
s
Et
(βζw )s−t Cs−σ
− (1 + λw )
Hs (j) = 0.
−σ
P
C
s
s
s=t
All unions face an identical problem. We focus on a symmetric equilibrium in which all unions
choose the same wage W̃t (j) = W̃t . Let wt ≡ Wt /Pt denote the real wage. The first order
condition for optimal wage setting becomes


ν 
− 1+λw


λw

w̃
t


w
ω πt,s ws
Hs 
∞
  w̃ − 1+λ
 w̃
X
λw
t
t
s−t −σ
− (1 + λw )
Hs = 0,
Et
(βζw ) Cs
 πt,s

πt,s ws
Cs−σ


s=t




(A-23)
where πt,s = Ps /Pt .

A-10

Online appendix for The Great Escape

By the law of large numbers, the probability of changing the wage corresponds to the
fraction of types who actually do change their wage. Consequently, from expression (A-8), the
real wage evolves according to
− 1
wt λw

= (1 −

− 1
ζw )w̃t λw


+ ζw

wt−1
πt

−

1
λw

.

Defining the wage inflation as πtw = Wt /Wt−1 and using (A-24), (A-23) becomes

−λw +(1+λw )ν
1
λf
w
Xw
 1 − ζw π t

= 1t
w,
1 − ζw
X2t

(A-24)

(A-25)

w and X w are the expected present value of marginal disutility of work and real
where X1t
2t

marginal wage revenue as
w
X1t

=

w
X2t
=

B.5.3



(1+λw)(1+ν)
ω
w
w
1+ν
λ
w
X1t+1
Ht
+ βζw Et πt+1
(1 − κ)ν


1
1
w
w λw
X2t+1
.
Ct −σ wt Ht + βζw Et πt+1
1 + λw

(A-26)
(A-27)

Final and Intermediate Goods Producers

Competitive final goods producers choose Yt (i) to maximize profits
Z 1
Pt Yt −
Pt (i)Yt (i)di,
0

where Pt (i) is the price of the

ith

variety, subject to (A-1). The solution to the profit max-

imization problem yields the demand for the generic ith intermediate good (A-2). The zero
profit condition for competitive final goods producers implies that the aggregate price level is
(A-3).
Monopolistically competitive intermediate goods producers hire labor from households and
rent capital from entrepreneurs to produce intermediate goods according to the production
technology (A-4) and subject to the demand condition (A-2). We solve the problem for intermediate goods producers in two steps. First, we solve for the optimal amount of inputs (capital
and labor) demanded. For this purpose, intermediate goods producers minimize costs
rtk Kit + wt Hit
subject to (A-4). Let mcit be the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint, the real marginal cost.
The first order condition implies that the capital-labor ratio at the firm level is independent
of firm-specific variables as
Kt
γ wt
Kit
=
=
.
Hit
Ht
1 − γ rtk

(A-28)

A-11

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Then the marginal cost is independent of firm-specific variables as
 γ 
1−γ
1 rtk
wt
mcit = mct =
.
At γ
1−γ

(A-29)

The second step consists of characterizing the optimal price setting decision in the event
that firm i can adjust its price. Recall that this adjustment occurs in each period with probability 1 − ζp , independent of previous history. If a firm can reset its price, it chooses P̃t (i) to
maximize
Et

∞
X

"
s−t

(βζp )

Cs−σ

s=t

#
P̃t (i)
− mcs Ys (i),
Ps

subject to (A-2). The first order condition for this problem is
"
#
∞
X
P̃
(i)
t
Et
(βζp )s−t Cs−σ
− (1 + λf )mcs Ys (i) = 0.
Ps
s=t
All intermediate goods producers face an identical problems. As for the wage setting decision,
we focus on a symmetric equilibrium in which all firms choose the same price P̃t (i) = P̃t . Let
p̃t ≡ P̃t /Pt denote the optimal relative price. The first order condition for optimal price setting
becomes
Et

∞
X

(βζp )

s−t

Cs−σ



s=t

p̃t
− (1 + λf )mcs
πt,s



pet
πt,s

− 1+λf
λf

Ys = 0.

(A-30)

By the law of large numbers, the probability of changing the price coincides with the
fraction of firms who actually do change the price in equilibrium. Therefore, from expression
(A-3), inflation depends on the optimal reset price according to
− λ1

1 = (1 − ζp )p̃t

f


+ ζp

1
πt

−

1
λf

(A-31)

Using (A-31), the price setting rule (A-30) becomes


 1 − ζp π t
1 − ζp

1
λf

−λf


=

p
X1t
p ,
X2t

(A-32)

p
p
where X1t
and X2t
are expected present value of real marginal cost and real marginal revenue

as
p
X1t
p
X2t

= Ct −σ Yt mct + βζp Et
=

πt+1

1+λf
λf

!
p
X1t+1



1
1
p
−σ
λf
Ct Yt + βζp Et πt+1 X2t+1
1 + λf

(A-33)
(A-34)

A-12

Online appendix for The Great Escape

The evolution of real wage is given by
πw
wt
= t .
wt−1
πt

(A-35)

The fact that the capital-output ratio is independent of firm-specific factors implies that
we can obtain an aggregate production function
At Ktγ Ht1−γ
where Kt ≡

R1
0

1

Z
−Γ=

Yt (i)di =
0

Kit di and Ht ≡

R1
0

∆t =

∞
X

ζp (1 − ζp )

t−s



s=0

pet−s
πt−s,t

− 1+λf
λf

Yt ,

Hit di. Defining the effect of price dispersion as

∞
X

ζp (1 − ζp )

s=0

t−s



pet−s
πt−s,t

− 1+λf
λf

,

the aggregate production function becomes
At Kt γ Ht 1−γ − Γ = ∆t Yt .

(A-36)

Using (A-31), we can define ∆t recursively as

∆t = ζp ∆t−1 πt

B.5.4

1+λf
λf


+ (1 − ζp ) 

1 − ζp πt
1 − ζp

1
λf

1+λf
.



(A-37)

Capital Producers

Capital producers transform consumption into investment goods and operate in a competitive
national market. Their problem consists of choosing the amount of investment goods produced
It to maximize (A-9) taking the price of investment goods pIt as given. The first order condition
for this problem is
pIt = 1 + S
B.5.5

 
 
It It
It
+ S0
.
I
I I

(A-38)

Dividend of Equity

The dividend per unit of equity is the sum of rental rate of capital and the profits of intermediate
goods producers and capital goods producers per unit of capital as

Yt − wt Ht − rtk Kt + pIt It − It 1 + S
k
k
Rt = rt +
Kt

It
I


(A-39)

A-13

Online appendix for The Great Escape

B.5.6

Government budget

Using the expression of real value of liquidity, government budget constraint and tax rule
(22,23) can be written as
Rt−1 Lt
= τt + [Rtk + (1 − δ)qt ]Ntg + Lt+1 .
πt


Rt−1 Lt RL
g
−
τt − τ = ψτ
− qt N t
πt
π

g
qt Nt+1
+

B.6

(A-40)
(A-41)

Market-Clearing and Equilibrium

The market-clearing conditions for composite labor and capital use are
Z 1
Ht =
Hit di
0

and
Z

1

Kt =

Kit di.
0

The aggregate capital stock evolves according to
Kt+1 = (1 − δ) Kt + It ,

(A-42)

and capital stock is owned by either households or government as
g
.
Kt+1 = Nt+1 + Nt+1

Finally, the aggregate resource constraint requires that

 
It
Yt = Ct + 1 + S
It .
I

(A-43)

(A-44)

The total factor productivity and resaleability (At , φt ) follow an exogenous Markov process.
In addition to these, we have five endogenous state variables of (Kt , Ntg , Rt−1 Lt , wt−1 , ∆t−1 )
- aggregate capital stock, government ownership of capital, a real liquidity measure, the real
wage rate and the effect of price dispersion from the previous period. The recursive competitive
g
equilibrium is given by nine quantities (Ct , It , Ht , Yt , τt , Kt+1 , Nt+1 , Nt+1
, Lt+1 ), and fifteen
p
p
w , X w , ∆ ) as a function of the
prices (Rt , qt , pIt , wt , rtk , Rtk , mct , Λt , πt , πtw , X1t
, X2t
, X1t
t
2t

state variables (Kt , Ntg , Rt−1 Lt , wt−1 , ∆t−1 , At , φt ) which satisfies the twenty four equilibrium
conditions (20, 21, A-42, A-43, A-44, A-17, A-19, A-20, A-22) (A-25 - A-29), (A-32 - A-41).
Once all the market clearing condition and the government budget constraints are satisfied,
the household budget constraint (15) is satisfied by Walras’ Law.

A-14

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Additionally, we define:
"
#
k
Rt+1
+ (1 − δ)qt+1
q
: Expected rete of return on equity.
Rt = Et
qt
B.6.1

(A-45)

Steady state

We consider a steady state economy in which there is no change in the total factor productivity,
resaleability, the nominal price level, and the endogenous quantities and prices. Condition (A28) at steady state implies
γ w
K
=
.
H
1 − γ rk

(A-46)

In steady state all firms charge the same price, hence p̃ = 1 and the real marginal cost is equal
to the inverse of the markup
1
mc =
A



rk
γ

γ 

w
1−γ

1−γ
=

1
.
1 + λp

(A-47)

We also choose the fixed cost of production so that the profit equals zero in the steady state
as
Y = mc · (Y + Γ)

(A-48)

Incorporating these three equations into the steady state version of the production function
(A-36) yields a relation between the capital-output ratio and the rental rate of capital
Y
rk
= .
K
γ

(A-49)

Because the ratio between capital and hours is a function of the capital-output ratio (from the
production function), equation (A-47) also yields an expression for the real wage as a function
of the rental rate

w = (1 − γ)

A
1 + λf



1
1−γ

γ
rk

γ
1−γ

.

(A-50)

In steady state, the real wage is equal to a markup over the marginal rate of substitution
between labor and consumption
w = (1 + λw )

ωH ν
.
C −σ

(A-51)

From the steady state version of (16), we can solve for the steady state real interest rate
(r ≡ R/π = R) as a function of q
β

−1



q−1
=r 1+κ
1 − θq


(A-52)

A-15

Online appendix for The Great Escape

where we used the fact that in steady state pI = 1 because (S(1) = S 0 (1) = 0 (from A-38). This
condition implies that the liquid asset has a return that is less that β −1 as long as 1 < q < 1/θ.
Steady state tax obtain from (A-40)
τ = (r − 1)L.

(A-53)

In steady state, zero profit condition implies
Rk = r k .
Then condition (A-22) implies
I=κ

[Rk + (1 − δ)φq]K + rL − τ
[rk + (1 − δ)φq]K + L
=κ
,
1 − θq
1 − θq

(A-54)

where we used (A-53) to eliminate transfers and the fact that in steady state K = N since
by assumption N g = 0. Steady state investment is simply equal to depreciated steady state
capital
I
= δ.
K

(A-55)


L
.
δ(1 − θq) = κ r + (1 − δ)φq +
K

(A-56)

Combining (A-54) with (A-55), we obtain


k

Using the steady state capital output ratio (A-49), we obtain a relationship between rk and q


1L
δ − [δθ + κ(1 − δ)φ]q = κ 1 +
rk ,
(A-57)
γY
where L/Y is ratio of liquid assets to GDP that we take as exogenous in our calibration.
Another relationship between rk and q obtains from the steady state version of (17)


rk + (1 − δ)q
q−1
κ(1 − δ)(1 − φ)(q − 1)
β −1 =
1+κ
−
(A-58)
q
1 − θq
1 − θq
where (rk + λq)/q is the steady state return on equity. As long as φ < 1, the return on equity
is larger than the steady state return on the liquid assets by
κ(1 − δ)(1 − φ)(q − 1)

.
q−1
(1 − θq) 1 + κ 1−θq
We can insert the solution for rk from (A-57) into (A-58) and solve for q. Once we have q and
rk , r can be obtained from (A-52), w from (A-50), K/Y from (A-49), K/H from (A-46), I/K
from (A-55) and C/Y from the resource constraint. Finally economy size Y is determined to
satisfy (A-51). The size of fixed cost Γ is chosen so that zero profit condition is satisfied with
exactly the unit mass of intermediate goods producers in (A-48).

A-16

Online appendix for The Great Escape

B.7

Zero-Coupon Bonds Returns

While the paper only considers one-period perfectly liquid securities and illiquid stocks, our
empirical analysis in Section 3.2 describing the calibration of the liquidity shock considers the
spread between illiquid and liquid long term securities, most of which are zero-coupon bonds.
Therefore in this section we derive the spreads for zero-coupon bonds with varying degree of
liquidity φj . As mentioned in the paper, we assume that the net supply of these bonds is zero
so that the equilibrium condition does not change from our model.
We will show that, for short term bonds the convenience yield in our model CYt approximately equals the spread between perfectly illiquid and perfectly liquid assets CY t . For long
term bonds this is not the case: intuitively, the spread in this case is proportional to the
average of expected future convenience yields, as shown in expression (A-70) below. The last
part of the section also shows that under the assumption that the φjt have a common and an
idiosyncratic component, the yield spreads have a factor structure where the common factor
is proportional to the convenience yield.
(T,j)

Let Pt

be the price of a long-term zero coupon bond j with maturity T which pays $1

at date t+T for sure. Euler equation is given by


mt+1
j
(T − 1, j)
(T, j)
,
(1 + φt+1 Λt+1 )Pt+1
Pt
= Et
πt+1

(A-59)

(T − 1, j)
is the price of this bond at t+1 (as it becomes bond with maturity T-1), and
where Pt+1

mt+1 = β (ct+1 /ct )−σ is marginal rate of substitution.
Iterating this equation forward we obtain:
"T
#
Y
m
t+s
Pt(T, j) = Et
(1 + φjt+s Λt+s ) .
πt+s

(A-60)

s=1

j)
j) T
The nominal gross yield to maturity nytm(T,
and the price are related as (nytm(T,
) =
t
t

1/Pt(T, j) . We can then rewrite the Euler condition for the long term bonds as
"
j)
1 = nytm(T,
t

Et

T
Y
mt+s
(1 + φjt+s Λt+s )
πt+s

#!1/T
.

(A-61)

s=1

Let j = l denote the bond that is always perfectly liquid, i.e., φlt = 1 for all t, and let j = 0
denote the bond that is always totally illiquid, i.e., φ0t = 0 for all t. Then we have
"
(T, l)

1 = nytmt

Et

#!1/T
T
Y
mt+s
(1 + Λt+s )
and
πt+s

s=1

(A-62)

A-17

Online appendix for The Great Escape

"
(T, 0)

1 = nytmt

Et

T
Y
mt+s
πt+s

#!1/T
.

(A-63)

s=1

Here we assume entrepreneurs cannot use the return on the totally illiquid bond for funding
investment even at the maturity date.
At steady state these conditions imply:
β
β
1 = nytm(T, j) (1 + φj CY ) = nytm(T, l) (1 + CY )
π
π
or
ytm(T, j) − ytm(T, l) =

nytm(T, j) nytm(T, j)
1 − φj
CY
−
= β −1
,
π
π
1 + CY 1 + φj CY

(A-64)

where φj is liquidity of the private bonds in the steady state. From the spread before the crisis
(which we consider the deterministic steady state), we can estimate φj as
1 − φj =

1 + CY β(ytm(T, j) − ytm(T, l) )(1 + CY )
.
CY 1 + β(ytm (T, j) − ytm(T, l) )(1 + CY )

(A-65)

This is the equation (25) in the text. We also use (A-62, A-63) to get
CY ≡ ytm(T, 0) − ytm(T, l) = β −1

CY
' CY.
1 + CY

(A-66)

In the steady state, the convenience yield approximately equals the yield spread between totally
illiquid and perfectly liquid bonds.
In practice our data on yields are percent annualized net nominal returns Y T M (T, j) and
Y T M (T, l) . We compute the spread in real terms (ytm(T, j) − ytm(T, l) ) as exp{(Y T M

(T, j)

−

π̄)/400} − exp{(Y T M (T, l) − π̄)/400} where π̄ is net inflation, percent annualized. We compute the steady state convenience yield as the difference between annualized gross returns of
perfectly illiquid and perfectly liquid bonds, in percent. Of course CY and CY are not the
same, but in practice they are very close. When computing φj in Table A-2 we use expression
(A-65).
Outside the steady state, for discount bond of one-period maturity, we can use (A-62, A-63)
to obtain by ignoring the covariance terms as
(1, 0)

1 = nytmt


Et

mt+1
πt+1



0)
' nytm(1,
Et (mt+1 ) Et
t

1



πt+1


mt+1
1 = nytmt Et
(1 + Λt+1 )
πt+1


1
(1, l)
' nytmt Et (mt+1 ) Et
(1 + CYt )
πt+1
(1, l)





A-18

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Thus we learn


0)
CY t = nytm(1,
− nytm(1, l) Et
t





1

'

πt+1

1
CYt
' CYt .
Et (mt+1 ) 1 + CYt

(A-67)

Thus, even outside the steady state, the convenience yield of our model CYt defined in (A-18)
approximately equals the yield spread between perfectly illiquid and perfectly liquid one-period
bonds, both of which do not have default risk.
When we use the zero coupon bond with longer maturity, such simple relationship no
longer holds. Applying the log-linearization of approximation to (A-61) and (A-62) by denoting
x
bt ≡ ln xt − ln x ' (xt − x)/x as approximately proportional deviation of xt from the steady
state, we get:
(T, j)

[t
0 = nytm

+ Et [

T
T
1X
1X
m̂t+s ] − Et [
π̂t+s ]
T
T
s=1

+

1 + φj CY
(T, j)

[t
= nytm

s=1

)
T
T
1X j
1 Xb
Et [
φ̂t+s ] + Et [
Λt+s ]
T
T

(

φj CY

+ Et [

h

s=1
T
X

1
T

+ 1 − βytm(T,j)

m̂t+s ] − Et [

s=1

i

s=1
T
X

1
T

π̂t+s ]

s=1

)
T
T
T
1X
1 X ej
1 Xb
Et [
φ̂t+s ] + Et [
φt+s ] + Et [
Λt+s ] ,
T
T
T

(

s=1

s=1

s=1

where we define φejt+s = φ̂jt+s − φ̂t+s as the idiosyncratic shock to the resaleability of bond j
and use (A-64) for the last step. Similarly we get
(T, l)

[t
0 = nytm

+ Et [

T
T
T
1X
1X
1X
m̂t+s ] − Et [
π̂t+s ] + [1 − βytm(T, l) ]Et [
Λt+s ].
T
T
T
s=1

s=1

s=1

Taking the difference between the two, we obtain
(T, j)

[t
nytm

(T, l)

[t
− nytm

T −1
h
i
1 Xd
=β ytm(T,j) − ytm(T,l) Et [
CY t+s ]
T
s=0

T
T
1 Xe
1X
(T,j)
(T,j)
− [1 − βytm
]Et [
φ̂t+s ] − [1 − βytm
]Et [
φt+s ],
T
T
s=1



s=1



d t = Et Λ
b t+1 .
using CY
d t is approximately proportional to φ̂t as argued in footnote (31) and
If we assume that CY
d t follow an AR(1) process with autoregressive coefficient ρφ we
we assume both φ̂t and CY

A-19

Online appendix for The Great Escape

obtain
(
(T, j)

[t
nytm

(T, l)

[t
− nytm

h
i
β ytm(T,j) − ytm(T,l) − [1 − βytm(T,j) ]ρφ

=

−[1 − βytm

(T,j)

φ̂t
dt
CY

!)

T
1 Xe
]Et [
φt+s ].
T

1 − ρTφ
(1 − ρφ )T

dt
CY

(A-68)

s=1

This equation shows the real yield spreads between many pairs of zero coupon bonds with the
same payoff and different liquidity tend to comove with the convenience yield except for the
term reflecting the idiosyncratic shocks to the resaleability of each bond. Using βytm(T,j) =
1
1+φj CY

and βytm(T,l) =

1
1+CY

and ignoring the terms which are higher order than that is

proportional to the convenience yield, obtain
j)
l)
nytm(T,
− nytm(T,
− [nytm(T, j) − nytm(T, l) ]
t
t


φ̂t
1 − φj − φj (1 + CY )ρφ d
1 − ρTφ
CY t
[CYt − CY ]
'
1 + φj CY
(1 − ρφ )T

−

T
1 Xe
φj CY (1 + CY )
E
[
φt+s ]. (A-69)
t
1 + φj CY
T
s=1

(Here we also approximate π/[β(1 + CY )2 ] ' 1 by assuming the length of period is short and
that inflation rate is not too high). This is the base of our dynamic factor formula used in
d t ) is negative in our model when shocks to resaleability
Section 3.2. Note that term (φ̂t /CY
are important.
For the special case of totally illiquid bond, we have
(T, 0)

nytmt

(T, l)

− nytmt

(T, 0)

− [nytm

− nytm

(T, l)

]'

1 − ρTφ
(1 − ρφ )T

Thus to the extent the shock is not permanent so that

1−ρT
φ
(1−ρφ )T

[CYt − CY ] .

(A-70)

< 1, the change of the yield

spread between totally illiquid and perfectly liquid long-term bonds in the left hand side
underestimates the change of the convenience yield CYt −CY of our model. Our approximations
ignore potentially very important covariance terms, associated with risks. Examining asset
price implications of liquidity constraints and liquidity shocks which takes into account risks
is a topic of future research.

Online appendix for The Great Escape

C

A-20

Impulse Responses to Other Shocks

In this section, we document the response of macroeconomic variables to standard shocks
studied in the literature: productivity, monetary policy, and government spending. All three
shocks follow a stationary autoregressive process
At = (1 − ρA )A + ρA At−1 + εAt
ιt = ρι ιt−1 + ειt
Gt = (1 − ρG )G + ρG Gt−1 + εGt
The introduction of productivity and monetary policy shocks in the model is straightforward. The former affects the production function (A-4) while the latter enters the monetary
policy rule (20). Both shocks, however, do not change the steady state. Conversely, the government spending shock requires some amendments to the steady state. The resource constraint
now becomes


 
It
+ Gt ,
Yt = Ct + 1 + S
I

where Gt is the level of government spending. The government budget constraint becomes
g
+
qt Nt+1

Rt−1 Lt
= τt − Gt + [RtK + (1 − δ)qt ]Ntg + Lt+1 .
Πt

We calibrate the ratio of government spending to GDP to 21%, which corresponds to the postwar US data. In the KM model, the way government spending is financed is not neutral. If
an increase in government spending is financed primarily via debt issuance, liquidity increases.
To keep our results comparable with the literature, we study the response to a government
spending shock assuming the fiscal authority keeps the real value of liquid assets constant
(Bt /Pt = b).50
For the productivity and government spending shock, we calibrate the size of the shocks
(0.45 and 0.52%) and the persistence parameters (ρA = 0.95 and ρG = 0.97) to the posterior
mode in Smets and Wouters (2007). The size of the monetary policy shock is 25 basis points
annualized, and we assume a high persistence parameter (ρι = 0.8) to compensate for the
absence of interest rate smoothing in the monetary policy rule.51

A-21

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-1: Response of macroeconomic variables to a productivity shock.
Inflation

Nominal Interest Rate

0

0

0.4

-0.1

-0.1

0.35

-0.2

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

-0.3
-0.4
-0.5

0.1

-0.6

0.05

-0.7

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

-0.8

16

annualized p.p. (" from s.s.)

0.45

annualized p.p.

% " from s.s.

Output

2

4

Consumption

6

8

10

12

14

16

-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
-0.7
-0.8
-0.9

2

4

6

Investment

10

12

14

16

10

12

14

16

TFP

0.6

0.45

8

0.45

0.4

0.4
0.5

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

% " from s.s.

0.35

% " from s.s.

% " from s.s.

0.35
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.1

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

0.1
0.05
0

0.05
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

0

2

4

6

8

Notes: Impulse response function to an increase in productivity.

C.1

Productivity Shocks

In response to a persistent increase in productivity (see Figure A-1), all quantities (output,
consumption and investment) increase as in a standard New Keynesian model. The higher
level of productivity, however, reduces the firms’ marginal cost, thus inducing disinflationary
pressures. As a reaction, the central bank cuts the nominal interest rate.

C.2

Monetary Policy Shocks

In response to a persistent increase in nominal interest rates (see Figure A-2), aggregate demand falls, and so does inflation. The systematic component of the monetary policy rule
accommodates the downturn, so in equilibrium the nominal interest rate actually increases
less than the original shock.
50

In a model similar to ours, Kara and Sin (Forthcoming) analyze how the government spending multiplier

changes depending on the government financing decisions.
51
This value is consistent with the posterior mode for the interest rate smoothing parameter in Smets and
Wouters (2007).

A-22

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-2: Response of macroeconomic variables to a monetary policy shock.
Output

Inflation

Nominal Interest Rate
0.06

annualized p.p. (" from s.s.)

0

0
-0.02

-0.02

annualized p.p.

% " from s.s.

-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.1

-0.04
-0.06
-0.08

-0.12
-0.1

-0.14
-0.16

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

-0.12

2

4

Consumption

6

8

10

12

14

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0

16

Investment

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Monetary Policy Shock
25

0

-0.02

20

-0.06
-0.08
-0.1

annualized bps

% " from s.s.

% " from s.s.

-0.04
-0.05

-0.1

15
10
5

-0.12
0

-0.14
-0.16

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

-0.15

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

-5

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Notes: Impulse response function to an increase in the nominal interest rate.

C.3

Government Spending Shocks

The increase in government spending (see Figure A-3) raises output but crowds out private
demand, so consumption and investment fall. The demand shock leads the central bank to
increase the interest rate. In equilibrium, inflation falls, but the effect is small and the result
depends on the high degree of persistence of the shock. With lower persistence, inflation would
rise, at least on impact.

A-23

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-3: Response of macroeconomic variables to a government spending shock.
Inflation
0
-0.002

0.03

-0.004

0.025
0.02
0.015

-0.008
-0.01
-0.012

0.01

-0.014
-0.016

0

-0.018

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

0.025

-0.006

0.005
2

Nominal Interest Rate
annualized p.p. (" from s.s.)

0.04
0.035

annualized p.p.

% " from s.s.

Output

2

4

Consumption

6

8

10

12

14

16

Investment

0

0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
-0.005

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Government Spending Shock
0.6

0
-0.005

0.5

-0.01

-0.04
-0.06
-0.08

-0.015

% " from s.s.

% " from s.s.

% " from s.s.

-0.02

-0.02
-0.025
-0.03
-0.035
-0.04

-0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

-0.045
-0.12

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

-0.05

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Notes: Impulse response function to an increase in government spending.

16

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Online appendix for The Great Escape

D

A-24

Robustness

In this section, we discuss the robustness of our quantitative results to changes of a selected
number of key parameters: (i) the degree of price and wage rigidities ζp and ζw ; (ii) the
coefficient of relative risk aversion σ; and (iii) the adjustment cost parameter S 00 (1). We keep
the shock fixed to the baseline case but adjust the feedback coefficient in the policy rule for
private asset purchases ψk so that the intervention remains 10% of GDP. Table A-1 summarizes
the results.
The first column reports the impact response to the liquidity shock of output and its components, the inflation rate, the nominal value of the capital stock (all in percentage deviations
from steady state), and the convenience yield (in annualized basis points) in the baseline case.
In the next five columns, we vary one parameter at a time and report the same statistics.
Column (2) shows the implications of having a higher degree of price and wage rigidity
relative to the baseline calibration, equal to 0.85, implying that firms (unions) reset prices
(wages) every six and a half quarters. A lower frequency of price changes induces a smaller
drop in inflation relative to the baseline. Consequently, the real interest rate rises less, and
the fall in output is less pronounced. Because the financial frictions affect investment largely
independently of nominal rigidities, the effect on investment is still large, while the effect on
consumption is proportionally smaller. Overall, the composition of output is still comparable
to the data, with a much larger fall in investment than in consumption. The fall in the
price of capital is smaller on account of the lower deflation. Column (3) considers the opposite
experiment, that is, a lower degree of price and wage rigidity relative to the baseline calibration,
equal to 0.66, implying that firms (unions) reset prices (wages) every three quarters. Not
surprisingly, the direction of the change relative the baseline is the opposite of what just
discussed for the case of higher price and wage rigidities. In this case, the fall in investment
and consumption (and hence output) is closer to the data, but the model overestimates the
effect on inflation, which now drops by almost five percent. More flexible prices make the
intervention more powerful when the ZLB is binding, because the real interest rate increases
by more when prices are more flexible.
Column (4) of Table A-1 reports the results of increasing the coefficient of relative risk
aversion to 2. The fall in output is a bit smaller than in the baseline calibration. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution (the inverse of the coefficient of relative risk aversion) is
now smaller, so consumption is less sensitive to the increase in the real rate that results from
the combination of the zero lower bound and the deflationary pressures. Conversely, the fall
in investment is roughly unchanged. Overall, this case is not very different from the baseline.

A-25

Online appendix for The Great Escape

The last two columns of Table A-1 show the results of decreasing (column 5) and increasing
(column 6) adjustment costs. Here, the differences with the baseline calibration depend primarily on the relative response of investment and the value of equity. With lower adjustment
costs, investment falls more, dragging down output, but the smaller decline in the value of equity falls partially tempers this effect. In this case, however, the increase in convenience yield is
less than observed in the data. The opposite occurs with larger adjustment cost, as investment
falls less than in the baseline, while the value of equity drops more and the convenience yield
rises more significantly.
The last two rows report the response of output and inflation in the absence of intervention
for the same parameters. The overall message is that the effect of the liquidity injection is
roughly stable across parameterizations.
Table A-1: Robustness
Baseline
(1)
Nominal Rigidities (ζp , ζw )
Risk Aversion (σ)
Adjustment Costs (S 00 (1))

Alternative Parameterizations
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.75

0.85

0.66

1

2

0.75

0.5

1

Period 1 response with intervention
Output

-4.41

-3.89

-5.28

-4.22

-5.14

-3.99

Consumption

-1.32

-0.86

-2.09

-0.99

-0.76

-1.71

Investment

-14.17

-13.37 -15.45 -14.41 -19.16 -11.18

Inflation

-2.51

-0.79

-4.90

-2.66

-2.48

-2.52

Value of Capital

-1.80

-0.85

-3.21

-1.99

-0.75

-2.51

180

181

176

179

166

190

Convenience Yield

Period 1 response without intervention
Output

-5.78

-4.62

-7.46

-5.23

-6.36 - 5.40

Inflation

-3.50

-0.99

-7.49

-3.57

-3.38

-3.54

Note: The first three rows of the table show the alternative parameters that we consider. The next six rows report the firstperiod response of output, consumption, investment, inflation, the nominal value of capital, and the convenience yield
for the baseline calibration with intervention and for alternative parameterizations of nominal rigidities, risk aversion,
and adjustment costs. The last two rows report the first-period response of output and inflation without intervention for
the same parameters.

A-26

Online appendix for The Great Escape

E

Additional Tables and Figures
Table A-2: Average Returns and Implied φj

2004/ 7/21–2007/ 6/29

2008/10/ 1–2008/12/31

CY: 0.46

CY: 3.42
φ

spread

φ

spread

1Y Refcorp

1.150

-0.07

20Y TIPS

0.806

0.65

6M Refcorp

1.067

-0.03

On-Off

0.795

0.69

2Y Refcorp

0.990

0.00

20Y Refcorp

0.747

0.85

AA CDS-Bond Basis

0.985

0.01

2Y Refcorp

0.720

0.94

A CDS-Bond Basis

0.945

0.02

5Y Refcorp

0.702

1.01

3Y Refcorp

0.920

0.04

7Y Refcorp

0.701

1.01

On-Off

0.889

0.05

10Y Refcorp

0.692

1.04

5Y Refcorp

0.854

0.07

1Y Refcorp

0.690

1.05

BBB CDS-Bond Basis 0.851

0.07

10Y TIPS

0.682

1.07

4Y Refcorp

0.822

0.08

3Y Refcorp

0.679

1.08

7Y Refcorp

0.779

0.10

4Y Refcorp

0.665

1.13

10Y Refcorp

0.671

0.15

5Y TIPS

0.654

1.17

20Y Refcorp

0.659

0.15

6M Refcorp

0.612

1.31

5Y TIPS

0.371

0.28

7Y TIPS

0.586

1.40

7Y TIPS

0.311

0.31

AA CDS-Bond Basis

0.548

1.53

20Y TIPS

0.298

0.31

AAA

0.448

1.86

10Y TIPS

0.219

0.35

A CDS-Bond Basis

0.282

2.43

AAA

-0.294

0.58

BBB CDS-Bond Basis 0.000

3.39

Notes: The two panels show the average spread for the securities listed above (see Appendix A.2 for a description) for the
2004/ 7/21–2007/ 6/29 (left) and 2008/10/ 1–2008/12/31 (right) periods, as well as the implied φj computed according
to formula (25).

A-27

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-4: The Liquidity Share in the Data
24

22

percentage points

20

18

16

14

12

10

8
1952

1960

1968

1976

1984

1992

2000

2008

Notes: The figure plots the evolution of the liquidity share, defined as the ratio of government liabilities (liquid assets)
to total assets in the U.S. economy, over the sample period 1953Q1:2008Q3.

Figure A-5: Steady State as a Function of φ
Price of Equity (q)

Liquidity Share
12.65
12.6

1.1

percentage points

units of consumption

1.12

1.08
1.06
1.04
1.02
1
0.1

12.55
12.5
12.45
12.4
12.35
12.3

0.15

0.2

0.25

?

0.3

0.35

12.25
0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

?

0.3

0.35

Notes: The figure plots the steady-state price of equity (left panel) and liquidity share (right panel) as a function of the
steady-state value of the resaleability parameter φ.

A-28

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-6: Liquidity Spreads and Common Factor
6M Refcorp
1Y Refcorp
2Y Refcorp
6M Refcorp

1Y Refcorp

2

2Y Refcorp

2

1.6

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component
1.4

1.5

1.5

1.2

1

1

0.8

0.5

0.5

0

0

1

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

3Y Refcorp

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.4
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

4Y Refcorp

3Y Refcorp

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

5Y Refcorp

4Y Refcorp

2

2008/ 7/18

5Y Refcorp

2

1.6

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component
1.4

1.5

1.5

1

1

1.2

1

0.8

0.6
0.5

0.5
0.4

0

0.2

0

0

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

7Y Refcorp

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

10Y Refcorp

7Y Refcorp

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

20Y Refcorp

10Y Refcorp

1.4

2008/ 7/18

20Y Refcorp

1.6

1.4

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

1.4

1.2

1.2
1.2

1
1
1
0.8
0.8

0.8
0.6
0.6

0.6

0.4
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.2

0

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

0

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

0
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

Notes: The figure shows the daily time series (black) of each spread as well as its projection on the first principal
component and a constant (blue).

A-29

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-7: Liquidity Spreads and Common Factor – Continued
AAA
5Y TIPS
7Y TIPS
AAA

5Y TIPS

2.4

7Y TIPS

2.5

2.5

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

2.2
2
2

2

1.8
1.5
1.6

1.5

1.4

1

1.2

1
0.5

1

0.8

0.5
0

0.6

0.4
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

10Y TIPS

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

0
2004/ 9/17

20Y TIPS

10Y TIPS

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

AA CDS−Bond Basis

1.4

2.5

spread
liquidity component
1.4

2008/ 7/18

AA CDS-Bond Basis

20Y TIPS

1.6

2006/ 8/18

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

1.2

2

1

1.5

0.8

1

0.6

0.5

0.4

0

0.2

−0.5

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

0
2004/ 9/17

A CDS-Bond Basis

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−1
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

BBB CDS-Bond Basis

A CDS−Bond Basis

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

On-Off

BBB CDS−Bond Basis

3

2008/ 7/18

On−Off

4.5

1

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

4

2.5

0.8
3.5
2
3
0.6
1.5

2.5

1

2

0.4

1.5

0.5

0.2
1
0
0.5
0
−0.5

−1
2004/ 9/17

0

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

Notes: The figure shows the daily time series (black) of each spread as well as its projection on the first principal
component and a constant (blue).

A-30

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-8: Liquidity Spreads and Common Factors – Two Factor Model
6M Refcorp
1Y Refcorp
2Y Refcorp
6M Refcorp

1Y Refcorp

2

2Y Refcorp

2

1.6

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component
1.4

1.5

1.5

1.2

1

1

0.8

0.5

0.5

0

0

1

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

3Y Refcorp

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.4
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

4Y Refcorp

3Y Refcorp

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

5Y Refcorp

4Y Refcorp

2

2008/ 7/18

5Y Refcorp

2

1.8

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component
1.6

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0

0

0.2

0

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

7Y Refcorp

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

10Y Refcorp

7Y Refcorp

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

20Y Refcorp

1.6

1.4

spread
liquidity component
1.4

2010/ 6/18

20Y Refcorp

10Y Refcorp

1.6

2008/ 7/18

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

1.4
1.2

1.2

1.2

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

0
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

Notes: The figure shows the daily time series (black) of each spread as well as its projection on the first principal
component and a constant (dark blue) and on the first two principal components and a constant (light blue).

A-31

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-9: Liquidity Spreads and Common Factors – Two Factor Model – Continued
AAA
5Y TIPS
7Y TIPS
AAA

5Y TIPS

2.4

7Y TIPS

2.5

2.5

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

2.2
2
2

2

1.8
1.5
1.6

1.5

1.4

1

1.2

1
0.5

1

0.8

0.5
0

0.6

0.4
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.5
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

10Y TIPS

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

0
2004/ 9/17

20Y TIPS

10Y TIPS

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

AA CDS−Bond Basis

1.4

2.5

spread
liquidity component
1.4

2008/ 7/18

AA CDS-Bond Basis

20Y TIPS

1.6

2006/ 8/18

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

1.2

2

1

1.5

0.8

1

0.6

0.5

0.4

0

0.2

−0.5

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

0
2004/ 9/17

A CDS-Bond Basis

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−1
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

BBB CDS-Bond Basis

A CDS−Bond Basis

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

On-Off

BBB CDS−Bond Basis

3.5

2008/ 7/18

On−Off

5

1.2

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

spread
liquidity component

3
1

4
2.5

0.8
2

3
0.6

1.5
2
1

0.4

0.5

1
0.2

0
0

0

−0.5

−1
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−1
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

−0.2
2004/ 9/17

2006/ 8/18

2008/ 7/18

2010/ 6/18

2012/ 5/18

2014/ 4/18

Notes: The figure shows the daily time series (black) of each spread as well as its projection on the first principal
component and a constant (dark blue) and on the first two principal components and a constant (light blue).

A-32

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-10: Response of q (the Relative Price of Capital in terms of Consumption) to the
Baseline Liquidity Shock
Baseline
units of consumption

1

No ZLB

Deviations from St.St.

0.6

0.5

No Nominal Rigidities

Deviations from St.St.

2

Deviations from St.St.

0.5
1.5

0

0.4

-0.5

0.3

-1

1

0.2

-1.5

0.5
0.1

-2
-2.5

0
0
5
10
15
5
10
15
5
10
15
Notes: The figure plots the response of the value of capital to the calibrated liquidity shock in the baseline scenario (left
panel), without zero lower bound (middle panel), and without nominal rigidities (right panel).

Figure A-11:

percentage points

25
20
15
10
5
0
08q3

09q3

10q3

11q3

12q3

Nominal Value of Liquidity (Model)

25

percentage points

Liquidity in the Model and Data
Nominal Value of Liquidity (Data)

20
15
10
5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Notes: The top panel plots the evolution of nominal liquidity in the data, as defined in computing the liquidity share.
The data are detrended and normalized to zero in 2008Q3. The bottom panel plots the response of nominal liquidity in
the model.

A-33

Online appendix for The Great Escape

Figure A-12: Response of the Convenience Yield with and without Intervention.
Convenience Yield

annualized " bps from s.s.

250

200

150

100

50

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Notes: The continuous blue line reports the response of the convenience yield to the liquidity shock with intervention.
The dashed red line reports the response of the convenience yield to the liquidity shock in the absence of intervention.

Figure A-13: Response of Output Under Baseline (10% of GDP), Full Stabilization (75% of
GDP), Flex Prices/Wages Replication (45% of GDP), and No ZLB Replication (30% of GDP)
Intervention.
Baseline
(10% of GDP)
Deviations from St.St.

1

-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

10

-2
-3
-4
-5

Intervention
No intervention

5

-1

-6

15

Flexible Prices/Wages
(45% of GDP)
Deviations from St.St.

0

-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

Intervention
No intervention

5

10

Intervention
No intervention

5

10

15

No ZLB
(30% of GDP)

percentage points

percentage points

0

Deviations from St.St.

0

-1

percentage points

percentage points

0

Full Stabilization
(75% of GDP)

15

Deviations from St.St.

-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

Intervention
No intervention

5

10

15

Notes: The figure plots the response of the output to the calibrated liquidity shock with (solid blue) and without (dashed
red) intervention in four cases. The top-left panel is the baseline scenario. In the top-right panel, we calibrate the initial
intervention to fully stabilize output from the second period of the crisis onward. In the bottom-left panel, we calibrate
the initial intervention to approximate the path of output without nominal rigidities under the baseline intervention from
the second period of the crisis onward. In the bottom-right panel, we calibrate the initial intervention to match the fall
in output in the first period in the absence of the ZLB.

Figure A-14: The Effect of the Liquidity Facilities on Output in the Baseline Case, Without
the ZLB, and Without Nominal Rigidities

percentage points

2

Baseline
No ZLB
Flex Prices/Wages

1.5
1
0.5
0
5

10

15

Notes: The figure shows the difference between counterfactual and actual response of output in the baseline scenario
(solid blue ), without the zero lower bound (dashed red), and without nominal rigidities (dashed-dotted black).

34

