                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CROSS-GENERATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN
                THE SECOND GREAT WAVE OF IMMIGRATION

                                        Umut Özek
                                       David N. Figlio

                                     Working Paper 22262
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22262


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2016




This research was supported by the National Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in
Education Research (CALDER) funded through Grant R305A060018 from the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, and American Institutes for Research. We are
grateful to Ran Abramitzky, Leah Boustan, Celeste Carruthers, Christina Felfe, Amy Schwartz,
Steve Trejo, and seminar and conference participants and discussants at CESifo, AEFP, and
APPAM for helpful comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank Florida Departments
of Education and Health for providing the data used in this analysis. All opinions expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Florida Departments of
Education and Health or our funders. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Umut Özek and David N. Figlio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Cross-Generational Differences in Educational Outcomes in the Second Great Wave of Immigration
Umut Özek and David N. Figlio
NBER Working Paper No. 22262
May 2016
JEL No. I20,I24,J15

                                           ABSTRACT

We make use of a new data source – matched birth records and longitudinal student records in
Florida – to study the degree to which student outcomes differ across successive immigrant
generations. Specifically, we investigate whether first, second, and third generation Asian and
Hispanic immigrants in Florida perform differently on reading and mathematics tests, and whether
they are differentially likely to get into serious trouble in school, to be truant from school, to
graduate from high school, or to be ready for college upon high school graduation. We find evidence
suggesting that early-arriving first generation immigrants perform better than do second generation
immigrants, and second generation immigrants perform better than third generation immigrants.
Among first generation immigrants, the earlier the arrival, the better the students tend to perform.
These patterns of findings hold for both Asian and Hispanic students, and suggest a general pattern
of successively reduced achievement – beyond a transitional period for recent immigrants – in the
generations following the generation that immigrated to the United States.


Umut Özek
American Institutes for Research/CALDER
1000 Thomas Jefferson St. NW
Washington, DC 20007
uozek@air.org

David N. Figlio
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu
 CROSS-GENERATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN THE
              SECOND GREAT WAVE OF IMMIGRATION

1. Introduction

       Over the last five decades, the United States has experienced the second largest wave of

immigration in its history. Triggered by the enactment of the Immigration and Nationality Act of

1965, this immigration flow gained further momentum in the 1990s and changed the

demographic composition nationwide. The last thirty years have averaged more than one million

documented immigrants per year, and unlike the earlier waves of immigration, the majority of

these immigrants have come from Latin America and Asia. Immigrants and children of

immigrants currently account for nearly a quarter of all school-aged children in the United

States, and are projected to account for one-third by 2050 (Passel, 2011). How this new wave of

immigrant youth fare in the U.S. public education system, therefore, has significant short-term

and long-term welfare implications.

       This paper presents the first use of matched administrative school and natality records to

offer the most comprehensive analysis to date of the educational experiences of immigrants in

the U.S. public school system. These remarkable data permit, for the first time, the study of

educational outcomes across first, second, and third generation immigrants in the United States,

and the exceptionally rich data we use from Florida administrative records provide the

opportunity to follow hundreds of thousands of immigrant children longitudinally through

school. In particular, we investigate the gaps in student achievement, misbehavior, truancy,

persistence in high school, and college readiness upon graduation across immigrant generations,

and explore how these gaps evolve across grades. We then examine the extent to which these

gaps are driven by observable education production function inputs that are typically out of the




                                                 3
control of school system such as socioeconomic differences, and potentially malleable factors

such as differences in school quality.

       There exists an extensive literature regarding the degree to which economic outcomes of

immigrants converge to those of natives across generations; see Abramitzky and Boustan

(forthcoming) for a review. Abramitzky, Boustan, and Erikkson (2014), studying the Age of

Mass Migration, while finding evidence of partial convergence across generations, emphasize

the importance of relative immigrant advantage or disadvantage over natives: The relative

outcomes of second generation immigrants are strongly related to the relative position of the first

generation from a sending country in comparison to natives. Borjas (1994, 1992) and Card,

DiNardo, and Estes (2000), using multiple rounds of the Census, demonstrate strong degrees of

intergenerational correlation in earnings.

       What about the current wave of immigrants? Earnings gaps between immigrants and

natives are greater now than they were in the Age of Mass Migration, and the ratio of

development between the United States and today’s major sending countries, such as China and

Mexico, is considerably greater than the development gap between the United States and

European sending countries in the Age of Mass Migration (Abramitzky and Boustan,

forthcoming). At the same time, and counter to the negative/neutral selection observed in the

Age of Mass Migration (Abramitzky and Boustan, forthcoming), there is evidence of positive

selection among recent migrants to the United States from many sending countries (see, e.g.,

Jasso, et al., 2004; Feliciano, 2005; Kennedy et al., 2006; Grogger and Hanson, 2011), and in the

case of Mexican immigrants, there is evidence of either negative selection (e.g, Ambrosini and

Peri, 2012; Kaestner and Malamud, 2014) or that migrants are drawn from the middle of the skill

distribution (e.g, Chiquiar and Hanson, 2005; Orrenius and Zavodny, 2005). There is clearly a




                                                 4
tremendous amount to learn about the current wave of immigrants from historical data, but it is

also valuable to supplement this knowledge with current measures of success.

        There has been a fair amount of research on the educational attainment of immigrants

compared to natives in the United States, but comparatively little is known about how well

immigrant students perform while in school. 1 This question is important for a number of reasons.

For one, performance in school serves as an early indicator of later human capital formation and

labor market outcomes, and studying school performance across different generations of

immigrants at the present moment can provide evidence about the potential future success of

children who are very recent immigrants to the United States. In addition, in an educational

setting we can directly investigate the trajectories of improvement the longer children remain in

the United States. These “intermediate” educational outcomes, which might help to explain some

of the disparities in educational attainment and labor market outcomes, constitute the main focus

of this study.

        Two streams of research dominate the literature in this context, with most of the earlier

studies relying on survey data (e.g. Kao and Tienda, 1995; Kao, 1999; Glick and White, 2003;

Portes and MacLeod, 1996; Cortes, 2006; and White and Glick, 2009) whereas the more recent

literature utilizes large administrative datasets (e.g. Schwartz and Stiefel, 2006; Conger et al.,

2007; Stiefel et al., 2010). 2 These papers tend to find evidence that immigrants outperform


1
  Some examples in the earlier sociological and anthropological literature are Carter and Segura (1979), Trueba
(1987), Perlmann (1988), Ogbu (1978, 1987), and Ogbu and Matute-Bianchi (1986). See Chiswick and DebBurman
(2004) for an overview of this literature. Several themes emerge from this literature. First, first generation
immigrants tend to attain fewer years of schooling compared to natives. For instance, using Current Population Data
(CPS), Chiswick and DebBurman (2004) show that first generation immigrants, on average, obtain two years less
schooling compared to natives. Further, this schooling gap depends heavily on age at immigration, with immigrant
adults who entered the U.S. early in childhood acquiring years of schooling comparable to native adults (Gonzalez
(2003) and Chiswick and DebBurman (2004)). Also see Dustmann (2011) and Lüdemann and Schwerdt (2010) for
a brief overview of the literature on the educational experiences of immigrants in European countries.
2
  A related strain of research examines the effect of immigrant students on their native peers. Recent examples in
this context include Conger (2012); Cortes (2006); Schwartz and Stiefel (2009); and Gould, Lavy and Paserman


                                                         5
native-born peers with the same ethnic identification, contradicting the notion of “straight-line

assimilation” (Park, 1914; Gordon, 1964; Suarez-Orosco, 2000). 3

        That said, the literature has many unanswered questions that are relevant to current policy

debates – most notably, how do first generation, second generation, and third generation

immigrants perform relative to one another; how does this performance change as students age

through school; and how much of these differences can be explained by different student, family,

and school attributes? The lack of clarity on these questions is due to limitations in the existing

data -- in particular, due to the inability to identify immigrant generation in school records. The

administrative data and survey data employed in the existing literature each present different

benefits and challenges in this context. For instance, using survey data to investigate “nativity

gaps” allows comparisons between first, second, and third (and higher) generation immigrants as

these data typically provide detailed information about the children’s families (such as parental

education and parents’ countries of origin). However, most of these datasets contain a limited

number of student outcomes (and no high-stakes outcomes), no information about the schools

these students attend, and do not follow individual students over time. Further, studies that rely

on survey data commonly suffer from small sample sizes, which hinder subgroup analysis and

further complicate understanding potential mechanisms through which the relationships may be

operating. On the other hand, large administrative datasets sometimes present very detailed

information about student experiences in the public school system, yet they lack detailed

information on family characteristics, and studies making use of administrative data are unable to




(2011). The overarching conclusion of these studies is that immigrant students have either small or no effect on the
achievement levels of their native peers.
3
  In particular, immigrant students, especially those who migrate early in childhood, have been shown to perform
comparable to or even better than their U.S.-born peers on elementary and middle school tests (Schwartz and Stiefel
(2006), Kao (1999), Portes and MacLeod (1996), Kao and Tienda (1995), Cortes (2006)).


                                                         6
identify second versus third generation immigrants 4, and hence present comparisons between

first generation immigrants and all other U.S. born students. Given that Duncan and Trejo (2016)

demonstrate the degree to which self-identified ethnicity among second generation immigrants is

selected (positive for Asian-Americans, and negative for Hispanic Americans), both types of

datasets could lead to a very selected set of comparison students.

        We make use of a unique dataset from Florida, in which student records are matched with

birth certificate data for all children born between 1992 and 2002, in order to overcome the

limitations of the prior literature and address a set of heretofore unanswered questions. Linking

school records to birth records allows us to take advantage of the positive benefits of both

administrative data and survey data in an environment in which we can observe outcomes for the

entire population, and Florida is the only major immigrant-receiving state in the United States

where it has proven feasible to match birth and school records to date. There are several distinct

advantages that are realized as a consequence: First, the birth certificate data allow us to identify

second generation immigrants, and offer the chance to observe a large range of variables (e.g.,

parental education and marital status) not observed in school records. They also enable us to

contrast whether estimated cross-generational differences in educational outcomes are different

depending on whether children are identified based on their stated ethnic identity or their

parents’ stated ethnic identity, permitting us to reduce the likelihood that our results are driven

by the self-identification bias identified by Duncan and Trejo (2016). Moreover, because we can

follow approximately two million individual students over more than a decade, including

hundreds of thousands of foreign-born children and children of immigrants, we are able to

examine the progress of immigrant students after they enter Florida public schools, and to


4
 We classify all children whose parents are U.S.-born as “third generation” immigrants. No population-level data
source in the United States that is matchable to school records identifies grandparental birthplace.


                                                        7
observe outcomes of first generation immigrants based on their timing of entry into the school

system. Finally, using our administrative data, we can examine not only high-stakes outcomes

like student test scores, high school graduation, and high school course-taking, but also non-

cognitive outcomes such as disciplinary incidents and truancy.

         One limitation of using data from a single state is that the immigrants residing in that

state may differ systematically from those living elsewhere in the country. We investigate this

possibility directly using data from the American Community Survey, pooled across the years

2006-2014. We find that, indeed, Hispanic and Asian immigrants into Florida are positively

selected (driven largely by the fact that Mexicans are relatively underrepresented in Florida

versus the United States as a whole as a fraction of total immigrants). However, the degree of

positive selection is not particularly great across generations: First generation Asian and

Hispanic immigrants in Florida have 7.2 percentage point higher rates of maternal college

education than their counterparts outside of Florida. 5 For second generation immigrants in

Florida, the difference is 5.7 percentage points, and for third-plus generation immigrants in

Florida, the difference in 6.8 percentage points. 6 Because of the apparent positive selection into

Florida, driven largely by compositional differences, in the analysis that follows we stratify our

analysis, to the extent possible, by country of origin to increase the external validity of our

findings.

         We find a general pattern of deteriorating educational outcomes across successive

immigrant generations. In particular, we find that first generation immigrants – beyond a



5
  These figures are based on children aged five to sixteen, and make use of individual weights.
6
  We can also compare second generation to third-plus generation immigrants born in Florida who remain versus
leave the state and those born elsewhere in the United States who migrate to Florida versus those who do not.
Second generation Florida stayers have lower levels of maternal education than second generation Florida leavers, in
comparison with their third-plus generation counterparts, but the patterns are reversed regarding second versus third-
plus generation Florida in-migrants versus those who do not migrate to Florida.


                                                          8
transition period - perform better in reading and math tests than do second generation

immigrants, and second generation immigrants perform better than third generation immigrants.

We also find that recent immigrants are significantly more likely to graduate from high school

than more established generations, and are better prepared for college upon high school

graduation. This pattern also holds true for student misbehavior and truancy, and for both Asian

and Hispanic immigrants, and remain unchanged even after controlling for observed student,

family and school attributes, or whether we use the student’s or the mother’s reported

racial/ethnic identity.

        These findings can be regarded as evidence against the straight-line assimilation theory

if immigrant optimism indeed fades across successive generations. We find significant cross-

generational differences in the revealed educational preferences of Hispanic immigrants in

elementary and high school, with second and third generation immigrants more likely to

“undershoot” compared to observationally similar recent immigrants, presenting evidence of

educational aspirations dissipating across generations.

        These findings can also help to explain the patterns of racial and ethnic differences in

educational trajectories as children progress through school. Clotfelter et al. (2009), for example,

find that both Hispanic and Asian students gain on whites in reading and math tests as they

progress between grades 3 and 8. We find that this relative gain in achievement among Hispanics

is almost exclusively driven by first generation immigrants. On the other hand, both first and

second generation Asian immigrants gain considerably on whites in reading and math tests

between third and eighth grades.



2. Data and Empirical Strategy




                                                 9
    2.1. Data

         To address our research questions, we merge together two large data sets from the state of

Florida: student-level administrative data and birth records. School records provide detailed

information on all students in grades K-12 enrolled in Florida public schools between 2002-03

and 2011-12 school years, including performance on the high-stakes Florida Comprehensive

Assessment Test (FCAT) in reading and math of all students between grades three and ten,

courses taken in elementary, middle, and high school, student demographics, poverty, measures

of English proficiency (limited English proficiency indicator and language spoken at home, as

reported by parents), attendance, disciplinary incidents, and the country of birth for all students.

This variable enables us to identify first generation immigrants in the population, as well as their

countries of origin.

         We merge these school records with the birth records of all children born in Florida

between 1992 and 2002. The birth records identify maternal country of birth 7, permitting us to

differentiate between second generation immigrants and higher-order generations (which, for

ease of explanation, we will call third generation immigrants). 8 Birth records also record

maternal self-reported ethnicity, allowing us to reduce the likelihood that our results are driven

by bias associated with cross-generational differences in self-reported ethnicity discussed by


7
  During the time frame we examine in Florida, birth certificate applications listed the following options for the birth
place of the mother: (1) United States; (2) Puerto Rico; (3) U.S. Virgin Islands; (4) Guam; (5) Canada; (6) Cuba; (7)
Mexico; (8) Northern Marianas; (9) American Samoa; and (10) All others. While the application form provided
additional space to write down the birth place if it is not listed, either very few applicants opted to specify, or very
few were recorded. Therefore, we can credibly identify the birth place of the mother only for the countries listed
above.
8
  Throughout the analysis, we identify second generation immigrants as those who were born in the U.S. to foreign
born mothers. Another commonly used approach in this context is to define second generation as those who were
born in the U.S. with at least one immigrant parent. In this study, we cannot utilize this alternative definition as we
do not observe father’s birthplace in the birth records. Therefore, it is important to note that some students who
would be identified as second generation under the alternative are categorized as third generation in our analysis.
However, this should not be a great concern, since, based on the recent Census estimates, among the households
with a native wife, only 3 percent have a foreign-born husband in the U.S.
(http://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/acsbr11-16.pdf, accessed 4/18/2014).


                                                          10
Duncan and Trejo (2016). Furthermore, the birth records offer background information not

typically seen in school records including maternal education and marital status. Because the

birth-school match is based on full name, exact date of birth, and social security numbers, the

birth and school records are virtually perfectly matched (Figlio et al., 2014). 9 A high match rate

is especially important when considering a Hispanic population, given the higher concentration

of Hispanic surnames relative to names from other origins, as well as the uneven treatment of

Hispanic mothers’ and fathers’ family names in children’s administrative records. Because we

can determine second versus third generation immigrant status only for Florida-born children

born between 1992 and 2002, we restrict the data for non-Florida-born children to those years of

birth as well.

         Florida is an ideal location in this context both because of its outstanding student

longitudinal data system and also because of its position as one of the major destinations for the

recent wave of immigration. Currently, foreign born individuals constitute one-fifth of the

population in Florida, and 9.2 percent of all foreign-born individuals and 8.5 percent of all

foreign-born children in the United States reside in Florida. Further, the composition of these

immigrants closely resemble the new wave of immigrants nationwide: 85 percent of the current

immigrant population in Florida was born in Latin America or Asia. In the 2009-10 school year,

one-tenth of all Florida K-12 public school students were born outside of the U.S, and another

quarter of Florida’s students had foreign-born parents. Therefore, Florida can be regarded as a

mirror for the future demographics of the public school system in the United States.

         Figure 1 presents the distribution of immigrant generations by major race/ethnicities in

Florida. In this graph, the first category represents the foreign born students, the second category


9
 As Figlio et al. (2014) demonstrate, the match rate is essentially identical to that which would have been predicted
based on the American Community Survey data.


                                                         11
identifies students born in Florida to foreign born mothers, the third category represents Florida

born students with U.S. born mothers, and the fourth category denotes students born in another

state in the U.S. Overall, 71 percent of children in Florida public schools were born either

outside of the U.S. or in Florida – a necessary condition for understanding second versus third

generation immigrant status. Of those for whom it is possible to divine immigrant generation,

about 14 percent are first generation immigrants, 21 percent are second generation, and 66

percent are third generation (or longer ago) immigrants. The distribution among Hispanic and

Asian students, on the other hand, reflect the recent wave of immigration into the U.S., with the

majority of Hispanic and Asian students being first or second generation immigrants. For

instance, among Hispanics born either in Florida or abroad, 33 percent of the students are foreign

born and 47 percent have an immigrant mother. Among Asians born either in Florida or abroad,

43 percent of the students are foreign born and 54 percent have an immigrant mother. One-fifth

of Hispanics and three percent of Asians for whom we can determine generation status are in the

third or higher generation. In our main analysis, we exclude the students born in another state as

we cannot identify their immigrant generation. 10

         Table 1 presents the distribution of country of birth among first generation Hispanic and

Asian immigrants, and portrays the diversity of the immigrant population in Florida. For

instance, over 90 percent of the first generation Hispanic immigrants in the sample were born in

14 countries, with the majority coming from Cuba (22 percent), Mexico (17 percent), Colombia

(12 percent), and Puerto Rico (10 percent). In any analysis of Hispanic immigrants in Florida,

especially in a location such as Florida, there is the question of how to characterize those who

were born (or whose parents were born) in Puerto Rico and Cuba. 10 percent (23 percent) of first

10
  To check the robustness of our findings to this restriction, we compare the nativity gaps in eighth grade test scores
using all U.S. born students in our sample and the nativity gaps obtained using only Florida-born second and higher
generation students in the online appendix, and show that patterns remain unchanged.


                                                          12
generation Hispanic immigrants and 11 percent (20 percent) of second generation Hispanic

immigrants in Florida are of Puerto Rican (Cuban) origin, so this is a meaningful decision in the

present analysis. Immigrants from both countries tend to be more advantaged socioeconomically

and contextually/linguistically than other Latino groups (Galindo and Reardon, 2006) and have

consistently outperformed Hispanic immigrants from other countries (ACT, 2007), and, of

course, all Puerto Ricans are themselves U.S. citizens, so their status as “immigrants” in the U.S.

is somewhat different from immigrants from other places besides Puerto Rico. In our main

analysis, we include first and second generation Puerto Rican and Cuban immigrants. That said,

all of our results reported below are virtually unchanged when we exclude these students from

the analysis. 11



     2.2. Empirical Framework

         We are interested in five distinct student outcomes: (1) FCAT scores in reading and math

standardized to zero mean and unit variance at the grade-year level; (2) disciplinary problems (as

measured by whether the student was involved in a disciplinary incident); (3) attendance (percent

absent days); (4) on-time high school graduation (whether the student received a standard high

school diploma within four years after entering the ninth grade for the first time); and (5) college

readiness as measured by whether the student took a college credit-bearing course 12 before high

school graduation. Along these five dimensions, we compare first, second and third generation

Hispanic and Asian immigrants, with third generation white students – that is, white students


11
   Results of analyses in which we exclude first and second generation Puerto Rican and Cuban immigrants are
available in the online appendix.
12
   Florida offers a wide array of high school acceleration programs for students to earn college credit while in high
school, including Advanced Placement (AP), International Baccalaureate (IB), Advanced International Certificate of
Education (AICE), and dual enrollment (DE) courses. In our main analysis, we focus on AP, IB, and AICE course-
taking in math, science, English, and social studies because these courses are offered in the K-12 system and hence
included in our data.


                                                         13
whose mothers were born in the United States -- as the baseline group. In the case of student test

scores, disciplinary incidents, and attendance, we measure these outcomes in the eighth grade so

that it is more reasonable to assume that the estimated differences between early entering first

generation and later generations can be interpreted as relatively permanent. This restriction

leaves us with seven birth cohorts of students who are old enough to reach the eighth grade by

the end of our sampling frame (students born between 1992 and 1998). For the high school

outcomes, we are limited to those students born between 1992 and 1994, because of the years of

data availability.

        We execute our analysis by dividing individuals into eleven groups – first generation

immigrants who first arrive in the school system in each grade from eighth (latest-arriving

immigrants) to kindergarten (earliest-arriving immigrants) 13; second generation immigrants

whose mothers were born outside of the United States; and third generation “immigrants” whose

mothers were born in the United States but who identify as having either an Asian identity or a

Hispanic identity. Because of the possibility of bias in self-identification of Asians and Hispanics

described by Duncan and Trejo (2016), we identify the set of second and third generation

immigrants based either on child’s ethnic identification in school or mother’s ethnic

identification at the time of the child’s birth.

        We present three basic sets of analyses. In the first set of models, we show raw

comparisons across the generations, and for first generation students, across age at entry,

controlling only for disability status, age at 8th grade, year, and gender. In the second set of

models, we include a set of control variables: Because immigrants might attend systematically

13
   To identify students who enter the school system as early as KG, we restrict the sample to students born in 1997
and 1998 for whom it is possible to track students all the way from KG to the 8th grade in our sampling frame. In
other analysis, we divide the first generation immigrants into two groups - immigrants who enter the Florida public
school system by the third grade (early entering) and those who enter after the third grade (late entering). In the
latter analysis, we use all students born between 1992 and 1998 and subsequently attended a Florida public school.


                                                        14
different sets of schools depending on generation, we control for school by cohort fixed effects 14

so that we are directly comparing immigrants from different generations attending the same

schools. In addition, we control for a measure of low-income status (free or reduced-price lunch

eligibility) and language minority status 15 (whether or not English is spoken at home). 16 In the

third set of models, we further control for a set of family background characteristics observed on

the birth certificate – maternal education and marital status. Our objective in presenting these

multiple sets of models is to show the degree to which cross-generational differences, and

differences across first generation students depending on age at entry, are sensitive to whether or

not we control for variables that can be correlated with immigrant generation or perhaps age at

entry. We cluster all standard errors at the school-by-year level.

         In addition to studying cross-generational differences in eighth grade levels of outcomes,

we also follow individual students over time, and examine how these gaps evolve between third

and eighth grades using early entering first, second and third generation immigrants.



3. Results

         Tables 2 and 3 present the descriptive statistics for our five outcomes of interest and

student/family attributes, comparing third generation white students with Hispanic students by


14
   For test scores, disciplinary incidents and attendance, we use the year the student enters the eighth grade for the
first time, and the school attended during that year to define cohorts. For high school graduation, we use the year the
student enters the ninth grade for the first time, and the high school attended during that year.
15
   Several studies in the literature use limited English proficiency (LEP) as a covariate in this context (e.g. Schwartz
and Stiefel (2006), and Kao and Tienda (1995)). We choose not to follow this approach for the following reason. In
Florida, an LEP student is defined as “a student whose home language is one other than English and whose English
aural comprehension, speaking, reading, or writing proficiency is below the average English proficiency level of
English speaking”. Therefore, once native language is controlled for, LEP status captures the differences between
the language skills of students, which are likely correlated with differences in their cognitive development.
Therefore, regressions controlling for the LEP status might understate the underlying cognitive differences across
immigrant generations. Because we have information about home language itself, we believe that it is preferable to
control for home language – which we consider an input into the education production process – rather than LEP
status – which we consider a potential outcome.
16
   We also show in Appendix A what happens as we control successively for each set of these control variables.


                                                          15
generation in Table 2, and third generation white students with Asian students by generation in

Table 3. For ease of tabular comparison, we present descriptive statistics just for early entering

(those who entered the public school system by the third grade) versus late entering first

generation students. These raw statistics reveal that outcomes differ, sometimes dramatically,

across generations, yet the same general pattern is observed for both Asian and Hispanic

immigrants with worsening educational outcomes as we move from recent immigrants to more

established immigrant generations beyond a transitional period for first generation immigrants.

For instance, foreign-born Hispanic students who enter the school system after the third grade

score roughly 90 percent of a standard deviation worse in eighth grade reading tests (roughly

0.6σ worse in math) than third generation white students, are 16 percentage points (30 percent)

less likely to graduate from high school, and are 13 percentage points (25 percent) less likely to

take a college credit-bearing course before graduating from high school. In stark contrast, the

Hispanic gap in test scores shrinks to about 0.2σ in reading and math for early entering first

generation Hispanics, and goes up to 0.28σ for second generation Hispanics, and further

increases to about 0.3σ for third generation (or higher) Hispanics. Similarly, recent Hispanic

immigrants (early entering first and second generation) have more favorable disciplinary

outcomes and attendance records, are significantly more likely to graduate from high school, and

are more likely to take an AP, IB, or AICE course before graduating from high school than third

generation immigrants. The same patterns are observed for Asians, with more favorable

outcomes than third generation whites along all five dimensions.

       Interestingly, the findings reported in these two tables also reveal that recent immigrants

outperform more established generations despite the evidence that immigrants accumulate wealth

and education across generations, and that later generations have significantly better English




                                                 16
skills than recent immigrants. For instance, among Hispanics, 75 percent of early entering first

generation immigrants are eligible for subsidized meals, compared to 70 percent among second

generation Hispanics, and 59 percent among third generation. Similarly, one-third of second

generation Hispanic immigrants have mothers with less than a high school degree, compared to

30 percent for third generation. 84 percent of the early entering first generation Hispanics have

been categorized as limited English proficient at least once since they entered the public school

system, in stark contrast to 60 percent for second generation, and 27 percent for third generation

Hispanics. Similar, yet considerably smaller, cross-generational differences in wealth, education

and English skills are observed among Asian immigrants.



       3.1. Cross-generational Differences in Educational Outcomes

       Figure 2 illustrates the patterns of eighth grade reading and math test scores for Hispanic

and Asian students, arrayed from left to right in terms of the amount of time spent in the United

States. It’s clear that whether or not we present raw differences or differences controlling for

school fixed effects and background characteristics, the patterns of results are the same: For both

Asian and Hispanic students, the latest arriving first generation students fare the worst, and

eighth grade test scores rise essentially monotonically with the amount of time spent in the

United States, peaking for those who began kindergarten in Florida schools. Second generation

students, either Asian or Hispanic, perform worse than the earliest-arriving first generation

students, and third generation students tend to perform worse still. For Asians, there is essentially

no difference between the models in which we control for school fixed effects and background

characteristics and those in which we control for just disability, year, age, and gender. For

Hispanics, it makes a difference regarding level of performance whether or not we control for




                                                 17
these variables – across the board, Hispanic students are estimated to perform relatively better

(and for the earliest-arriving first generation immigrants, exceed third generation white

performance) in models where we control for a variety of factors than in cases in which we don’t

control for these variables. But the control variables simply shift the relationship relative to third

generation white students; they do not alter the relationship across generations for Hispanic

students virtually at all.

        As discussed by Duncan and Trejo (2016), this pattern of declining test scores across

successive immigrant generations might be indicative of bias associated with cross-generational

differences in self-reported ethnicity. To investigate this possibility, we replicate the analysis in

Figure 2 using the maternal racial identity reported in birth records to identify race/ethnicity for

second and third generation immigrants, using third generation white students with non-Hispanic

and non-Asian mothers as the baseline group. If the decline in test scores is indeed driven by

negative selection into later generations, one would expect the achievement gaps between early

entering first generation immigrants and more established generations to decrease when Hispanic

and Asian identity is defined based on mothers’ self-reported race/ethnicity. 17

        Figure 3 presents the cross-generational differences obtained using our baseline model

where the first set of estimates (labeled “Student Hispanic” and “Student Asian”) use the self-

reported race/ethnicity of the student, whereas the second set of estimates (labeled “Mother

Hispanic” and “Mother Asian”) use the self-reported race/ethnicity of the mother to identify

Hispanic and Asian second and third generation immigrants. In both cases, first generation


17
  With regard to Hispanic immigrants, changes between maternal ethnic identity and children’s ethnic identity are
the same across generations: Among children of mothers who self-identify as Hispanic, 73 percent of second
generation immigrants identify as Hispanic and 74 percent of third generation immigrants identify as Hispanic. But
there are large cross-generational differences with regard to Asians. Among children of mothers who self-identify as
Asian, 70 percent of second generation immigrants identify as Asian but only 34 percent of third generation
immigrants identify as Asian. This suggests that Asian immigrants have integrated across generations in a different
manner than have Hispanic immigrants.


                                                        18
immigrants are classified based on their self-reported racial/ethnic identity, and third generation

white students are used as the baseline group. Among both Hispanics and Asians, we find that

the general patterns in the cross-generational differences in test scores remain unchanged

whether we use the student’s or the mother’s self-reported racial/ethnic identity to classify

second and third generation Hispanics or Asians. In the online appendix (Figures 4-6), we repeat

the same analysis for Hispanics excluding students of Cuban or Puerto Rican origin, and show

that the conclusions remain unchanged. To investigate whether changes in the national origin

composition of Hispanics and Asians across generations account for any of the observed cross-

generational differences, we break down the Hispanic and Asian analyses for first and second

generation by country of origin (Puerto Ricans, Cubans, Mexicans, and all others for Hispanics;

Filipinos, Chinese, Japanese, and all others for Asians) 18 in Appendix Figures B1-B4, and show

that second generation immigrants perform either worse than, or comparable to early-entering

first generation immigrants.

         In Appendix Table A1 we present the results in which we move from the first to the

second model sequentially, first controlling for school by cohort fixed effects, then controlling

for native language spoken, then controlling for low-income status, and then finally controlling

for maternal background factors. Two findings are worth highlighting when making the step-by-

step controls. First, the observed differences in English language skills, wealth and education

between Hispanics and third generation whites explain a significant portion of the Hispanic

achievement gaps (except for the late-entering first generation immigrants), yet the extent of

their role in explaining these gaps diminish across generations. Second, the acquisition of

English language, wealth and education across immigrant generations explain very little of the

18
  We are limited to these countries of origin because Puerto Ricans, Cubans, and Mexicans are the only Hispanic
groups independently identified on the birth certificate under maternal place of birth, while Chinese, Japanese, and
Filipinos are the only Asian groups identified on the birth certificate under maternal race.


                                                         19
cross-generational differences in educational outcomes among Hispanics and Asians. Table 1 in

the online appendix presents the same set of analyses in models excluding Cuban and Puerto

Rican students, and demonstrates that the patterns remain the same regardless of our treatment of

these student groups.

        We next turn to attendance and behavioral outcomes, as reported in Figure 4 (and

Appendix Table A2, and Table 2 in the online appendix for specifications excluding Cuban and

Puerto Rican students). Again, with these outcomes the differences across generations (as well as

when compared with third generation white students) are very similar whether or not we control

for a variety of background factors and school-by-cohort fixed effects. For the most part, there is

not much of a pattern in disciplinary incidents and absenteeism across timing of first generation

entry, and second generation Asian and Hispanic students have disciplinary and absenteeism

outcomes similar to first generation students. For third generation students, however, outcomes

tend to be worse for both Hispanic and Asian students – with often markedly increased rates of

both disciplinary outcomes and absenteeism relative to first and second generation immigrants.

Third generation Hispanic absenteeism rates are very similar to third generation white

absenteeism rates (and third generation Hispanic disciplinary rates exceed third generation white

rates), while third generation Asian disciplinary rates are very similar to third generation white

disciplinary rates.

        Patterns like those seen regarding test scores re-emerge when considering on-time high

school completion and advanced course-taking in high school, as presented in Figure 5 (and

Appendix Table A3, and Table 3 in the online appendix for specifications excluding Cuban and

Puerto Rican students). Because of data limitations, for these outcomes we cannot differentiate

amongst the earliest entrants – all we know is whether a student arrived in third grade or earlier.




                                                 20
Nonetheless, the same inverse-U shaped pattern emerges for both Hispanic and Asian

immigrants across generations and within the first generation. Among first generation students,

the probability of on-time graduation and the likelihood of taking advanced high school classes

increase the earlier the student arrived in Florida public schools. Second generation students fare

similarly to the earliest arriving first generation students, and then third generation students fare

worse than second generation students. As with the pattern seen with test scores, it appears that

higher-generation Hispanic and Asian students begin to fall back relative to their early-entering

first generation peers. We also inspect the possible role of selection into later generations along

these two outcomes (not reported here), and find that these patterns persist whether we use

students’ or mothers’ racial/ethnic identify to classify second and third generation Asian and

Hispanic immigrants.

         3.2. Cross-Generational Differences in Student Progress

         Beyond cross-sectional comparisons in educational outcomes across immigrant

generations, we also examine how these gaps in student outcomes evolve across grades. For this

exercise, we construct a balanced panel of students who are observed in each grade from three

through eight, and compare (regression-adjusted) patterns of test score growth across grades for

first, second, and third generation Hispanic and Asian students, relative to third generation white

peers. 19 For this analysis, it is of course necessary that we concentrate only on early-entering

first generation immigrants, as we need to observe third grade test scores for them.

         Figure 6 presents these over-time patterns for the same students. (Similar patterns can be

observed in the raw data, and are presented in the online appendix, Figures 2 and 3.) As can be

seen, second and third generation Hispanic students tend to maintain their same position relative


19
  Note that since this specification involves controlling for school-by-cohort fixed effects, we are comparing
students to their peers at the same schools.


                                                         21
to third generation white students in both reading and math over the grades considered, while

first generation Hispanic students make rapid progress across the grades, eventually overtaking

second and third generation Hispanics (and, in the case of reading, third generation whites as

well, in the regression-adjusted specification). Third generation Asians maintain their position

relative to third generation white students, while both first and second generation Asian students

improve in relative terms over the six-grade period, with first generation students eventually

pulling away from second generation students as well. These patterns suggest that Clotfelter et

al.’s (2009) findings that Asian and Hispanic students’ test scores in North Carolina grow more

rapidly across the grades than do white students’ scores are driven by first and (in the case of

Asian students, second) generation immigrants, and likely not by the more generationally-

established Asian and Hispanic-identifying families.

       We perform the same analysis looking at disciplinary incidents and truancy across the

same grades; these results are presented in Figure 7. In the case of disciplinary incidents, all

Hispanic students tend to have similar or lower rates of disciplinary incidents to third generation

white students in the elementary grades, a relationship that holds in the middle grades for first

and second generation Hispanic students. Third generation Hispanic students, on the other hand,

have more disciplinary incidents in the middle school grades. For Asian students, all generations

have fewer disciplinary incidents in the elementary school grades, but in the middle grades the

third generation Asian students’ disciplinary issues are indistinguishable from those of third

generation whites, while first and second generation Asian students have substantially fewer

disciplinary incidents in the middle school grades. Regarding absences, the relative patterns

across the generations appear to be highly stable across grades for both Asian and Hispanic




                                                 22
students. We repeat the same analysis excluding students of Cuban or Puerto Rican origin

(reported in Figure 7 in the online appendix), and find similar patterns.

       3.3. Other Possible Mechanisms behind the Cross-Generational Gaps

       So far, beyond a transition period for first generation immigrants after their initial entry

into the school system, our findings have shown a steady decline in student performance across

generations even after controlling for observed student, family and school traits, with early-

arriving first generation immigrants academically outperforming those born in the United States,

and those born in the United States to foreign-born mothers tending to academically outperform

those born in the United States to native-born mothers. That said, there is not a clear-cut pattern

regarding truancy and disciplinary outcomes – just regarding test scores, high school completion,

and high school course-taking.

       Aside from the aforementioned negative racial/ethnic selection into later generations, the

decline in academic outcomes across successive immigrant generations might be interpreted as

evidence against the straight-line assimilation theory if immigrant optimism fade across

generations, with more established generations passing their leveled aspirations to their children.

This decline in educational motivation might manifest itself in cross-generational differences in

revealed educational preferences among observationally equivalent students. We investigate this

possibility in the context of school choice behavior in middle school and advanced course-taking

behavior in high school. For the former exercise, we focus on students in the last year of

elementary school and examine whether first generation immigrants are more likely to choose a

high-performing middle school (schools that received a grade of ‘A’ or ‘B’ in Florida’s school

accountability system) in the following year, compared to their second and third generation peers

in the same elementary school with similar achievement levels and socioeconomic status. In the




                                                 23
latter exercise, we once again estimate the cross-generational gaps in college credit-bearing

course-taking among high school graduates, yet, this time, we also account for the differences in

eighth grade test scores. In both cases, we exclude late-entering first generation immigrants from

the analysis, and use early-entering first generation immigrants as the baseline group.

       We find significant differences in the educational choices of first, second, and third

generation Hispanic students, with second and third generation Hispanics more likely to

“undershoot” compared to their foreign-born Hispanic peers. In particular, the estimates

presented in the first two columns of Table 4 reveal that first generation Hispanics are 4

percentage points (about 8 percent) more likely to choose a high-performing middle school, and

3 percentage points more (about 6 percent) more likely to take advanced high school courses

compared to their observationally similar second generation peers, who are, in turn, less likely to

undershoot compared to their third generation Hispanic peers (even though the gap shrinks

considerably when we control for maternal attributes). We find similar, yet less precise, cross-

generational differences among Asian immigrants (reported in the third and fourth columns of

Table 4).

       4. Conclusion

       This paper presents the first comprehensive look at the relative performance of early

arriving first generation immigrants, late-arriving first generation immigrants, second generation

immigrants, and third generation immigrants using population-level data in the United States. A

clear pattern of results emerges, at least for the Florida public school students identified as Asian

or Hispanic whom we study: We observe that while first generation immigrants who arrive in

Florida in fourth grade or later consistently perform at a level that is lower than other students,

first generation students who arrive in Florida in third grade or earlier generally perform better




                                                 24
than any other generation of students who share their same ethnicity. Second generation Asian

and Hispanic students in turn tend to perform better than do third generation students of the same

ethnicity.

        These results have potential implications for immigration policy and how one perceives

the role immigrants play in American schools and beyond. They suggest that while it appears

that newly-arrived immigrant children perform very poorly and require considerable resources,

not only do these children catch up very quickly to their native-born co-ethnic peers, but for

those who arrived before the age of nine or so, they tend to exceed the performance of their

native-born co-ethnic peers. And the U.S.-born children of foreign-born individuals, regardless

of when they arrived in the United States, tend to outperform others from the same ethnicity

whose families have lived longer in the country. While understanding the cultural and economic

mechanisms behind these patterns of findings is beyond the scope of the present project, it will

be important to understand why, for instance, third generation Asian students no longer possess

the relative academic advantages of first and second generation Asian students, and why third

generation Hispanic students appear to fall back academically relative to their first and second

generation Hispanic peers.




                                                25
                                          References

Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Platt Boustan (forthcoming). Immigration in American Economic
      History. Journal of Economic Literature.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson (2014). A Nation of Immigrants:
      Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration. Journal of Political
      Economy 122 (3): 467-506.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson (2012). Europe’s Tired, Poor,
      Huddles Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.
      American Economic Review 102 (5), 1832-56.

ACT. (2007). State of College Readiness for Latino Students. Iowa City, IA: ACT.

Akbulut-Yuksel, Mevlude and Adriana Kugler (2016). Intergenerational Persistence of Health in
      the U.S.: Do Immigrants Get Healthier as they Assimilate? NBER working paper 21987.

Ambrosini, J. William and Giovanni Peri (2012). The Determinants and the Selection of Mexico-
     US Migrants. The World Economy 35 (2): 111-51.

Borjas, George J. (2014). The Slowdown in the Economic Assimilation of Immigrants: Aging
        and Cohort Effects Revisited Again. NBER Working Paper 19116.

Borjas, George J. (1994). Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials: The Children and
        Grandchildren of the Great Migration. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47 (4):
        553-73.

Borjas, George J. (1992). Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 107 (1): 123-50.

Card, David, John DiNardo, and Eugena Estes (2000). The More Things Change: Immigrants
       and the Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s. In Issues in the
       Economics of Immigration, edited by George J. Borjas. 227-70. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press.

Carter, Thomas P. and Roberto D. Segura (1979). Mexican Americans in School: A
        Decade of Change. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.

Chiquiar, Daniel and Gordon Hanson (2005). International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
       Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States. Journal of Political
       Economy 113 (2): 239-81.

Chiswick, Barry R., and Noyna DebBurman (2004). Educational attainment: analysis by
      immigrant generation. Economics of Education Review 23, 361–379.




                                               26
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor (2009). The Academic Achievement
        Gap in Grades 3 to 8." Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (2): 398 - 419.

Conger, Dylan (2012). Immigrant Peers and Academic Performance in High School. George
      Washington University Working Paper.

Conger, Dylan, Amy E. Schwartz and Leanna Stiefel (2007). Immigrant and Native-born
      Differences in School Stability and Special Education: Evidence from New York City.
      International Migration Review 41(2), 402-431.

Cortes, Kalena E. (2006). The effects of age of arrival and enclave schools on the
        academic performance of immigrant children. Economics of Education Review
        25, 121–132.

Duncan, Brian and Stephen Trejo (2016). The Complexity of Immigrant Generations:
      Implications for Assessing the Socioeconomic Integration of Hispanics and Asians.
      NBER working paper 21982.

Dustmann, Christian, Tomasso Frattini and Gianandrea Lanzara (2011). Educational
      Achievement of Second Generation Immigrants: An International Comparison.
      NORFACE MIGRATION Discussion Paper No. 25.

Feliciano, Cynthia (2005). Educational Selectivity in US Immigration: How Do Immigrants
        Compare to Those Left Behind? Demography 42 (1): 131-52.

Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth (2014). The
        Effect of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development. American
        Economic Review.

Galindo, C., and Reardon, S. F. (2006). Latino students’ educational experiences and
       opportunities during kindergarten. Tempe, AZ: National Task Force on Early Childhood
       Education for Hispanics.

Glick, Jennifer E., Michael J. White (2003). The academic trajectories of immigrant youths:
        analysis within and across cohorts. Demography 40 (4), 759–783.

Gonzalez, Arturo (2003). The education and wages of immigrant children: the
      impact of age at arrival. Economics of Education Review 22, 203–212.

Gordon, Milton M. (1964). Assimilation in American Life: The Role of Race, Religion, and
      National Origins. New York: Oxford University Press.

Gould, Eric D., Victor Lavy and M. Daniele Paserman (2011). Sixty Years after the Magic
       Carpet Ride: The Long-Run Effect of the Early Childhood Environment on Social and
       Economic Outcomes. Review of Economic Studies, 78(3), 938-973.




                                              27
Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon Hanson (2011). Income Maximization and the Selection and
      Sorting of International Migrants. Journal of Development Economics 95 (1): 42-57.

Jasso, Guillermina, Douglas Massey, Mark Rosenzweig, and James Smith (2004). Immigrant
        Health: Selectivity and Acculturation. Critical Perspectives on Racial and Ethnic
        Differences in Health in Late Life: 227-66.

Kaestner, Robert and Ofer Malamud (2014). Self-Selection and International Migration: New
       Evidence from Mexico. Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (1): 78-91.

Kao, Grace (1999). Psychological well-being and educational achievement among
      immigrant youth. In Children of immigrants: Health, adjustment, and public assistance,
      edited by D. J. Hernandez. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 410–77.

Kao, Grace and Marta Tienda (1995). Optimism and achievement: the educational performance
      of immigrant youth. Social Science Quarterly 76, 1–19.

Kennedy, Steven, James Ted McDonald, and Nicholas Biddle (2006). The Healthy Immigrant
      Effects and Immigrant Selection: Evidence from Four Countries. Social and Economic
      Dimensions of an Aging Population Research Paper 164.

Lüdemann, Elke and Guido Schwerdt (2010). Migration Background and Educational Tracking:
     Is there a Double Disadvantage for Second-Generation Immigrants?. CESifo Working
     Paper Series 3256, CESifo Group Munich.

Ogbu, John U. (1987). Variability in Minority School performance: A Problem in
       Search of an Explanation. Anthropology and Education Quarterly. 18 (4); 313-
       334.

Ogbu, John U. and Maria E. Matute-Bianchi (1986). Understanding Sociocultural
       Factors: Knowledge, Identity, and School Adjustment. In Beyond Language:
       Social and Cultural Factors in Schooling Language Minority Students. Los
       Angeles: Office of Bilingual Bicultural Education, pp. 73-142.

Ogbu, John U. (1978). Minority Education and Caste: The American System in Cross-Cultural
       Perspective. New York: Academic Press.

Orrenius, Pia and Madeline Zavodny (2005). Self-Selection among Undocumented Immigrants
       from Mexico. Journal of Development Economics 78 (1): 215-40.

Park, Robert E. (1914). “Racial Assimilation in Secondary Groups”. American Journal of
       Sociology, 19, 606-23.

Passel, Jeffrey S. (2011). “Demography of Immigrant Youth: Past, Present, and Future”. The
        Future of Children, 21(1), 19-41.




                                              28
Perlmann, Joel (1988). Ethnic Differences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Portes, Alejandro, and MacLeod Dag (1996). Educational progress of children of immigrants:
        The roles of class, ethnicity, and school context. Sociology of Education 69, 255–
        75.

Ruiz-de-Velasco, Michael E. Fix, and Beatriz Clewell (2002). Overlooked and Underserved:
       Immigrant Students in U.S. Secondary Schools. The Urban Institute, Washington, DC.

Schwartz, Amy Ellen and Leanna Stiefel (2009). Immigrants and Inequality in Public Schools.
      Prepared for the project on Social Inequality and Educational Disadvantage.

Schwartz, Amy Ellen and Leanna Stiefel (2006). Is there a nativity gap? New evidence on
      the academic performance of immigrant students. Education Finance and Policy
      1 (1), 17–49.

Stiefel, Leanna, Amy E. Schwartz and Dylan Conger (2010). Age of Entry and the High School
         Performance of Immigrant Youth. Journal of Urban Economics 67 (3), 303-14.

Suarez-Orozco, Marcelo M. (2000). Everything You Wanted to Know about Assimilation
       but Were Afraid to Ask. Daedalus, 129 (4), pp. 1-30.

Trueba, Henry (1987). Success or Failure? Learning and the Language Minority
       Student.Cambridge, MA: Newbury House.

White, Michael J. and Jennifer E. Glick (2009). Achieving Anew: How new immigrants do in
       American schools, jobs, and neighborhoods. Russell Sage Foundation.




                                             29
Figure 1
Student Distribution in Four Major Race/Ethnicity Categories by Immigrant Generation




                                             30
Figure 2 –Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Test Scores among Hispanic and Asian Students, Compared to Third
Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants
                    (I) Reading - Hispanic                                             (II) Reading - Asian




                           (III) Math – Hispanic                                                                (IV) Math - Asian




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, English language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also
maternal characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors
clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. The regressions include 19,286 unique first
generation Hispanic students, 21,998 unique second generation Hispanic students, 10,533 unique third generation Hispanic students, 2,375 unique first
generation Asian students, 2,534 unique second generation Asian students, 331 unique third generation Asian students, and 76,664 unique third generation white
students.



                                                                                  31
Figure 3 - Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Test Scores Compared to Third Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into
the School System for the First Generation Immigrants, Student Racial/Ethnic Identification versus Mother Racial/Ethnic
Identification
                    (I) Reading - Hispanic                                               (II) Reading - Asian




                          (III) Math – Hispanic                                                             (IV) Math - Asian




Notes: The estimates are obtained using the model that controls for disability, gender, age controls, and cohort fixed-effects. “Student Hispanic” and “Student
Asian” specifications use the self-reported race/ethnicity whereas “Mother Hispanic” and “Mother Asian” specifications use the self-reported race/ethnicity of
the mother to identify second and third generation Asian and Hispanic immigrants. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent
the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. The regressions include 19,286 unique first generation Hispanic students, 28,870 unique second
generation students with Hispanic mothers, 9,823 unique third generation students with Hispanic mothers, 2,375 unique first generation Asian students, 2,051
unique second generation students with Asian mothers, 233 unique third generation students with Asian mothers, 21,998 unique second generation Hispanic
students, 10,533 unique third generation Hispanic students, 2,375 unique second generation Asian students, 331 unique third generation Asian students, and
79,052 unique third generation white students with non-Hispanic and non-Asian mothers.


                                                                               32
Figure 4 – Cross-Generational Differences in Disciplinary Incidents and Absences among Hispanic and Asian Students, Compared to
Third Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants
              (I) Disciplinary Incidents - Hispanic                              (II) Disciplinary Incidents - Asian




                    (III) % Absent Days – Hispanic                                                        (IV) % Absent Days - Asian




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, English language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also
maternal characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors
clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. The regressions include 20,756 unique first
generation Hispanic students, 22,457 unique second generation Hispanic students, 10,874 unique third generation Hispanic students, 2,552 unique first
generation Asian students, 2,572 unique second generation Asian students, 342 unique third generation Asian students, and 79,729 unique third generation white
students.



                                                                                  33
Figure 5 – Cross-Generational Differences in High School Graduation and Course-Taking among Hispanic and Asian Students,
Compared to Third Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants
            (I) High School Graduation - Hispanics                           (II) High School Graduation - Asians




              (III) Advanced Course-Taking - Hispanics                                              (IV) Advanced Course-Taking - Asians




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, English language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also
maternal characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors
clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. See Appendix Table A3 for number of
observations in each group.



                                                                                  34
Figure 6 – Cross-Generational Regression-Adjusted Trends in Student Test Scores over Grades among Hispanic and Asian Students,
Compared to Third Generation Whites in grades 3 through 8, Conditional on Continuous Enrollment
                          (I) Reading - Hispanic                                                             (II) Reading - Asian




                           (III) Math – Hispanic                                                              (IV) Math - Asian




Notes: The estimated cross-generational differences among Asian, Hispanic, compared to the third generation white students are obtained using the covariates
given in column (IV), Table A1, estimated separately for each given grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95
percent confidence interval for each estimated coefficient. The regressions include 34,325 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students, 61,439 unique
second generation Hispanic students, 27,018 unique third generation Hispanic students, 3,321 unique early entering first generation Asian students, 6,307 unique
second generation Asian students, 709 unique third generation Asian students, and 218,830 unique third generation white students.




                                                                               35
Figure 7 – Cross-Generational Regression-Adjusted Trends in Student Disciplinary Incidents and Absences over Grades among
Hispanic and Asian Students, Compared to Third Generation Whites in grades 3 through 8, Conditional on Continuous Enrollment
                   (I) Disciplinary Incidents - Hispanic                                             (II) Disciplinary Incidents - Asian




                     (III) % Absent Days – Hispanic                                                     (IV) % Absent Days - Asian




Notes: The estimated cross-generational differences among Asian, Hispanic, compared to the third generation white students are obtained using the covariates
given in column (IV), Table A1, estimated separately for each given grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95
percent confidence interval for each estimated coefficient. The regressions include 37,402 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students, 63,251 unique
second generation Hispanic students, 28,406 unique third generation Hispanic students, 3,694 unique early entering first generation Asian students, 6,457 unique
second generation Asian students, 754 unique third generation Asian students, and 234,095 unique third generation white students.




                                                                               36
Table 1 - Country of Birth among First Generation Asian and Hispanic Immigrants
Hispanic Students                                                               Asian Students
                                 Percent of First            Number of                                            Percent of First              Number of
Country of Birth               Generation Hispanics        unique students      Country of Birth                 Generation Asians            unique students
Cuba                               22.18                       41,964           Philippines                        16.04                          3,914
Mexico                             17.32                       32,766           China                              13.42                          3,275
Colombia                           12.02                       22,744           India                              13.22                          3,225
Puerto Rico                        10.86                       20,541           South Korea                         9.32                          2,273
Venezuela                           7.31                       13,827           Vietnam                             8.02                          1,956
Dominican Republic                  3.93                        7,438           Pakistan                            4.36                          1,064
Honduras                            3.79                        7,164           Japan                               3.25                           793
Peru                                3.74                        7,082           Bangladesh                          3.04                           741
Argentina                           3.18                        6,012           Thailand                            2.50                           610
Ecuador                             2.17                        4,111           Canada                              2.48                           605
Guatemala                           2.01                        3,804           Guyana                              1.87                           456
Nicaragua                           1.75                        3,304           Burma                               1.31                           319
Brazil                              1.37                        2,586           Taiwan                              0.99                           241
Spain                               1.35                        2,549           Other                              20.19                          4,926
Other                               7.04                       13,314
Notes: The distribution of country of birth among first generation immigrants is obtained using the set of students who were born outside of the U.S. between
1992 and 2002, and subsequently attend 8th grade in a Florida public school between 2002-03 and 2011-12 school years.




                                                                               37
Table 2 - Cross-generational Differences in Student Outcomes and Characteristics – Hispanic Immigrants
                                                                        Hispanic              Hispanic
                                                   White                first Gen.            first Gen.               Hispanic               Hispanic
                                                 third Gen.           Late Entering         Early Entering           second Gen.             third Gen.
FCAT reading score – eighth grade                     0.265               -0.603                  0.0750               -0.0118                 -0.0159
                                                     (0.909)              (1.168)                (0.964)               (0.917)                 (0.926)
FCAT math score – eighth grade                        0.264               -0.383                  0.0865                0.0159                 -0.0117
                                                     (0.884)              (1.110)                (0.950)               (0.899)                 (0.918)
Disciplinary incident – eighth grade                  0.202                0.191                  0.200                 0.204                   0.246
                                                     (0.401)              (0.393)                (0.400)               (0.403)                 (0.430)
% Absent days – eighth grade                          0.0636               0.0569                 0.0545                0.0562                  0.0676
                                                     (0.0768)             (0.0733)               (0.0670)              (0.0722)                (0.0823)
Graduated from HS                                     0.591                0.431                  0.535                 0.562                   0.522
                                                     (0.492)              (0.495)                (0.499)               (0.496)                 (0.500)
Took an advanced course in HS                         0.508                0.376                  0.532                 0.483                   0.470
                                                     (0.500)              (0.484)                (0.499)               (0.500)                 (0.499)
FRPL Eligible                                         0.315                0.750                  0.739                 0.698                   0.585
                                                     (0.464)              (0.433)                (0.439)               (0.459)                 (0.493)
Limited English proficient – eighth grade             0.000265             0.559                  0.0932                0.0369                  0.0213
                                                     (0.0163)             (0.497)                (0.291)               (0.189)                 (0.144)
Limited English proficient – Ever                     0.00338              0.829                  0.839                 0.597                   0.272
                                                     (0.0581)             (0.377)                (0.368)               (0.490)                 (0.445)
English Non-Native                                    0.0102               0.944                  0.953                 0.838                   0.477
                                                     (0.100)              (0.231)                (0.211)               (0.369)                 (0.499)
Special education                                     0.132                0.0513                 0.112                 0.134                   0.148
                                                     (0.339)              (0.221)                (0.316)               (0.341)                 (0.355)
Mother - Less than HS                                 0.159                                                             0.339                   0.303
                                                     (0.366)                                                           (0.473)                 (0.460)
Mother – HS graduate                                  0.386                                                             0.362                   0.350
                                                     (0.487)                                                           (0.480)                 (0.477)
Mother – Some college                                 0.258                                                             0.183                   0.233
                                                     (0.438)                                                           (0.387)                 (0.423)
Mother – Bachelor’s or more                           0.194                                                             0.114                   0.111
                                                     (0.396)                                                           (0.317)                 (0.314)
Mother married                                        0.773                                                             0.675                   0.612
                                                     (0.419)                                                           (0.468)                 (0.487)
Notes: Standard deviations are given in parentheses. See Appendix Tables A1, A2, and A3 for the numbers of unique students in each category given in columns.




                                                                             38
Table 3 - Cross-generational Differences in eighth Grade Student Outcomes and Characteristics – Asian Immigrants
                                                                          Asian                 Asian
                                                   White                first Gen.            first Gen.                Asian                  Asian
                                                 third Gen.           Late Entering         Early Entering           second Gen.             third Gen.
FCAT reading score – eighth grade                     0.265                0.0366                 0.674                 0.593                   0.363
                                                     (0.909)              (1.167)                (0.960)               (0.921)                 (0.885)
FCAT math score – eighth grade                        0.264                0.475                  0.837                 0.780                   0.396
                                                     (0.884)              (1.046)                (0.945)               (0.914)                 (0.882)
Disciplinary incident – eighth grade                  0.202                0.0691                 0.0825                0.0859                  0.151
                                                     (0.401)              (0.254)                (0.275)               (0.280)                 (0.358)
% Absent days – eighth grade                          0.0636               0.0314                 0.0311                0.0291                  0.0513
                                                     (0.0768)             (0.0571)               (0.0471)              (0.0470)                (0.0712)
Graduated from HS                                     0.591                0.575                  0.708                 0.758                   0.628
                                                     (0.492)              (0.494)                (0.455)               (0.429)                 (0.484)
Took an advanced course in HS                         0.508                0.749                  0.811                 0.805                   0.602
                                                     (0.500)              (0.433)                (0.391)               (0.396)                 (0.490)
FRPL Eligible                                         0.315                0.413                  0.357                 0.334                   0.351
                                                     (0.464)              (0.492)                (0.479)               (0.472)                 (0.478)
Limited English proficient – eighth grade             0.000265             0.370                  0.0374                0.0152                  0.00167
                                                     (0.0163)             (0.483)                (0.190)               (0.122)                 (0.0408)
Limited English proficient – Ever                     0.00338              0.561                  0.475                 0.303                   0.0501
                                                     (0.0581)             (0.496)                (0.499)               (0.460)                 (0.218)
English Non-Native                                    0.0102               0.725                  0.662                 0.568                   0.112
                                                     (0.100)              (0.446)                (0.473)               (0.495)                 (0.315)
Special education                                     0.132                0.0251                 0.0490                0.0570                  0.0860
                                                     (0.339)              (0.156)                (0.216)               (0.232)                 (0.280)
Mother - Less than HS                                 0.159                                                             0.138                   0.179
                                                     (0.366)                                                           (0.345)                 (0.383)
Mother – HS graduate                                  0.386                                                             0.316                   0.311
                                                     (0.487)                                                           (0.465)                 (0.463)
Mother – Some college                                 0.258                                                             0.198                   0.298
                                                     (0.438)                                                           (0.398)                 (0.458)
Mother – Bachelor’s or more                           0.194                                                             0.338                   0.208
                                                     (0.396)                                                           (0.473)                 (0.406)
Mother married                                        0.773                                                             0.886                   0.693
                                                     (0.419)                                                           (0.318)                 (0.462)
Notes: Standard deviations are given in parentheses. See Appendix Tables A1, A2, and A3 for the numbers of unique students in each category given in columns.




                                                                             39
Table 4 - Cross-Generational Differences in School Choice and Advanced Course-Taking in High School
                                                                                  Chose a High Performing Middle School
                                                                     Hispanics                                                     Asians
                                                          (I)                           (II)                          (I)                            (II)
Second generation                                     -0.0405***                                                  -0.0101
                                                      (0.00288)                                                   (0.00824)
Third generation                                      -0.0504***                    -0.00737**                    -0.0286                        -0.0192
                                                      (0.00323)                     (0.00276)                     (0.0156)                       (0.0155)

Prior year school x Cohort FE                            Yes                          Yes                    Yes                                    Yes
Native language                                          Yes                          Yes                    Yes                                    Yes
FRPL eligible                                            Yes                          Yes                    Yes                                    Yes
Prior year test scores                                   Yes                          Yes                    Yes                                    Yes
Maternal characteristics                                 No                           Yes                     No                                    Yes
                                         N             246,792                      176,871                 20,356                                 13,307
                                                                                  Took an Advanced High School Course
Second generation                                     -0.0326***                                          -0.0134
                                                      (0.00614)                                           (0.0151)
Third generation                                      -0.0636***                   -0.0314***             -0.152***                              -0.133***
                                                      (0.00726)                    (0.00592)              (0.0417)                               (0.0398)

High School x Cohort FE                                  Yes                            Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Native language                                          Yes                            Yes                           Yes                           Yes
FRPL eligible                                            Yes                            Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Eighth grade test scores                                 Yes                            Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Maternal characteristics                                  No                            Yes                           No                            Yes
                                         N              37,543                         26,629                        4,063                         2,802
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the prior year school level in the top panel, and clustered at the high school level in the bottom panel in parentheses, * p <
0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. All models control for gender, age, special education status in addition to the covariates listed.




                                                                                  40
APPENDIX A
Table A1 - Regression Adjusted Cross-Generational Differences in Hispanic and Asian Eighth Grade Test Scores, Compared to Third
Generation White Students
                                                                           Reading Scores
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
Hispanics -
              Late Entering First Gen.    -1.167***         -1.093***          -0.943***         -0.857***
                                          (0.0147)          (0.0112)           (0.0119)          (0.0116)
              Early Entering First Gen.   -0.170***         -0.162***          -0.0110            0.0579***
                                          (0.00863)         (0.00570)          (0.00664)         (0.00647)
                    Second Generation     -0.258***         -0.230***          -0.100***         -0.0392***        -0.0626***
                                          (0.00733)         (0.00507)          (0.00596)         (0.00579)         (0.00560)
                     Third Generation     -0.251***         -0.233***          -0.161***         -0.114***         -0.106***
                                          (0.00729)         (0.00523)          (0.00552)         (0.00537)         (0.00524)
Asians -
              Late Entering First Gen.    -0.464***         -0.495***         -0.375***          -0.355***
                                          (0.0232)          (0.0207)          (0.0205)           (0.0199)
              Early Entering First Gen.    0.302***          0.202***          0.313***           0.317***
                                          (0.0139)          (0.0126)          (0.0130)           (0.0127)
                    Second Generation      0.223***          0.127***          0.222***           0.227***          0.177***
                                          (0.0111)          (0.00964)         (0.00989)          (0.00977)         (0.00958)
                     Third Generation      0.0293           -0.0150            0.00475            0.0207            0.0211
                                          (0.0253)          (0.0248)          (0.0248)           (0.0244)          (0.0238)
                                                                            Math Scores
Hispanics -
              Late Entering First Gen.    -0.892***          -0.831***         -0.741***         -0.663***
                                          (0.0132)           (0.00919)         (0.00977)         (0.00960)
              Early Entering First Gen.   -0.164***          -0.170***         -0.0793***        -0.0167**
                                          (0.00975)          (0.00541)         (0.00643)         (0.00628)
                    Second Generation     -0.229***          -0.206***         -0.128***         -0.0728***         -0.0661***
                                          (0.00766)          (0.00455)         (0.00555)         (0.00542)          (0.00548)
                     Third Generation     -0.245***          -0.236***         -0.193***         -0.149***          -0.124***
                                          (0.00749)          (0.00511)         (0.00541)         (0.00526)          (0.00514)
Asians -
              Late Entering First Gen.     0.0216            -0.0202            0.0526**          0.0710***
                                          (0.0210)           (0.0181)          (0.0182)          (0.0177)


                                                              41
                Early Entering First Gen.             0.467***               0.348***               0.415***                0.418***
                                                     (0.0146)               (0.0126)               (0.0131)                (0.0128)
                       Second Generation              0.402***               0.294***               0.351***                0.356***               0.318***
                                                     (0.0116)               (0.00954)              (0.00984)               (0.00975)              (0.00967)
                         Third Generation             0.0590*                0.0132                 0.0234                  0.0375                 0.0444*
                                                     (0.0247)               (0.0233)               (0.0233)                (0.0229)               (0.0224)

School x Cohort FE                                        No                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Native language                                           No                    No                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
FRPL eligible                                             No                    No                     No                     Yes                    Yes
Maternal characteristics                                  No                    No                     No                     No                     Yes
Notes: The regressions include 33,880 unique late entering first generation Hispanic students, 49,839 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students,
88,116 unique second generation Hispanic students, 40,072 unique third generation Hispanic students, 4,326 unique late entering first generation Asian students,
4,837 unique early entering first generation Asian students, 9,245 unique second generation Asian students, 1,111 unique third generation Asian students,
342,297 unique third generation white students. Late entering students are defined as the students who entered the Florida public school system after the third
grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level in parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. All models control for gender, age, special
education status, and cohort fixed effects.




                                                                               42
Table A2 - Regression Adjusted Cross-Generational Differences in Hispanic and Asian Eighth Grade Disciplinary Incidents and
Attendance, Compared to Third Generation White Students
                                                                          Disciplinary Incidents
                                            (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)              (5)
Hispanics -
              Late Entering First Gen.    -0.000908          0.0111***           0.00134           -0.0243***
                                          (0.00316)         (0.00259)           (0.00301)          (0.00302)
              Early Entering First Gen.   -0.00494           0.0191***           0.00923***        -0.0121***
                                          (0.00294)         (0.00227)           (0.00280)          (0.00281)
                    Second Generation      0.000441          0.0287***           0.0202***          0.00116         -0.00939***
                                          (0.00275)         (0.00195)           (0.00232)          (0.00232)        (0.00254)
                     Third Generation      0.0403***         0.0565***           0.0519***          0.0369***        0.0225***
                                          (0.00305)         (0.00242)           (0.00251)          (0.00248)        (0.00252)
Asians -
              Late Entering First Gen.    -0.114***         -0.110***          -0.118***           -0.123***
                                          (0.00375)         (0.00396)          (0.00421)           (0.00424)
              Early Entering First Gen.   -0.0979***        -0.0805***         -0.0876***          -0.0887***
                                          (0.00401)         (0.00411)          (0.00433)           (0.00432)
                    Second Generation     -0.0926***        -0.0791***         -0.0852***          -0.0866***       -0.0780***
                                          (0.00324)         (0.00325)          (0.00345)           (0.00346)        (0.00357)
                     Third Generation     -0.0352***        -0.0215*           -0.0223*            -0.0271**        -0.0316**
                                          (0.0103)          (0.0102)           (0.0103)            (0.0103)         (0.0104)
                                                                             % Absent Days
Hispanics -
              Late Entering First Gen.    -0.00254***       -0.00477***          -0.00427***       -0.00917***
                                          (0.000578)        (0.000521)           (0.000583)        (0.000589)
              Early Entering First Gen.   -0.0106***        -0.00973***          -0.00922***       -0.0133***
                                          (0.000510)        (0.000427)           (0.000508)        (0.000516)
                    Second Generation     -0.00856***       -0.00747***          -0.00704***       -0.0107***       -0.0136***
                                          (0.000523)        (0.000386)           (0.000432)        (0.000441)       (0.000476)
                     Third Generation      0.00263***        0.00217***           0.00241***       -0.000430        -0.00353***
                                          (0.000586)        (0.000445)           (0.000456)        (0.000451)       (0.000454)
Asians -
              Late Entering First Gen.    -0.0269***        -0.0266***           -0.0262***        -0.0273***
                                          (0.000915)        (0.000907)           (0.000940)        (0.000948)
              Early Entering First Gen.   -0.0284***        -0.0253***           -0.0249***        -0.0252***


                                                               43
                                                    (0.000720)             (0.000714)              (0.000741)             (0.000743)
                       Second Generation            -0.0286***             -0.0265***              -0.0263***             -0.0265***             -0.0249***
                                                    (0.000572)             (0.000573)              (0.000593)             (0.000589)             (0.000606)
                         Third Generation           -0.00920***            -0.00635**              -0.00646**             -0.00741***            -0.00801***
                                                    (0.00201)              (0.00198)               (0.00198)              (0.00197)              (0.00196)

School x Cohort FE                                        No                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Native language                                           No                    No                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
FRPL eligible                                             No                    No                     No                     Yes                    Yes
Maternal characteristics                                  No                    No                     No                     No                     Yes
Notes: The regressions include 41,069 unique late entering first generation Hispanic students, 51,605 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students,
90,847 unique second generation Hispanic students, 41,764 unique third generation Hispanic students, 5,367 unique late entering first generation Asian students,
4,981 unique early entering first generation Asian students, 9,450 unique second generation Asian students, 1,175 unique third generation Asian students,
342,297 unique third generation white students. Late entering students are defined as the students who entered the Florida public school system after the third
grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level in parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. All models control for gender, age, special
education status, and cohort fixed effects.




                                                                               44
Table A3 - Regression Adjusted Cross-Generational Differences in Hispanic and Asian High School Graduation and Advanced
Course-Taking, Compared to Third Generation White Students
                                                                       Graduated from High School
                                     (1)                (2)                    (3)                (4)             (5)
Hispanics -
       Late Entering First Gen.    -0.189***          -0.186***             -0.168***           -0.144***
                                   (0.00761)          (0.00590)             (0.00654)           (0.00644)
      Early Entering First Gen.    -0.000362          -0.00887*              0.00924*            0.0284***
                                   (0.00523)          (0.00402)             (0.00458)           (0.00455)
             Second Generation      0.00285           -0.00452               0.0111**            0.0283***       0.0398***
                                   (0.00595)          (0.00387)             (0.00420)           (0.00416)       (0.00437)
              Third Generation     -0.0325***         -0.0354***            -0.0267***          -0.0133***       0.00478
                                   (0.00562)          (0.00390)             (0.00403)           (0.00388)       (0.00382)
Asians -
        Late Entering First Gen.   -0.0457***         -0.0527***            -0.0377***          -0.0321***
                                   (0.00951)          (0.00925)             (0.00964)           (0.00956)
      Early Entering First Gen.     0.0895***          0.0716***             0.0854***           0.0900***
                                   (0.00799)          (0.00834)             (0.00879)           (0.00894)
             Second Generation      0.111***           0.0936***             0.104***            0.105***        0.0896***
                                   (0.00545)          (0.00578)             (0.00598)           (0.00585)       (0.00576)
              Third Generation      0.00423            0.00523               0.00732             0.00995         0.0153
                                   (0.0186)           (0.0168)              (0.0167)            (0.0165)        (0.0163)

                                                       Took an Advanced Course Before High School Graduation
Hispanics -
       Late Entering First Gen.    -0.142***          -0.191***             -0.149***           -0.110***
                                   (0.0139)           (0.0102)              (0.0102)            (0.00990)
      Early Entering First Gen.     0.0214            -0.0360***             0.00537             0.0361***
                                   (0.0121)           (0.00728)             (0.00810)           (0.00784)
             Second Generation     -0.0238            -0.0799***            -0.0446***          -0.0179**       -0.00762
                                   (0.0138)           (0.00650)             (0.00703)           (0.00677)       (0.00674)
              Third Generation     -0.0388**          -0.0937***            -0.0748***          -0.0561***      -0.0396***
                                   (0.0119)           (0.00650)             (0.00659)           (0.00650)       (0.00653)
Asians -
        Late Entering First Gen.    0.239***           0.131***              0.165***            0.176***
                                   (0.0152)           (0.0139)              (0.0144)            (0.0142)


                                                                  45
       Early Entering First Gen.              0.290***                  0.176***                 0.208***                  0.217***
                                             (0.0142)                  (0.0133)                 (0.0138)                  (0.0140)
              Second Generation               0.280***                  0.171***                 0.196***                  0.200***                 0.184***
                                             (0.0112)                  (0.0104)                 (0.0107)                  (0.0106)                 (0.0105)
                Third Generation              0.0794*                   0.0228                   0.0274                    0.0302                   0.0349
                                             (0.0312)                  (0.0276)                 (0.0279)                  (0.0275)                 (0.0264)

High School x Cohort FE                         No                       Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Native language                                 No                       No                        Yes                      Yes                       Yes
FRPL eligible                                   No                       No                        No                       Yes                       Yes
Maternal characteristics                        No                       No                        No                       No                        Yes
Notes: High school graduation regressions include 15,943 unique late entering first generation Hispanic students, 20,467 unique early entering first generation
Hispanic students, 36,260 unique second generation Hispanic students, 15,685 unique third generation Hispanic students, 1,810 unique late entering first
generation Asian students, 1,806 unique early entering first generation Asian students, 3,728 unique second generation Asian students, 418 unique third
generation Asian students, and 154,758 unique third generation white students. Advanced course-taking regressions include 7,883 unique late entering first
generation Hispanic students, 10,914 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students, 20,362 unique second generation Hispanic students, 8,178 unique
third generation Hispanic students, 1,170 unique late entering first generation Asian students, 1,261 unique early entering first generation Asian students, 2,862
unique second generation Asian students, 268 unique third generation Asian students, and 92,346 unique third generation white students. Late entering students
are defined as the students who entered the Florida public school system after the third grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level in parentheses,
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. All models control for gender, age of the student when he/she enters the ninth grade for the first time, special education
status, and cohort fixed-effects.




                                                                                   46
APPENDIX B
Figure B1 – Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Reading Scores among Hispanic Students, Compared to Third
Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants, by Country of Origin
                                (I) Puerto Rico                                                                         (II) Cuba




                                 (III) Mexico                                                                          (IV) Other




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also maternal
characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors clustered
at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. Regressions include 1,647 unique first generation
Puerto Rican immigrants, 2,374 unique second generation Puerto Rican immigrants, 6,464 unique first generation Cuban immigrants, 5,543 unique second
generation Cuban immigrants, 2,283 unique first generation Mexican immigrants, 4,239 unique second generation Mexican immigrants, 8,894 unique first
generation immigrants from other countries, 9,842 unique second generation immigrants from other countries.




                                                                                   47
Figure B2 – Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Math Scores among Hispanic Students, Compared to Third Generation
Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants, by Country of Origin
                                (I) Puerto Rico                                                                         (II) Cuba




                                 (III) Mexico                                                                          (IV) Other




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also maternal
characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors clustered
at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. Regressions include 1,647 unique first generation
Puerto Rican immigrants, 2,374 unique second generation Puerto Rican immigrants, 6,464 unique first generation Cuban immigrants, 5,543 unique second
generation Cuban immigrants, 2,283 unique first generation Mexican immigrants, 4,239 unique second generation Mexican immigrants, 8,894 unique first
generation immigrants from other countries, 9,842 unique second generation immigrants from other countries.




                                                                                   48
Figure B3 – Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Reading Scores among Hispanic Students, Compared to Third
Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants, by Country of Origin
                               (I) Philippines                                                                      (II) China




                                 (III) Japan                                                                        (IV) Other




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also maternal
characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry where “1G-3rd” indicates
entry during or before the third grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each
coefficient. Regressions include 1,437 unique first generation Filipino immigrants, 1,069 unique second generation Filipino immigrants, 1,192 unique first
generation Chinese immigrants, 984 unique second generation Chinese immigrants, 216 unique first generation Japanese immigrants, 70 unique second
generation Japanese immigrants, 6,534 unique first generation immigrants from other countries, 7,192 unique second generation immigrants from other countries.




                                                                                49
Figure B4 – Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Math Scores among Hispanic Students, Compared to Third Generation
Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants, by Country of Origin
                               (I) Philippines                                                                      (II) China




                                 (III) Japan                                                                        (IV) Other




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also maternal
characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry where “1G-3rd” indicates
entry during or before the third grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each
coefficient. Regressions include 1,437 unique first generation Filipino immigrants, 1,069 unique second generation Filipino immigrants, 1,192 unique first
generation Chinese immigrants, 984 unique second generation Chinese immigrants, 216 unique first generation Japanese immigrants, 70 unique second
generation Japanese immigrants, 6,534 unique first generation immigrants from other countries, 7,192 unique second generation immigrants from other countries.




                                                                                50
 CROSS-GENERATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN THE
              SECOND GREAT WAVE OF IMMIGRATION
                APPENDIX FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

Online Figure 1 – Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Test Scores among Hispanic
and Asian Students, Compared to Third Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School
System for the First Generation Immigrants, including Students Born in Another State
            (I) Reading – Hispanic                            (II) Reading - Asian




                (III) Math - Hispanic                                         (IV) Math - Asian




Notes: The estimated cross-generational differences are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age
controls, and cohort fixed-effects, estimated separately using all second and higher generation students and using
only Florida-born second and higher generation students. The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first
generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes
represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. Regressions include 19,286 unique first generation
Hispanic immigrants, 2,375 unique first generation Asian immigrants; 51,892 unique second or higher generation
Hispanic immigrants, 5,615 unique second or higher generation Asian immigrants including the native students born
in another state; 32,531 unique second or higher generation Hispanic immigrants, 2,865 unique second or higher
generation Asian immigrants excluding the native students born in another state.




                                                         51
Online Figure 2 – Cross-Generational Differences in Raw Trends in Student Test Scores over
Grades among Hispanic and Asian Students, Compared to Third Generation Whites in grades 3
through 8, Conditional on Continuous Enrollment
            (I) Reading - Hispanic                          (II) Reading - Asian




               (III) Math – Hispanic                                         (IV) Math - Asian




Notes: The estimated cross-generational differences among Asian, Hispanic, compared to the third generation white
students are obtained without any additional covariates, estimated separately for each given grade. Standard errors
clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each estimated
coefficient. The regressions include 34,325 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students, 61,439 unique
second generation Hispanic students, 27,018 unique third generation Hispanic students, 3,321 unique early entering
first generation Asian students, 6,307 unique second generation Asian students, 709 unique third generation Asian
students, and 218,830 unique third generation white students.




                                                        52
Online Figure 3 – Cross-Generational Differences in Raw Trends in Student Disciplinary
Incidents and Absences over Grades among Hispanic and Asian Students, Compared to Third
Generation Whites in grades 3 through 8, Conditional on Continuous Enrollment
      (I) Disciplinary Incidents - Hispanic            (II) Disciplinary Incidents - Asian




         (III) % Absent Days – Hispanic                                (IV) % Absent Days - Asian




Notes: The estimated cross-generational differences among Asian, Hispanic, compared to the third generation white
students are obtained without any additional covariates, estimated separately for each given grade. Standard errors
clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each estimated
coefficient. The regressions include 37,402 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students, 63,251 unique
second generation Hispanic students, 28,406 unique third generation Hispanic students, 3,694 unique early entering
first generation Asian students, 6,457 unique second generation Asian students, 754 unique third generation Asian
students, and 234,095 unique third generation white students.




                                                        53
Online Figure 4 – Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Test Scores, Disciplinary Incidents, and Absences among Hispanic
Students, Compared to Third Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants,
Excluding Students of Cuban or Puerto Rican Origin
                         (I) Reading                                                         (II) Math




                       (III) Disciplinary Incidents                                                             (IV) % Absent Days




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, English language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also
maternal characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors
clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. The regressions in the top panel include
11,176 unique first generation Hispanic students, 14,081 unique second generation Hispanic students, 10,533 unique third generation Hispanic students, and
76,664 unique third generation white students for the top panel; 11,965 unique first generation Hispanic students, 14,367 unique second generation Hispanic
students, 10,874 unique third generation Hispanic students, and 76,664 unique third generation white students for the top panel.



                                                                                  54
Online Figure 5 - Cross-Generational Differences in Eighth Grade Test Scores Compared to Third Generation Whites, by Grade of
Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants, Student Racial/Ethnic Identification versus Mother Racial/Ethnic
Identification, Excluding Students of Cuban or Puerto Rican Origin
                           (I) Reading                                                        (II) Math




Notes: The estimates are obtained using the model that controls for disability, gender, age controls, and cohort fixed-effects. “Student Hispanic” specification use
the self-reported race/ethnicity whereas “Mother Hispanic” specification use the self-reported race/ethnicity of the mother to identify second and third generation
Hispanic immigrants. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. The
regressions include 11,176 unique first generation Hispanic students, 19,788 unique second generation students with Hispanic mothers, 9,823 unique third
generation students with Hispanic mothers, 14,081 unique second generation Hispanic students, 10,533 unique third generation Hispanic students, and 79,052
unique third generation white students with non-Hispanic and non-Asian mothers.




                                                                                55
Online Figure 6 – Cross-Generational Differences in High School Graduation and Course-Taking among Hispanic Students,
Compared to Third Generation Whites, by Grade of Entry into the School System for the First Generation Immigrants, Excluding
Students of Cuban or Puerto Rican Origin
                  (I) High School Graduation                                     (II) Advanced Course-Taking




Notes: The “no controls”, “with controls”, and “full controls” specifications are obtained using models with only disability, gender, age controls, and cohort
fixed-effects (no controls), controls for school by cohort fixed effects, English language spoken at home, and school lunch eligibility (with controls), and also
maternal characteristics (full controls). The first generation indicators replaced by a series of first generation indicators based on grade of entry. Standard errors
clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95 percent confidence interval for each coefficient. High school graduation regressions include
24,866 unique first generation Hispanic students, 23,195 unique second generation Hispanic students, 15,685 unique third generation Hispanic students, and
154,758 unique third generation white students. Advanced course-taking regressions include 13,238 unique first generation Hispanic students, 12,898 unique
second generation Hispanic students, 8,297 unique third generation Hispanic students, and 93,641 unique third generation white students.




                                                                                  56
Online Figure 7 – Cross-Generational Regression-Adjusted Trends in Student Test Scores over Grades among Hispanic Students,
Compared to Third Generation Whites in grades 3 through 8, Conditional on Continuous Enrollment, Excluding Students of Cuban or
Puerto Rican Origin
                         (I) Reading                                                        (II) Math




                       (III) Disciplinary Incidents                                                         (IV) % Absent Days




Notes: The estimated cross-generational differences among Hispanic students compared to the third generation white students are obtained using the covariates
given in column (IV), Table A1, estimated separately for each given grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level. Capped spikes represent the 95
percent confidence interval for each estimated coefficient. The regressions include 23,694 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students, 39,922 unique
second generation Hispanic students, 27,018 unique third generation Hispanic students, and 218,830 unique third generation white students.



                                                                               57
Online Table 1 - Regression Adjusted Cross-Generational Differences in Hispanic Test Scores, Compared to Third Generation White
Students in Grades 3 through 8, Excluding Cuban and Puerto Rican Students
                                                                            Reading Scores
                                             (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)
             Late Entering First Gen.     -0.979***         -0.933***          -0.776***         -0.692***
                                          (0.0101)          (0.00720)          (0.00731)         (0.00721)
            Early Entering First Gen.     -0.319***         -0.294***          -0.135***         -0.0647***
                                          (0.00542)         (0.00311)          (0.00335)         (0.00326)
                  Second Generation       -0.369***         -0.287***          -0.145***         -0.0732***         -0.0666***
                                          (0.00363)         (0.00223)          (0.00250)         (0.00240)          (0.00232)
                   Third Generation       -0.293***         -0.253***          -0.179***         -0.128***          -0.109***
                                          (0.00321)         (0.00203)          (0.00208)         (0.00198)          (0.00189)
                                                                             Math Scores
             Late Entering First Gen.      -0.692***         -0.679***          -0.560***        -0.480***
                                           (0.00977)         (0.00615)          (0.00631)        (0.00621)
                                                  ***               ***                 ***
            Early Entering First Gen.      -0.193            -0.210             -0.0896          -0.0215***
                                           (0.00540)         (0.00277)          (0.00309)        (0.00300)
                  Second Generation        -0.268***         -0.226***          -0.118***        -0.0487***         -0.0289***
                                           (0.00377)         (0.00209)          (0.00242)        (0.00235)          (0.00235)
                   Third Generation        -0.265***         -0.251***          -0.195***        -0.146***          -0.117***
                                           (0.00330)         (0.00194)          (0.00203)        (0.00194)          (0.00188)

School-Year FE                                          No                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Native language                                         No                     No                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes
FRPL eligible                                           No                     No                      No                      Yes                    Yes
Maternal characteristics                                No                     No                      No                      No                     Yes
Notes: The regressions include 20,610 unique late entering first generation Hispanic students, 34,151 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students,
56,404 unique second generation Hispanic students, 40,072 unique third generation Hispanic students, 342,297 unique third generation white students. Late
entering students are defined as the students who entered the Florida public school system after the third grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year
level in parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. All models control for gender, age, special education status, and cohort fixed effects.




                                                                                 58
Online Table 2 - Regression Adjusted Cross-Generational Differences in Hispanic Disciplinary Incidents and Attendance, Compared
to Third Generation White Students in Grades KG through 8, Excluding Cuban and Puerto Rican Students
                                                                           Disciplinary Incidents
                                             (1)                (2)                  (3)              (4)                (5)
Hispanics -
             Late Entering First Gen.     -0.0188***         -0.0160***           -0.0193***       -0.0307***
                                          (0.00159)          (0.00112)            (0.00117)        (0.00116)
                                                  ***                  ***                ***
            Early Entering First Gen.     -0.0157            -0.00880             -0.0122          -0.0223***
                                          (0.000777)         (0.000535)           (0.000624)       (0.000632)
                                                    ***                ***                  ***
                  Second Generation       -0.00895           -0.00317             -0.00622         -0.0169***        -0.0209***
                                          (0.000635)         (0.000466)           (0.000535)       (0.000535)        (0.000557)
                                                  ***                ***                  ***               ***
                   Third Generation        0.0132             0.0183               0.0167           0.00900            0.00405***
                                          (0.000704)         (0.000506)           (0.000507)       (0.000487)        (0.000479)
                                                                              % Absent Days
Hispanics -
             Late Entering First Gen.      -0.00488***        -0.00666***          -0.00616***      -0.0101***
                                           (0.000289)         (0.000245)           (0.000256)       (0.000261)
            Early Entering First Gen.      -0.00950***        -0.00956***          -0.00907***      -0.0125***
                                           (0.000180)         (0.000157)           (0.000172)       (0.000177)
                  Second Generation        -0.00913***        -0.00927***          -0.00883***      -0.0125***        -0.0145***
                                           (0.000175)         (0.000136)           (0.000146)       (0.000150)        (0.000159)
                   Third Generation         0.00390***         0.00409***           0.00432***       0.00168***       -0.000308**
                                           (0.000185)         (0.000117)           (0.000120)       (0.000118)        (0.000116)

School-Year FE                                          No                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Native language                                         No                     No                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes
FRPL eligible                                           No                     No                      No                      Yes                    Yes
Maternal characteristics                                No                     No                      No                      No                     Yes
Notes: The regressions include 25,281 unique late entering first generation Hispanic students, 35,453 unique early entering first generation Hispanic students,
58,065 unique second generation Hispanic students, 41,764 unique third generation Hispanic students, 342,297 unique third generation white students. Late
entering students are defined as the students who entered the Florida public school system after the third grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year
level in parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. All models control for gender, age, special education status, and cohort fixed effects.




                                                                                 59
Online Table 3 - Regression Adjusted Cross-Generational Differences in Hispanic High School Graduation, Compared to Third
Generation White Students, Excluding Cuban and Puerto Rican Students
                                                                     Graduated from High School
                                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)                (5)
     Late Entering First Gen.      -0.189***           -0.186***            -0.168***          -0.144***
                                   (0.00761)           (0.00590)            (0.00654)          (0.00644)
    Early Entering First Gen.      -0.000362           -0.00887*             0.00924*           0.0284***
                                   (0.00523)           (0.00402)            (0.00458)          (0.00455)
          Second Generation         0.00285            -0.00452              0.0111**           0.0283***          0.0398***
                                   (0.00595)           (0.00387)            (0.00420)          (0.00416)          (0.00437)
           Third Generation        -0.0325***          -0.0354***           -0.0267***         -0.0133***          0.00478
                                   (0.00562)           (0.00390)            (0.00403)          (0.00388)          (0.00382)
                                                      Took an Advanced Course Before High School Graduation
     Late Entering First Gen.      -0.103***           -0.157***            -0.115***          -0.0751***          0
                                   (0.0139)            (0.0104)             (0.0107)           (0.0104)            (.)
                                           **                  **                                      ***
    Early Entering First Gen.       0.0352             -0.0234               0.0178             0.0514             0
                                   (0.0123)            (0.00798)            (0.00911)          (0.00897)           (.)
          Second Generation        -0.0339*            -0.0824***           -0.0457***         -0.0126            -0.00685
                                   (0.0136)            (0.00728)            (0.00808)          (0.00797)          (0.00656)
           Third Generation        -0.0389**           -0.0927***           -0.0741***         -0.0550***         -0.0449***
                                   (0.0119)            (0.00651)            (0.00663)          (0.00653)          (0.00633)

High School x Cohort FE                         No                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                      Yes
Native language                                 No                       No                        Yes                       Yes                      Yes
FRPL eligible                                   No                       No                        No                        Yes                      Yes
Maternal characteristics                        No                       No                        No                        No                       Yes
Notes: High school graduation regressions include 10,758 unique late entering first generation Hispanic students, 14,108 unique early entering first generation
Hispanic students, 23,195 unique second generation Hispanic students, 15,685 unique third generation Hispanic students, and 154,758 unique third generation
white students. Advanced course-taking regressions include 5,217 unique late entering first generation Hispanic students, 7,374 unique early entering first
generation Hispanic students, 12,785 unique second generation Hispanic students, 8,178 unique third generation Hispanic students, and 92,346 unique third
generation white students. Late (early) entering students are defined as the students who entered the Florida public school system after (before or during) the third
grade. Standard errors clustered at the school by year level in parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. All models control for gender, age of the student
when he/she enters the ninth grade for the first time, special education status, and cohort fixed-effects.




                                                                                 60
