                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            PRICE REGULATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL EXTERNALITIES:
                       EVIDENCE FROM METHANE LEAKS

                                      Catherine Hausman
                                     Lucija Muehlenbachs

                                      Working Paper 22261
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22261


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                              May 2016, February 2018




We thank Kathy Baylis, Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Laura Grant, Sumeet Gulati, Sarah
Jacobson, Corey Lang, Erich Muehlegger, Jim Sallee, Catherine Wolfram, seminar participants at
Carnegie Mellon, Columbia SIPA, Cornell, Duke-NCSU-RTI, EDF, HEC Montreal, UC-Davis,
the University of Michigan, the University of Tennessee, and participants at the NBER Future of
Energy Distribution meeting, the Association of Environmental and Resource Economics
meeting, the Midwest Energy Fest, the ASSA meetings, and the Berkeley POWER conference for
helpful feedback. We are grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada, and Resource for the Future for financial support. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Catherine Hausman and Lucija Muehlenbachs. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Regulation and Environmental Externalities: Evidence from Methane Leaks
Catherine Hausman and Lucija Muehlenbachs
NBER Working Paper No. 22261
May 2016, Revised February 2018
JEL No. D22,D42,L95,Q41

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate expenditures by US natural gas distribution firms to reduce natural gas leaks.
Reducing leaks averts commodity losses (valued at around $5/Mcf), but also climate damages
($27/Mcf) because the primary component of natural gas is methane, a potent greenhouse gas. In
addition to this private/social wedge, incentives to abate are weakened by this industry's status as
a regulated natural monopoly: current price regulations allow many distribution firms to pass the
cost of any leaked gas on to their customers. Our estimates imply that too little is spent repairing
leaks—we estimate expenditures substantially below $5/Mcf, i.e. less than the commodity value
of the leaked gas. In contrast, expenditures on accelerated pipeline replacement are in general
higher than the combination of gas costs and climate benefits (we estimate expenditures ranging
from $48/Mcf to $211/Mcf). We conclude by relating these findings to regulatory-induced
incentives in the industry.


Catherine Hausman
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
chausman@umich.edu

Lucija Muehlenbachs
Department of Economics
University of Calgary
2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and Resources for the Future
lmuehlen@ucalgary.ca
    Methane emissions have been the focus of much recent public attention. This invisible
gas is 34 times more potent a greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, yet its release to the
atmosphere has been largely unregulated. One source of methane emissions is leaks from the
natural gas industry: methane is the primary component of natural gas. Leaks throughout
the US natural gas supply chain result in roughly $8 billion of climate impacts annually.1
However, the economics literature on methane leaks is largely nonexistent. In this paper,
we analyze incentives to abate methane leaks in the natural gas distribution sector, a sector
that is made up of around 1,500 local distribution companies delivering gas to residential,
commercial, and industrial customers. This is a sector that is not covered by new federal
methane regulations, and it has had limited emissions reductions to date.2
    Using a panel of US natural gas utilities, we empirically estimate how much is spent to
reduce natural gas leaks. We use an instrumental variables strategy, leveraging plausibly
exogenous variation in historical pipeline infrastructure combined with changes in federal
pipeline regulations. Armed with our estimate of how much utilities spend to reduce leaks
and the commodity cost of the leaks (i.e., the price paid for the gas), we can test whether
utilities equate marginal abatement costs with marginal abatement benefits.
    Our paper highlights a previously unstudied distortion in the natural gas distribution
sector, in which utilities are allowed to pass the cost of lost gas on to customers. Distribution
is a natural monopoly because the necessary pipelines entail both large fixed costs and
economies of density (Joskow, 2007). As such, most natural gas distribution is from price-
regulated investor-owned utilities. By regulating prices, inefficiencies are introduced, largely
stemming from the regulator’s inability to perfectly observe firm effort (Posner, 1969; Laffont
and Tirole, 1986; Joskow, 2007). This paper focuses on the inefficiency from treating leaked
gas as a cost of doing business; a decision that dates back to a 1935 Supreme Court case
in which “a certain loss [of natural gas] is unavoidable, no matter how carefully business is
conducted.”3 The natural gas industry provides an excellent opportunity to test whether
price-regulated firms cost-minimize, because the researcher is able to observe the commodity
value of gas lost as well as effort undertaken to prevent those losses.
    Importantly, the distortion induced by price regulation in this setting is more costly
   1
      This calculation uses the 322 billion cubic feet (Bcf) the Environmental Protection Agency estimated
for 2012 (DOE 2015), the most recent year for which data are finalized. For the social cost, we use a global
warming potential of 34 and the Interagency Working Group’s social cost of carbon for 2015 emissions, $41
per ton. Below we discuss this approach relative to using Marten et al. (2015)’s estimates of the social cost
of methane.
    2
      Federal rules finalized in 2016 will require, once implemented, methane emissions from
oil and gas production on Federal land to comply with New Source Performance Stan-
dards, see, https://www.epa.gov/stationary-sources-air-pollution/epas-actions-reduce-methane-and-volatile-
organic-compound-voc.
    3
      West Ohio Gas Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, January 7, 1935.


                                                     1
than in many other settings, because the leaked commodity imposes outsized external costs.
The full social cost of leaked natural gas is around an order of magnitude larger than the
commodity value.4 In contrast, the ratio of social to private cost is a little less than three
for combusted coal and less than two for combusted gasoline (Parry et al., 2014). Thus in
a second-best setting without a carbon tax, reducing distortions stemming from economic
regulations could have substantial environmental benefits. Additionally, given the rapid
recent growth in the natural gas market, this margin for climate change policy is taking
on greater importance. Moreover, if the gas accumulates (for instance, in a building), it
poses a risk of explosion – resulting in property damage and loss of life. A 2011 explosion in
Allentown, Pennsylvania, caused by a leaking cast iron pipeline, killed five people.5 A 2010
explosion in San Bruno, California killed eight people and destroyed 38 homes.6 This accident
was caused by a transmission line, but it led to greater public and regulatory scrutiny for
both transmission and distribution lines.
    As we describe later, the academic literature on regulated utilities has largely ignored
natural gas firms, so no previous estimates of abatement costs exist. While engineering
estimates give a range of costs for potential activities, they cannot tell us the cost of actions
utilities have actually undertaken. As such, they do not allow for tests of cost minimization.
    Utilities can abate in a myriad of ways, which we divide into two methods: (1) pipeline
repairs, involving operations and maintenance (O&M) expenditures which leave pipeline
infrastructure intact; and (2) pipeline replacement, involving capital expenditures. When
examining O&M expenditures, we find that utilities spend far less for leak repairs than the
value of lost gas itself, implying that they do not fully take advantage of cost-effective leak
mitigation opportunities. These results are consistent with a setting where price regulations
weaken the incentive to cost-minimize, and we document institutional details to explain the
mechanisms underlying our finding. A key mechanism appears to be the reimbursement for
leaked gas through retail rates.
    Our O&M cost estimate is also well below the social cost of leaks, after accounting for
greenhouse gas and safety impacts. To estimate the safety benefits of leak abatement we
collect data on property damages, injuries, and fatalities from incidents involving distribu-
tion pipelines. We relate these to leaks and then monetize them, using a standard Value
of a Statistical Life assumption, to be able to include safety impacts in our cost/benefit
    4
      This paper is focused on methane escaping to the atmosphere, before combustion by an end-user. The
social cost of combusted natural gas is lower; the social cost upon combustion, including the emitted CO2
and local pollutant emissions, is a bit less than twice the private cost of the gas (Parry et al., 2014).
    5
      Source: http://www.lehighvalleylive.com/allentown/index.ssf/2013/02/ugi agrees to pay 500000 fine.html.
    6
      Source:    http://ww2.kqed.org/news/2015/09/08/five-years-after-deadly-san-bruno-explosion-are-we-
safer.



                                                   2
calculations.
    When we examine the other type of leak abatement method, capital expenditures on
pipeline replacement, we find the opposite: utilities spend far more to reduce a unit of
leaked gas than the cost of the gas itself. To estimate a levelized cost of capital intensive
abatement, we first estimate the per-mile cost of pipeline replacement. Using this estimate,
plus assumptions on the amount of methane leaked per mile of low-quality pipe, the pipeline
lifetime, and the discount rate, we calculate the expenditures made on pipeline replacement
as a levelized cost in dollars per unit of methane abated. We provide a range of cost esti-
mates, documenting reasons to suspect heterogeneity. The entire range of capital-intensive
abatement expenditures is substantially higher than the private cost of leaks. However,
some capital-intensive expenditures are lower than the social cost of leaked gas, implying
that moving pipeline replacement forward in time in order to abate greenhouse gas emis-
sions appears to pass a cost/benefit test under some parameter combinations (but not under
all). This heterogeneity is driven by differences in replacement costs, differences in emissions
factors, and differences in explosion risk.
    Finally, to better understand the abatement cost estimates, we look empirically and in
greater depth at utility expenditures. Specifically, we exploit within-utility variation in a
wide selection of financial, regulatory, and safety incentives. We find overall that expendi-
tures are correlated with variables aimed at capturing various economic regulations, rather
than with a non-regulatory financial incentive such as commodity cost – despite tremendous
identifying variation in recent years in these costs. This is consistent with industry reports,
as well as with the abatement cost estimates, and it implies that the regulatory environment
is an important determinant of firm maintenance choices.
    Our paper makes several additional contributions to the literature. The academic litera-
ture on methane leaks has come primarily from engineers and natural scientists, emphasizing
strategies for the measurement of methane emissions (Miller et al., 2013; Phillips et al., 2013;
Brandt et al., 2014; Howarth, 2014; Jackson et al., 2014a,b; Lamb et al., 2015; McKain et al.,
2015).7 The existing research on natural gas distribution companies in the economics liter-
ature is quite small, and generally limited to two areas. One strand of this literature has
focused on retail pricing decisions (Davis and Muehlegger, 2010; Borenstein and Davis, 2012).
Another strand, related to operational decisions, has estimated various efficiency measures
(see e.g., Farsi, Filippini and Kuenzle, 2007; Tanaka and Managi, 2013; Tovar, Ramos-Real
and Fagundes de Almeida, 2015). Perhaps the most closely related paper is Borenstein,
    7
      White papers and non-academic reports on methane leaks and aging pipelines include Aubuchon and
Hibbard, 2013; Costello, 2012; Costello, 2013; Department of Energy, 2015; Yardley Associates, 2012; ICF
International, 2014; Webb, 2015.



                                                   3
Busse and Kellogg (2012), which documents inefficiencies in regulated distributors’ natural
gas procurement, specifically in the forward market. We contribute to this literature by
examining in depth the impact of the regulatory structure on the operational decisions of
a large sample of US utilities. To do so, we construct a dataset of a comprehensive set of
variables, including utility expenditures, pipeline infrastructure, regulatory proceedings, and
safety incidents.
    The financial incentives of natural gas utilities have not been widely studied, in spite
of the size of this sector: in 2013 the US distribution sector was worth almost 80 billion
dollars. In contrast, natural monopoly regulation in the electricity sector has been heavily
studied (for a review, see Borenstein and Bushnell, 2015), having been aided by a clean
natural experiment when price regulations were removed from many firms in the late 1990s
and early 2000s. In contrast, we propose an approach that can be applied even in a setting
where only regulated utilities are observed, in the spirit of Borenstein, Busse and Kellogg
(2012). Rather than comparing the behavior of price-regulated and competitive firms, we
compare the willingness of firms to prevent leaks with the commodity value of the leaks
themselves. Comparing firm behavior to a theoretical optimum, rather than relying on
natural experiments from policy changes, may allow for the study of price regulations in a
wider array of industries.
    With worldwide methane emissions currently valued at over $300 billion per year in cli-
mate change costs, policy-makers are increasingly looking for mitigation opportunities.8 Our
results can inform discussions about how to achieve the least-cost abatement in the distri-
bution sector. In this setting, the presence of distortions from price regulations implies that
there may be “low-hanging fruit” for climate policy. That is, some methane leak abatement
would be economically worthwhile for its commodity costs alone – this has parallels in the
search for negative abatement costs in the energy efficiency literature. The energy-paradox
literature has suggested that there may be substantial negative cost abatement opportuni-
ties, but this claim is controversial (Allcott and Greenstone, 2012; Gillingham and Palmer,
2014; Gerarden, Newell and Stavins, 2017), and recent evidence from a randomized control
trial suggests that there may not be an energy efficiency gap in one setting where the gap
was previously thought to exist (Fowlie, Greenstone and Wolfram, 2015). Insights from this
literature suggest that it is also possible that a non-regulated natural gas firm could fail to
cost-minimize because of inattention or distorted managerial incentives (Gosnell, List and
Metcalfe, 2016). However, in contrast to much of the literature examining the failure of
firms to efficiently manage their energy inputs, the sole business of the firms we observe is
   8
    The IPCC estimated 49 GtCO2-eq of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in 2010, of which 16%
were methane (https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/SYR AR5 FINAL full.pdf).



                                                4
the delivery of energy to end-use customers. That is, their entire business model is based
on acquiring, transporting, and delivering natural gas (and possibly also electricity) to cus-
tomers; as such, one would expect them to have greater expertise in, and attention to, the
efficient management of their natural gas inputs.9 Our setting contributes to this literature
by pointing out an area ignored by previous studies – natural gas distribution – and by
focusing on an important mechanism: the failure of price regulations to ensure privately
optimal use of energy. Finally, our paper relates to questions of maintaining and replacing
aging infrastructure, which will have implications in domains such as water, transportation
infrastructure, and the electricity grid.
    Section 1 provides background on natural gas utilities and regulations. Section 2 describes
the data sources, with a detailed description of the data on leaked gas. In Section 3, we
describe our empirical strategy and provide our results, estimating both the cost of leak
detection and repair and the cost of pipeline replacement. In Section 4, to understand the
mechanisms underlying our main results, we empirically examine associations between utility
expenditures and various financial and regulatory variables. Section 5 concludes.


1       Background
Beginning in the 1820s, the natural gas distribution network today has grown to over 1
million pipeline miles. In 2013, the distribution market as a whole was worth almost 80
billion dollars and served 72 million customers.10


1.1     Natural Gas Leaks and Infrastructure
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimated in 2013 that 1.4 percent of natural
gas leaked from the supply chain (Jackson et al., 2014b). However, considerable uncer-
tainty persists, and academic scientists and engineers have questioned the EPA estimates
(Brandt et al., 2014). Some of the uncertainty comes from observed differences in bottom-up
approaches, with emissions factors estimated for specific components of the supply chain,
compared to top-down approaches that use remote sensing and atmospheric models (Jackson
et al., 2014b).
    The Department of Energy recently reported that 32 percent of methane emissions from
    9
      Our setting does not allow us to test for differences between regulated and non-regulated firms, as all
of the utilities delivering natural gas are either price-regulated or government-operated.
   10
      Distribution volumes totaled over 15 billion thousand cubic feet (Mcf), and the average price paid
by utilities in 2013 was $4.97/Mcf. Customer counts are comprised of 67 million residential, 5 million
commercial, and almost 200 thousand industrial and electric power customers.



                                                     5
the natural gas system are from the production stage, 14 percent from processing, 33 percent
from transmission and storage, and 20 percent from distribution (DOE 2015). While in
recent years methane emissions have been reduced, little of the reductions have come from
the distribution sector, suggesting that the distribution sector merits closer attention.11 The
distribution sector also carries outsized safety risks because of its location in population
centers. An average of 11 fatalities, 50 injuries, and $25 million in property damages occur
annually as a result of incidents in the natural gas distribution system. While many of these
occur because of excavation accidents, over which a utility has little control, 20 percent of
incidents occur because of corrosion failures, equipment failures, etc.12
    Several components of the distribution system lead to methane emissions. First, leaks
can occur at metering and pressure stations; these include the “citygate” where the utility
receives the gas from the transmission line as well as downstream pressure reduction stations.
As components age, or if they have not been properly fitted together, gas escapes. Also,
underground pipelines leak, including mains (shared lines) and services (lines connecting
customers to mains). As pipes corrode, they can develop cracks—and similar to loose-fitting
components in pressure stations, loose-fitting pipes also lead to escaped gas. Emissions also
occur when utilities intentionally vent equipment. For instance, to undertake maintenance
projects, sections of pipeline are purged of gas, frequently by releasing the gas to the atmo-
sphere. Finally, emissions can occur when forces largely beyond the control of the utility
lead to damaged equipment. Third-party excavation damages (e.g., home-owners hitting a
line when digging) are common, as are vehicle collisions with infrastructure.
    Leaks from pipelines have attracted the most public attention. Around 15 percent of the
nation’s distribution pipelines are at least 50 years old; another 8 percent are of unknown
age. Moreover, much of the oldest infrastructure is composed of cast iron or bare steel,
materials that are especially prone to leak. Researchers have found particularly high leak
rates in cities such as Boston, Manhattan, and Washington, D.C., which have especially high
concentrations of cast iron and bare steel pipe (Phillips et al., 2013; Jackson et al., 2014a;
Gallagher et al., 2015; McKain et al., 2015). Utilities have been slowly, but systematically,
replacing older pipelines. Nationwide, the number of miles of pipes built before 1940 have
been reduced by almost 20 percent since 2004. In addition, utilities have undertaken efforts to
better identify the age and quality of their pipeline infrastructure. Pipes of unknown vintage
  11
      In 2013, the EPA estimated that its voluntary reductions program, the Natural Gas STAR Program,
led to a reduction in methane emissions of 51 Bcf, with 81 percent coming from production, 17 percent
coming from transmission, 2 percent from gathering and processing, and less than 1 percent from distribution
(US EPA Natural Gas STAR program website, http://www3.epa.gov/gasstar/accomplishments/ index.html,
accessed Feburary 16, 2016). Other years saw similar breakdowns.
   12
      Source: PHMSA data, described later in the paper.



                                                     6
have been reduced by almost 15 percent since 2004, a combination of pipeline replacement
as well as better data collection on age. At EPA emissions factors, we estimate that pipeline
replacements since 2004 have saved 5 million Mcf annually in leaks, worth around 130 million
dollars annually in climate change benefits and over 30 million dollars in gas costs. Below,
we examine the cost-effectiveness of these programs relative to other forms of abatement.
    Throughout this paper, we refer to the benefits, in dollars per thousand cubic feet
($/Mcf), of leak abatement. The first benefit is saved commodity costs, which as described
later, is equal to the citygate price of natural gas. In 2015, this averaged $4.25/Mcf. Over our
sample (1995-2013), this averaged $6.75/Mcf for all utilities and $7.14/Mcf for the investor-
owned utilities on which we focus. The second benefit of leak abatement is averted climate
change impacts. At a social cost of carbon of $41/ton and a global warming potential (GWP)
of 34, this is equal to around $27/Mcf.13 The final benefit is averted explosions, for which
our estimates are very noisy, but all are less than $2.74/Mcf.


1.2     Environmental and Safety Regulations
Two federal government agencies regulate natural gas leaks from the distribution sector. The
EPA has a voluntary reductions program, the Natural Gas STAR Program, which provides
technical advice regarding abatement options throughout the supply chain. Information
sheets for this program tend to cite benefits related to greenhouse gas impacts as well as
operational efficiency.14
    In addition, the Department of Transportation’s Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) regulates natural gas pipeline safety. PHMSA issues regulations
and conducts inspections and enforcement operations. Most recently, PHMSA issued a
new rule on “Gas Distribution Integrity Management Programs,” tightening standards on
distribution pipelines. The rule was issued in December 2009, and operators were required
to comply by August 2011. Each utility is required to develop its own risk-based program,
which PHMSA then approves. PHMSA coordinates with state-level agencies, which in some
cases layer on additional regulations.
    Thus, state-level regulations have generally been motivated by, and directed at, safety
impacts rather than climate change impacts per se. Historically, federal regulations have
  13
      Throughout we use a GWP-scaling approach, rather than Marten et al. (2015)’s estimate of the social
cost of methane. An advantage of the Marten et al. approach is that it directly estimates the social cost of
methane rather than simply scaling by a GWP. A disadvantage is that it relies on IPCC Fourth Assessment
Report (AR4) rather than AR5 results (Interagency Working Group, 2016), and it has not yet been updated
to reflect the significantly higher GWPs used in AR5.
   14
      See e.g. the “2012 EPA Natural Gas STAR Program Accomplishments” document. Accessed February
16, 2016 from http://www3.epa.gov/gasstar/documents/ngstar accomplishments 2012.pdf.



                                                     7
not explicitly targeted the climate change component of methane leaks, beyond the EPA’s
voluntary program.


1.3       Economic Regulations
Natural gas distribution is a natural monopoly. It has high fixed costs related to surface
stations and pipelines, and costs are lowered by having a single network within a city. As
a result, the industry has long faced economic regulation. Economic regulation takes two
forms in this context: some utilities are investor-owned utilities facing price regulations, and
other utilities are owned and operated by municipal governments.15
    Investor-owned utilities tend to serve larger customer bases, and accordingly make up 90
percent of total gas delivered in the US. Municipal utilities, while smaller in total volume
delivered, are greater in number – in 2013, over 70 percent of utilities were government
agencies. In this paper, we focus largely on investor-owned utilities, for which more data are
available, but we comment in the conclusion on municipally-run distributors.
    Investor-owned utilities are regulated by state-level public utility commissions (PUCs)
via a cost-plus form of price regulation. The utility is reimbursed for its operating and capital
expenses, earning a fair rate-of-return on capital for its investors. Both this reimbursement
process and retail rate setting occur through a quasi-judicial process involving the commission
and the utility. Disincentives for leak repair are possible for a couple of reasons. First, it has
been argued that necessary pipeline replacements are slowed down by the rate case process
(Yardley Associates, 2012). In recent years, alternative mechanisms to recover costs without
a regulatory proceeding have been introduced in some states, which we explore in more depth
below.
    Additionally, in almost all jurisdictions, utilities are able to include the cost of leaked
gas directly in their retail rates, and thus are not fully incentivized to reduce leaks. Leaked
gas is typically recovered in the same mechanism that is used to recover gas purchases,
called a purchased gas adjustment (PGA). Specifically, utilities, “in their PGA mechanisms,
generally divide the total gas-purchased costs by the volume of gas sold to customers. . .
By calculating the PGA mechanism based on sales, the utility is implicitly building in the
LAUF [lost and unaccounted for]-gas factor” (Costello, 2013). To incentivize leak abatement,
some state utility commissions limit the amount of leaked gas that can be passed through
to ratepayers. However, a 2013 survey asked state utility commissions “What incentive does
your commission provide utilities to manage LAUF gas?,” and 19 of 41 responded “None”
or something similar (Costello, 2013).16 Lost and unaccounted for gas (LAUF) is the only
  15
       A small portion – around 2 percent – of distribution companies are cooperatives or have other structures.
  16
       We note that in this paper we do not examine whether utilities with an incentive mechanism behave

                                                        8
widely available measure of leaks and is simply the difference between gas purchased and
gas sold. Utilities have argued that both LAUF volumes and commodity prices are volatile
and outside of their control, and therefore they should be able recover the cost in their rates
(Costello, 2013).
    We note that utilities are also able to recover costs of leak repairs, since O&M and capital
costs are also reimbursed via retail rates. It is theoretically possible, then, that a utility would
be exactly indifferent between repairing and not repairing. If any uncompensated managerial
effort or attention is required, however, then the utility would be under-incentivized to repair,
as in Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007).17
    The economic regulations faced by utilities may lower the incentive to repair leaks, but on
the other hand, the safety regulations described previously are likely to raise the incentive.
As such, whether cost-effective abatement opportunities are left on the table remains an open
question. Below, we empirically examine the impact of the economic and safety regulations
on utility behavior. We show that data on lost and unaccounted for gas can be used to
analyze leak abatement.
    Finally, an additional distortion is possible, which we explore below. Averch and Johnson
(1962) point out that, because utilities are allowed to earn a fair rate of return on their
capital investments but not on their labor or other variable costs, the utilities’ input choice
can be distorted away from the efficient allocation. We also look for the possibility of an
Averch-Johnson effect in input choices.


2     Data
We collect data from several government agencies on natural gas-utility operations, con-
structing a panel of around 1,500 utilities covering the years 1995 to 2013. The bulk of our
data are from SNL, a company providing proprietary energy data. The SNL data combine
information from many sources, including the Department of Energy’s Energy Information
Administration (EIA), the Department of Transportation’s Pipeline and Hazardous Materi-
als Safety Administration (PHMSA), and state-level public utility commissions.
    First, the SNL data include information from the EIA-176 database, which identifies
all utilities by type (investor owned, municipally owned, other) and location. This census
differently from those without. We do not have the data on the dates that the incentives were implemented;
more importantly, adoption of an incentive mechanism may be endogenous. We note, however, that it is not
clear that all of the incentive mechanisms are binding. For example, the incentive is frequently a cap at,
e.g., 5% of volume, below which the mechanism would not bind. In the states without a cap, the rules are
vague, with states reporting simply that a high leak could lead to an investigation.
   17
      Furthermore, the cost of leaked gas is likely easier to recover, as it is typically through an automatic
adjustment, as compared to the reimbursement of O&M expenses.


                                                      9
contains annual data for all utilities on volumes of gas purchased and delivered.18 For
deliveries, volumes are broken down by sector (residential, commercial, industrial, electric
power, other). At the sectoral level, we also observe revenue and the number of customers
by sector. Finally, this dataset includes estimates of losses from leaks and accidents, which
we describe in greater detail below.
    Second, the SNL data include detailed annual data from PHMSA on infrastructure at all
utilities. Specifically, the dataset tracks miles of distribution pipes and number of customer
connection lines, broken down by type. Materials are separated out (e.g. cast iron, plastic,
copper), as are the decades of installation.19 PHMSA data also track the number of known
leaks eliminated/repaired, by type (e.g. corrosion, excavation damage, etc). Separately, from
PHMSA we obtain a dataset that tracks accidents, reporting the date, number of injuries
and fatalities, and dollar value of property damages.
    We also collect financial data from SNL for a subset of investor-owned utilities. The
original source of this financial information is state-level filings of utilities with public utility
commissions. This information on investor-owned utilities includes annual operations and
maintenance (O&M) expenditures, new capital expenditures, number of employees, etc. The
O&M data are separated into various components, such as distribution, transmission, etc.
Separately, SNL also provides information on all rate cases that investor-owned utilities face.
These data are assembled by SNL from state-level regulatory documents; the dataset includes
dates of rate cases, dollar amounts requested, and dollar amounts granted. We additionally
assemble from several sources a list of alternative rate case proceeding regulations, which we
discuss below.
    We use the annual state-level citygate price, in $/Mcf, from the EIA. The citygate is the
location where a utility receives gas from the transmission system, and as such the citygate
price represents the utility’s commodity cost. We convert all prices to 2015 dollars using the
CPI (all items less energy) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
    Table A1 in the Appendix provides summary statistics for the primary variables of in-
terest. Statistics are provided for the full sample of utilities, as well as for the sample of
investor-owned utilities for which we have financial data. Comprehensive financial infor-
mation on municipally owned utilities is not available, since it is typically not reported to
state public utilities commissions. While investor-owned utilities make up only 25 percent of
company counts, they are on average much larger than municipal utilities. As such, investor-
   18
      We drop utilities that appear in this dataset but report zero residential customers, in order to focus our
sample on distribution utilities.
   19
      Materials data are available for our entire time period, but age data begin only in 2004. Moreover, 8%
of miles are reported as “unknown decade.” As a result, we focus on materials rather than age for most of
our analysis.



                                                      10
owned utilities make up 90 percent of all volumes delivered in the US. We are only able to
observe financial information on a subset of these, which are again larger than the typical
investor-owned utility. Overall, the investor-owned utilities with financial data make up 75
percent of the end-user purchases by companies with residential customers.
    Comprehensive, historical data on directly measured methane emissions from distribution
systems do not exist: recently there have been direct measurements from leaking components
but these do not capture all leaks from a distribution system; satellite data of methane
emissions are comprehensive, but they confound sources (e.g., a landfill or a cattle farm will
also contribute to methane readings). We show that data that has been collected for years
by the EIA can be used to infer trends in leaks. Lost and unaccounted for gas, or what
is commonly called LAUF, is calculated as the difference between how much gas a utility
purchases and how much it sells (information that has long been reported to the EIA, via form
EIA-176).20 Purchases include supply coming from own production, storage withdrawals,
and receipts from other companies. Sales include sales to end-use customers, fuel used in
the firm’s operations, storage injections, and sales to other utilities. The difference between
these two quantities is what is lost and unaccounted for.21,22
    The LAUF measure has noise, created by differences in the timing of measurements;23
by variation in temperature and pressure for gas in versus gas out;24 by storage of gas in the
pipeline network itself; and from meter inaccuracies and accounting mistakes.25 Addition-
  20
       LAUF is known in the industry by other acronyms as well, including “LUAF,” “LAUG,” and “UFG.”
  21
       The EIA-176 form has also, since 2002, asked utilities to report the volume in Mcf of “Losses from
leaks, damage, accidents, migration and/or blow down within the report state.” If a company had no known
losses or leaks, it reported estimates based on engineering studies (Personal communication, EIA staff) –
the dataset does not report which observations are from known leaks and which from engineering estimates.
Until 2010, many companies failed to report this variable. Because this is sometimes based on engineering
estimates, and because of the incomplete time coverage, we do not use this variable. Nonetheless, this volume
is captured in our measure of escaped gas, since it shows up in the purchases variable but not in the sales
variable.
    22
       Unfortunately, for companies engaged in storage, transmission, and distribution, the LAUF variable
cannot be broken down into leaks from the distribution network versus, e.g., transmission or storage. In
general, we interpret our results as driven primarily by the distribution network, for several reasons. First,
the companies in our dataset are primarily engaged in the distribution business rather than the transmission
or storage business, as we demonstrate in the Appendix. Second, we rely on an identification strategy that
leverages changes in distribution-related incentives (described below). Finally, in the Appendix we examine
the impact on our results of weighting by the portion of each utility’s purchases that are from the citygate
(as opposed to an interstate pipeline or storage facility), and we find that our conclusions are robust.
    23
       Contractual arrangements (such as billing cycles) might result in differences in the timing of when
purchases are tracked and when sales are tracked. To examine the potential magnitude of this empirically,
we compared the distribution of one-year LAUF rates to 10-year LAUF rates. The 10-year LAUF rate
distribution is narrower, but not substantially so.
    24
       Respondents to the EIA-176 survey are instructed to correct all volumes to a standard temperature of
60 degrees and a standard pressure of 14.73 psia, but there may be errors in this calculation.
    25
       While some utilities have aimed to improve meter accuracy rates over time, we do not see much of a
narrowing over time of the distribution of LAUF in our data.


                                                     11
ally, theft rather than leaks could account for lost gas, although this is presumably small.
Industry reports have criticized the use of LAUF data, claiming that any information on
leaks is overwhelmed by accounting errors. This measure is indeed noisy; a histogram shows
(Appendix Figure A1) that around 30 percent of the observations fall below zero, which is
not physically possible for leaks. We also note that if using LAUF to calculate climate-change
consequences, gas that leaks from underground pipes is partially oxidized by surrounding
soil and thus does not escape to the atmosphere as methane. Oxidation rates vary, with one
widely-cited study estimating an average rate of 18 percent (Kirchgessner et al., 1997).
    However, we show that LAUF is not purely noise: it responds in systematic ways to
indicators of infrastructure quality. We begin by visually examining data covering around
1,500 utilities for the years 2004-2013. While some variables are available beginning in
1995, pipeline age data were only collected beginning in 2004. (In addition, some variable
definitions were changed by PHMSA in 2004, so for the rest of the paper, we use 2004-2013 as
our primary sample.) Figure 1 shows the association between the percent of gas that is leaked
and two measures of pipeline quality: materials and age. For each panel, we bin the measure
of pipeline quality and calculate bin-level averages of the percent of gas that is leaked; we
also add a linear regression line. The left-hand panel shows a positive relationship between
the percent of gas that is leaked and the percent of pipeline miles that are constructed
low-quality material. Low-quality materials are defined here, and throughout the paper, as
cast iron, ductile iron, and unprotected bare steel. The right-hand panel shows a positive
relationship between leaks and the average age of pipelines in the utility’s network. These
relationships are formalized in the Appendix, with regressions that include both pipeline
quality and pipeline age, as well as a number of controls (Table A2).
    For both panels, the bulk of the observations are in the left-most bins, which explains the
noise apparent in the leak values for the right-most bins. However, we also note that that
there are a number of large utilities with a sizeable fraction of low-quality pipes. Boston Gas
Company, Brooklyn Union Gas Company, Consolidated Edison of New York, and Philadel-
phia Gas Works all had networks in 2013 with at least 40% of miles composed of low-quality
materials. Combined, they served over 3 million residential customers in 2013.
    Finally, we note that there appears to be significantly less measurement error in the
percentage of gas leaked for the sub-sample of utilities on which we have financial data. In
Appendix Figure A1, we show that the distribution of leaked gas is narrower for these utili-
ties. When weighting by firm size, the distribution is even narrower. We also calculate, for
each utility, the standard deviation in the percentage of gas leaked across years. The average
of these values across the financial reporters is substantially lower (by over 40 percent) than
the average for the other utilities. This is consistent with the investor-owned utilities being


                                              12
                        Figure 1: Lost Gas is Correlated with System Materials




                        Note: Low-quality materials are defined as cast iron, ductile iron, and un-
                        protected bare steel. We bin the percent of mains that are low quality (left
                        panel) and the average age of mains (right panel); the raw data is a panel,
                        with around 1,500 utilities covering the years 2004-2013. The black line
                        shows a regression line fit through the binned observations. The data source
                        is EIA and PHMSA via SNL, as described in the text.



larger, and perhaps more sophisticated, firms than, for example, municipal distributors. This
provides reassurance that measurement error will be less of an issue for the firms on which
we focus our analysis. To reduce the amount of variation driven by extreme mismeasure-
ment, throughout the paper we also drop outliers (the upper and lower 5% of leak rates).26
Nonetheless, we will rely on empirical strategies that are robust to measurement error.


3         Cost Estimates
We next estimate the cost of abatement activities undertaken by utilities. We classify the
abatement opportunities for distribution, outlined in the EPA’s Natural Gas STAR program,
into two broad categories: (1) O&M expenditures on leak detection and repair; and (2)
capital expenditures on pipeline replacement.


3.1         Cost of O&M-Driven Detection and Repair
As described in the Background section, leaks can occur at surface facilities as components
age or when they are poorly fitted together. One broad category of abatement involves
identifying these leaks (at metering and regulator stations, for instance) and repairing them.
    26
         Our results are robust to trimming only the upper and lower 1% (Appendix Table A6).


                                                            13
Also falling in this category are activities to reduce so-called “blowdowns,” the intentional
venting of natural gas during maintenance projects. What we characterize as leak detection
and repair can be broadly thought of as maintenance-related activities, with little capital
investment.27
    The EPA’s Natural Gas STAR program has released informational sheets on different
leak detection and repair activities, including engineering cost estimates. We summarize a
selection of these in the Appendix (Table A14). Overall, they span a range of costs – from
so negligible the EPA does not report a cost, up to over $7 per Mcf, with many falling in the
$0-5/Mcf range. We are interested in analyzing the cost of the activities actually undertaken
by utilities in the past two decades, rather than simply the range of potential activities. In
particular, we aim to estimate the cost of abatement observed in our sample, to inform our
understanding of the utilities’ incentives.
    For instance, we documented in the previous section that many utilities are fully reim-
bursed for the cost of their leaked gas, via cost-of-service price regulations. If all utilities
were fully reimbursed, and they failed to internalize any safety or greenhouse gas costs, we
would expect to see only abatement that could be completed at zero marginal cost. As a
second example, if utilities were not reimbursed at all, but still failed to internalize any safety
or greenhouse gas costs, we would expect to observe abatement equal to the commodity cost
(citygate price). Binding safety or environmental regulations would incentivize utilities to
abate at greater cost. In practice, as described above, utilities likely internalize some safety
concerns but not greenhouse gas costs. In light of the reimbursement rules, we aim to test
whether they fully internalize commodity costs.
    Since engineering estimates of potential abatement opportunities cannot inform our un-
derstanding of what utilities have been willing to do historically, we empirically estimate
abatement costs. Ideally, we would estimate a cost function of the form

                                    Eit = β0 + αAit + Xit Θ + εit ,                                     (1)

where Eit is expenditures, Ait is the amount of gas abated in Mcf, and Xit is a vector of
other determinants of expenditures. Unfortunately, we do not directly observe Ait . Instead,
we can only observe Lit , the amount of gas leaked, where Ait = Lcit − Lit and Lcit is the
unobservable counterfactual leakage absent abatement activities.
  27
    As an aside, pipeline repair and replacement could lead to road closures and traffic congestion; traffic
congestion costs from repairing water pipes are estimated to be low (LaRiviere, Wichman and Cunningham,
2016).




                                                    14
    As such, one feasible approach is to regress expenditure amounts on volumes leaked:28

                                     Eit = β0 + β1 Lit + Xit Θ + εit .                                     (2)

This regression would capture that reducing leaked gas requires abatement expenditures.
However, not all of the observed reduction in leaks is necessarily from abatement; we don’t
know what the counterfactual amount of leaked gas would be in the absence of abatement.
Therefore, using data on gas leaked can be thought of as having measurement error around
Ait where Lcit is the measurement error. It would be classical if Lcit were uncorrelated with Ait ,
although in practice that may not hold. For a constant Lcit , equation (2) could be estimated
in place of equation (1), with α = −β1 . In practice, Lcit is not expected to be constant, and
so we consider an instrumental variables approach.
    To solve both the measurement error related to unobserved counterfactual leaks and the
measurement error related to the LAUF variable itself (described in the data section), we re-
quire an instrument that incentivizes leak detection and repair, impacting expenditures only
through these abatement activities. For our instrument, we leverage increased stringency in
distribution-related safety regulations in 2010 (details on the variable’s construction follow).
Intuitively, these regulations should have incentivized utilities to conduct additional repair
activities, raising expenditures and reducing leak volumes.29 Moreover, they should not im-
pact counterfactual emissions Lcit . The use of our instrument has an additional benefit: by
focusing on distribution-related incentives, it will alleviate bias related to activities at other
(non-distribution) parts of the supply chain. We use 2SLS estimation:

                                     Eit = β0 + β1 L
                                                   cit + Xit Θ + εit .                                     (3)

      cit denotes the instrumented volume of leaked gas, in Mcf.30 We scale expenditures
where L
  28
       Below and in Appendix Table A5, we also consider the reverse specification, in which volumes leaked are
regressed on expenditure amounts, and the coefficient on expenditures gives the inverse of the abatement cost.
Both forward and reverse estimation require an instrumental variables approach, since both leak volumes
and expenditures have measurement error.
    29
       Repair activities themselves may involve risk, in which case the social cost/benefit analysis of leak
repairs should take into account the difference in risk between repairing and not repairing. For our estimates
of O&M costs and comparison to commodity value, we are implicitly assuming that neither safety risks
from leaks nor risks from repairing leaks are internalized by the firm. While it is possible that some risk is
internalized (for instance, via lawsuits), estimates of safety risks in the Appendix are small enough that this
issue appears negligible.
    30
       This specification imposes linearity on the total cost function, so that marginal cost is constant and
equal to average cost. If marginal costs are actually rising, then our results would be biased. To examine
this possibility, we estimate the equation including a quadratic term for Lit to allow for the possibility of
rising marginal cost. The coefficient on the quadratic term is very small and not statistically different from
zero. Therefore, we conclude that our simplification is adequate, and that we can treat β1 as the marginal



                                                      15
and leaked gas volumes, as well as the controls listed below, by the average number of pipeline
miles for each utility over our sample period, T1 2013
                                                  P
                                                     t=2004 milesit . As Table A1 shows, utilities
vary tremendously in size, so the literature has found scaling helpful for precision and to
reduce the influence of outliers (Davis and Muehlegger, 2010). Here -β1 is the coefficient of
interest: the cost of abatement that utilities have undertaken, in $/Mcf. Because both the
left-hand and right-hand side variables are scaled by the same amount, this interpretation
is unaffected by scaling. (In the Appendix, Table A6, we show that results are similar when
we do not scale.)
    The controls Xit include region-by-year effects for each of the four census regions (West,
South, Midwest, and Northeast), utility effects, as well as a number of utility-specific, time-
varying variables. We control for total volume sold, total miles of mains (time-varying, in
contrast to the scaling variable), and counts of service lines to absorb variation from changes
in utility operations stemming from, for instance, territory expansion. We control for miles of
mains and count of service lines constructed of low-quality material, since utilities that have
undertaken leak detection and repair are also likely to have undertaken pipeline replacement.
In the next section, we directly estimate the cost of pipeline replacement, but here we wish
to control for it to isolate other leak mitigation activities. We note that in the Appendix
we also estimate versions of equation (3) that take capital expenditures into consideration
(Table A6). We winsorize the upper and lower 1 percent of outliers (but Appendix Table
A6 shows that results are robust to dropping instead of winsorizing, as well as leaving the
data as is). The Appendix also shows that results are robust to alternative sets of controls
(Table A7). Standard errors are clustered at the utility level.
    The basis of our instrument is as follows. As described in Section 1.2, stricter safety
regulations issued by PHMSA took effect in 2010.31 These required “integrity management”
plans from distribution companies. Each company was required to take an assessment of
its own risks, informed by specific characteristics of its distribution network, to have risk
mitigation plans, and to maintain ongoing records.32 Progress was intended to be mea-
sured against the utility’s own historical baseline, rather than against national averages, in
recognition of the heterogeneous risks faced by each utility (depending on materials used
historically, climate and seismic conditions, etc.).
cost parameter of interest.
   31
      The stated goals of the regulation were generally related to safety, rather than to recovery of lost gas
per se, but ex-ante impact analysis assumed that lost gas would be reduced in practice.
   32
      Specific actions were not generally mandated by the law. However, examples of specific processes
mentioned in PHMSA supporting documentation or in individual company compliance plans include, but are
not limited to: leak surveys with detection equipment; expanded operator qualification programs; installation
of excess flow valves; inspections at bridge crossings; increasing information provision to the public on
excavation risk; installation of liners in pipes; and pipeline replacement.



                                                     16
    Our instrument is the utility-specific historical leak volume interacted with a dummy
for the years following the implementation of more stringent PHMSA safety regulations.33
The idea is that the PHMSA rules incentivized all utilities to upgrade their pipes, but
these regulations were more binding for utilities with historically bad system leaks. The
utility fixed effects control for the level effect of having a historically leaky network, so
the IV is capturing only the differential effect following the implementation of PHMSA
regulations. We construct the instrument by multiplying a dummy for the years after the
PHMSA regulations were enacted (2010 and beyond) by the leaks reported by each utility
in the years leading up to the PHMSA regulations (i.e., the average annual leak volume in
the years 2004 to 2009). Thus we expect to see in the first stage that higher pre-regulation
leak volumes lead to greater reductions in leak volumes after the regulations are enacted.
As with the other variables, we scale by each utility’s average number of pipeline miles
over the sample period. In the Appendix, we examine specifications designed to address
various potential concerns arising from the use of this instrument, such as the possibility of
differential trends or mean reversion, finding that our results our robust (Table A4).
    To visually display the variation provided by our instrument, we show an event study
plot for leak volumes. Specifically, we separate the utilities into those with pre-treatment
values of the instrument above and below the median. We regress leak volumes (scaled by
pipeline miles) on years, omitting 2009, the year just prior to PHMSA regulations taking
effect. As Figure 2 shows, leak volumes dropped sharply in the upper median relative to the
bottom median beginning in 2010, the year the PHMSA regulations took effect. Moreover,
they dropped the most for utilities above the median. It is particularly reassuring that
no differential pre-treatment trend is visible. This figure thus provides evidence that the
PHMSA regulations led to a sharp reduction in leak volumes, particularly for the utilities
with the leakiest networks historically; moreover this was not driven by any pre-existing
trends.
    In the Appendix, we assess balance and overlap of covariates. Not surprisingly, the
utilities with higher historical leak volumes per mile are somewhat different; they tend to
be larger (as measured by total pipeline miles), sell greater volume of gas, have a denser
network (as measured by the count of service lines per mile of pipeline mains), and have
lower-quality pipes. Reassuringly, however, there is decent overlap of these covariates (Figure
A2). Moreover, because our instrument leverages time-series variation induced by federal
regulations and our specification includes fixed effects, these cross-utility differences would
  33
     We note that 2010 was also the year of the San Bruno accident in California, mentioned above. This led
to greater scrutiny on the responsible company, Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E), including on non-distribution
components of its extensive supply chain. We drop PG&E from our sample, because the San Bruno effect
cannot be disentangled from the PHMSA effect given our lack of detailed transmission data.


                                                    17
                       Figure 2: Event Study Graph for the First Stage




                   Note: This figure plots the difference in leak volumes, across time, between
                   utilities in the upper half of our instrument’s value and those in the bottom
                   half. The instrument is the utility’s average volume of leaked gas prior to
                   treatment. The omitted year is 2009, the year just prior to PHMSA regula-
                   tions taking effect. Leak volumes are in Mcf scaled by miles of pipe.



pose a problem for identification only if different utility types were following different trends.
Appendix Table A7 demonstrates that the main results are robust to various specifications
addressing issues of balance, overlap, and differential trends.
    The first-stage results show that we have a strong instrument, which moves leaks in the
expected direction, as shown in Table 1. The historical leak volume interacted with post-
PHMSA regulations has a negative and statistically significant coefficient, implying that
utilities with leaky networks were differentially incentivized by the regulations to reduce
leak volumes. The magnitude of the coefficient, -0.43, implies that for every additional 1
Mcf of gas leaked per mile in the pre-regulation period (relative to the average utility), the
utility abated an additional 0.43 Mcf per mile in the post-regulation period. The Kleibergen-
Paap first-stage F-statistic (which is robust to non-i.i.d. errors) is 17.96, which is above the
Stock and Yogo (2005) critical value of 16.38 (for 10% maximum relative bias). We also
reject the null that the equation is underidentified, with a p-value of 0.0027.
    Table 2 shows the OLS and 2SLS results for the main coefficient of interest, which is
on the volume of natural gas leaked – this coefficient is the cost of abatement utilities have
undertaken, in $/Mcf. The coefficient on volume leaked is expected to be less than zero in
both columns: it gives the increase in expenditures associated with a reduction in volume
leaked, i.e., the cost of abatement.
    The first column shows the results when we do not instrument for the volume of leaked
gas. In the OLS specification, the estimate of abatement expenditure is small and not

                                                       18
                  Table 1: Instrumenting for Volume Leaked: First Stage

                                                                                (1)
                                                                           Volume Leaked
                     Excluded Instrumental Variables:
                     Past volume leaked×I(Post-PHMSA)                         -0.43***
                                                                               (0.10)
                     Controls:
                     Volume sold, Mcf                                           -0.01**
                                                                                 (0.00)
                     Pipeline mains, miles                                       83.23
                                                                                (89.37)
                     Service lines, count                                         -0.94
                                                                                 (1.31)
                     Low-quality mains, miles                                 -901.91**
                                                                               (383.55)
                     Low-quality service lines, count                             -0.14
                                                                                 (2.66)
                     Region-year effects                                           Yes
                     Utility effects                                               Yes
                     Observations                                                1,551
                     R2                                                            0.63
                     Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                                     17.96
                   Note: Dependent variable is the endogenous regressor in Table 2: volume
                   of leaked gas in Mcf. The instrument is the utility’s average volume of
                   leaked gas in the period before PHMSA increased regulations, interacted
                   with a dummy for the period after PHMSA increased regulations. All vari-
                   ables are scaled by the utility’s average count of pipeline miles over the
                   sample period. Standard errors are clustered by utility. *** Statistically
                   significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




statistically different from zero ($0.13/Mcf). The standard errors are large, however the point
estimate is so small that it is statistically different from commodity costs at the 1 percent
level (citygate prices average $5.67/Mcf in our sample for 2010-2013, and the last row of the
table tests the difference between this average and our estimated abatement expenditure).
Given the endogeneity concerns discussed above, the second column is more informative. In
Column (2), using the instrument described above, we also estimate a cost of abatement that
is small and not statistically different from zero ($0.48/Mcf). Again, although the standard
errors are large, the 2SLS estimate of $0.48/Mcf is statistically different from the citygate
price at the 1 percent level.
    It is striking that the safety-related instrument leads to a cost of abatement that is
below the average commodity value over the period of increased regulatory stringency. Most
importantly, one would expect utilities to abate beyond the value that would be privately
optimal for achieving commodity cost savings, if safety regulations were binding. That is,
we would expect the abatement cost estimated in this 2SLS framework to be larger than
the commodity value. In addition, the coefficients in Table 2 are equal to the marginal cost
of abatement only if the abatement persists just one year. It is possible that the abatement
activities persist beyond one year, which would mean abatement expenditures are even lower


                                                        19
          Table 2: Abatement Costs: Operations and Maintenance Expenditures

                                                                              OLS                IV
                                                                               (1)               (2)
                                                                             O&M               O&M
                Volume leaked, Mcf                                            -0.13             -0.48
                                                                             (0.08)            (0.92)
                Controls:
                Volume sold, Mcf                                                0.02              0.02
                                                                               (0.03)            (0.03)
                Pipeline mains, miles                                        1,161.05          1,130.18
                                                                             (804.09)          (764.79)
                Service lines, count                                            9.04              8.86
                                                                              (13.45)           (12.38)
                Low-quality mains, miles                                    -2,378.39         -2,621.54
                                                                           (4,159.24)        (4,048.68)
                Low-quality service lines, count                               -29.55            -28.42
                                                                              (25.28)           (23.88)
                Region-year effects                                             Yes               Yes
                Utility effects                                                 Yes               Yes
                Observations                                                   1,579             1,551
                R2                                                              0.97                .
                Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                                           .              17.96
                Difference from citygate price ($/Mcf)                       5.54***           5.19***
             Note: Dependent variable is the utility’s expenditures on O&M. The negative of the co-
             efficient on “Volume leaked, Mcf” can be interpreted as the amount of distribution O&M
             expenditures (in $/Mcf terms) to reduce leaks. The average citygate price, post-2010, in our
             sample is $5.67. See text for details on the instrument used in Column (2), and Table 1 for
             the first stage. All variables are scaled by the utility’s average count of pipeline miles over
             the sample period. Standard errors are clustered by utility. *** Statistically significant at
             the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




than the reported coefficients. Because we do not observe activities on individual pipeline
segments, we are unable to investigate heterogeneity in the longevity of repairs across repair
activities. However, EPA documentation of suggested repairs (Table A14) frequently assumes
an equipment lifetime beyond one year. Moreover, additional cost savings mentioned after
the first year include, for instance, leveraging knowledge from the first year to be able to
focus in future years on components most likely to leak. Unfortunately, it is difficult to
verify this empirically, because estimation with lags requires multiple endogenous variables
and multiple instruments, and we have low power.
    To interpret our findings, we note that our estimate is consistent with the range of cost
estimates for leak detection and repair that are published by the EPA’s Natural Gas STAR
program. We also note that our estimate is below the commodity cost of gas itself which
utilities save when they repair leaks. Moreover, the estimate is a local average treatment
effect driven by safety regulations, which would be expected to incentivize utilities to abate
above and beyond the commodity value of leaked gas. There are two possible interpretations
of this result. One possibility is that utilities “walk up the abatement cost curve,” and that
prior to the safety regulations, they were undertaking only abatement activities costing less


                                                          20
than our $0.48/Mcf estimate. In this case, the increased safety regulations moved utilities
closer to the socially optimal outcome, although not fully to the point where marginal benefit
equals marginal cost. An alternative possibility is that utilities select some suite of abatement
actions, not necessarily undertaking the cheapest activities first. That is, we cannot rule out
that safety-related repairs were conducted at a high cost even in the years prior to the
increased regulation. But in this case, the $0.48/Mcf estimate implies that, regardless of
what abatement they undertook before safety regulations were tightened, there was low-
hanging fruit in the form of inexpensive abatement actions that they undertook once the
regulations became more binding.34
    Overall, the cost estimates are consistent with a setting where utilities are reimbursed for
lost gas in the rates they charge customers. Moreover, despite increased safety regulations
in recent years, there appear to have been activities available costing well below the social
benefit of leak abatement. This social benefit is at least $30/Mcf (incorporating the com-
modity value of the gas, the greenhouse gas benefits of avoiding methane leaks, and safety
benefits to the public). This suggests that the quantity of leak abatement undertaken by
utilities is currently lower than what a social planner would choose, although how much more
abatement would be socially optimal cannot be calculated without knowing how steeply the
marginal cost curve slopes upwards.35

3.1.1     Robustness

In the Appendix, we show that the results are robust to alternative controls,36 alternative
sub-samples,37 weighting,38 and alternative variable definitions.39 We also show results in-
   34
      By similar logic, if our estimate of $0.48/Mcf is an average across low-cost and high-cost activities in
the post-period, it would provide evidence that low-hanging fruit was available even if the regulations also
induced high-cost abatement.
   35
      While we can test for upward sloping marginal cost in our sample, of more relevance for calculating
deadweight loss is knowing how quickly marginal cost increases outside our sample, i.e. for actions utilities
have historically not taken.
   36
      We show results with year effects rather than region-by-year effects; regional cubic time trends rather
than region-by-year effects; results that control only for region-by-year effects and not for, e.g. pipeline miles;
results controlling for a cubic function of volume sold and for retail prices; results controlling for differential
linear trends for utilities that had historically high leak rates; results controlling for utility-specific time
trends; and results controlling for the citygate price. The differential time trends are intended to use only
variation induced by the 2010 regulations, rather than a general trend of improvements to historically leaky
networks (Table A7).
   37
      We present results using bundled utilities only (i.e., not delivery-only utilities); dropping all of California
rather than simply PG&E; dropping utilities in the East Coast; and restricting to sub-samples with improved
covariate balance and overlap (Table A7).
   38
      We present results weighting each firm by the portion of its purchases coming directly from the citygate
(Table A6).
   39
      For alternative variable definitions, we trim leaks at the one percent rather than five percent tails; drop
rather than winsorize outliers; keep outliers as they are; and do not scale variables (Table A6).


                                                         21
cluding capital expenditures in the dependent variable (Table A6). We maintain first stage
power, and the resulting abatement cost estimates are comparable for all these alternative
specifications.
    We also estimate specifications using alternative instrument definitions, to leverage al-
ternative sources of identifying variation. As shown in the Appendix, Table A4, we first use
the leak rate, rather than the leak volume. We next define the instrument using leaks in
2004, before the regulations would have been anticipated by the utilities. We next define
the instrument using many more years of data (1995-2009). Finally, we use first-differences
variation only, i.e. the nation-wide impact of the 2010 regulations, by defining our instru-
ment as a dummy equal to one for all years beginning in 2010 for all utilities. In this latter
specification, we control for regional cubic trends, rather than for region-by-year effects. We
include these latter two specifications because of potential concerns about mean reversion
driving the main results. Our primary specification uses an instrument constructed from six
years of leak volumes, so we do not expect mean reversion to be a significant issue. Never-
theless, the specification using more years of data is reassuring for alleviating any concerns
along this line, as is the first-difference specification (since it uses only time-series variation).
Again we find that our main results are robust to these alternative specifications.
    Additionally, we show reverse-OLS and reverse-2SLS specifications in the Appendix (Ta-
ble A5). Our main specification in the paper regresses expenditures on leak volumes, since
the resulting coefficient gives the parameter of interest directly. However, one could also
estimate the reverse specification. The OLS specification is problematic since expenditures
contain measurement error – in particular, we observe all O&M expenditures, rather than
expenditures specifically aimed at leak mitigation efforts. As such, we expect the 2SLS spec-
ification to again be more informative. As the Appendix shows, estimating this reverse-2SLS
specification and using the inverse of β1 as our parameter of interest is identical to the strat-
egy we have followed in our main specification (they are in fact mathematically equivalent),
since the 2SLS coefficient in the case of one instrument is simply equal to the ratio of the
first stage and reduced-form coefficients.
    Finally, we explore whether estimated abatement costs vary by a key utility characteristic:
density, as measured by the number of customer connections (service lines) per mile of main
line. A potential concern is that the local average treatment effect (LATE) is driven by
utilities that have unobserved non-monetary costs of repairing leaks (for example, the extra
cost of closing a street in a dense city could be enough to prevent leak repair). In the
Appendix, we show that our finding is robust across different subsamples depending on
network density. Dividing the sample into quartiles of density, we show that all quartiles



                                                 22
have abatement costs that are statistically significantly less than the citygate price.40


3.2     Capital Cost of Pipeline Replacement
As mentioned previously, an alternative to leak detection and repair, of either surface stations
or pipelines, is full replacement of pipeline infrastructure. This is a capital-intensive project
that requires digging up aging pipelines and replacing them with new plastic or protected
steel pipes. In this section, we estimate the cost of abatement from pipeline main replace-
ment, then compare it to the benefit of replacement as well as the previously estimated cost
of leak detection and repair. Pipelines must eventually be replaced, and this replacement
rate might be determined by engineering analyses of time-to-failure. Our calculations allow
us to ask the question, “does pulling forward the replacement timeline in order to obtain
greenhouse gas abatement pass a cost/benefit test?”
    The decision of when to replace a pipe is fundamentally an optimal stopping problem
(a la Rust’s 1987 bus engine replacement), in which replacement is an irreversible decision
with uncertainty in what the future holds.41 In this paper, we estimate the expenditures on
repair and replacement undertaken by utilities using utility-wide changes in expenditures,
pipeline repairs, and leaks. Because we don’t see the decisions made for individual-pipeline
segments, or an individual pipeline’s emissions, we are prevented from modeling the pipeline-
by-pipeline decision to replace versus repair, and we do not estimate the potential repair or
replacement costs for all pipes in the system. Our estimation strategy, rather, tells us how
much utilities spend on average to reduce an Mcf of methane emissions.
    The structural equation of interest is similar to that used for leak detection and repair:

                                     Eit = β0 + β1 Pit + Xit Θ + εit .                                     (4)

Our dependent variable of interest Eit will again be expenditures, but now we focus on
distribution-related capital expenditures. The independent variable of interest Pit is now
total pipeline miles of low-quality materials, where we aggregate bare steel, cast iron, and
ductile iron miles, the materials most widely targeted in recent years for replacement.
   40
      See Appendix Table A8. All quartiles, except the fourth quartile, have a strong first stage. We also find
O&M estimates that are less than citygate price after excluding utilities on the East Coast, where many of
the oldest and densest networks are located (Appendix Table A7).
   41
      Insights from these models suggest that there will be fewer replacements when replacement costs are
high, maintenance costs are low, expectations of pipeline failures are low, and uncertainty in future costs
is high. The benefit of having such a modeling approach, which considers the option value of waiting to
replace, is to obtain an estimate of the cost to repair or replace any pipe (and armed with these costs, one
can make counterfactual predictions as to how much repair or replacement there will be under different states
of nature).



                                                      23
    Miles of low-quality materials again poses endogeneity concerns, but they are slightly
different from the leak-volume endogeneity concerns. First, measurement error is also pos-
sible for miles of low-quality pipes – much public attention has been paid, for instance, to
out-of-date records at PG&E, the utility responsible for the San Bruno explosion. To the
extent that this shows up in the level of low-quality materials, it should not be a barrier, as
we will use changes in low-quality materials as our identifying variation.
    However, two additional sources of measurement error, this time non-classical, impact
our choice of an estimation strategy. First, it is possible that the expenditures do not show
up in exactly the same year of the data as the pipeline replacements, if pipeline replacement
programs are spread out over several years. This would bias β1 towards zero. More impor-
tantly, anecdotal reports suggest a form of non-classical measurement error of Eit , driven by
the regulatory process. Suppose utilities face a budget constraint, determined by how much
they deem is politically acceptable to request from the public utility commission in a given
rate case.42 Then, in order to spend money on pipeline replacement, they would save money
elsewhere by deferring other capital expenditures. Since we observe only total expenditures,
our left-hand side variable would be the net of these two effects, biasing our estimate towards
zero. Unfortunately, comprehensive information on individual components of expenditures
(for instance, pipeline upgrades as opposed to citygate station repairs) is not available.43
    To deal with the first set of endogeneity concerns (e.g. classical measurement error), we
again use an instrument related to safety regulations. This instrument will not, however,
solve the second set of endogeneity concerns, which stem from the way costs appear in the
data over time. To address these, we use long differences, rather than year-to-year within-
utility variation. In particular, we use the across-utility variation from the start of our
sample to the end in total miles replaced and in total capital spent. The 2SLS regression we
estimate is thus:
                                ∆Ei = β0 + β1 ∆P
                                               di + Xi Θ + εi .                             (5)

Here ∆Ei is new capital accumulated by the plant, calculated as the sum of new capital
expenditures over the period 2004 to 2013. ∆P
                                           di is the reduction in low-quality pipeline miles
   42
      For instance, Costello (2012) describes “no rate shock” as one of the ratemaking principles a commission
might consider.
   43
      One might worry about the same sort of soft budget constraint for operations and maintenance ex-
penditures, impacting our estimates in Section 3.1. However, this may be less likely because distribution
O&M is only a portion of total O&M expenditures, which also includes categories such as administrative
expenses (executive compensation; employee pensions) and retailing expenses (e.g., meter reading), making
distribution O&M less salient. In contrast, a significant portion of total capital expenditures are for the dis-
tribution network. In any event, because we observe individual categories of O&M (although not categories
of distribution capital), we are able to examine this possibility empirically. In the Appendix, we show that
estimates for subcategories of distribution O&M are generally smaller than our main preferred estimate,
indicating that bias from an overall budget constraint is unlikely.


                                                      24
from 2004 to 2013, instrumented with historic pipeline quality. As in the previous section, we
scale all variables by the utility’s size. Because the variables are in changes, time-invariant
characteristics of utilities have been washed out, similar to a fixed effects specification. We
additionally control for several time-varying characteristics (Xi ): the change in the total
miles of any quality pipe in the system, the change in the total volume sold, and the change
in the total customer count. These controls are designed to absorb the variation in capital
expenditures arising from service territory expansions. Finally, we include region effects –
given the long differences specification, this allows for differential trends across regions.
    The instrument we use is miles of low-quality pipes in the first year of our sample. As
in the leak detection and repair regression, the intuition is that with increasing regulatory
scrutiny in recent years, utilities with poorer pipeline networks have had to undertake more
extensive repairs. First stage results are given in the Appendix (Table A10); the coefficient
on the instrument has the expected sign and is statistically significant at the one percent
level. The Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic is 40, i.e. above the Stock and Yogo (2005) critical
value of 16.38.
    Table 3 gives OLS and 2SLS estimates. After instrumenting for pipe replacement, the
point estimate is 1,222 (in $000), implying that the replacement of one bad pipeline mile
costs $1.2 million dollars. The OLS estimate is smaller, with one mile costing $607 thousand
to replace. Both of these are in line with estimates from public utility commission reports,
which show a range (details in the Appendix) of $170,000 to $3 million. While this wide
range of reported estimates is striking, it is plausible that there is substantial heterogeneity
in the cost of pipeline replacement. Large cost savings might be achieved if repairs can take
place at the same time that other street work is being done. Moreover, replacing pipe in a
dense urban area, perhaps with cobblestone streets, is likely more expensive than replacing
pipe in a more rural area.44 In the Appendix we show that indeed utilities with denser
networks have higher estimated pipeline replacement costs (Table A12).

3.2.1   Converting the $/Mile Estimates to $/Mcf Estimates

With estimates of the cost of replacing a mile of low-quality pipe, and an emissions factor
for a mile of low-quality pipe (Mcf leaked per mile of low quality pipe), we can calculate
the cost per Mcf abated associated with pipeline replacement. Because this is a capital-
intensive activity with benefits that are expected to persist over time, we calculate the
implied levelized cost of abatement. A levelized cost gives the constant, in real terms, price
of abatement over the lifetime of a project. Similar calculations are used in, for instance,
  44
     See, e.g., a notice to customers regarding pipeline replacement          in   Pittsburgh,   at
http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/district5/Regent Square Civic Association.pdf.


                                              25
                                 Table 3: Cost of Pipeline Replacement

                                                            Total Capital Expenditures, 2004-2013 ($000)
                                                                 (1)                     (2)
                                                                OLS                      IV
                Low-quality main replacement, miles          607.17**               1,221.89**
                                                             (257.49)                (506.55)
                ∆ volume sold, Bcf                            -505.98                -1,016.83
                                                            (4,119.03)              (3,638.49)
                ∆ mains, miles                               147.89**               194.49***
                                                              (61.68)                 (59.29)
                ∆ customers                                     2.71                   2.77*
                                                               (1.65)                  (1.57)
                Region effects                                  Yes                     Yes
                Observations                                    140                     140
                R2                                              0.38                      .
                Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                           .                    40.02
              Note: Dependent variable is the sum of capital expenditures made from 2004 to 2013. In Col-
              umn (2) the reduction in low quality mains from 2004 to 2013 is instrumented for using the
              miles of low quality mains in 2004. First stage results are found in Table A10. All variables are
              scaled by the utility’s average count of pipeline miles over the sample period. Robust standard
              errors in parentheses. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




calculations of long-run electricity costs, e.g. Borenstein (2012). The equation we use is:
                                                         PT         Et
                                                                            
                                                            t=0    (1+r)t
                                               LC = P                                                           (6)
                                                     T  M cft
                                                            t=0    (1+r)t


where LC is the levelized cost; Et when t = 0 is the capital cost at the time of the pipeline
replacement; Et when t > 0 is the future stream of payments associated with the program
(described below); M cft is the emissions abated in period t, and r is the discount rate. Our
main calculation uses a cost of $1.2 million per mile of pipeline replacement, from our IV
specification; an alternative calculation uses $607,000, from our OLS specification, but also
matching some of the lower-end estimates reported in public sources (see Table A15). We
further assume that the emissions abated in each year, M cft , are constant, and we calculate
the levelized cost for two different emissions factors: 470 Mcf/mile and 229 Mcf/mile. The
higher emissions factor is calculated from our data and the lower emissions factor is taken
as reported by the EPA.45 For a discount rate, we follow the EPA, showing results using a
3 percent and a 7 percent discount rate. We must also make an assumption about the total
lifetime of the project benefits. For our preferred calculation, we use a lifetime of 40 years;
an alternative calculation uses 60 years. Finally, in addition to the one-time capital cost in
period t = 0, we must make an assumption about the impact of the replacement program
  45
     For details on how we estimate the emissions factor see Appendix Section A5. The EPA uses an
estimate of 229 Mcf per mile of cast iron relative to plastic pipe (see Annex 3, Table A-138 of Environmental
Protection Agency (2015)).


                                                            26
                Table 4: Levelized Cost of Abatement via Pipeline Replacement

                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
      Capital cost, $                        1,221,890    607,170    1,221,890   1,221,890    1,221,890   1,221,890
      Abatement rate, Mcf/mile replaced         470         470         229         470          470         470
      Discount rate                             0.03        0.03        0.03        0.07         0.03        0.03
      Lifetime                                   40          40          40          40           60          40
      Offset O&M, $ per year                   -3,049      -3,049      -3,049      -3,049       -3,049         0
      Levelized cost, $/Mcf                     103          48         211         176           85         109
     Note: This table gives the implied levelized cost of abatement associated with one mile of pipeline replacement,
     under various parameter assumptions. Column (1) is the preferred specification, as described in the text. Columns
     (2) - (6) vary the capital cost, abatement rate, discount rate, pipeline lifetime, and offset O&M, respectively.




on the stream of operating costs. Following Aubuchon and Hibbard (2013), we assume that
O&M expenditures decrease after the replacement program. We use the simple average of
the offset O&M that they report for six utilities: $3,049 per mile per year. To examine the
impact of this assumption, we also show the levelized cost if there are no O&M savings.
    Table 4 shows the resulting levelized cost calculations. With our preferred set of param-
eters, we calculate a levelized cost of natural gas leak abatement of $103/Mcf from pipeline
replacement programs. This cost varies from $48 to $211 under alternative assumptions, in
Columns (2) - (6).
    This estimated levelized cost is clearly well above the cost of leak detection and repair
activities undertaken by utilities – it is more than an order of magnitude larger. As such, we
can conclude that pulling forward the pipeline replacement timeline has not historically been
a cost-effective method (on average) of capturing lost commodity, nor of averting greenhouse
gas consequences. This finding is consistent with an Averch-Johnson effect, in which utilities
over-invest in capital when the regulated rate of return is higher than the cost of capital.
However, an Averch-Johnson effect is not the only potential explanation. It is also possible
that utilities have concentrated more on pipeline replacement programs because of perceived
safety benefits, or that public utility commissions have been more willing to approve pipeline
replacement programs because of perceived safety benefits. Leak detection repair programs
and pipeline replacement programs are not necessarily substitutes for one another in terms
of averting explosions. It is not only the quantity of gas that is leaked that poses a risk
for explosion, but also how much of the gas can accumulate, and how close the leak is to
a population center. Thus a citygate station that is leaking to the atmosphere would pose
less of an explosion risk than a pipeline that is leaking into an enclosed space. Moreover,
the citygate station is likely to be further from population than a leaking pipeline; the latter
would present a greater safety threat if it is in a densely populated urban area.
    In general, then, it does not necessarily follow that utilities are engaging in too much
pipeline replacement, from a social planner’s perspective. First, safety benefits must be

                                                           27
accounted for, and are likely not perfectly correlated with other leak abatement benefits.
In addition, as Column (2) demonstrates, the levelized cost of pipeline replacement is much
closer to the benefit of replacement in areas where capital costs are lower than average.

3.2.2    Incorporating Safety Benefits

To better understand the impact of safety benefits, we collect PHMSA data on fatalities,
injuries, and property damages. With these data, we estimate the safety benefits of reducing
leaks and of replacing low-quality miles.46 We use a panel 2SLS approach, with the same
instrument used in our abatement cost estimation. We assume a Value of a Statistical Life
of $9.1 million, as suggested by the EPA. Estimation results are provided in the Appendix,
Table A16. Because the results are quite noisy, we are reluctant to rely too heavily on the
point estimates. In addition, it is possible that an infrequent “black swan” event could
change our calculations.47 However, a few broad conclusions emerge.
    The estimated safety benefits from both leak reduction and low-quality main replacement
are small compared to the greenhouse gas benefits. The safety benefits associated with leaks
reductions are estimated to be at most $0.19/Mcf. The additional safety benefits associated
with pipeline replacement are in the range of $0-600 per mile per year, or up to $2.65/Mcf
(depending on the emissions factor used). The combined benefits (recognizing that pipeline
replacement entails leak reductions) are estimated to be at most $2.74/Mcf. This translates
into a net present value that is substantially less than the replacement costs estimated in
Table 3. As such, our qualitative conclusion about the cost-effectiveness of the average
pipeline replacement does not change. However, we maintain that heterogeneity is likely
to matter, although we have insufficient power to explore it empirically. That is, pipeline
upgrades may well pass a cost-benefit test when they are in very densely populated areas
(where the safety benefits are largest), where leak rates are highest, and where replacement
costs are lowest. Additionally, using the emissions factors presented above, it appears that
the safety benefits of pipeline upgrades may be larger, in $/Mcf terms, than the safety
benefits of other leaks reductions. This is intuitive, since other leaks reductions may be
achievable at surface stations far from urban centers, whereas pipeline upgrades may occur
in heavily populated areas.
   46
      Because some of these accidents might have arisen during repairs themselves, the estimates are inter-
preted as the risk reduction net of any risks from repairs. As such, this estimate is useful in order to compare
with actual expenditures, because this estimate accounts for any of the net risk that the firm undertakes in
order to do the repair.
   47
      For instance, a 1996 explosion in Puerto Rico killed 33 people and wounded 80 more. It does not appear
in our data, which do not cover Puerto Rico. Before natural gas was odorized, one of the deadliest accidents
occurred at a Texas high school in 1937 – around 300 people were killed.



                                                      28
   Overall, we conclude that pipeline replacement programs have not historically been a
cost-effective way of addressing greenhouse gas externalities, but that they may be socially
optimal in some places.


4     Incentives to Abate
Finally, to explain the low abatement effort for leak detection and repair found in subsection
3.1, we next look empirically at utility expenditures in greater depth. Bearing in mind the
incentives for abatement described qualitatively in the Background section, here we look for
corroborating empirical evidence using our panel data. We regress expenditures on a broad
set of variables describing the economic and regulatory environment facing utilities, control-
ling for utility fixed effects and region-by-year effects. This regression is thus nearly identical
to the reduced-form regression estimated as part of the 2SLS results provided in Table 2,
but with additional explanatory variables included and with both distribution and capital
expenditures on the left-hand side. We did not include these explanatory variables in our
previous analysis because their causal interpretation is less clear. However, as we demon-
strate in the Appendix, including these additional control variables does not significantly
change the coefficients of interest in the reduced-form results underlying Table 2.
    We again control for total pipeline miles and total volume of gas sold to absorb variation
that could impact expenditures and could also be correlated with the explanatory variables
(for instance, expansion of service territory). Also, we again scale variables by the utilities’
size. We do not claim that this regression can identify causal mechanisms; rather, we hope
to understand within-utility and within-year associations between expenditures and various
financial and regulatory variables. This provides some evidence to corroborate the intuition
presented in the Background section and the finding of sub-optimal expenditures on leak
detection and repair.
    The first new explanatory variable we consider is the citygate price of natural gas. If
utilities were competitive firms, and with an upward sloping marginal cost of abatement, we
would expect that they would spend more money on maintenance when citygate prices were
high, to avoid losing valuable gas. In contrast, if public utility commissions allow utilities to
recoup their lost gas costs in regulated rates, utilities should not respond to citygate prices.
As Table 5 shows, utilities spend less (although not significantly different from zero) in the
short-run on O&M and capital when citygate prices are high. The magnitude of the effect is
small; a $1 increase in citygate price results in total expenditures falling by 2 percent. One
possible explanation is the reimbursement of the cost of leaked gas. An additional possible
explanation is the desire of commissions to avoid “bill shock” or “rate shock” (Costello,

                                                29
        Table 5: Reduced-Form Estimates of What Explains Utility Expenditures

                                                                             Expenditures
                                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)
                                                                Total ($)     O&M ($)       Capital ($)
               Past volume leaked×I(Post-PHMSA)                   0.09          0.30           -0.11
                                                                 (1.87)        (0.39)         (1.62)
               Other economic and regulatory variables:
               Citygate price, $/Mcf                               -194           -46            -115
                                                                  (342)          (48)           (287)
               Fraction of year in a rate case                   1473**         307**           1070*
                                                                  (653)         (151)           (576)
               Fraction of year in a rate-case test year          823*         179***            598
                                                                  (475)          (59)           (420)
               I(Utility has pipeline rider)                     1993**           -35          1868**
                                                                  (927)         (160)           (822)
               Controls:
               Pipeline mains, miles                            20020**          836         14754***
                                                                 (7852)         (757)         (5503)
               Service lines, count                              -10.58          3.76          -17.15
                                                                (55.96)        (11.48)        (39.74)
               Volume sold, Mcf                                   -0.02          0.03           -0.06
                                                                 (0.17)         (0.03)         (0.15)
               Region-year effects                                 Yes           Yes             Yes
               Utility effects                                     Yes           Yes             Yes
               Observations                                       1,490         1,603          1,490
               R2                                                  0.84          0.97           0.77
               Mean of dependent variable                        11,736         4,550          7,076
             Note: Dependent variables by column are: (1) the sum total of capital and O&M expendi-
             tures; (2) O&M expenditures; and (3) capital expenditures. All variables are scaled by the
             utility’s average count of pipeline miles over the sample period, except price, fractions, and
             indicator variables. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




2012) – to keep total bills from varying too much across years, capital projects could be
disproportionately carried out when commodity costs are low. Overall, the lack of a positive
coefficient on the commodity cost of natural gas is consistent with regulatory distortions,
such as commodity cost pass-through. We note that citygate prices fell approximately 40
percent from the period 2006-09 to 2010-13, so there should be sufficient variation to pick
up any effect.
   Next we consider the timing of rate cases. We include both the portion of the current year
that is during a rate case, and the portion of the year that is a test year. A rate case, which
can last for several years, is the period after a utility (or commission) calls for a change in
rates and before the new rates take effect. A test year is typically a 12-month period, during
which expenditures are carefully tracked to determine what cost recovery is necessary. Table
5 shows that these variables are associated with higher spending, both in terms of O&M
expenditures and capital expenditures. The magnitudes are large; the coefficients imply
that total expenditures are 13% higher during a rate case and 7% higher during a test year.
There are two possible explanations, which cannot be separately identified in this regression
framework, because rate-case timing is endogenous. First, utilities could call for a rate case

                                                           30
when they expect their expenses to be exogenously high. Second, utilities could pad expenses
during rate cases to increase rates. For the first explanation, no first-order inefficiency is
expected; utilities could still be spending the socially optimal amount. There could, however,
be inefficiencies arising from intertemporal allocations of expenditures. As described in the
Background section, the gas industry has claimed that the rate case process hampers timely
pipeline upgrades (Yardley Associates, 2012).
    As mentioned in the Background section, alternative regulatory procedures have arisen
to handle pipeline replacement capital costs. These “targeted infrastructure” programs or
“capital trackers” are designed to allow utilities to recover capital costs associated with the
replacement of antiquated pipes without having to wait for a rate case. Rather than waiting
for a rate case, a utility is allowed to add a “rider” to retail bills – a line item with a separate
charge for recovery of infrastructure capital costs (Yardley Associates, 2012; Aubuchon and
Hibbard, 2013). We obtained information on whether a utility has a rider and the date that
it was implemented.48 We estimate that total expenditures are 17% higher when such a
mechanism is implemented, but we note that the implementation is likely endogenous. For
instance, it is possible that it has been implemented in places that were already replacing
low-quality pipelines.
    Finally, we consider a variable designed to capture regulatory stringency related to safety.
We use the same instrument used in Section 3.1, the interaction of the post-PHMSA reg-
ulation dummy with the pre-regulation leak volume. Again, this interaction captures the
differential effect for the utilities with worse networks, in the years when following the new
PHMSA regulations. We find higher spending on maintenance, consistent with the results
in Section 3.1, although the standard errors are too large to be conclusive. This is consis-
tent with utilities responding to safety regulations by increasing expenditures for abatement
projects, but also consistent with the low abatement costs estimated above.
    In summary, we see that variables related to economic regulations (such as the rate case
variables and the pipeline rider variable) are associated with O&M expenditures and capital
expenditures. In contrast, the coefficient on the citygate price has an unexpected sign.
Overall, this suggests that incentives for abatement expenditures are not properly aligned in
terms of avoiding lost commodity value. In contrast, they are driven by regulatory incentives.
  48
     We checked three sources for company names and locations and implementation dates: Yardley As-
sociates (2012), American Gas Association (2012), and the “Natural Gas State Profiles” section of the
current American Gas Association website (https://www.aga.org/knowledgecenter/facts-and-data/state-
profiles-natural-gas), accessed August 15, 2016. The three sources had a high degree of overlap.




                                                 31
5        Conclusion
This paper provides the first test of natural gas utility behavior to avoid commodity leaks.
Despite the commodity, climate change, and safety costs associated with leaked natural gas,
losses continue to occur throughout the supply chain. Focusing on the distribution network,
we find that leak abatement incentives are misaligned because of the form of price regulations
that utilities face. Public utility commissions have historically considered lost gas a cost of
doing business, and they have generally allowed this to be passed on to retail customers.
Increased stringency of safety regulations has, however, led to increased utility expenditures
and decreased leak rates. Using an instrumental variables strategy that yields a treatment
effect local to the impact of these safety regulations, we estimate realized abatement costs
of around $0.48/Mcf. While this indicates that leak detection activities are indeed being
undertaken by utilities because of safety concerns, the realized abatement cost is far below the
total benefits to society. These include saved commodity value (currently around $4.25/Mcf)
plus avoided climate change damages (around $27/Mcf) as well as the safety benefits that
motivated the regulations.
    In contrast, we estimate that pipeline replacement programs, which have received much
public attention, have levelized costs well above the leak detection and repair activities
described above. This implies that more cost-effective abatement could be undertaken with
leak detection and repair. While very high capital expenditure is consistent with an Averch-
Johnson effect, it is also consistent with differential perceptions of safety benefits. The
results do not necessarily imply that pulling forward some pipeline replacement programs
in order to obtain GHG abatement would not pass a cost/benefit test. For some parameter
combinations, levelized costs close to the societal benefits described above are possible.
    Overall, we conclude that price regulations have introduced a distortion in the natural
gas distribution market, by under-incentivizing utilities to avoid the leakage of their primary
input. This distortion has had outsized social impacts because of the substantial wedge
between commodity costs and social costs, including environmental and safety impacts. Re-
solving the price-regulation distortion could have substantial social benefits. Regulations
that would allow for cost-recovery without distorting abatement incentives could be de-
signed based on the incentive regulations used in the electric utility industry, for instance.
Rather than simply ending reimbursement, one could imagine allowing reimbursement for
the national average leak rate rather than for a utility’s own rate (and thus preserving
marginal abatement incentives).49 A complication, though, is that the only measure of lost
    49
     Or, given heterogeneity in existing infrastructure, the benchmark could be for a peer group of utilities
rather than the national average.



                                                     32
gas that is available on a comprehensive basis is “unaccounted for gas,” calculated as the
difference between gas purchased and gas sold. While the measure is useful for our analysis
once we use an empirical strategy that is robust to measurement error, regulatory penalties
associated with a very noisy measure may be politically challenging to implement. That is,
any overhaul of price regulations would perhaps only be feasible if accompanied by better
measurement of leak rates. Regulators have indeed been considering technological solutions
to this problem.50
    Of course, resolving the price regulations problem will not alone achieve the theoretically
optimal level of abatement. With climate change costs an order of magnitude larger than
commodity costs, the theoretical first-best outcome would only be reached with additional
environmental regulations. In a similar spirit to the incentive-compatible reimbursement
policy described above, an incentive-compatible climate policy could be designed. The reg-
ulator could tax utilities for the climate costs of their own leakage, but allow them to pass
on costs to their customers at the national average leak rate. This would again preserve
marginal incentives while allowing for profit neutrality on average.
    While this paper focused on investor-owned utilities, it is worth thinking about other
ownership structures. It is unlikely that municipal utilities are acting on the greenhouse gas
implications of their actions. Given that they do not face competition, it is also plausible
that they are under-incentivized to avoid leaked commodity costs. Empirical research on
municipally-run distributors would be worthwhile. A few lessons also apply for other com-
ponents of the natural gas supply chain, such as production, processing, and transmission.
The economic regulations and incentives faced by these firms are different from what we have
described for distribution utilities. However, it is plausible that they face distorted incentives
for leak abatement. For instance, oil producers located far from natural gas infrastructure
may not face an incentive to capture methane leaks, leaving regulators to rely on venting
and flaring regulations. In any event, production, processing, and transmission firms do
not currently internalize the greenhouse gas costs of their actions. Future research on these
sectors to understand the level of abatement they have historically undertaken, compared to
what a social planner would choose, would aid policy-makers.


References
Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2012. “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?”
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 3–28.
  50
     See the White House’s “Climate Action Plan: Strategy to Reduce Methane Emissions,” March 2014.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/strategy to reduce methane emissions 2014-03-28 final.pdf.



                                                   33
American Gas Association. 2012. “Natural Gas Rate Round-Up: A Periodic Update on
 Innovative Rate Designs.” Accessed from https://www.aga.org/sites/default/files/legacy-
 assets/our-issues/RatesRegulatoryIssues/ratesregpolicy/rateroundup/Documents/2012
 %20Jun%20Update%20%20Infrastructure%20Investment.pdf.
Aubuchon, Craig, and Paul Hibbard. 2013. “Summary of Quantifiable Benefits and
 Costs Related to Select Targeted Infrastructure Replacement Programs.” Accessed from
 http://www.analysisgroup.com/uploadedfiles/content/insights/publishing/benefits costs
  tirf jan2013.pdf, Analysis Group, Inc.
Averch, Harvey, and Leland L Johnson. 1962. “Behavior of the Firm under Regulatory
 Constraint.” The American Economic Review, 1052–1069.
Borenstein, Severin. 2012. “The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity
 Generation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 67–92.
Borenstein, Severin, and James Bushnell. 2015. “The US Electricity Industry After 20
 Years of Restructuring.” Annual Review of Economics, 7(1): 437–463.
Borenstein, Severin, and Lucas W. Davis. 2012. “The Equity and Efficiency of Two-
 Part Tariffs in U.S. Natural Gas Markets.” Journal of Law and Economics, 5(1): 75–128.
Borenstein, Severin, Meghan R. Busse, and Ryan Kellogg. 2012. “Career Concerns,
 Inaction and Market Inefficiency: Evidence from Utility Regulation.” Journal of Industrial
 Economics, 60(2): 220–248.
Brandt, A. R., G. A. Heath, E. A. Kort, F. O’Sullivan, G. Petron, S. M. Jordaan,
 P. Tans, J. Wilcox, A. M. Gopstein, D. Arent, S. Wofsy, N. J. Brown, R.
 Bradley, G. D. Stucky, D. Eardley, and R. Harriss. 2014. “Methane Leaks from
 North American Natural Gas Systems.” Science, 343: 733–735.
Costello, Ken. 2012. “Balancing Natural Gas Pipeline Safety with Economic Goals.” Na-
 tional Regulatory Research Institute Report No. 12-04.
Costello, Ken. 2013. “Lost and Unaccounted-for Gas: Practices of State Utility Commis-
 sions.” National Regulatory Research Institute Report No. 13-06.
Davis, Lucas W., and Erich Muehlegger. 2010. “Do Americans Consume Too Little
 Natural Gas? An Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing.” RAND Journal of Economics,
 791–810.
Department of Energy. 2015. “Quadrennial Energy Review First Installment: Trans-
 forming U.S. Energy Infrastructures in a Time of Rapid Change.” Accessed from
 http://energy.gov/epsa/downloads/quadrennial-energy-review-first-installment.
Environmental     Protection     Agency. 2015. “Inventory of U.S. Green-
 house Gas Emissions and Sinks:          1990 – 2013, ANNEX 3 Methodologi-
 cal Descriptions for Additional Source or Sink Categories.” Accessed from
 https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/Downloads/ghgemissions/US-GHG-Inventory-
 2015-Annex-3-Additional-Source-or-Sink-Categories.pdf.

                                            34
Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2007. “Do Mar-
  kets Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric
  Generation Efficiency.” The American Economic Review, 97(4): 1250–1277.

Farsi, Mehdi, Massimo Filippini, and Michael Kuenzle. 2007. “Cost Efficiency in the
  Swiss Gas Distribution Sector.” Energy Economics, 29: 64–78.

Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram. 2015. “Do Energy
  Efficiency Investments Deliver? Evidence from the Weatherization Assistance Program.”
  NBER Working Paper No. 21331.

Gallagher, Morgan E., Adrian Down, Robert C. Ackley, Kaiguang Zhao, Nathan
 Phillips, and Robert B. Jackson. 2015. “Natural Gas Pipeline Replacement Programs
 Reduce Methane Leaks and Improve Consumer Safety.” Environmental Science and Tech-
 nology Letters, 2(10): 286–291.

Gerarden, Todd D., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. 2017. “Assessing
 the Energy-Efficiency Gap.” Journal of Economic Literature, 55(4): 1486–1525.

Gillingham, Kenneth, and Karen Palmer. 2014. “Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap:
 Policy Insights from Economic Theory and Empirical Evidence.” Review of Environmental
 Economics and Policy, 8(1): 18–38.

Gosnell, Greer K., John A. List, and Robert Metcalfe. 2016. “A New Approach to an
 Age-Old Problem: Solving Externalities by Incenting Workers Directly.” NBER Working
 Paper No. 22316.

Howarth, Robert W. 2014. “A Bridge to Nowhere: Methane Emissions and the Green-
 house Gas Footprint of Natural Gas.” Energy Science and Engineering.

ICF International. 2014. “Lost and Unaccounted for Gas.” Accessed from
  http://www.mass.gov/eea/docs/dpu/gas/icf-lauf-report.pdf, Prepared for Massachusetts
  Department of Public Utilities.

Interagency Working Group. 2016. “Addendum to Technical Support Doc-
  ument on Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis under Ex-
  ecutive Order 12866:      Application of the Methodology to Estimate the So-
  cial Cost of Methane and the Social Cost of Nitrous Oxide.” Accessed from
  https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/august 2016 sc ch4 sc n2o
   addendum final 8 26 16.pdf.

Jackson, Robert B., Adrian Down, Nathan G. Phillips, Robert C. Ackley,
  Charles W. Cook, Desiree L. Plata, and Kaiguang Zhao. 2014a. “Natural Gas
  Pipeline Leaks Across Washington, DC.” Environmental Science and Technology, 48: 2015–
  2058.




                                          35
Jackson, Robert B., Avner Vengosh, J. William Carey, Richard J. Davies,
  Thomas H. Darrah, Francis O’Sullivan, and Gabrielle Petron. 2014b. “The Envi-
  ronmental Costs and Benefits of Fracking.” Annual Review of Environment and Resources,
  39: 327–362.

Joskow, Paul L. 2007. “Regulation of Natural Monopoly.” Handbook of Law and Eco-
  nomics, 2: 1227–1348.

Kirchgessner, David A., Robert A. Lott, R. Michael Cowgill, Matthew R. Har-
 rison, and Theresa M. Shires. 1997. “Estimate of Methane Emissions from the U.S.
 Natural Gas Industry.” Chemosphere, 35(6): 1365–1390.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and Jean Tirole. 1986. “Using Cost Observation to Regulate
  Firms.” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3): 614–41.

Lamb, Brian K., Steven L. Edburg, Thomas W. Ferrara, Touche Howard,
  Matthew R. Harrison, Charles E. Kolb, Amy Townsend-Small, Wesley Dyck,
  Antonio Possolo, and James R. Whetstone. 2015. “Direct Measurements Show De-
  creasing Methane Emissions from Natural Gas Local Distribution Systems in the United
  States.” Environmental Science and Technology, 49: 5161–5169.

LaRiviere, Jacob S, Casey J Wichman, and Brandon D Cunningham. 2016. “Clus-
  tered into Control: Causal Impacts of Water Infrastructure Failure.” Resources for the
  Future Discussion Paper.

Marten, Alex L, Elizabeth A Kopits, Charles W Griffiths, Stephen C Newbold,
 and Ann Wolverton. 2015. “Incremental CH4 and N2O Mitigation Benefits Consistent
 with the US Government’s SC-CO2 Estimates.” Climate Policy, 15(2): 272–298.

McKain, Kathryn, Adrian Down, Steve M. Raciti, John Budney, Lucy R.
 Hutyra, Cody Floerchinger, Scott C. Herndon, Thomas Nehrkorn, Mark S.
 Zahniser, Robert B. Jackson, Nathan Phillips, and Steven C. Wofsy. 2015.
 “Methane Emissions from Natural Gas Infrastructure and Use in the Urban Region of
 Boston, Massachusetts.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(7): 1941–
 1946.

Miller, Scot M., Steven C. Wofsy, Anna M. Michalak, Eric A. Kort, Arlyn E.
 Andrews, Sebastien C. Biraud, Edward J. Dlugokencky, Janusz Eluszkiewicz,
 Marc L. Fischer, Greet Janssens-Maenhout, Ben R. Miller, John B. Miller,
 Stephen A. Montzka, Thomas Nehrkom, and Colm Sweeney. 2013. “Anthro-
 pogenic Emissions of Methane in the United States.” Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 110(50): 20018–20022.

Parry, Ian, Dirk Heine, Eliza Lis, and Shanjun Li. 2014. Getting Energy Prices Right
 From Principle to Practice. International Monetary Fund.

Phillips, Nathan G., Robert Ackley, Eric R. Crosson, Adrian Down, Lucy R.
 Hutyra, Max Brondfield, Jonathan D. Karr, Kaiguang Zhao, and Robert B.

                                          36
  Jackson. 2013. “Mapping Urban Pipeline Leaks: Methane Leaks across Boston.” Envi-
  ronmental Pollution, 173: 1–4.

Posner, Richard A. 1969. “Natural Monopoly and Its Regulation.” Stanford Law Review,
 21(3): 548–643.

Rust, John. 1987. “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of
 Harold Zurcher.” Econometrica, 999–1033.

Stock, James H, and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear
  IV Regression.” Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of
  Thomas Rothenberg.

Tanaka, Kenta, and Shunsuke Managi. 2013. “Measuring Productivity Gains from
  Deregulation of the Japanese Urban Gas Industry.” The Energy Journal, 34(4): 181–198.

Tovar, Beatriz, Francisco Javier Ramos-Real, and Edmar Luiz Fagundes de
  Almeida. 2015. “Efficiency and Performance in Gas Distribution. Evidence from Brazil.”
  Applied Economics, 47(50): 5390–5406.

Webb, Romany. 2015. “Lost but Not Forgotten:                 The Hidden Environmen-
 tal Costs of Compensating Pipelines for Natural Gas Losses.” Accessed from
 https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/handle/2152/33371/Final-White-Paper-
 with-Adv-Counc 4.21.2015.pdf, KBH Energy Center Research Paper No. 2015-01.

Yardley   Associates.     2012.    “Gas     Distribution  Infrastructure:     Pipeline
 Replacement and Upgrades:             Cost Recovery Issues and Approaches.”
 Accessed          from            https://opsweb.phmsa.dot.gov/pipelineforum/docs/07-
 2012%20Gas%20Distribution%20Infrastructure%20-%20Pipeline%20Replacement%20and
 %20Upgrades.pdf, Prepared for the American Gas Foundation.




                                           37
Online Appendix: Price Regulation and Environmental
Externalities: Evidence from Methane Leaks
Catherine Hausman and Lucija Muehlenbachs

In this Appendix, we provide additional tables and figures referred to in the main text.
    Table A1 shows summary statistics for the primary variables of interest, with separate
statistics reported for the full sample and for the sub-sample that report financial data.
    Figure A1 compares the density of leak volumes as a percentage of total volume purchased
for the full sample of utilities (grey) versus just those utilities reporting financial information
(green). It additionally shows the impact of weighting by firm size (red). The measurement
error appears to be substantially lower for the utilities reporting financial information – i.e.,
for the sub-sample used in our cost estimation – and is even lower when weighting by firm
size.


A1       Regression Results: Lost Gas is Correlated with
         System Materials
In Section 2, we argue that the leak rate data are meaningful, in that they correlate with
physical pipeline characteristics in intuitive ways. This was shown in the text with Figure
1. Here, we formalize the relationship with regressions (Table A2). We control for Census
region-by-year effects and depending on the specification, state fixed effects or utility fixed
effects. We examine the percent leaked (volume leaked as a function of total gas purchased),
because utilities vary tremendously in the volumes they purchase. When comparing across
utilities we find the leak rate increases significantly in pipeline age.51 Each additional year
increases the leak rate by 0.02 percentage points – Column (1) – with a standard error of less
than 0.01. To put this in perspective, the average pipeline age is 26 years and the average
leak rate is 1.7 percent, so the elasticity is 0.24. Moreover, the leak rate is decreasing in the
portion of pipeline that is composed of either high-quality steel (coated and/or cathodically
protected) or plastic. For each percentage point of high quality material, the leak rate
declines by 0.02 percentage points. Alternatively, if a utility were to change from entirely
low-quality to high-quality material, the leak rate would decline by 2 percentage points, or
roughly the mean value.
  51
     As mentioned, 8% of miles are reported as “unknown decade.” Age in this regression is defined as the
average age of the miles with a known vintage. Including the portion of unknown vintage as a separate
explanatory variable does not change the results.



                                                  A-1
    These results are robust to additional specifications, as shown in Columns (2)-(5). Much
of the identifying variation is cross-sectional, since pipeline upgrades are slow. As such,
including utility effects (Column 5) leads to very imprecise estimates; however the point es-
timates are qualitatively similar. Overall, these regressions indicate that, while the reported
leak measure is noisy, it is highly correlated with measures of pipeline quality. It is worth
noting that, if the mean leak volume in these data is assumed to be correct, then emissions
from the distribution system would be more than double the estimate reported by the federal
government (in e.g. DOE 2015).


A2       Assessing Covariate Balance and Overlap
This section assesses covariate balance and overlap across historical leak volumes. The in-
strument used to estimate the cost of leak abatement leverages variation across utilities’
historical leak volumes, in addition to time-series variation resulting from changes in federal
regulations. Table A3 shows how observable characteristics of utilities vary across the quar-
tiles of the historical leak volume, where leak volume is scaled by utility size, as in the main
text. The first column regresses the number of pipeline miles on dummies for the second,
third, and fourth quartiles of historical leak volumes. Columns (2)-(5) use similar specifica-
tions for the covariates included in the main results in Table 2, all of which are scaled by the
average number of pipeline miles for each utility over our sample period. Column (1) shows
that the utilities with higher leak volumes per mile tend to be larger. Not surprisingly, util-
ities with higher historical leaks tend to sell more volume per mile (Column 2), have denser
networks as measured by service lines per mile (Column 3), and have a higher portion of
low-quality mains and service lines (Columns 4 and 5).
    Reassuringly, there is decent overlap of these covariates. Figure A2 shows kernel density
plots for each covariate across the four quartiles of historical leak volume. While shifts in
mean are visible, matching the results in Table 2, overlap is generally good.
    Nonetheless, this difference in observable characteristics highlights the importance of our
fixed effects specification, which controls for cross-utility differences. As such, cross-utility
differences would pose a problem for identification only in the case of differential trends. In
the robustness checks in the following section, we assess sensitivity to covariate balance and
overlap (Table A7, Columns 11 and 12), as well as to the possibility of differential trends
(Table A7, Column 6).




                                              A-2
A3       Supplementary Tables for O&M Estimates of Leak
         Detection and Repair Expenditures
This section provides additional results related to the estimation of the cost of leak abatement
and pipeline replacement. Several tables provide alternative specifications for the regressions
in Table 2, which estimate the cost of leak abatement. Across more than twenty alternative
specifications, we obtain results very similar to our main specification.
    Table A4 shows alternative forms of the IV. Here we aim to leverage alternative sources
of identifying variation. In Column (1) we use the leak rate (not scaled by pipeline miles),
rather than the leak volume. In Column (2) we use leak rates from 2004 only – i.e. before
the regulations could have been anticipated by utilities. Column (3) defines the instrument
using a longer sample (1995-2009). As such, the regression uses the full sample (1995-2013) of
data, whereas the main specification is limited to 2004-2013. This specification is intended
to alleviate concerns about mean reversion in the leaks variable. Column (4) uses first-
differences variation only, i.e. the nation-wide impact of the 2010 regulations, by defining
our instrument as a dummy equal to one for all years beginning in 2010 for all utilities. In
this latter specification, we control for regional cubic trends, rather than for region-by-year
effects. While we do not expect mean reversion to be a problem given that our instrument
is defined off of six years of leak volumes, this first-difference specification alleviates any
potential concerns along this line. Finally, Column (5) uses two instruments, the indicator
for the period after PHMSA increased stringency as well as the main instrument (past leak
volumes interacted with the indicator of post-PHMSA regulations). Across all five columns
we have estimates similar to our main estimate.
    Next, Table A5 shows the reverse-2SLS estimation in which we regress leak volumes on
expenditures and use the same instrument as our main specification. For these specifications,
the coefficient on expenditures gives the inverse of the abatement cost. We prefer forward-
2SLS since the coefficient gives the parameter of interest directly, but we show the reverse
specifications for completeness. Reverse-OLS is expected to perform poorly, since the right-
hand side variable of interest (expenditures) has measurement error. In particular, it includes
spending on things other than leak repairs. As such, we expect the 2SLS specification to again
be more informative. As such, we estimate this reverse-2SLS specification and calculate the
inverse of the coefficient on volume leaked. As expected, the resulting estimate is identical to
the coefficient in our main specification (they are in fact mathematically equivalent), since
the 2SLS coefficient in the case of one instrument is simply equal to the ratio of the first
stage and reduced-form coefficients.
    Table A6 presents results using different weights as well as alternative variable definitions.

                                               A-3
Column (1) weights each firm by the portion of its purchases coming directly from the
citygate, rather than from interstate pipelines, storage facilities, and other sources. Since we
are unable to directly separate distribution-network and transmission-network leak volumes,
this column is designed to more heavily weight those utilities with lower transmission-related
volumes. In our sample, the median utility reports that 85 percent of its purchases come
directly from the citygate, and over 99 percent of its disposition is to end users. Given the
low volumes coming from or going to transmission and storage networks (and given that our
instrument is based off distribution-related regulations), we interpret our main specification
as being driven primarily by distribution-related activities. It is nonetheless reassuring that
the results in Column (1) are comparable to the main results.
    Columns (2) through (8) of Table A6 use alternative variable definitions. Column (2)
trims leaks at the one percent rather than five percent tails. Column (3) drops rather than
winsorizes all outliers. Column (4) keeps outliers as is, rather than dropping or winsorizing
them. Column (5) does not scale variables (the main specification scales by utility average
pipeline miles).
    Columns (6) and (7) examine the sensitivity of the results to including other expenses,
such as transmission expenses and capital. In Column (6) we include capital expenses (after
dividing expenses by 10 to approximate a 10-year levelization). In Column (7) we include
many additional expenses. Since some of the leak volumes may have come from the trans-
mission network, it is important to examine whether including transmission expenditures
changes the results. For this specification, we aggregate the distribution O&M expenditures
from the main specification with transmission O&M, storage O&M, customer information
provision, sales and advertising, administrative expenses, and annuitized capital. It is re-
assuring that including these other expenditures does not change our conclusions about
abatement costs. Lastly, Column (8) uses pre- and post-regulation averages rather than an-
nual data; thus the identifying variation is for a longer time horizon. This robustness check
alleviates the concern of unaccounted for dynamic effects, such as leak repairs lasting more
than one year, or a utility’s workforce taking time to adjust to new PHMSA regulations.
    Table A7 shows alternative controls and alternative sub-samples. Column (1) uses year
effects rather than region-by-year effects. Column (2) includes an indicator for post-PHMSA
regulations as well as a cubic of regional time trends instead region-by-year effects. Column
(3) does not include any control variables, except for region-by-year and utility effects. Col-
umn (4) controls for a cubic of sales as well as a linear function of the retail price.
    Columns (5) through (7) are designed to alleviate concerns that the instrument is simply
capturing general trends in leak abatement, rather than variation specific to the 2010 PHMSA
regulations. In Column (5) we control for the pre-regulation total leaks, interacted with a


                                              A-4
linear time trend. In Column (6), we control for utility-specific linear time trends. Both of
these specifications, designed to capture the possibility of differential trends leading up to
the PHMSA regulations in 2010, yield results similar to the main estimates. In Column (7),
we control for citygate prices—the implementation of the PHMSA regulations coincided with
a large drop in natural gas prices, following increased production from shale gas reserves.
However, this robustness check shows that our results are robust to include citygate price as
a control.
    Columns (8) through (12) of Table A7 use alternative sub-samples. Column (8) uses only
a balanced panel of bundled utilities. Column (9) drops California rather than simply PG&E,
because of changes in scrutiny in California following the San Bruno accident. Column (10)
omits the East census region, because this region contains older, high-density cities, and
we do not want our identifying variation to only come from cities with potentially large
unobservable costs to repair pipe (e.g., narrow or cobblestone streets). Column (11) excludes
the utilities in the highest quartile of historical leak volumes, since those utilities showed
the poorest balance in Table A3. Column (12) excludes observations with poor overlap of
covariates (miles of pipeline mains, volume sold, count of service lines, count of low-quality
mains, or the count of low-quality service lines). Specifically, because Figure A2 shows some
right-tail outliers of covariates for quartiles 3 and 4 of historical leak volumes, we restrict
the sample to those observations that lie between the minimum and maximum values for
quartiles 1 and 2.
    Overall, our results are robust across the broad array of robustness checks in Tables A6
and A7. Across all the columns, we maintain first stage power, and the resulting abatement
cost estimates are similar to the main result.
    Table A8 explores heterogeneity in the O&M expenditures across utilities with different
network densities. We divide the sample by quartile of density (as measured by the number
of service lines divided by pipeline mains), and estimate equation 3 for each quartile. All
quartiles have abatement costs that are statistically significantly less than the citygate price
and all quartiles, except the fourth quartile, have a strong first stage.
    Table A9 replicates Table 2, but with subcategories of O&M spending. Each point esti-
mate is from a separate regression. The rows list separate dependent variables (for instance,
dollars spent on “Operations: Supervision and Engineering”) and the columns designate
different specifications. The columns mirror the specifications in Table 2; OLS and IV speci-
fications are presented. We note that these estimates should NOT be used as the abatement
cost associated with each activity, because the regressions are attributing all leak abate-
ment to each subcategory of spending. However, this table is helpful to determine if there
are tradeoffs between expenditure categories. If utilities face a soft budget constraint, we


                                              A-5
would expect to see large and significant abatement costs for categories such as “Mainte-
nance: Mains” and “Maintenance: Services” (leak repair for both mains and service lines is
a main component of distribution integrity management programs) offset by estimates with
the opposite sign for other categories.52 This is not the case, in that we don’t generally see
large positive and statistically significant results in any of the categories, providing evidence
that the dependent variable used in Table 2 is appropriate. Three other specifications (not
shown for space) aimed at understanding the possibility of a soft budget constraint are also
reassuring. First, we run our main regression limiting the left-hand side expenditures to
just the subcategories that on their own yield an estimate <0 in Table A9. This yields an
estimated abatement cost of $1.12/Mcf. Second, we limit the post-sample to 2013, giving
utilities time to petition their PUCs for extra funds. The resulting estimate is $1.33/Mcf.
Finally, we combined strategies (1) and (2), and the estimated abatement cost is again com-
parable. Overall, then, it does not appear that our conclusions are sensitive to the possibility
of a soft budget constraint.


A4       Supplementary Tables for Capital Expenditures on
         Pipeline Replacement
Table A10 provides the first stage results for the pipeline replacement regressions (the 2SLS
results are shown in the text in Table 3). Having an additional mile of low-quality mains
in the first year of the sample results in an additional 0.18 miles of pipeline replacement
between the ten years.
    Table A11 provides robustness checks for Table 3. Column (1) includes O&M as well
as capital expenditures in the outcome variable. In this case, the IV does not satisfy the
exclusion restriction, since the safety regulations induced O&M spending not related to
pipeline upgrades – this column can be thought of as providing an upper bound. Column
(2) includes all gas-related capital, not just distribution-specific gas-related capital. Column
(3) uses an alternative definition of capital: the change in accumulated capital, rather than
the sum of capital additions. Column (4) includes as a control the change in citygate prices
between 2004 and 2013. Column (5) does not include any control variables. In Column (6)
we use the count of low quality pipeline mains in 1995 (the first year of pipeline quality data)
as an instrument. In Column (7) we use data from 1998 to 2013 (starting with the first year
of capital expense data), rather than 2004 to 2013. Accordingly, the instrument is defined
using low-quality mains in 1998. Column (8) weights by portion of purchases made at the
  52
    The other statistically significant category is for “Operations: Meter & House Regulators.” There are
reports of utilities replacing meters because of associated exposed gas piping posing a safety threat.

                                                  A-6
citygate (and not transmission or storage volumes). While the previous columns scale all
variables by utility’s average pipeline miles across the sample period, Column (9) does not
scale. Across these specifications, the cost of replacing low-quality pipe varies from $1.2 to
2.1 million per mile.
    Dividing the sample into quartiles depending on network density (measured by the count
of service lines per mile of pipeline mains), we find that replacement expenditures are higher
in utilities with denser networks (Table A12). This is perhaps not surprising, given that
more populated areas pose a greater safety risk, but also could require more complicated
and expeditious replacement.


A5        Estimating the Emissions Abated from Pipeline
          Replacement
To interpret the costs per mile in comparison to the benefits of leak abatement, we must
assume an emissions factor: the volume of leaks abated for each mile of pipeline replaced.
To do so, we estimate the following equation:

                                    Lit = β0 + β1 Pi,t−1 + Xit Θ + εit                                    (7)

where Lit is again the volume of gas leaked, in Mcf; Pi,t−1 is again the miles of low-quality
pipes, and Xit is a vector of controls (all scaled by utility size, as in the previous sections).
Here we use lags because contemporaneous P poses a simultaneity problem. We want to
capture the fact that leaks are higher when there are more miles of low-quality, rather
than high-quality, pipes. The endogeneity concern is that, as described previously, gas is
intentionally vented when repairs occur. That is, at the same time that low-quality pipes
are replaced with high-quality pipes, gas is vented, increasing L. This will bias β1 towards
zero. The instruments we used in previous specifications will not help, since they incentivize
repairs and therefore increase venting.53
    Lags should, however, address this concern: if a mile of low-quality pipe P is replaced
  53
      Note that in the O&M cost estimation, our abatement costs are measured per realized Mcf abated, that
is, net of any venting that occurs during repairs. This is precisely the parameter of interest. In contrast,
for emissions factors, we are interested in abatement realized over the lifetime of the pipe. Since venting
would occur only in the first year, we focus on the emissions factor for each year thereafter. In principle,
one would want to estimate the abatement in the first year (net of venting) and abatement in subsequent
years (in which venting does not occur), then use these two separate emissions factors in the levelized cost
calculation. Unfortunately, we do not have the power to do that. To the extent that realized abatement is
lower in the first year, this would imply that our levelized costs would be too small, although this effect is
likely negligible.



                                                    A-7
in time t, volume leaked L should decrease in time t + 1. As such, identification rests on
leak abatement from pipeline replacement persisting. We find this plausible – while new
pipes may decay somewhat, there should still be a benefit to having a one-year old pipe
rather than a sixty-year old pipe. We also point out that our estimate is at the system
level, and therefore will include any change in leaks downstream that occur when a pipe is
replaced upstream. For example, it is possible that by replacing a pipe, it can be operated
at higher capacity, which would put more pressure on all downstream pipes, thus increasing
leaks downstream. The controls Xit include lagged miles of medium-quality miles, lagged
volume sold, the lagged number of total miles, and region-by-year effects. The lagged sales
variable aids with both precision (by absorbing a determinant of leaks) and with identification
(since it could be correlated with service territory changes). The lagged total pipeline miles
variable again controls for service territory changes, so that the coefficient of interest is for
the differential effect of a low-quality pipe relative to a high-quality pipe. All variables
are scaled by the utility’s average length of pipeline miles over the sample period. Region-
by-year effects control for differential trends in leak rates across regions coming from, for
instance, differential weather trends. Much of the identifying variation is cross-sectional,
since pipeline upgrades are slow (including utility effects leads to quite noisy estimates).
Table A13, Column (1) shows the full sample and Column (2) shows the subsample of
utilities that report financial information, for which we estimate that 573 Mcf are abated
per mile of low-quality main replacement (Appendix, Table A13).
    We should also note an additional concern with this estimate: it might be higher than the
emissions factors of remaining pipes, since the estimate is driven by variation in historical
changes in pipes, and utilities perhaps targeted the leakiest pipes first. Accordingly, the
estimated 573 Mcf/mile is an upper bound on the average emissions factor. To calculate
how much of the leaked methane escaped to the atmosphere, we account for an 18 percent
soil oxidation rate described in Section 2, and thus use 470 Mcf/mile as an upper bound to
the emissions factor.54 Finally, to the extent that utilities with old pipelines also have old
surface facilities, this will bias our emissions factors upwards, again indicating that the 470
emissions factor is an upper bound. In contrast, the EPA uses an estimate of 229 Mcf per
mile of cast iron relative to plastic pipe.55 Some of the academic literature (Brandt et al.,
2014; Howarth, 2014; McKain et al., 2015) has criticized EPA emissions factors throughout
the supply chain as too conservative, so we use this estimate as a lower bound.56 At the
   54
      From the utility’s perspective, this soil oxidation is irrelevant; the gas is still lost to the system. From
the social planner’s perspective, however, the soil oxidation lowers the amount of gas that contributes to
climate change. From a utility’s perspective, then, the true levelized cost would be somewhat lower than the
calculations shown in Table 4. This would not change the conclusions we present below.
   55
      Source: Annex 3, Table A-138 of Environmental Protection Agency (2015).
   56
      The EPA is considering revising these emissions factors downwards to reflect pipeline upgrades, accord-

                                                      A-8
beginning of the paper we discussed the relationship between leak rates and average age and
material quality, with formalized regression results presented in Table A2. We note that
transforming these coefficients at median sample values for the financial reporters gives an
emissions factor between the EPA’s rate and our estimated upper bound.


A6       Documented Leak Abatement Opportunities
Table A14 assembles cost estimates for various leak detection and repair activities, provided
by the EPA’s Natural Gas STAR program, referred to in Section 3.1 of the main text.
Similarly, Table A15 assembles reported pipeline replacement costs from a number of sources.
This is referred to in Section 3.2 of the main text.


A7       Estimating Safety Benefits
Table A16 shows our estimates of safety benefits from leak abatement. We regress damages
(in dollars) on leaks (in Mcf) and low-quality mains (in miles). The damage variable is for
safety incidents reported to PHMSA and combines values for property damages, injuries,
and loss of life. As we mention in the main text, some of these accidents might have arisen
because of repairs themselves. As a result, the estimates are interpreted as the risk reduction
net of any risks from repairs. This is precisely the parameter of interest for comparison with
expenditures, because this estimate accounts for any of the net risk that the firm undertakes
in order to do the repair.
    The first column shows OLS results without fixed effects. This regression is arguably
biased because those distribution companies with higher leak rates and poor-quality networks
might for other reasons have more frequent and more costly accidents. We include this
specification to get a sense of the upper bound on damages. We also provide the OLS
estimates after including utility fixed effects (Column 2). Because of measurement error and
the potential for unobservables to be correlated with the variables of interest, in the remaining
column we instrument for both leaks and miles using two instruments. We interact past leak
volumes and past count of low-quality miles with an indicator for the period after PHMSA
regulations increased in stringency. The dependent variable for all three columns is the
aggregate of property damages; fatalities using a Value of Statistical Life of $9.1 million;
and injuries, assuming $1 million per reported injury. The implied leak abatement benefits
ing to the 2015 “Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: Revisions under Consideration for
Natural Gas Distribution Emissions,” but we note that these lower estimates would apply for future years,
rather than our sample.



                                                  A-9
in $/Mcf is simply equal to the coefficient on “Volume leaked, mcf.” The implied pipeline
benefits rows re-scale the coefficient on “Low-quality mains, miles” by an emissions factor,
in Mcf/miles, of either 229 or 470.
    Overall, the safety benefits of leak abatement are noisy and estimated to be at most
$0.19/Mcf, although not statistically different from zero. The safety benefits of pipeline
upgrades are also noisy, with the largest point estimate implying a benefit of $2.65/Mcf
(note this would be in addition to the $0.08/Mcf in associated leak reductions, for a total
of $2.74/Mcf). The noise is not surprising given that the typical utility in our sample has
one accident every ten years, ignoring third-party damages. We are reluctant to place too
much emphasis on these estimates, because of the potential for underreporting as well as
the potential for unobservable black swan events with right-tailed damages. However, we
note a few things. First, the positive point estimates for the pipeline coefficient imply that
the safety benefits of pipeline replacement are larger than the safety benefits of other leak
abatement. This is intuitive, if old pipelines are closer to population centers than are, for
instance, surface stations where leaks could be abated. The negative point estimates would
yield the opposite conclusion, but they are for the OLS specification with utility fixed effects
(which we are reluctant to rely upon).
    In Section 3.1, we concluded that utilities have been abating at a cost below the the-
oretical socially optimal cost. This was based on point estimates of abatement costs of
around $0.48/Mcf. We then compared this to the commodity value that utilities faced
(sales-weighted citygate prices for financial reporters after 2010, $5.67/Mcf, but many utili-
ties were able to pass this through to retail customers). Moreover, society faces an additional
cost of $27/Mcf in climate change damages from methane leaks. Including safety benefits
does not, as such, change the qualitative conclusion we reached, which is that leak abatement
is currently well below the level that social planner might choose.
    In Section 3.2, we concluded that the levelized cost of pipeline replacement ($48/Mcf
to $211/Mcf, from Table 4) is well above the cost of historically undertaken leak detection
and repair activities. In addition, our preferred set of parameters implied a levelized cost of
abatement well above the value of commodity conserved and climate change damages avoided
(around $34/Mcf for our sample). We cautioned that pipeline replacement may entail greater
safety benefits than would other leak detection and repair activities, and indeed our preferred
estimates in Table A16 are consistent with this intuition. However, the largest value of safety
benefits we estimate for pipeline replacement ($2.74/Mcf) would not change our qualitative
conclusions.
    Overall, while we are reluctant to rely too heavily on these noisy estimates, we note that
they appear to be small enough to not change our qualitative conclusions about the effective-


                                             A-10
ness of the average mile of pipeline replacement. However, we maintain that heterogeneity
is likely to matter, as we discuss in the main text.


A8      Robustness: Incentives to Abate
Table A17 provides robustness checks for Table 5, on what is correlated with utility expen-
ditures. The first two columns provide the following robustness checks: alternative controls
(Column 1); and a subsample of utilities (Column 2). The next two columns compare the
estimates from Table 5 with the reduced-form estimates underlying our main O&M estima-
tion. A somewhat different set of control variables is used across these two specifications,
but the coefficient on the instrument (“Past volume leaked×I(Post-PHMSA)”) is reassur-
ingly similar.




                                           A-11
Figure A1: Percent Lost and Unaccounted for Gas, Fi-
nancial Reporters versus Full Sample




Note: This histogram compares the density of leak volumes as a percentage
of total volume purchased for the full sample of utilities (grey) versus just
those utilities reporting financial information (green). It additionally shows
the impact of weighting by firm size (red). The upper and lower 1 percent
tails of the distribution have been trimmed. A unit of observation is a utility-
year combination, with around 1,500 utilities across 19 years (1995 to 2013).
The data source is EIA via SNL, as described in the text.




                                    A-12
                                          Figure A2: Covariate Overlap




Note: These kernel density plots assess covariate overlap. For each covariate, four histograms are shown: one for each quartile
of historical leak volume.




                                                            A-13
                                     Table A1: Summary Statistics

                                                               Full                         With Financial Data
                                                   Mean       Std. Dev.         N          Mean    Std. Dev.        N
 Volume leaked, Bcf                                 0.18            2.06   22,580           1.05         4.54 2,958
 Volume leaked, %                                   1.70            3.70   22,580           1.05         2.64 2,958
 Volume purchased, Bcf                             15.38          78.55    25,096          81.53       154.48 3,051
 Total end-user customers, count               49,911.06     247,108.15    25,096     332,859.29 611,704.18 3,051
 Pipeline mains, miles                            882.21       3,355.34    21,173       5,222.39     7,326.45 2,756
       Unprotected bare steel                      44.97         294.45    21,174         307.53       733.11   2,756
       Unprotected coated steel                    16.11         178.52    21,174         108.78       469.93 2,756
       Cathodically protected bare steel           10.80         161.69    21,174          49.79       185.43   2,756
       Cathodically protected coated steel        365.96       1,685.59    21,174       2,173.17     3,493.70   2,756
       Plastic                                    408.15       1,532.65    21,174       2,344.70     3,421.92 2,756
       Cast iron                                   32.93         223.10    21,174         220.10       570.61 2,756
       Other                                        3.24         126.85    21,173          18.30       347.17   2,756
 Low-quality mains, %                               4.21          11.69    21,094          10.61        14.34 2,756
 Average pipeline age, years                       26.18          13.46    10,575          26.85        10.28   1,690
 Citygate price, $/Mcf                              6.75            2.31   29,583           7.14         2.36 3,089
 O&M expenses, $000                                                                    23,596.38    38,091.57 3,001
 Capital expenses, $000                                                                34,254.94    54,082.89 2,477
Note: The full sample is a census of 1,557 natural gas distribution utilities. The financial reporters sample is com-
posed of 240 large investor-owned utilities, representing 75% of total purchases by companies with residential cus-
tomers. Most variables are available for the period 1995-2013; but capital expenses data begin in 1998 and pipeline
age data begin in 2004. The upper and lower five percent of leak rates have been trimmed, as described in the text.
Low-quality mains refers to pipeline mains made of ductile iron, unprotected bare steel, and cast iron. Prices and
expenses are listed in 2015 dollars.




                                          Table A2: Leak Rates

                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                 % Leaked      % Leaked     % Leaked      % Leaked     % Leaked
      Average pipeline age, years                 0.016***      0.017**      0.017***     0.016***        0.021
                                                   (0.005)      (0.009)       (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.014)
      Plastic or high-quality steel, %           -0.022***       -0.021     -0.037***                    -0.011
                                                   (0.008)      (0.013)       (0.010)                   (0.015)
      Unprotected coated steel, %                                                           -0.029**
                                                                                             (0.011)
      Cathodically protected bare steel, %                                                 -0.034***
                                                                                             (0.010)
      Cathodically protected coated steel, %                                               -0.032***
                                                                                             (0.009)
      Plastic, %                                                                           -0.032***
                                                                                             (0.009)
      Cast iron, %                                                                            -0.018
                                                                                             (0.016)
      Ductile iron, copper, or other, %                                                     -0.023**
                                                                                             (0.011)
      Region-year effects                           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes
      State effects                                 Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes         No
      Utility effects                                No            No           No              No        Yes
      Observations                                 9,334         10,112       6,952           9,334      9,334
      R2                                            0.09          0.06         0.10            0.09       0.43
    Note: The dependent variable is the percent of gas purchased that is leaked. All columns trim outliers of
    leak rates that are in the upper and lower 5%, with the exception of Column (2) which trims only the up-
    per and lower 1%. Column (3) uses a balanced panel of bundled-only utilities. In Column (4) the omitted
    category of pipeline type is unprotected, bare steel. Standard errors are clustered at the utility level. ***
    Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                       A-14
                                        Table A3: Covariate Balance Test

                                      Mains, unscaled       Vol. Sold       Service Lines     Low-qual Mains      Low-qual Serv
                                             (1)                 (2)              (3)                (4)                 (5)
                                           (miles)              (Bcf)          (count)            (miles)             (count)
 I(P25< Historical leaks< P50)             -876.91            -1,582.19          -2.03              -0.03               -0.55
                                         (1,151.90)          (1,222.37)         (2.97)             (0.02)              (0.60)
 I(P50< Historical leaks< P75)           2,778.05*           2,478.71*        11.48***              0.03               1.52*
                                         (1,661.62)          (1,471.71)         (2.87)             (0.02)              (0.82)
 I(Historical leaks> P75)                2,956.99*          6,094.78***       15.47***            0.13***             4.20***
                                         (1,533.02)          (2,028.52)         (4.61)             (0.03)              (1.38)
 Constant                               3,927.50***        10,603.23***       43.53***            0.06***             1.72***
                                          (968.31)             (859.90)         (2.12)             (0.02)              (0.49)
 Observations                                920                 920              920                920                 920
Note: This table examines covariate balance for pre-treatment years (2004-2010), by reporting mean covariate values across
quantiles of the historical leaks variable. Columns (2)-(5) scale the dependent variable by the average number of pipeline
miles for each utility, as in our main cost specifications. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




   Table A4: O&M Abatement Expenditures: Robustness using Different Instruments

                                                                                        IV
                                                              (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)
                                                            O&M           O&M        O&M          O&M          O&M
             Volume leaked, Mcf                              0.00          -1.38      -0.49        -0.78        -0.53
                                                            (0.51)        (2.05)     (2.08)       (0.69)       (0.85)
             Controls                                        Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
             Region-year effects                             Yes            Yes        Yes          No           No
             Cubic time trends by region                      No            No          No          Yes          Yes
             Utility effects                                 Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
             Observations                                   1,551          1,399     2,557        1,569        1,551
             Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                        24.43          7.81        9.78       13.30        14.74
             Difference from citygate price ($/Mcf)        5.67***        4.29**     5.18**      4.89***      5.14***
          Note: Using different instrumental variables for volume of leaked gas. Instruments are variants of the
          interaction term used as our main instrument in Table 2: (1) Instrument is scaled by the utility’s total
          purchased volume, instead of pipeline miles; (2) Instrument uses the volume leaked in 2004 as the pre-
          period; (3) Instrument uses the average volume leaked between 1995 and 2009 as the pre-period and
          regression uses all years of data; (4) Instrument is the indicator of the period after PHMSA increased
          regulations, instead of the interaction; (5) Two instruments: the interaction used in Table 2 as well as
          the indicator of the period after PHMSA increased regulations. *** Statistically significant at the 1%
          level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                              A-15
Table A5: Reverse IV: Volume of Gas Leaked on Operations and Maintenance Expenditures


                                                                             OLS                 IV
                                                                              (1)                 (2)
                                                                         Vol. Leaked        Vol. Leaked
                           O&M expenses, $                                   -0.01              -2.07
                                                                            (0.01)             (3.94)
                           Controls                                           Yes                Yes
                           Region-year effects                                Yes                Yes
                           Utility effects                                    Yes                Yes
                           Observations                                      1,579             1,551
                           Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                             .                 0.27
                           Abatement cost ($/Mcf)                           -91.18              -0.48
                           Difference from citygate price ($/Mcf)           -85.51            5.19***
                        Note: Coefficients represent the Mcf reduced per $ spent. The instrument is the
                        utility’s average volume of leaked gas in the period before PHMSA increased reg-
                        ulations, interacted with a dummy for the period after PHMSA increased regula-
                        tions. Controls are total volume sold; total miles of pipeline mains; total service
                        line counts; low-quality pipeline miles; and low-quality service line counts. All
                        variables are scaled by the utility’s average count of pipeline miles over the sam-
                        ple period. Standard errors are clustered by utility. *** Statistically significant
                        at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




    Table A6: O&M Abatement Expenditures: Robustness to Alternative Specifications


                              Weighting                                        Different Definitions
                                  (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)            (6)                   (7)           (8)
                                O&M          O&M        O&M        O&M        O&M        O&M and Capital       All Expenses      O&M
 Volume leaked, Mcf              -1.15        -0.24      -0.26      -0.53      -1.73          -0.12                 2.23          -0.61
                                (3.26)       (0.62)     (0.44)     (0.62)     (1.50)         (1.16)                (2.13)        (0.67)
 Utility effects                  Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes                  Yes            Yes
 Controls                         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes                  Yes            Yes
 Region-year effects              Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes                  Yes            No
 Region-period effects             No          No         No         No         No             No                    No            Yes
 Observations                   1,413        1,582      1,433      1,551      1,551          1,441                 1,441           332
 Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.        13.73        19.43      27.12      16.37      14.36          17.85                 17.85         20.22
 Dif. from citygate               4.52      5.43***    5.41***    5.14***    3.94***        5.55***               7.90***       5.06***
Note: Specifications are variants of the IV specification in Table 2. Columns are: (1) Weighting by portion of purchases at citygate
(i.e., non-transmission or storage volumes); (2) Trimming upper and lower 1% of leaked gas (instead of 5%); (3) Dropping outliers
instead of winsorizing; (4) Not dropping or winsorizing outliers; (5) No scaling. (6) O&M expenditures as well as annuitized capital
expenditures; (7) O&M expenditures as well as transmission, storage, information, administration, and annuitized capital expendi-
tures; (8) Collapsing across years to two periods (pre and post). *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                              A-16
                            Table A7: O&M Abatement Expenditures: Robustness to Alternative Specifications

                                                                    Different Controls                                                   Different Samples
                                           (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)
                                         O&M        O&M         O&M        O&M        O&M         O&M        O&M        O&M         O&M        O&M        O&M         O&M
        Volume leaked, Mcf                -0.59      -0.50       -0.82      -0.38      1.18        1.15       -0.47      -1.16       -0.36      -1.48      -1.01       -0.45
                                         (0.95)     (0.93)      (0.95)     (0.84)     (1.18)      (1.15)     (0.92)     (0.80)      (0.92)     (1.50)     (0.78)      (0.64)
        Utility effects                    Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
        Controls                           Yes        Yes         No         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
        Year effects                       Yes        No          No         No         No          No         No         No          No          No         No          No
        Cubic regional time trends         No         Yes         No         No         No          No         No         No          No          No         No          No
A-17




        Region-year effects                No         No          Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
        Cubic sales control                No         No          No         Yes        No          No         No         No          No          No         No          No
        Past leaks*Year                    No         No          No         No        Yes          No         No         No          No          No         No          No
        Utility effects*Year               No         No          No         No         No         Yes         No         No          No          No         No          No
        Citygate price control             No         No          No         No         No          No         Yes        No          No          No         No          No
        Observations                     1,551      1,551       1,576      1,524      1,551       1,551      1,551        772       1,521      1,155      1,160       1,441
        Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.          15.88      17.90       16.54      15.66      13.46       12.45      17.96      15.69       17.39      21.90       6.52       15.77
        Dif. from citygate              5.08***    5.17***     4.85***    5.29***    6.85***     6.82***    5.20***    4.51***     5.31***    4.19***    4.66***     5.22***
       Note: Specifications are variants of the IV specification in Table 2. Columns are: (1) Year effects instead of region-year effects; (2) Post-PHMSA indicator
       and cubic of regional time trends instead of region-year effects; (3) Not including control variables; (4) Including retail price and cubic of sales; (5) Past leaks
       interacted with year trend; (6) Utility fixed effects interacted with year trend; (7) Including citygate prices; (8) Balanced sample of only utilities with residential-
       bundled sales; (9) Excluding California utilities; (10) Excluding the East Coast; (11) Excluding the highest quartile of historical leak volume. (12) Excluding
       observations with poor covariate overlap. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.
Table A8: Heterogeneity in Operations and Maintenance Expenditures

                                                            Quartile of Density
                                                  1st          2nd        3rd          4th
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                O&M          O&M         O&M         O&M
    Volume leaked, Mcf                           -0.28        -0.63       0.58        -1.55
                                                (0.40)       (0.68)      (1.04)      (1.96)
    Utility effects                               Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
    Region-year effects                           Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
    Observations                                  384          379        387          401
    Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                     51.48        86.87       18.34        3.02
    Difference from citygate price ($/Mcf)     5.39***      5.04***     6.25***      4.12**
  Note: Subsamples divided by quartile of network density (as measured by number of service
  lines divided by pipeline mains). Dependent variable is the utility’s expenditures on O&M.
  The coefficient on “Volume leaked, Mcf” represents the amount spent on distribution O&M
  to reduce natural gas leaks, in $ per Mcf. All variables are scaled by the utility’s average
  count of pipeline miles over the sample period. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***
  Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                             A-18
Table A9: Subcategories of Operations and Maintenance Expenditures

                                                           OLS                 IV
                                                            (1)                (2)
    Category                                          Estimate, $/Mcf    Estimate, $/Mcf

    Operations: Supervision & Engineering                  -0.032               0.173
                                                          (0.028)             (0.192)
    Operations: Distr Load Dispatching                      0.007              -0.056
                                                          (0.012)             (0.064)
    Operations: Compressor Station Labor                   0.000               -0.001
                                                          (0.001)             (0.003)
    Operations: Compressor Stat Fuel & Power               0.000               0.000
                                                          (0.000)             (0.001)
    Operations: Mains & Services                           0.039                0.253
                                                          (0.045)             (0.240)
    Operations: Meas & Reg Station, General                -0.007               0.007
                                                          (0.007)             (0.030)
    Operations: Meas & Reg Station, Industrial            0.003*                0.013
                                                          (0.002)             (0.010)
    Operations: Meas & Reg Station, City Gate               0.000               0.000
                                                          (0.002)             (0.009)
    Operations: Meter & House Regulator                    -0.070            -0.357**
                                                          (0.054)             (0.155)
    Operations: Customer Installation                      -0.018              -0.298
                                                          (0.041)             (0.314)
    Operations: Other Expense                               0.023              -0.009
                                                          (0.027)             (0.125)
    Operations: Rents                                      -0.010               0.038
                                                          (0.009)             (0.040)
    Maintenance: Supervision & Engineering                  0.022              -0.100
                                                          (0.025)             (0.122)
    Maintenance: Structures & Improvements                -0.008*              -0.005
                                                          (0.004)             (0.026)
    Maintenance: Mains                                    -0.100*              -0.212
                                                          (0.058)             (0.749)
    Maintenance: Compressor Station Equipment               0.000              -0.005
                                                          (0.000)             (0.004)
    Maintenance: Meas & Reg Station, General               -0.007               0.006
                                                          (0.007)             (0.028)
    Maintenance: Meas & Reg Stat, Industrial               -0.001              -0.005
                                                          (0.001)             (0.006)
    Maintenance: Meas & Reg Station, City Gate             -0.003              -0.012
                                                          (0.004)             (0.012)
    Maintenance: Services                                 -0.033*            -0.199**
                                                          (0.020)             (0.082)
    Maintenance: Meters & House Regulators                 -0.012               0.012
                                                          (0.018)             (0.079)
    Maintenance: Other Equipment                            0.003               0.036
                                                          (0.010)             (0.033)
    Note: Each point estimate is the coefficient on volume of leaked gas obtained from one
   of 44 separate regressions. The rows vary by dependent variable, covering the compre-
   hensive list of 22 subcategories of distribution O&M expenditures. The columns mirror
   the specifications in Table 2: Column (1) is the OLS specification and Column (2) in-
   struments for the quantity of leaked gas using past leaked gas interacted with the period
   after PHMSA increased stringency. These estimates should not, however, be used as the
   abatement cost associated with each activity, because the regressions attribute all leak
   abatement to each subcategory of spending.




                                            A-19
Table A10: Instrumenting for Pipeline Replacement: First Stage of Capital Cost Regression


                                                                          (1)
                                                           Low Quality Mains Replacement
                   Historic low-quality mains, miles                   0.18***
                                                                        (0.03)
                   ∆ volume sold, Bcf                                    0.24
                                                                        (0.38)
                   ∆ mains, miles                                     -0.05***
                                                                        (0.02)
                   ∆ customers                                           0.00
                                                                        (0.00)
                   Region effects                                        Yes
                   Observations                                          140
                   Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                              40.02
                Note: Results show the first stage regression corresponding to Table 3. Depen-
                dent variable is the replacement of low quality mains from 2004 to 2013. The
                instrument is the miles of low quality mains in 2004. All variables are scaled
                by the utility’s average count of pipeline miles over the sample period. Robust
                standard errors in parentheses. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; **
                5% level; * 10% level.




                                                     A-20
                           Table A11: Cost of Pipeline Replacement: Robustness to Alternative Specifications

                                                                                          Total Capital Expenditures ($000)
                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                 O&M+Capital       All Capital   Alt. Capital     Capital    Capital    Capital      Capital     Capital     Capital
        Low-quality main replacement, miles        2,069***         1,214**       1,232***       1,435*** 1,229***      1,236**     1,558***    1,571***    1,868***
                                                     (792)            (505)         (407)          (526)      (438)      (515)        (533)       (556)       (313)
A-21




        Observations                                  140              140            129           126        141        119          81          136         140
        Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                      40.02            40.02         39.75          35.80      64.90      30.11        43.39       30.57       80.79
       Note: Specifications are variants of the IV specification found in Table 3. Column (1) includes O&M in addition to Capital. Column (2) includes all gas-related
       capital, not just distribution-specific gas-related capital. Column (3) uses an alternative reporting of capital: the change in accumulated capital rather than
       the sum of capital additions. Column (4) includes the addtional control of the change in citygate price. Column (5) has no controls. Column (6) uses uses low
       quality pipes in 1995 (instead of 2004) as the instrument. (Note, pipeline quality data begin in 1995.) Column (7) uses data from 1998 to 2013 instead of 2004
       to 2013 and uses low quality pipes in 1998 as the instrument. (Note, capital expense data only start in 1998.) Column (8) weights by portion purchases made
       at the citygate (i.e., non-transmission and storage volumes). Column (9) does not scale. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** Statistically significant at
       the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.
           Table A12: Heterogeneity in Cost of Pipeline Replacement

                                                                Quartile of Density
                                                     1st        2nd         3rd            4th
        Low-quality main replacement, miles       -561.75*     466.91     735.85**    2,462.00***
                                                  (325.42)    (769.26)    (360.67)      (672.08)
        Region effects                               Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes
        Observations                                 32          36          36            36
        Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                     55.68       1.51        6.89          10.57
       Note: Subsamples divided by quartile of network density (as measured by number of ser-
       vice lines divided by pipeline mains). Dependent variable is the sum of capital expenditures
       made from 2004 to 2013 in thousands of dollars. The reduction in low quality mains from
       2004 to 2013 is instrumented for using the miles of low quality mains in 2004. All variables
       are scaled by the utility’s average count of pipeline miles over the sample period. Robust
       standard errors in parentheses. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; *
       10% level.




Table A13: Estimating an Emissions Factor: Volume Leaked on Miles Replaced

                                                               (1)                  (2)
                                                        Volume Leaked        Volume Leaked
             Lagged low-quality mains, miles              400.46***            573.18***
                                                            (24.69)              (67.22)
             Lagged medium quality mains, miles              23.96              294.99**
                                                            (15.65)             (117.55)
             Lagged volume sold                            0.00***               0.00***
                                                             (0.00)               (0.00)
             Lagged pipeline mains, miles                    15.18              -226.77*
                                                            (31.85)             (117.91)
             Region-year effects                              Yes                  Yes
             Observations                                    8,689                1,410
             R2                                               0.08                 0.17
           Note: Dependent variable is the volume of leaked gas (Mcf). Column (1) includes
           all data, not only the financial reporters. Column (2) only includes financial re-
           porters. Coefficient on “Lagged low-quality mains” in Column (2) serves as the
           emissions factor of gas leaked per mile of low-quality pipe, in Mcf/mile. Low-quality
           mains are those constructed of cast iron, ductile iron, or unprotected bare steel and
           medium-quality mains are those constructed of copper, unprotected coated steel,
           or cathodically protected bare steel. The omitted category of mains is high-quality
           mains: protected coated steel and plastic. All variables are scaled by the utility’s
           average count of pipeline miles over the sample period. Standard errors are clus-
           tered by utility. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10%
           level.




                                                  A-22
  Table A14: Reported Leak Detection and Repair Costs

  Type                                                         Estimate, $/Mcf

  Reducing blowdown:
  Repairing valves during other repairs                             $1.20
  Composite wrap to prevent repairs                                 $1.43
  Improved control system to reduce compressor start-ups            $2.19
  Hot taps to reduce blowdown                                       $3.93
  Capturing vented gas                                            $5.55-6.67

  Repairing leaks from compressors and pipes:
  Flexible plastic liners                                            offset
  Compressor stations                                                $0.89
  Excess flow valves for new services                                $2.20
  Pneumatic devices, retrofit                                        $2.93
  Pneumatic device, early replacement                                $7.11
  More frequent walking surveys                                      $7.33

  Reducing system pressure:
  Manually                                                          $1.95
  Automated                                                        depends

 Note: Source is EPA’s Natural Gas STAR program. All are 2009-2015. Ac-
 cessed February 16 2016 from various “Fact Sheets” at the EPA’s “Recom-
 mend Technologies and Practices – Natural Gas STAR Program” website,
 https://www3.epa.gov/gasstar/tools/recommended.html. Programs and equip-
 ment are assumed in this calculation to last one year, with the exception of ex-
 cess flow valves. Some documentation suggests 50-year lifetimes for excess flow
 valves; here we have assumed a more conservative 25 year lifetime and a 3 per-
 cent discount rate.



     Table A15: Reported Pipeline Replacement Costs

 Type                                   Source                    Estimate

 Mains, Florida                         PUC1                 170,000 - 190,000
 Cast iron, Allentown                   Newspaper2                 650,000
 Cast iron, OH and KY                   Duke3                      670,000
 Cast iron, Philadelphia                NPR4                      1 million
 Mains, Pennsylvania                    PUC5                200,000 - 1.8 million
 Bare steel, Ohio and New England       Analysis Group6     300,000 - 1.2 million
 Mains, Philadelphia                    PUC5                     1.5 million
 Cast iron, urban areas                 ICF for EDF7            1 - 3 million
 Cast iron                              AGA8                  1.5 - 2.1 million

Note: All are 2009-2015. Sources: 1 Florida Public Service Commission, Docket
No 140166-GU. Order No PSC-14-0693-TRF-GU. Issued December 15, 2014.
2 www.lehighvalleylive.com. 2012. “Allentown, UGI differ over whether pace of

gas pipeline replacement is enough.” 3 Duke Energy. 2012. “Lessons Learned from
an Accelerated Main Replacement Program.” 4 NPR. 2014. “Report: Philadelphia
gas utility second worst for pipeline leaks.” 5 Pennsylvania Public Utility Commis-
sion. Staff Report. “Inquiry into Philadelphia Gas Works’ Pipeline Replacement
Program.” April 2015. 6 Aubuchon, Craig and Hibbard, Paul. “Summary of Quan-
tifiable Benefits and Costs Related to Select Targeted Infrastructure Replacement
Programs.” Analysis Group, Inc. January, 2013. 7 ICF International. 2014. “Eco-
nomic Analysis of Methane Emission Reduction Opportunities in the U.S. Onshore
Oil and Natural Gas Industries.” Prepared for the Environmental Defense Fund.
8 American Gas Association website: https://www.aga.org/content/estimation-

replacement-national-cast-iron-inventory-2012. Accessed April 19 2016.




                                      A-23
                              Table A16: Damages from Accidents

                                                                           OLS                          IV
                                                                 (1)                  (2)               (3)
                                                             Damages ($)         Damages ($)       Damages ($)
  Volume leaked, Mcf                                            0.08                 0.02               0.19
                                                               (0.07)               (0.06)            (0.26)
  Low-quality mains, miles                                    607.94**             -120.91            433.14
                                                              (293.58)            (301.68)          (2,105.43)
  Controls                                                      Yes                  Yes                Yes
  Region-year effects                                           Yes                  Yes                Yes
  Utility effects                                                No                  Yes                Yes
  Observations                                                 3,319                3,319             3,127
  Kleibergen-Paap F-stat.                                                                              14.01
  Implied leak abatement benefit, $/Mcf                           0.08               0.02              0.19
                                                                 (0.07)             (0.06)            (0.26)
  Implied pipeline replacement benefit, $/Mcf, F=229             2.65**              -0.53             1.89
                                                                 (1.28)             (1.32)            (9.19)
  Implied pipeline replacement benefit, $/Mcf, F=470             1.29**              -0.26             0.92
                                                                 (0.62)             (0.64)            (4.48)
Note: These columns estimate the monetary damages from distribution pipeline accidents, i.e., the safety-related
benefits of accident prevention. Each column is a regression of monetary damages on leaks and on low-quality
miles. Dependent variable is the aggregate of property damages, lost lives, using a Value of a Statistical Life
of $9.1 million, and injuries, using a value of $1 million per injury. Column (3) instruments for both explana-
tory variables using the interaction of historical count of low quality mains and an indicator for the period after
PHMSA regulations increased in stringency; and the interaction of historical volume leaked and an indicator for
the period after PHMSA regulations increased in stringency. The implied leak abatement benefits in $/Mcf for
are simply equal to the coefficient on “Volume leaked, Mcf.” The implied pipeline benefits re-scale the coefficient
on “Low-quality mains, miles” by an emissions factor, in Mcf/miles, of either 229 or 470. All three specifications
control for: region-year effects; total miles of pipeline mains; and total volume sold. All variables are scaled by
the utility’s average count of pipeline miles over the time period. Sample includes only utilities that ever re-
ported an accident. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered by utility. *** Statistically significant at the
1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                      A-24
Table A17: Robustness: Reduced-Form Estimates of What Explains Utility Expenditures

                                                      Alternative Specifications   Specification Comparison
                                                         (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)
                                                      Total ($)     Total ($)      O&M ($)      O&M ($)
          Past volume leaked×I(Post-PHMSA)              1.33          0.35           0.30         0.21
                                                       (1.51)        (0.94)         (0.39)       (0.43)
          Economic and Regulatory Variables:
          Citygate price, $/Mcf                          -227          -37             -46
                                                        (264)         (168)           (48)
          Fraction of year in a rate case              1339**        1242**          307**
                                                        (642)         (618)          (151)
          Fraction of year in a rate-case test year      739          903*          179***
                                                        (525)         (457)           (59)
          I(Utility has pipeline rider)                2513**         1081             -35
                                                       (1023)         (831)          (160)
          Controls:
          Pipeline mains, miles                       16038**         -2629           836          1090
                                                       (7790)        (1961)          (757)        (811)
          Service lines, count                          11.85         23.32           3.76         9.32
                                                      (58.39)        (23.40)        (11.48)      (13.33)
          Volume sold, Mcf                              -0.05          0.14           0.03         0.02
                                                       (0.18)         (0.14)         (0.03)       (0.03)
          Low-quality mains, miles                                                                -2187
                                                                                                 (4180)
          Low-quality service lines, count                                                        -28.35
                                                                                                 (26.36)
          Region-year effects                            No           Yes            Yes           Yes
          Year effects                                  Yes            No             No            No
          Utility effects                               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
          Observations                                 1,490          704           1,603         1,559
          R2                                            0.83          0.85           0.97          0.97
         Note: Regressions show the reduced-form regressions of expenditures on our instrument (the util-
         ity’s past leak volume interacted with the period that PHMSA increased regulatory stringency),
         along with other economic and regulatory variables. The dependent variable in the first two
         columns is the sum total of capital and O&M expenditures in dollars. Columns show alterna-
         tive specifications to the total-expenditure regression found in Table 5: Column (1) includes year
         effects instead of region-year effects. Column (2) uses a balanced sample of bundled-only util-
         ities. The last two columns compare the estimates from the regressions exploring what drives
         abatement with the reduced-form version of our main O&M estimation: Column (3) is the O&M
         counterpart of the previous columns (this specification is also found in Table 5). Column (4) is
         the reduced form of our main estimation result (Table 2). All variables are scaled by the utility’s
         average count of miles of pipeline mains over the sample period, except price, fractions, and in-
         dicator variables. Standard errors are clustered by utility. *** Statistically significant at the 1%
         level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                        A-25
