NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAMILY DISADVANTAGE AND THE GENDER GAP IN BEHAVIORAL AND
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES
David Autor
David Figlio
Krzysztof Karbownik
Jeffrey Roth
Melanie Wasserman
Working Paper 22267
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22267
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016, September 2017
We thank Josh Angrist, Marianne Bertrand, Raj Chetty, John Ham, Nathan Hendren, Louis
Kaplow, Mikael Lindahl, Jeremy Majerovitz, Richard Murnane, Jessica Pan, Kjell Salvanes, Till
von Wachter, and numerous seminar participants at AEFP, CESifo Program on the Economics of
Education, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Harvard University, Hitotsubashi University, IZA,
Maastricht University, Miami University, MIT, National University of Singapore, the NBER
Education Program, Northwestern University, Queens University, Simon Fraser University,
University of Chicago, University of Erlangen-Nurnberg, University of Leicester, University
of Oregon, University of Quebec at Montreal, University of Southampton, University of
Toronto, Uppsala University, Washington University in Saint Louis, and the Yrjö Jahnsson
Foundation 60th Anniversary Conference on Inequality and Health for valuable suggestions that
helped to improve the paper. Autor acknowledges support from the Russell Sage Foundation
(Grant #85-12-07). Figlio and Roth acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation
and the Institute for Education Sciences (CALDER grant), and Figlio acknowledges support
from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation. Wasserman acknowledges support from the NSF Graduation Research
Fellowship, NIA Grant #T32-AG000186, and NICHD Grant #HD007339-30. We are grateful to
the Florida Departments of Education and Health for providing the de-identified, matched
data used in this analysis. The conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not represent the positions of the Florida Departments of Education and Health, nor
those of our funders, nor the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by David Autor, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie
Wasserman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes
David Autor, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman
NBER Working Paper No. 22267
May 2016, September 2017
JEL No. I24,J12,J13,J16
ABSTRACT
Using birth certificates matched to schooling records for Florida children born 1992–2002, we
assess whether family disadvantage disproportionately impedes the pre-market development of
boys. We find that, relative to their sisters, boys born to disadvantaged families have higher rates
of disciplinary problems, lower achievement scores, and fewer high-school completions.
Evidence supports that this is a causal effect of the post-natal environment; family disadvantage
is unrelated to the gender gap in neonatal health. We conclude that the gender gap among black
children is larger than among white children in substantial part because black children are raised
in more disadvantaged families.
David Autor
Department of Economics, E52-438
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu
David Figlio
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu
Krzysztof Karbownik
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
krzysztof.karbownik@northwestern.edu

Jeffrey Roth
Department of Pediatrics
University of Florida
PO Box 100296
Gainesville, FL 32610-0296
jeffroth@ufl.edu
Melanie Wasserman
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
melanie.wasserman@anderson.ucla.edu

Introduction
The last four decades have witnessed a swift and substantial reversal of the gender gap in educational
attainment in the U.S. and much of the developed world. Between 1970 and 2010, the high school
graduation rate of U.S. women rose by six percentage points, from 81 to 87 percentage points, while
the U.S. male high school graduation rate was unchanged (Murnane, 2013).1 Contemporaneously,
women have overtaken and surpassed men in higher education: in 2011, the ratio of female to
male college attainment among adults ages 25 – 34 exceeded unity in 28 of 34 OECD countries,
with a median above 1.4 (OECD, 2013). Amidst this widely remarked rise in female educational
attainment hides a striking and comparatively unremarked puzzle: the female advantage in high
school graduation and college attainment is larger and has risen by substantially more among children
of minority families. For example, while the overall female advantage in high school completions
among U.S. adults ages 20 through 24 was 6.2 percentage points in 2010, it was 4.5 percentage points
among whites, 12.2 percentage points among blacks, and 7.8 percentage points among U.S. born
Hispanics (Murnane, 2013, Table 3).2 Contemporaneous race gaps in college attainment among
young U.S. adults are equally pronounced (U.S. National Center for Education Statistics, 2013,
Table 104.20).3
What accounts for the systematically larger gender gaps in educational outcomes among minorities? One possible explanation—the focus of this paper—is family disadvantage, defined as lower
levels of the quality and quantity of available household resources, child-rearing inputs (e.g., nutrition, safety in the home, stimuli), and parental attention. We hypothesize that family disadvantage
diﬀerentially inhibits the behavioral and academic development of boys relative to girls, either because these outcomes are more elastic to family circumstances among boys than girls, or because
diﬀerential parental investment in girls relative to boys varies inversely with household socioeconomic
status (SES). Our goals in this paper are: (a) to test whether family disadvantage levies a disproportionate eﬀect on the educational and behavioral outcomes of school-age boys relative to girls;
(b) to diﬀerentiate this hypothesis from a ’fetal origins’ alternative as well as from a neighborhoodand-school-quality explanation; and (c) to utilize the resulting estimates to quantify the degree to
which higher rates of family disadvantage among minority populations can partly explain the larger
gender gaps in educational outcomes we observe among minorities.4
1
High school graduation rates refer to the status completion rate of U.S. born adults ages 20-24, and they include
both traditional high school graduates and GED holders. Thus, 1970 graduation rates refer to cohorts born 1947-50,
and 2010 graduation rates refer to cohorts born 1986-1990.
2
By comparison, the gap in 1970 was zero overall, 0.4 percentage points among whites, 5.1 percentage points
among blacks, and 2.5 percentage points among U.S. born Hispanics. Thus, the increase in the gap among whites,
blacks, and Hispanics in this 40 year period was 4.9, 7.1, and 10.3 percentage points, respectively
3
Whereas white women ages 25 to 29 were 22 percent more likely to hold a B.A. than white males in 2010, the
corresponding gap was 55 percent among both blacks and Hispanics. Goldin et al. (2006) document that among
the high school graduating class of 1992, the female advantage in B.A. attainment was far higher among children of
families in the bottom two SES quartiles than among the top two quartiles, and, moreover, the gender gap in the
lower two quartiles had risen by substantially more than among the upper quartiles in the prior twenty years.
4
Prevailing gender norms historically inhibited women from attaining education commensurate with their ability.
As documented by Goldin et al. (2006) and Fortin et al. (2015), U.S. girls outranked U.S. boys in high school grade
point averages for many decades. And yet, until the early 1980s, girls were substantially less likely than boys with

1

In quantifying the contribution of family disadvantage to the gender gap in behavioral and
academic outcomes, we face two principal obstacles: suitable data and credible identification. To
address the data and measurement challenge, we draw upon a matched database of birth certificate,
and academic, disciplinary, and high school graduation records for over one million children born in
Florida between 1992 and 2002.5 Florida is particularly well-suited to this research because it has a
large, demographically diverse, and socioeconomically heterogeneous population. Our longitudinal
data oﬀer remarkable detail on family characteristics, infant and maternal health at birth, early
educational outcomes (including assessments of kindergarten readiness at the start of formal schooling), third through eighth grade test scores, absenteeism, disciplinary outcomes, disability, and high
school graduation for the oldest cohorts in our sample. Since family disadvantage is imperfectly
observable even in this rich database, we combine multiple variables to proxy for this underlying
construct, focusing particularly on maternal education, household poverty, and marital status/father
presence or absence at the time of birth.
The second obstacle to our inquiry is that family environment is intrinsically confounded with
congenital and hereditary factors that likely aﬀect children’s outcomes independent of their impact
on family environment. For example, highly educated parents reside in safer neighborhoods, enroll
their children in higher quality schools, are disproportionately likely to have stable marriages, and
may have children with above average latent ability.6 Our challenge is thus to separate the direct
impact of family environment (e.g., quality and quantity of parental inputs) from the heredity and
environmental confounds that would almost surely lead to disparate outcomes among children absent
any causal eﬀect of family environment on children’s development. Our empirical approach purges
these confounds by contrasting the outcomes of opposite-sex siblings linked by birth and schooling
records to the same mother. This strategy provides valid identification of the diﬀerential eﬀect of
child-rearing environment on boys relative to girls under two conditions. The first is that siblings
raised by the same mother are (on average) exposed to the same family environment, an assumption
that we find ex ante plausible. The second, more stringent, condition is that the gender gap in
potential outcomes between siblings is uncorrelated with our measures of family environment at
the time of birth; that is, any intrinsic genetic or biological advantage that girls may possess at
birth relative to their male siblings is not systematically larger or smaller in less relative to more
disadvantaged families. While this strong unconfoundedness assumption is not fully testable, our
detailed and precise measures of infant and maternal health, obtained from vital statistics, oﬀer a
compelling confirmation of its plausibility.7
comparable class ranks or IQ scores to enter and complete college. But the overall relaxation of the gender norms does
not immediately explain why the gender gap has reversed to a substantially larger extent among children of minority,
low-income, and non-married families.
5
These data are also used by Figlio et al. (2014).
6
Consider, for example, the impact of father absence on the gender gap in children’s outcomes. Boys may be
diﬀerentially sensitive to this father absence since for boys, it also implies the potential lack of a same-sex role model
in the home (Autor and Wasserman, 2013). On the other hand, existing literature finds that mothers typically spend
more parenting time with daughters and fathers typically spend more parenting time with sons (Lundberg et al., 2007;
Baker and Milligan, 2013; Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Gayle et al., 2014), so girls may receive relatively larger parental
time investments in father-absent households.
7
We probe this assumption by assessing whether family disadvantage is correlated with a large set of health

2

We demonstrate that post-natal factors relating to family disadvantage, above and beyond the
neighborhoods children inhabit and the schools they attend, substantially and diﬀerentially influence
the likelihood that boys thrive relative to their sisters. We begin by documenting that the cross-race
diﬀerences in the gender gap in long-term educational attainment emerge early in students’ academic
trajectories and are apparent in both cognitive and behavioral outcomes. For example, 12.4 percent
of Florida public school children are suspended at least once between third and eighth grade. But
suspensions are 7.0 percentage points higher among white boys than girls, and an additional 6.2
percentage points higher among black boys relative to black girls. We then implement our primary
analysis which, by comparing siblings, demonstrates that boys born to low-SES households perform
worse on standardized tests throughout elementary and middle school, have higher rates of absences
and behavioral problems, and are less likely to graduate high school than are their sisters.8 These
within-household diﬀerentials are economically large and explain a substantial share of cross-race
group diﬀerences in the gender gap. Accounting for the diﬀerential eﬀect of family disadvantage
on boys relative to girls, reduces the cross-race suspension gap to 2.3 percentage points—meaning
that 4.1 percentage points of the observed black-white gender gap is proximately explained by higher
levels of disadvantage to which both black boys and girls are exposed. Among families of comparable
SES, we would predict the black-white gender gap to be 64 percent smaller. Carrying this exercise
forward to longer-term outcomes, our estimates of the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the
gender gap can explain one-third of the excess high school dropout diﬀerential among black males
versus black females relative to white males versus white females.
Another implicit assumption of our analytic approach is that the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap is comparable across race and ethnic groups—for example, father absence
is equally consequential for the brother-sister gap in downstream outcomes among white siblings,
black siblings, and Hispanic siblings. This assumption allows us to make the inference, for example,
that were black siblings exposed to the same average SES as white siblings, the excess suspension
gap among black relative to white siblings would be reduced by 64 percent. While our data generally do not reject the null hypothesis of comparable treatment eﬀects, we do find some important
outcomes reported on birth certificates: In addition to birthweight, a sensitive and powerful predictor of newborns’
long term health and educational outcomes into adulthood (Black et al., 2007; Aizer and Currie, 2014; Figlio et
al., 2014), we also measure Apgar scores, gestational age, congenital anomalies, complications of labor and delivery,
abnormal birth conditions, maternal health, and adequacy of prenatal care. In all cases, these at-birth outcomes
diﬀer systematically among SES groups: low-SES newborns are delivered in poorer health to less healthy mothers
who received less prenatal care and experience more frequent birth complications. Yet, in no case is the brother-sister
gap in these outcomes predicted by SES; brothers and sisters appear equally advantaged or disadvantaged by family
SES.
8
While the children observed in our sample are not yet old enough for us to observe adult outcomes such as high
school dropout (except for the oldest cohorts) or labor force participation and criminal activity, there is strong reason
to suspect that observed diﬀerences in disciplinary behaviors across genders and family types will later be manifest
in diﬀerences in academic and labor market performance. For example, Duckworth and Seligman (2005) find that
measures of eighth grade self-discipline are better predictors of subsequent academic performance than are measures
of IQ. Similarly, Segal (2013) reports that eight-grade teacher evaluations of children’s misbehavior (arguably akin
to our school suspension measure) have important predictive power for adult earnings over and above eighth grade
test scores. Segal (2013) additionally finds that, holding constant educational attainment, childhood misbehavior
is negatively associated with adult earnings at all educational levels, whereas achievement test scores are positively
related to earnings only for young men with postsecondary degrees.

3

deviations from this benchmark—in particular, greater family SES has a somewhat smaller moderating eﬀect on the sibling gender gap in suspensions among non-whites than among whites, perhaps
because schools are more punitive towards minority than non-minority boys. Accounting for this
non-parallelism does not substantively change our findings, however, as we discuss and interpret
below.
While the SES gradient in the gender gap may stem from family environment per se, it may
also reflect the diﬀerential eﬀect of neighborhood and school quality—both of which are correlated
with family income, education, and marital status—on boys relative to girls. We empirically diﬀerentiate among these alternatives by augmenting our main analysis with measures of the non-family
environment that siblings experience, including: measures of school quality produced by the Florida
Department of Education; estimates of the causal eﬀect of counties of residence on economic mobility produced by Chetty and Hendren (2015); and a saturated set of neighborhood indicators
(corresponding to zip codes). In all cases, we allow these environmental quality measures to differentially aﬀect outcomes of boys relative to girls. After accounting for the direct eﬀect of family
characteristics, we find that neighborhood quality makes a modest additional contribution to the
boy-girl outcome gap. School quality matters more, however: low quality schools, as measured by
Florida state reports of student test score gains, are particularly disadvantageous for boys. Nevertheless, accounting non-parametrically for the diﬀerential impact of schools and neighborhoods on
boys relative to girls reduces the estimated impact of family disadvantage on the sibling gender gap
in behavioral outcomes by at most one quarter.9
This paper contributes to an active literature examining the emerging gender gap in educational and behavioral outcomes.10 Buchmann and DiPrete (2006), Goldin et al. (2006), DiPrete and
Jennings (2012), Autor and Wasserman (2013), Bertrand and Pan (2013), DiPrete and Buchmann
(2013), Fortin et al. (2015), Chetty et al. (2016b), and Lundberg (2017) explore the evolution of
gender diﬀerences in behavioral and educational outcomes in the United States and internationally. Several papers explore specific hypotheses for this gender gap. Becker et al. (2010) theorize
that gender diﬀerences in the psychic costs of education—primarily diﬀerences in the distributions
of non-cognitive skills—explain the overtaking of men by women in higher education. Papers by
Buchmann and DiPrete (2006), DiPrete and Jennings (2012), Baker and Milligan (2013), Bertrand
9

It is still possible that neighborhood factors can explain some of what we are calling family disadvantage eﬀects.
Disadvantaged families might occupy micro-neighborhoods within the larger neighborhoods we can measure with
available administrative data. There exists considerable evidence from the sociology literature documenting that
neighborhoods vary within a zip code – the finest geography we observe in our data. (See Ingoldsby and Shaw
(2002); Beyers et al. (2003); Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn (2003); Ramirez-Valles et al. (2002) and Karriker-Jaﬀe et al.
(2009) for examples.) If particularly disadvantaged micro-neighborhoods aﬀect boys more than girls within the same
family, then these micro-neighborhoods would still be a pathway through which family disadvantage is operating.
That said, we have access to data from one large anonymous county-level school system in Florida that constructs
micro-neighborhoods that are on average one-tenth the population of the typical Census block group in the county. In
this one county, the between-zip code variation accounts for 74 percent of the overall variation in micro-neighborhood
poverty rates in the county, and the between-zip code variation accounts for 60 percent of the overall variation in
micro-neighborhood non-parental guardianship rates in the county. We therefore believe that most of the variation
in neighborhood quality is reflected in the zip code measure that we can observe statewide.
10
See Lundberg and Pollak (2007), Cherlin (2009), and Cherlin (2014) for broader discussions of the economics of
family structure and its evolution over recent decades.

4

and Pan (2013), Lundberg (2017), Owens (2016), Prevoo and ter Weel (2014), Karbownik and
Myck (2017), Riphahn and Schwientek (2015), and Woessmann (2015) focus on the role of family and schooling environment in generating observed gender gaps in behavioral and educational
outcomes.11 Bertrand and Pan (2013) oﬀer the most complete extant analysis of the relationship
between family background and gender diﬀerences in early childhood outcomes. They document
that boys raised in single-parent families exhibit twice the rate of behavioral and disciplinary issues
as boys raised in two-parent families and are more than twice as likely to be suspended from school
by the eighth grade. Considering detailed measures of home environment, school environment, and
parent-child interactions, Bertrand and Pan (2013) find only modest evidence that parental and
schooling inputs diﬀer systematically between boys and girls across family types. Their analysis
suggests, however, that the quality of parental and child-rearing inputs has larger impacts on the
behavioral and disciplinary outcomes of boys than it does of girls. Consistent with this line of argument, Fan et al. (2015) provide evidence from Norwegian registry data that mother’s employment
during children’s early years has a diﬀerentially adverse eﬀect on the educational attainment of sons
relative to daughters. They hypothesize that rising female employment may in part explain the
reversal of the male-favorable gap in educational attainment.12
Prior research in this vein implicitly draws a contrast between boys and girls born to diﬀerent
mothers to assess the relationship between family disadvantage and the gender gaps in child outcomes. This approach, necessitated by data and sample size constraints, leaves open the possibility
that unmeasured diﬀerences among families with children of diﬀerent sexes—or unobserved changes
in family structure occurring in childhood—may in part explain the contrast in developmental outcomes. Our approach exploits cross-gender, within-family sibling comparisons (akin to Chetty and
Hendren 2015, but adding the gender contrast), to sweep out unmeasured, time-constant family
eﬀects that may bias comparisons of children of diﬀerent genders raised in diﬀerent families. Additionally, the uniquely detailed Florida data, sourced from birth records, enumerate family structure
at birth—married, unmarried with father present, or unmarried with father absent—thus abstracting from any changes in family structure that occur postpartum.13 Across all manner of sibling
contrasts, we find robust evidence that behavioral and academic outcomes of boys are diﬀerentially
aﬀected by family circumstances.
A second strand of literature to which we contribute studies the causal eﬀects of environmental
and maternal stresses on children’s in utero mortality, birthweight, health, cognitive development,
and educational and labor market outcomes. Almond and Currie (2011) and Aizer and Currie (2014)
11

There is also a large sociological literature that documents gender diﬀerences in outcomes during childhood. See,
for example, Sampson et al. (2005) and Farrell et al. (2005).
12
Baker et al. (2008) document that the introduction of highly subsidized, universally accessible child care in
Quebec during the late 1990s increased maternal labor supply significantly and, simultaneously, adversely impacted
early childhood developmental outcomes among aﬀected cohorts of children. Follow-up work by Baker and Milligan
(2013) found that this childcare expansion generated increased parental time investment in boys relative to girls.
13
Unmarried fathers are more likely to establish paternity when the child is male (Almond and Rossin-Slater, 2013).
In addition, we have conducted an analysis of longitudinal data from a large Florida school district that shows that
unmarried fathers are more likely to leave the household by the time a child is in kindergarten if the child is a daughter
rather than a son.

5

review the large literature establishing the causal eﬀect of maternal disadvantage on infant birthweight and infant health, while Almond et al. (2005), Black et al. (2007), and Figlio et al. (2014)
document the robust and enduring adverse eﬀect of low birthweight on children’s IQ scores, educational attainment, and adult earnings. Several papers confirm the long-standing Trivers-Willard
hypothesis (Trivers and Willard, 1973) that in utero stress increases the mortality odds of male
relative to female fetuses (Norberg, 2004; Almond and Edlund, 2007). Studies that test for impacts of maternal malnutrition and maternal nutrition supplementation on subsequent academic
and labor market outcomes of children who were potentially exposed in utero, find robust, though
generally modest, impacts on adult health, skills acquisition, and labor market outcomes (Almond
and Mazumder, 2011; Field et al., 2009; Maccini and Yang, 2009; Almond et al., 2014; Hoynes et
al., 2016; Greve et al., 2015). These studies do not, however, find consistent diﬀerential impacts by
gender on post-natal outcomes. Moreover, where diﬀerences are detected, they largely suggest that
pre-natal disadvantage has a slightly more adverse impact on girls than boys.14 Assuming plausibly that pre-natal and post-natal disadvantage are positively correlated, this (modest) pre-natal
diﬀerential would work against our finding that boys are diﬀerentially adversely aﬀected by family
disadvantage.
A third strand of literature to which we contribute analyzes the causal eﬀects of neighborhoods
on developmental, educational, and labor market outcomes, abstracting from the direct eﬀect of
family characteristics that are often tightly correlated with neighborhood attributes (e.g., income,
race, and educational attainment). Recent work that pairs experimental (Chetty et al., 2016a) or
quasi-experimental (Chetty and Hendren, 2015) research designs with high resolution tax register
find that early and prolonged childhood exposure to low or high quality neighborhoods aﬀects
labor force participation, earnings, and education in adulthood. Of particular relevance to our
work, two quasi-experimental studies that obtain identification from millions of neighborhood moves,
Chetty and Hendren (2015) find that boys’ outcomes vary more across areas than girls, and that
boys’ outcomes—particularly employment rates in early adulthood—are diﬀerentially sensitive to
neighborhood exposure.
Our paper confirms the pattern reported by Chetty and Hendren (2015) and Chetty et al.
(2016a) and expands it along multiple dimensions. Most centrally, we demonstrate that although
neighborhood environment and family environment are highly correlated, they appear to make
substantial independent contributions to the gender gap in behavioral and educational outcomes.
14

Greve et al. (2015) find that fetal exposure to Ramadan has a larger negative impact on the achievement scores
of Muslim girls than boys in Denmark. Hoynes et al. (2016) find that improvements in in utero nutrition have
a larger positive impact on economic self-suﬃciency (an omnibus skills and earnings measure) and overall good
health among exposed girls than boys, while impacts for the prevalence of metabolic syndrome show slightly greater
benefits for exposed boys than girls. In a developing country context, Maccini and Yang (2009) examine the eﬀect
of weather shocks around the time of birth on Indonesian women and men, finding positive eﬀects on health, height,
schooling, and household wealth in adulthood among women but not men. Field et al. (2009) find that prenatal iodine
supplementation during the first trimester increased completed schooling by as much as half a year, with generally
stronger eﬀects for girls than boys. Cullen et al. (2015) review a large body of U.S., international, and time series
data on the male/female post-natal mortality gap. In wealthy countries such as the U.S., it is unambiguously the
case that poorer post-natal conditions (measured by income, education, or prevalence of poverty) are associated with
higher diﬀerential male mortality. Their paper does not explore mechanisms.

6

Accounting parametrically or non-parametrically for the county level community quality diﬀerences
documented by Chetty and Hendren (2015) and Chetty et al. (2016a), or for zip code level measures
of neighborhood quality, we find that the bulk of the within-sibling, SES gradient in the gender gap
remains—even while schools and neighborhoods also have independent diﬀerential eﬀects by gender.
This leads to our broader conclusion that diminished child-rearing environments—whether at the
household, school or neighborhood level—appear particularly pernicious for boys.

1

Data and descriptive statistics

1.1

Principal data sources

Data for our main analysis are drawn from two sources: the universe of birth certificates for the
state of Florida for years 1992 through 2002, sourced from the Florida Bureau of Vital Statistics; and
linked school records from the 1995-96 through the 2012-13 school years from the Florida Department
of Education Data Warehouse for children in these birth cohorts who attended the Florida public
schools.15 The Florida Departments of Education and Health matched birth certificate data to
schooling records for the purposes of this project using first and last names, exact date of birth and
social security number. Of the 2,047,663 births recorded by the Florida Bureau of Vital Statistics
during 1992-2002, 1,652,333 were observed in Florida public school data, representing an 80.7%
match rate. The match rate is almost identical to the percentage of children who are born in
Florida, reside there until school-going age, and attend public school, as computed from data from
the decennial Census and American Community Survey for years 2000 through 2009.16
Florida birth certificates enumerate demographic characteristics of the mother (including education, marital status and information whether birth was paid for by Medicaid), health and demographic characteristics of the the newborn, and demographic characteristics of the father if he
appears on the birth certificate.17 We use the birth certificate data to create three proxies of family
environment: mother’s completed education; birth paid by Medicaid, which we use as an indicator
of poverty status at the time of birth; and family structure at the time of birth. We use three
categories of family structure: parents married at birth (married ); unmarried but the father’s name
appears on the birth certificate (father present); and unmarried and the father’s name does not
appear on the birth certificate (father absent).18 We also construct a single composite SES measure
15

The bulk of our analysis is limited to children born between 1994 and 2002, as we only observe neighborhood
measures, proxy for income (Medicaid indicator) and sibship status for children in those birth cohorts. We make
use of data from 1992 and 1993 in order to study high school graduation, since our most recent data extract covers
outcomes through the high school class of 2012/2013.
16
Figlio et al. (2013) provide further details on the matching process as well as extensive validity checks on the
matching procedure.
17
In the very small number of cases (< 100 sibling pairs) where the measured race or ethnicity of the mother on
siblings’ birth certificates do not match, we assign the race and ethnicity of the first-born child.
18
For children born to unmarried parents, information about the father appears on the birth certificate only if
he claims paternity, so presence/absence refers to the father’s paternity status, not his physical presence/absence
at delivery. Paternity acknowledgment grants fathers legal rights to their children as well as obligates fathers to
pay child support. Prior research has documented that paternity acknowledgment is associated with greater father
involvement—measured by visitations and payments of child support—relative to births to unmarried mothers without

7

based on a principal components analysis of family structure/marital status, Medicaid-funded birth,
and maternal education (in years). Details on the construction of this measure are documented in
Online Appendix Table O1.
School records include third through eighth grade Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test
(FCAT) math and reading scores (which we average together), as well as records of absence rates
and suspensions during each academic year. In addition, for some cohorts of children, the Florida
Department of Education recorded the results of a universally-administered kindergarten readiness
assessment.19 Each child in the sample can contribute multiple observations, one per each year
observed in each grade. We discuss both birth characteristics and educational outcomes at length
below. Following Autor et al. (2016b), we use school-level gain scores calculated by the Florida Department of Education—schools’ average contribution to student outcomes—to measure the quality
of elementary and middle schools that children attend. For each school, we compute a simple average
of the observed gain scores between 2002 and 2013, which we then convert into a percentile rank in
the observed gains distribution across Florida schools.20 For each student, we construct the cumulative quality of schools attended from grade three through eight, equal to a years-weighted average
of the rank quality of all schools attended to that point. To measure the quality of neighborhoods,
we employ the Chetty-Hendren (2015) measure of county economic mobility associated with the zip
code of the mother’s residence at the time of birth as well as the median income in the zip code,
computed from the 2000 Census.

1.2

Sample selection

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the universe of Florida children born to white non-Hispanic,
black non-Hispanic, and Hispanic mothers for the years 1994 through 2002 (column 1), which for
compactness, we will refer to as white, black, and Hispanic for the remainder of the paper.21 The
second column drops the 4% of records that are missing key variables. The third column includes
paternity acknowledgment (Mincy et al., 2005). Our expectation is that the greatest degree of paternal involvement
occurs when the parents are married and the lowest degree of paternal involvement occurs when fathers are not present
on the birth certificate.
19
The Florida Department of Education recorded kindergarten readiness measures for entering kindergarteners in
two sets of kindergarten cohorts: those who entered kindergarten in fall 2001 and before, and those who entered
kindergarten in fall 2006 or later. In the early round of kindergarten readiness assessments, teachers administered a
readiness checklist of academic and behavioral skills designed by the state Department of Education with a dichotomous
ready/not-ready measure recorded in state records. In the later round of kindergarten readiness, the state universally
implemented the DIBELS assessment aimed at measuring early pre-literacy skills; this is a discrete measure that
we dichotomize using the approach described in Figlio et al. (2013) so that the percent identified as kindergarten
ready corresponds to the percentage in the later assessment. The birth cohorts between 1994 and 2002 who took the
kindergarten readiness assessment, therefore, are those born between 1994 and 1996 and those born between 2000 and
2002.
20
We average the three gain score measures consistently produced over the entire period: percent making gains
in reading, percent making gains in math, and percent of bottom quartile students making gains in reading. These
scores are available for download at schoolgrades.fldoe.org.
21
We exclude the 2.7 percent of births where mothers do not identify as white, black, or Hispanic. We also exclude
the 24 percent of births that are to immigrant mothers since these families are too heterogeneous to defy any simple
characterization. In Autor et al. (2016a) we additionally explored gender gaps among immigrant families. Gender
gaps among children born to immigrant mothers fall in between the black and Hispanic gaps and the proportion of
the gap that is explained by the diﬀerential eﬀect of family SES on boys is similar to that of the Hispanic population.

8

the 81% of column 2 records that were matched to Florida school records; those not matched to
school records have either left the state of Florida or attended private school in the state. Column 4
contains the subset of column 3 records with a valid third-grade test score, while column 5 presents
the subset of column 4 records with matched siblings.
Relative to the population of Florida births (column 1), limiting the sample to birth records
with complete data (column 2) has almost no eﬀect on birth demographics. Restricting further to
births that subsequently appear in Florida public school records (column 3) and eventually obtain
a third grade test score (column 4) increases the share of mothers who are black, younger, less
educated, and unmarried at the time of childbirth. These compositional changes are consistent with
the greater cross-state mobility of high SES adults and higher private school attendance rates of
their children (Molloy et al., 2011). While the matched sample represents a more disadvantaged
population than the full sample, the gender composition of those matched to school records does
not diﬀer appreciably from the full population of births, and there are virtually no diﬀerences in
birthweight between the full population and the matched sample.22 When we further limit the
sample to matched sibling births (column 5), we observe relatively fewer white mothers, slightly
more college educated mothers, and slightly more births with no paternity established.
Table 2 summarizes key demographic characteristics for our main sample observed either at
birth or during K-12 schooling according to the race and ethnicity of the mother. These include
mother’s education, the Medicaid funding indicator, and paternal status at birth (married; paternity
claimed (father present); and no paternity claimed (father absent)), the median income in the zip
code of the mother’s residence at the time of birth, the Chetty-Hendren (2015) measure of county
economic mobility associated with that zip code, and the rated quality of Florida public schools
subsequently attended. The pronounced contrasts among race and ethnic groups in each of these
measures highlights the degree to which family disadvantage diﬀers systematically across these broad
demographic groups. For example, the fraction of children born with no claimed paternity ranges
from 7 percentage points among whites to 43 percentage points among blacks. Comparisons of
maternal education, Medicaid-funded births, and zip code income reveal similarly stark contrasts,
underscoring that comparisons across race and ethnic groups are also implicitly comparisons across
education groups, income levels, and family types. To overcome these confounds, we assess the
impact of education, income and family structure on children’s outcomes by leveraging withinfamily, cross-gender contrasts; these within-family contrasts implicitly hold constant parental race,
education, poverty, and family structure (among many other factors).

1.3

Sibling gender gaps by family and maternal characteristics

Figure 1 sets the stage for our empirical inquiry by plotting gender contrasts in siblings’ educational
and behavioral outcomes by family demographics along four dimensions: kindergarten readiness (a
behavioral and academic measure); school absence rates (a behavioral measure); combined stan22
The slight reduction in the fraction of male births (from 51.3% to 50.5%) as the sample is restricted to more
disadvantaged mothers is consistent with the Trivers-Willard (1973) hypothesis.

9

dardized math and reading scores (an academic measure); and on-time high school graduation rates
(a labor market measure). Kindergarten readiness and high school graduation are observed for a
subset of cohorts. Appendix Tables A1 and A2 provide the corresponding summary statistics. Absence rates and math/reading scores are observed during grades three through eight for 1994 to 2002
cohorts; kindergarten readiness is observed for cohorts born between 1994 and 1996 and those born
between 2000 and 2002; and high school completion is observed for the 1992 and 1993 cohorts, which
had reached the age of on-time high school completion by the end of our sample.
Panel A of Figure 1 highlights the cross-race and cross-ethnicity diﬀerences in the gender gap in
academic and behavioral outcomes. Among children born to white mothers, the boy-girl gap in the
absence rate is 0.14 percentage points, the boy-girl gap in middle school math and reading scores
is

0.04 standard deviations (SDs), and the boy-girl gap in both kindergarten readiness as well as

on-time high school graduation is about

6 percentage points (i.e., girls start kindergarten more

ready to start school, and also have higher graduation rates). The gap in each of these outcomes
is monotonically widening (becoming less favorable to boys) as we move the focus of comparison
from whites to Hispanics to blacks. Among children of black mothers, the boy-girl gaps in absences,
math and reading scores, and on-time graduations are, respectively, 0.53 percentage points,
SDs, and

0.14

12.7 percentage points—in each case, two to four times as large as among whites. The

boy-girl gap in kindergarten readiness among blacks is

8.4 percentage points, nearly one and a half

the size of the boy-girl gap among white children. The gender gap in outcomes among children of
Hispanics mothers fall roughly in between those of whites and blacks on these measures.
Panels B through D of Figure 1 plot analogous contrasts by maternal education (high school
dropout, high school graduate or some college, four year college degree or higher), family structure
at birth (father absent, father present, married), and SES quartile (see Online Appendix O1).23 The
boy-girl deficits in behavioral and educational outcomes are robustly larger in families with greater
disadvantage, whether measured by maternal education, family structure, or the SES composite.

2

Empirical framework

Our empirical objective is to isolate the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap
in childhood behavioral and educational outcomes. Since family types are not randomly assigned
to children, we propose an identification strategy that recognizes the intrinsic correlation between
parents and children
operating
through
and hereditary channels.
n
n both environmental
o
o
0
1
0
1
Let Yjb 2 Yjb , Yjb and Yjg 2 Yjg , Yjg equal the potential outcomes of gender-discordant

siblings, b and g, born to mother j whose socioeconomic status at the time of the children’s birth is

Dj 2 {0, 1}. For expositional simplicity, we treat Dj as discrete (i.e., a family is either disadvantaged

or advantaged), and we consider the case where Dj is the same for both births, Dj = Djb = Djg .
23

High school graduations are not plotted by SES and family structure since not all of our component measures
of SES are available for the 1992 and 1993 birth cohorts, which are the cohorts for whom we currently observe high
school graduation. For these two cohorts, we lack information on Medicaid receipt and cannot diﬀerentiate between
paternal presence versus paternal absence among births to unmarried mothers.

10

We relax both assumptions in the estimation.24 For each sibling pair j, we observe only one set of
potential outcomes as a function of family disadvantage, Dj :
Yjb = Yjb1 ⇥ Dj + Yjb0 ⇥ (1

1 ⇥ D + Y 0 ⇥ (1
Dj ) and Yjg = Yjg
j
jg

Dj ).

(1)

We expect that potential outcomes will diﬀer between brothers and sisters within a family,
⇥ 1⇤
⇥ ⇤
⇥ 0⇤
⇥ ⇤
, E Yjb0 6= E Yjg
,
(2)
E Yjb1 6= E Yjg

and further, that potential outcomes will not be independent of family disadvantage for either boys
or girls,
⇤
⇥
⇤
⇥
⇤
⇥
⇤
⇥
E Yjs1 |Dj = 1 6= E Yjs1 |Dj = 0 , E Yjs0 |Dj = 1 6= E Yjs0 |Dj = 0 for s 2 {b, g}

(3)

These confounds mean that absent random assignment of disadvantage to households, simple within
or between-family contrasts will not provide a valid causal estimate of the eﬀect of family disadvantage on outcomes Y for either boys or girls. To see why, consider the non-experimental contrast
between the outcomes of boys born to disadvantaged versus advantaged families. This contrast is
⇥
⇤
⇥
⇤
E Yjb0 |Dj = 1
(4)
E [Yjb |Dj = 1] E [Yjb |Dj = 0] = E Yjb1 |Dj = 1
⇤
⇥ 0
⇤
⇥ 0
E Yjb |Dj = 0 ,
+ E Yjb |Dj = 1
where the first bracketed term on the right-hand side is the average causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on outcome Y for disadvantaged boys, and the second bracketed expression is a bias term,
stemming from diﬀerences in potential outcomes between boys born to disadvantaged versus advantaged families. Both intuition and data suggest that this bias term will be non-zero (per equation 3):
children born to advantaged families are likely to have genetic and health advantages at birth that
may yield more favorable outcomes, holding child-rearing circumstances constant. If so, we cannot estimate the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on children’s outcomes simply by contrasting
children born to disadvantaged and advantaged families.25
To circumvent this identification challenge, we select as our outcome of interest the diﬀerence
in the gender gap in sibling outcomes, Ŷj1 ⌘ Yjb1

1 and Ŷ 0 ⌘ Y 0
Yjg
j
jb

0 , between advantaged
Yjg

and disadvantaged families. Our hypothesis is that developmental outcomes of boys are more elastic
than those of girls to the quality and quantity of family inputs—hence, the same exposure to family
advantage or disadvantage aﬀects boys and girls diﬀerently. We can identify the causal eﬀect of
family disadvantage on the gender gap under the following assumption:
Assumption 1. (Unconfoundedness) Ŷj1 , Ŷj0 ? Dj . The latent gap in childhood outcomes between
brothers and sisters is as good as randomly assigned to families.

Under Assumption (1), any observed variation in the gender gap that diﬀers systematically
24

For exposition, we focus on gender-discordant siblings. But our empirical analysis includes all siblings, regardless
of gender discordance. These additional observations help to identify the relationships between our outcomes and
other attributes that vary across individuals within families, such as age and parity.
25
By a similar argument, the contrast between brothers and sisters within a family does not identify a parameter
of interest since, within families, we expect potential behavioral and educational outcomes to diﬀer systematically
between boys and girls (equation 2).

11

across family types will reflect the causal eﬀect of family advantage on the gender gap (rather than
a reification of the latent gap).26 Assumption (1) permits identification of the causal eﬀect of family
disadvantage on the gender gap accordingly by contrasting within-family, cross-sibling diﬀerences in
outcomes across disadvantaged and advantaged families:
i
h
i
h
⇥
⇤
1
E Ŷj0 |Dj = 0 = E Yjb1 Yjg
|Dj = 1
E Ŷj1 |Dj = 1
⇤
⇥
1
|Dj = 1
= E Yjb1 Yjg

⇥
E Yjb0
⇥
E Yjb0

0
Yjg
|Dj = 0

⇤
⇤

(5)

0
Yjg
|Dj = 1 ,

where the second equality above follows from Assumption (1). This double-diﬀerence eliminates
the dependency between family disadvantage and potential outcomes by contrasting brothers and
sisters; it further eliminates the dependency between gender and potential outcomes (arising from
intrinsic gender diﬀerences) by contrasting the sibling gender gap across advantaged and disadvantaged families. Under unconfoundedness, equation (5) provides an unbiased estimate of the causal
eﬀect of family disadvantage on boys relative to girls.
Is this unconfoundedness assumption plausible? Assume for example, in violation of our identifying assumption, that family SES diﬀerentially aﬀected the fetal development of sons relative to
daughters—which could occur if the male fetus is more sensitive than the female fetus to maternal
stress levels during pregnancy. In this case, the contrast formed in equation (5) would confound
any causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gap in outcomes between boys and girls with the
diﬀerential in utero impact of maternal stress on the subsequent development of children of each
sex. Following the fundamental problem of causal inference, this assumption is not directly testable.
But we can explore its plausibility by assessing whether gender gaps in neonatal health, measured
by birthweight, prenatal care, maternal health, and Apgar scores, diﬀer across families of varying socioeconomic levels. As documented in section 4, we find no evidence that these gaps vary
substantially or systematically with family disadvantage.27
Equation (5) also highlights an important feature of our identification approach. Imagine hypothetically that we were to estimate this key equation by calculating the double-diﬀerence in the
boy-girl gap among children from disadvantaged relative to advantaged families without using sibling
contrasts:
(E [Ynjb |Dhj = 1]

(Eio
[Yjb |D
nj =
h 0] E [Yjgi|Dj =h 0]) =
io
0 |D = 1
=1
E
=1
E Yjb0 |Dj = 1
E Yjg
E
j
n h
i
h
io n h
i
h
io
0 |D = 1
0 |D = 0
+ E Yjb0 |Dj = 1
E Yjb0 |Dj = 0
E Yjg
E Yjg
.
j
j
Yjb1 |Dj

E i[Yjg |Dhj = 1])

1 |D
Yjg
j

(6)

The first line following the equal sign in this expression is the causal eﬀect of interest. The second
line is a pair of bias terms corresponding to the diﬀerence in potential outcomes between boys and
girls from disadvantaged versus advantaged families. If potential outcomes are not independent of
family disadvantage, as per equation (3), then each of these terms will be non-zero. The composite
26

It is suﬃcient for our purposes that the latent gender gap is uncorrelated with our measures of family disadvantage.
Thus, Assumption (1) is stronger than we require but nevertheless appears plausible, as we document further below.
27
Furthermore, the multiple studies cited in the Introduction assessing the impact of in utero shocks on post-natal
outcomes generally find that adverse impacts are slightly more pronounced for girls than boys, which would work
against a finding that post-natal family disadvantage is diﬀerentially detrimental to boys.

12

bias expression will be non-zero if the two bias terms are not of equal magnitudes. In practice, this
form of bias may arise if family structure is endogenous to the sex of children, as suggested by Dahl
and Moretti (2008), leading to the possibility that the potential outcomes of girls and boys may be
diﬀerentially correlated with family disadvantage. We address this confound by limiting our analysis
to families with two or more children and, further, by sweeping out unobserved family attributes
using within-family comparisons.28

2.1

Implementation

We use a simple regression framework to quantify our motivating observation that there is a substantially greater female advantage in behavioral and early academic preparedness among children of
black and Hispanic households relative to children of white households. This observed gap serves as
a benchmark for assessing the explanatory power of our subsequent models. To obtain this baseline,
we estimate the following within-family gender gap regression:
= ↵j +

Yij

1 Boyi

+

2 (Boyi ⇥Blackj )

+F0j + X0i + eij ,

+

3 (Boyi ⇥Hispanicj )

(7)

where Yij represents an outcome for child i born to mother j, Boyi is an indicator variable for whether
the child is male, and Blackj and Hispanicj are indicators for whether the mother of child i belongs to
one of those mutually exclusive race or ethnic categories, with white, non-Hispanic mothers serving
as the reference category. The regression model includes family fixed eﬀects ↵j , which sweep out
mother-specific variation that is constant across sibling births, such as shared genetics or common
elements of the home environment. The vector Fj controls for maternal and family environment
characteristics that may vary across births i, including mother’s education, Medicaid receipt, age,
and marital/paternity status. The vector Xi additionally controls for time-invariant child attributes,
including birth order and month and year of birth.
In this initial descriptive regression model, the coeﬃcient

1

measures the brother-sister dif-

ference in outcome Y for the reference category of children of white, non-Hispanic mothers. The
coeﬃcients

2

and

3

correspond to the demographic diﬀerentials of interest, indicating how the

brother-sister gap varies with the race-ethnicity status of the mother. The main eﬀect of family
socioeconomic status (SES) Dj is absorbed by a vector of mother fixed eﬀects ↵j .29 These SES
eﬀects are constrained to be constant across genders in the baseline specification.
In a second step, we apply our proposed identification strategy to estimate the eﬀect of family
28

A concern remains that we are introducing selection into our sample by limiting it to mothers who have at least
two children. Evidence from Dahl and Moretti (2008) suggests that a first born girl increases women’s total fertility,
though the eﬀect for the marginal second child is extremely small. We also perform our main analysis using all
singletons, however, and find largely comparable results.
29
Our analysis permits measures of family disadvantage (mother education, Medicaid indicator, father absent/present/married) to vary across births, but all of the results are robust to either restricting the sample to
mothers with stable characteristics across births, or to assigning the characteristics of the first birth (maternal education, Medicaid indicator, marital status) to all subsequent births. Our primary models include main eﬀects for
disadvantage to account for this variation and thus allow Dj to also take an i subscript. We suppress this notation
here for simplicity.

13

disadvantage on the gender gap in academic and behavioral outcomes by augmenting the baseline
model to permit the eﬀect of family disadvantage Dj to diﬀer by child gender:
Yij

= ↵j +
+

0
1 Boyi

0
4 (Boyi

+

0
2 (Boyi ⇥Blackj )

+

⇥ Dj ) + F0j + X0i + eij .

0
3 (Boyi ⇥Hispanicj )

Here, Dj is a measure of family disadvantage and the coeﬃcient

0
4

(8)

on interaction term (Boyi ⇥ Dj )

captures the diﬀerential responsiveness of boys to family disadvantage. The interpretation of

0
4

as

the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap in cognitive and behavioral outcomes
hinges critically on the unconfoundedness assumption. We assess the plausibility of this assumption
in section 4 by estimating Equation (8) for pregnancy health and at-birth child health outcomes.
Through a comparison of the coeﬃcients from the within-family gap model from Equation (7)
and the augmented model from Equation (8), we infer what fraction of the race-ethnicity gradient
in the gender gap is explained by the diﬀerential eﬀect of family disadvantage on boys. Specifically,
we compare

2

to

0
2

and

3

to

0
3.

Take, for example, the comparison of the black-white gender

gap in the within-family gap model relative to the augmented model, as estimated by

2

and

0
2,

respectively. If we find that the black-white gender gap declines when we permit family disadvantage
to diﬀerentially aﬀect boys, i.e.

0
2

is smaller in (absolute) magnitude than

2,

we would attribute

this to the fact that disadvantage exerts a disproportionate negative eﬀect on boys relative to girls
and, critically, is more prevalent among black than white families.
Our main estimates use the population of Florida mothers who give birth to two or more children
in the observed years, allowing us to achieve identification of the boy main eﬀect (and interactions)
while including family fixed eﬀects. To assess whether this identification strategy is likely to limit
the generalizability of the findings, we take two further steps in Appendix Table A3: estimating
models that exclude family fixed eﬀects on the siblings sample; and estimating models without
family fixed eﬀects on an expanded sample that includes all singleton births. In practice, these
three specifications (siblings with family fixed eﬀects, siblings without family fixed eﬀects, and all
singleton births without family fixed eﬀects) yield largely comparable results.
Equation (8) imposes the restriction that the impact of disadvantage on the gender gap in
outcomes is constant across race and ethnicity groups—that is, the coeﬃcient on Boyi ⇥ Dj does

not require a race-ethnicity subscript. If this restriction does not hold, the precise contribution of
disadvantage to cross-group variation in the gender gap may be ambiguous for the simple reason that
the share of the cross-group gap explained by disadvantage will depend upon which group-specific

Boyi ⇥ Dj slope is used for the calculation. We test this restriction of constant slopes in section
4.2 and find that it is generally supported for most but not all outcomes. We elaborate upon and
interpret this finding below.

14

3

Main results: Gender gaps in behavioral and academic outcomes

Our main analysis estimates the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap in two
behavioral outcomes—absence and suspension rates—and one academic outcome, combined math
and reading standardized test scores, all observed in elementary through middle school, as well as
for kindergarten readiness. We then assess whether these results for medium-term outcomes carry
forward to a directly market-relevant outcome: high school completion.

3.1

Elementary and middle school behavioral and academic outcomes

Behavioral outcomes: Absences and suspensions
The first column in panel A of Table 3 reports estimates of Equation (7) for the gender gap in absence
rates, by mother’s race-ethnicity. The conditioning variables for this model include mother fixed
eﬀects, mother’s age, education, Medicaid indicator, and marital status at birth (married, father
present, father absent), and child’s birth order, birth month, and birth year. The coeﬃcient on
the boy main eﬀect, corresponding to the conditional mean diﬀerence between white, non-Hispanic
boys and their sisters, indicates that boys from this ethnic group have grade three through eight
absence rates that average 0.22 percentage points higher than those of their sisters. Confirming
the qualitative patterns in Figure 1, the coeﬃcients on the interactions between the boy main
eﬀect and each of the race-ethnicity main eﬀects reveal that the boy-girl gap in absence rates is
higher by 0.33 and 0.14 percentage points for black and Hispanic siblings, respectively. We refer to
these interactions as excess gender gaps, denoting the unexplained additional gender gaps detected
among blacks and Hispanics siblings relative to white siblings from families with the same maternal
education, Medicaid status, and family structure/marital status.
Column 2 augments this model with interactions between the boy indicator and variables that
proxy for family advantage at birth – parental status, poverty, and maternal education, as per
Equation (8). Consistent with our primary hypothesis, the interaction terms between the boy
dummy and various measures of advantage are uniformly negative, indicating that the brothersister gap in absence rates is smaller in more advantaged families. Relative to children born to
absent fathers, the boy-girl gap in absences is 0.20 percentage points lower where the father claimed
paternity, and 0.24 percentage points lower where the parents were married at the child’s birth.
Higher levels of maternal education and family income predict additional reductions in this gap of
up to 0.15 percentage points. Noting that these eﬀects are additive, the model implies that the
boy-girl gap in school absences is half a percentage point lower among children born to married
parents with college-educated mothers whose births were not funded by Medicaid relative to those
born to father-absent families with non-high school mothers who utilized Medicaid payments for
birth.
Are eﬀects of this magnitude economically consequential? Following our discussion above, a
useful benchmark for answering this question is to scale these eﬀects relative to the excess gender
gaps among black and Hispanic siblings. If the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender
15

gap is economically consequential and if disadvantage is systematically greater among minorities
than whites, then including interactions between gender and disadvantage will reduce these excess
gender gaps. Column 2 confirms this conjecture. Simply including interactions between gender and
family structure, Medicaid indicator, and maternal education reduces the excess black gender gap
by more than half, from 0.33 to 0.13 percentage points, with comparable proportional declines (from
a smaller base) among Hispanic siblings. This pattern indicates that the bulk of the black-white
excess gender gap is explained (in the sense of our decomposition above) by the disparate eﬀect of
family disadvantage on boys relative to girls. If our causal framework above is valid—a subject we
return to below—we can infer that half or more of the excess gender gap in absenteeism in black
families is due to the diﬀerential adverse eﬀect of disadvantage on boys relative to girls rather than
factors specific to black families per se. The role that disadvantage plays in the excess gender gaps
for Hispanic families is equally non-trivial.
To streamline exposition, column 3 of the table subsumes the interaction terms in the first five
rows of column 2 into a single composite SES measure based on a principal components analysis of
family structure/marital status, the proxy for poverty, and maternal education (in years). Construction of this measure is documented in Online Appendix Table O1. Similar to the higher-dimensional
specification in column 2, the interaction between SES and gender reduces the black excess gender
gap in absences from 0.33 to 0.17. This reduction follows directly from two facts: the SES gap
between white and black families and the diﬀerential eﬀect of family disadvantage on boys. Figure 2
panel A plots the SES gradient in the gender gap with a bin-scatter of the boy-girl gap in absences
against the composite SES index while conditioning on all of the covariates used in the corresponding
estimate in Table 3 (column 3 of panel A). This figure underscores the robust SES gradient in the
sibling gender gap in absences.30
While our preferred estimates focus on siblings and include mother fixed eﬀects, it is useful to
assess the degree to which the estimated relationships change depending on the inclusion of fixed
eﬀects and the expansion of the sample to include all singleton births. Appendix Table A3 explores
these permutations. With and without family fixed eﬀects, and even when expanding the sample to
all singleton births, the estimates reinforce the prior conclusions: the boy-girl gap in absence rates
is larger among black and Hispanic families than among white families; conditional on race and
ethnicity, the boy-girl gap is larger in lower SES families (lower maternal education, birth paid by
Medicaid, greater share of absent or unmarried fathers); and inclusion of the composite SES index
substantially reduces these excess gender gaps. The similarity of the results from the specifications
with and without family fixed eﬀects suggests that within-family contrasts are not central to estimation of the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap in youth outcomes. As discussed
above, due to ex ante concerns regarding the endogeneity of family types when contrasting children
across genders and families, our preferred specification uses family fixed eﬀects.
We extend this exercise to consider school suspensions in panel B of Table 3. Approximately 12
30

The plot includes point estimates for the larger SES bins only, and also reports the slope of an OLS regression fit
to all 94 points. This slope is close to the corresponding estimate in Table 3, but does not match exactly given the
diﬀerences in the specifications.

16

percent of Florida public school children are suspended for at least one day per school year during
grades 3 through 8 (Table A1). But suspension rates are twice as high among boys as girls (16.6
versus 8.0 percent), and the gender gap is almost twice as large among blacks as whites (13.1 vs.
7.0 percent). Panel B of Table 3 demonstrates that this pattern is replicated within families: white
boys are 7.0 percentage points more likely to be suspended than their sisters, while black boys are
13.4 percentage points more likely to be suspended than their sisters.
The bin-scatter in Figure 2 panel B documents that conditional on race-ethnicity, the brothersister gap in suspensions is far smaller in families where children are born to married parents,
where mothers are better educated and family income is higher. Accounting for race and ethnicity,
the column 2 estimate of panel B implies that the brother-sister gap in suspensions is more than
10 percentage points lower in the most relative to the least advantaged families. Collapsing our
multiple indicators of family disadvantage into the composite SES index in column 3 yields strong
evidence of an SES gradient in the gender gap: each standard deviation increase in disadvantage
(a reduction in the SES index of 1.57) increases the within-family boy-girl gap in suspensions by
2.2 percentage points. Accounting for the diﬀerential eﬀect of disadvantage of boys relative to girls
reduces the black excess suspension gap by more than 60 percent.
Academic outcomes: Test scores in grades 3 throughout 8
We measure academic performance using combined standardized mathematics and reading tests
administered annually during elementary and middle school.31 Relative to siblings in white families,
black and Hispanic boys perform worse than their sisters in mathematics and reading. Distinct from
the two outcomes analyzed above (absences and suspensions), we find in panel C of Table 3 that
family disadvantage contributes only modestly to the cross-race and cross-ethnic group variation in
the gender gap in these educational measures. The various measures of family advantage generally
have the expected sign (reducing relative boy-girl disadvantage in math and reading), but these
measures are not consistently statistically significant. When combined into a composite measure,
family SES is statistically significant but of modest economic magnitude (also see in the bin-scatter in
Figure 2 panel C). Accounting for SES diﬀerences explains about 10 percent of the excess black-white
gender gap in test scores. The substantially stronger eﬀects for behavioral outcomes are consistent
with findings from the Perry Preschool Program, which provided intensive early enrichment to lowincome minority children, leading to improved labor market and demographic outcomes in adulthood.
The Perry Program did not have lasting impacts on IQ scores but did augment personality traits
associated with labor market success (Heckman and Kautz, 2012).
31

We combine mathematics and reading test scores for conciseness. When performing this analysis separately
by subject, we find the same pattern of results, despite the fact that on average boys tend to outperform girls in
mathematics and the reverse is true with regard to reading.

17

Early academic and behavioral outcome: Kindergarten readiness
The Florida Department of Education recorded kindergarten readiness measures for entering kindergarteners in two sets of kindergarten cohorts—those who entered kindergarten in fall 2001 and before,
and those who entered kindergarten in fall 2006 or later.32 We use these assessments to construct a
dichotomous measure of readiness, based on the approach described in Figlio et al. (2013). Appendix
Table A4 reports the estimates of the eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap in kindergarten
readiness, with panel C presenting the estimates from the models including mother fixed eﬀects. A
one standard deviation increase in the SES index raises the readiness of boys relative to girls by
almost a full percentage point. The inclusion of the interaction of boy and SES reduces the excess
black-white disparity in kindergarten readiness among boys by 60 percent, and the adjusted diﬀerential is no longer statistically diﬀerent from zero. Thus, the apparent eﬀect of family disadvantage
on the gender gap in schooling outcomes emerges as early as age five.
Robustness
We have performed numerous extensions that corroborate these findings, many of which are available
as Online Appendix tables. To analyze the impact of family structure on the gender gap among siblings that experience arguably comparable family circumstances, we focused on both closely-spaced
siblings and on the first two siblings observed in larger families, and obtained closely comparable
eﬀects. We also find comparable results when we assign each child born to a given mother the family
structure (married, father present, father absent), poverty status, and maternal education observed
at the first birth. To further unpack the complex role played by parental structure, we present a
set of estimates for behavioral outcomes (i.e., absences and suspensions) in Appendix Table A5 in
which we limit the sample to the approximately 36 percent of families with distinct fathers and the
same mother. We then subdivide further into cases where family structure diﬀers across births and
cases where it does not.33 We estimate that marital status and, to a lesser degree, father presence,
reduce absences and suspensions for brothers relative to sisters among siblings with distinct fathers
born to the same mother, though these contrasts are not statistically significant.
We have also explored how the SES gradient in the gender gap in early outcomes evolves between grades three and eight using successive observations across grades (again, contrasting within
families). Both the SES gap and the gender gap in absences, suspensions, and test scores increases
year-over-year across grades within sibling pairs—that is, low SES children fare increasingly poorly
relative to high SES children, and boys fare increasingly poorly relative to girls. We do not, however,
find a consistent triple-interaction between these two forms of divergence.34
32
The birth cohorts between 1994 and 2002 who took the kindergarten readiness assessment, therefore, are those
born between 1994 and 1996 and those born between 2000 and 2002.
33
In each instance where no paternity is claimed on a birth certificate, we treat the father as distinct.
34
Of course, the third-level, within-family comparison makes substantial demands on the data.

18

3.2

High school completion

The cumulative adverse eﬀect of family disadvantage on the boy-girl gap in behavioral and academic
outcomes in kindergarten through middle school suggests that disadvantage may also contribute to
gender gaps in downstream market outcomes, including educational attainment and earnings. We
test this hypothesis by analyzing a key market outcome that is available in our data: high school
graduation.35 We ask whether family disadvantage aﬀects the gender gap in high school graduation,
and whether the impact of family disadvantage on third through eighth grade behavioral outcomes
and test scores can account for this relationship. Of necessity, this analysis is limited to the oldest
cohorts in our sample, principally those born in 1992 and 1993, for whom on-time graduations are
presently available. For these cohorts, we do not observe information on Medicaid payments or
paternity status among non-marital births and we additionally cannot link siblings.
Table 4 compares two OLS models fit to our Florida sample in order to assess the relationship
between family advantage and the gender gap in high school graduations (summarized in Appendix
Table A2): one containing the full set of family, mother, and child controls plus all boy ⇥ race-

ethnicity dummies; the second augmented with interactions between child gender and family advan-

tage (here, mother’s education and her marital status at the time of childbirth).36 The first column
of panel A shows that the conditional mean on-time high school graduation rate of white boys is
6.0 percentage points below that of white girls, and that there is an additional (excess) gap of 6.7
and 2.2 percentage points for black and Hispanic boys, respectively. Among black and Hispanic
students, these very large gender gaps in on-time high school graduation rates—ranging from 8 to
13 percentage points—are about equally accounted for by higher male dropout rates and higher
male grade repetition rates (which may culminate in dropout or high school completion). For white
students, the gender gap in high school graduation is attributed primarily to grade repetition.
The second column of each panel shows that the boy-girl disadvantage in high school completion
is substantially smaller in more advantaged families. Conditional on race-ethnicity, the gender
gap in on-time completions is 3.2 percentage points smaller for boys born to married mothers and
3.2 percentage points smaller again for boys with college-educated relative to high school dropout
mothers.37
Given the substantial diﬀerences in the distribution of maternal education and the prevalence
of in-wedlock childbearing between whites, blacks, and Hispanics (Table 2), it follows that the
pronounced excess boy-girl disadvantage in high school graduations among non-whites is in part
explained by the higher prevalence of disadvantage among minorities. A comparison of the boy ⇥
35

While high school diplomas are not allocated by a market mechanism, high school degrees are priced in the labor
market (see Autor 2014 for discussion).
36
We do not apply the SES index to this exercise because we lack information on Medicaid payments and paternity
status for the cohorts that have so far reached high school completion age.
37
These results are consistent with the evidence in Chetty et al. (2016b) that find a diﬀerential advantage of growing
up in a higher income family for boys’ relative to girls’ college attendance, employment, and earnings outcomes. In
contrast, recent evidence by Brenoe and Lundberg (2017) from Denmark and Lundberg (2017) from the U.S. finds that
the diﬀerential negative eﬀect of family disadvantage on boys’ adolescent outcomes does not persist into adulthood.
Our data do not permit us to assess post-high school outcomes.

19

race/ethnicity dummies in the even and odd-numbered columns confirms this intuition. Accounting
for mother’s education and marital status at child-birth reduces the black excess boy-girl disadvantage in high school graduations from 6.7 to 4.6 percentage points (30 percent), and reduces the
Hispanic excess boy-girl disadvantage from 2.2 to 1.5 percentage points. We also conjecture that
family disadvantage contributes to gender diﬀerentials in downstream market outcomes, including
college-going and earnings, though these outcomes are not visible in our data.
To what degree do the upstream eﬀects of SES on the gender gap in elementary and middle school
disciplinary and academic outcomes plausibly account for the SES gradient in the on-time high school
graduation gender gap? We cannot provide a complete answer to this question since we cannot
exhaustively account or control for all causal pathways. We oﬀer a simple benchmark, however,
as follows. We first estimate the predictive relationship between on-time high school graduation
observed in grade twelve and behavioral and educational outcomes observed in kindergarten and
grades five through eight.38 We then apply our estimates of the causal eﬀect of SES on upstream
outcomes to the point estimates from this predictive model to obtain an implied eﬀect of family
disadvantage on high school graduations operating through these channels.39
Table 5 summarizes this exercise. The first panel presents a linear probability regression of
on-time high school graduation (Hij ) on our standard set of covariates (child sex, race-ethnicity
interacted with child sex, birth order, birth year, and birth month, and mother’s education, age and
marital status at childbirth), augmented with a vector Ti of elementary and middle school behavioral
and educational outcomes. These child-specific outcomes include: absence rates, suspension rates,
combined standardized math and reading scores, each averaged over grades five through eight as
well as the kindergarten readiness measure:

Hij

=

T0i ⇡ +
+F0j

1 Boyi

+

X0i

+

2 (Boyi ⇥Blackj )

+

3 (Boyi ⇥Hispanicj )

(9)

+ eij .

To facilitate comparison across coeﬃcients, we standardize each of the predictive variables in T to
have mean zero and unit variance. The regression coeﬃcients therefore correspond to standardized
eﬀect sizes.
Estimates of Equation (9) in Table 5 find a highly significant predictive relationship between early
behavioral and educational outcomes and subsequent on-time high school completions. Whether entered into the regression individually (columns 1 through 4) or as a group (column 5), the data
unambiguously show that children who have higher absence and suspension rates and lower read38
Absences and suspensions are observed starting in the 2002-2003 school year. For this exercise, we therefore utilize
grades five through eight since we can observe both cognitive and behavioral measures for the full set of children born
in 1992 and 1993, the cohorts for which we observe high school graduation.
39
Our models for the predictive relationship between K-8 outcomes and subsequent high school graduations should
be understood as descriptive rather than causal. We do not claim that any causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on high
school outcomes runs entirely through K-8 behavioral and academic outcomes. Due to the data limitations for the
high school graduation sample, we re-estimated our main models from Table 3 on grade five through eight behavioral
and academic outcomes. These yield coeﬃcients of -0.15 (0.02), -2.39 (0.13) and 0.01 (0.00) for absences, suspensions,
and test scores, respectively.

20

ing/math scores during grades three through eight, as well as lower rates of kindergarten readiness,
are significantly less likely to complete high school within four years. Notably, the standardized
eﬀect sizes of early behavioral measures (absences and suspensions) are larger than the eﬀect sizes of
math and reading scores, which are in turn substantially larger than the eﬀect sizes of kindergarten
readiness.
To benchmark the economic magnitude of these coeﬃcients relative to those above, we scale
them by the estimated impact of SES on each behavioral and educational outcome and report them
(in standardized form) in panel B of Table 5. The final panel of Table 5 reports the implied impact
of SES on high school graduations scaled by three metrics: a one-standard deviation increment to
SES (row 1); the mean white-black SES diﬀerential (row 2); and the mean white-Hispanic SES
diﬀerential (row 3).
There is a large implied impact of family disadvantage on the gender gap in high school graduations operating through early behavioral and educational outcomes. A one-standard deviation
reduction in family SES is predicted to raise the boy-girl high school graduation deficit by approximately 1.32 percentage points. Since cross-group diﬀerences in SES are substantial, this mechanism
also contributes to observed race and ethnic gaps in on-time high school graduations. The mean
black-white and Hispanic-white SES diﬀerentials of

1.63

and

0.59 , respectively, can explain

1.37 percentage points of the 6.7 percentage point excess boy-girl deficit in HS graduations among
blacks and 0.49 percentage points of the 2.2 percentage point excess boy-girl deficit among Hispanics.
These estimated contributions operating through upstream channels are about 60 percent as large
as the direct eﬀects of SES on the excess gender gap in high school completions that we estimate in
Table 4.
The primary channel through which these eﬀects appear to operate is through behavioral outcomes. Variation in the gender gap in reading/math achievement and kindergarten readiness makes
a negligible contribution to the gender gap in HS graduations, jointly accounting for only 8 percent
of the total explained by the fifth through eighth grade measures (versus 92 percent explained by
absences and suspensions). A plausible interpretation of this finding is that, at least for boys, it
is behavioral rather than formal skills deficits that inhibit high school completion, as posited by
Heckman and Kautz (2012). Indeed, of the four measures considered, suspensions play the largest
role in explaining the boy-girl deficit in high school completions (panel C). Notably, when we estimate models akin to panel A of Table 5 for high school dropout and five-plus years of high school
attendance, we find that three-quarters of the estimated impact of behavioral measures on on-time
graduation operates through diﬀerences in the likelihood of dropout.

21

4

Testing the identifying assumptions

4.1

Unconfoundedness

Earliest health outcomes: Neonatal health
Interpretation of the above estimates as the causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap
in children’s outcomes hinges on the assumption that the latent gender gap in sibling outcomes is
independent of family disadvantage. We provide a falsification test by analyzing the relationship
between family disadvantage and the gender gap in the strongest available measure of neonatal
health: birthweight. A large medical and economic literature summarized earlier finds birthweight
to be robustly predictive of subsequent health, cognitive development, and labor market outcomes. In
our sample, there are substantial birthweight diﬀerences across our three main demographic groups,
as documented in Appendix Table A6. At birth, white children weigh an average of 265 grams
(approximately 8.4 percent) more than black children, and about 100 grams more than Hispanic
children. There are also substantial diﬀerences across these demographic groups in a number of
other measures of birth outcomes.
Table 6 estimates Equations (7) and (8) for birthweight and a range of additional neonatal
outcomes, including abnormal conditions of the newborn, maternal health, and adequacy of prenatal
care, to assess whether the sibling gender gap in neonatal outcomes varies systematically with
family disadvantage. If boys conceived by disadvantaged mothers are disproportionately less healthy
than girls conceived by disadvantaged mothers, this could be reflected in birthweight and abnormal
conditions. Alternatively, if maternal healthcare utilization or health are aﬀected by (or correlated
with) the gender of the fetus—perhaps due to son preference, as in Dahl and Moretti (2008)—our
measures of prenatal care and maternal health might detect such a relationship.
For each of the birth outcomes, we report three specifications. The first estimates mean birthweight (or other birth outcome) diﬀerences between boys and girls, overall and by race-ethnicity,
conditional on mother fixed eﬀects. In the case of birthweight, the coeﬃcient on the boy main eﬀect
indicates that white newborn boys weigh on average 124 grams more than their white newborn sisters. Despite the substantially lower average birthweight of black boys and girls, the black boy-girl
birthweight gap within families is essentially identical to that of whites, just 6 grams less than that
observed for whites. We also find very modest mean diﬀerences in the cross-sibling gender-racial
gap in birthweight among Hispanic births relative to white births.
The second column of each panel tests for a relationship between family disadvantage and the
gender gap in birth outcomes by adding a set of interactions between child sex, mother’s education,
proxy for poverty, and mother’s marital status at childbirth.40 The boy-girl diﬀerence in birthweight is trivially (and not statistically significantly) larger—less than 2 grams—for births where
the mother has at least a high school education, and is completely unrelated to family structure. An
40

These variables are only minimally correlated with newborns’ gender, and hence their main eﬀects (though not
their gender interactions) have essentially no impact on the estimated gender gaps in birth outcomes reported in the
first column of each panel.

22

economically and statistically insignificant relationship between measures of family advantage and
gender is generally observed across all of the other birth outcomes. The third column of each panel
subsumes these five interaction terms into our single composite SES measure described above. We
again estimate a small and statistically insignificant relationship between family advantage and the
gender gap in birthweight: a one standard deviation increase in the SES index (an increment of 1.57)
predicts less than a two gram rise in the boy-girl diﬀerential in birthweight, an order of magnitude
that is of negligible educational and health relevance.41 We also find no relationship between family
SES and the gender gap in the remaining three health outcomes considered in Table 6: abnormal
conditions at birth; maternal health problems; and prenatal care adequacy.
Online Appendix Figure O1 summarizes these patterns by presenting scatter plots of the relationship between family SES and the gender gap in neonatal health. Across multiple outcome measures,
the relationship between family advantage and the gender gap in infant health is of trivial economic
magnitude and is never statistically significant in within-family models. While neonatal outcomes
such as the abnormal conditions at birth, prenatal care adequacy, and maternal health indicators are
not as sensitive or reliable as birthweight as measures of neonatal health, these multiple outcomes
nonetheless paint a consistent picture: there is no evidence that the gender gap in infant health at
birth is correlated with family advantage.
We extend the analysis to a broader range of at-birth health outcomes in Online Appendix Table
O2, including the clinical estimate of gestation in weeks; the five-minute Apgar score, which is
a composite index of neonatal vital sign indicators collected in the minutes following delivery; the
presence of congenital anomalies; and complications of labor and delivery. In Online Appendix Table
O3, we further present estimates for the natural logarithm of birthweight and an index constructed
from all of the birth outcomes.42 Across all outcomes, we find no evidence of a socioeconomic
gradient in the gender gap in at-birth health. Notably, when we estimate the same birthweight
models omitting family fixed eﬀects (Online Appendix Table O4), the coeﬃcients on interactions
between SES measures and gender are in some cases statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero,
though in all cases of similar economic magnitude to those estimated using within family contrasts.
These results suggest that the ex ante concerns regarding the endogeneity of family types to child
gender—the rationale for the family fixed eﬀect research design—does not appear to be consequential
in practice.
As a further validation test, we summarize in Online Appendix Table O5 a set of augmented
estimates for the relationship between SES and the sibling gender gap in behavioral and educational
outcomes that control for the log of birthweight and its interaction with gender (in addition to all
prior covariates). If there is any residual relationship between family disadvantage, infant birthweight
and the gender gap in subsequent behavioral or educational outcomes, these augmented estimates
41
Figlio et al. (2014) estimate that a 1, 000g increase in birthweight is associated with a 0.19 standard deviation
increase in test scores in grades three through eight. The two gram diﬀerential we estimate in Table 6 is 0.2 percent
as large, implying a hypothetical impact on test scores on the order of two ten-thousandths of a standard deviation.
42
The natural logarithm of birthweight parameterization could matter since boys weigh more than girls on average
within every demographic subgroup. Construction of each of these outcome variables is detailed in the corresponding
table notes.

23

should account for that relationship. Consistent with expectations, children with higher birthweight
attain higher math and reading scores during third through eighth grades, though they also have
higher suspension rates. Inclusion of infant birthweight has no discernible impact on the estimated
SES gradient in the gender gap in behavioral and educational outcomes.43
Medium-term health and behavioral outcomes: Physical versus cognitive/behavioral
disabilities
We obtain additional evidence regarding the evolution of the SES gradient in the gender gap by
examining disability, as recorded by the Florida Department of Education. Although disabilities are
typically detected many years post-birth, one can view these outcomes as providing a further diagnostic for the unconfoundedness assumption. We distinguish between cognitive/behavioral disabilities
and physical disabilities. We hypothesize that physical disabilities are in many cases congenital or
otherwise reflect underlying health diﬀerences. Cognitive/behavioral disabilities, by contrast, are
likely to reflect learning and behavioral issues that, similar to absenteeism and suspensions, suggest
the child is not thriving in school. Indeed, children often receive a cognitive/behavioral disability
diagnosis during the assessment process for an Individualized Education Program (IEP).44
As reported in Appendix Table A6, 11 percent of children in our matched siblings sample have
a physical disability and 13 percent have a cognitive/behavioral disability.45 Within families, boys
are substantially more likely to be classified as physically or cognitively/behaviorally disabled than
are their sisters. These gaps also diﬀer across race and ethnic groups. The boy-girl gap in cognitive/behavioral disability is 50 percent larger among white than black siblings: 10.3 percentage
versus 6.9 percentage points. Conversely, the boy-girl gap in physical disability is slightly smaller
among blacks than white siblings: 4.9 versus 6.3 percentage points.46
Table 7 presents family fixed eﬀects models for the incidence of cognitive/behavioral disabilities
(panel A) and physical disabilities (panel B). Panel A finds a strong negative relationship between
maternal education and non-Medicaid births and the female-favorable gap in cognitive and behav43

We have also estimated models that control for a wider variety of birth outcome measures and their interactions
with infant gender, and these additions leave our results fundamentally unchanged. Models with second and third
level interactions between low birthweight (a dummy variable), SES, and gender find no consistent pattern of eﬀects
in sibling fixed eﬀects models. While low birthweight is generally predictive of less advantageous behavioral and
academic outcomes, it does not have a strong or consistent interaction with either SES, gender, or SES ⇥ gender.
44
Cognitive and behavioral disabilities include language impaired; intellectual disability (subdivided in the early
years of the data into educable mentally handicapped, trainable mentally handicapped, and profoundly mentally handicapped); developmental delay; specific learning disability; emotionally handicapped; severely emotionally disturbed;
and autism spectrum disorders. Physical disabilities include orthopedically impaired; speech impaired; deaf or hard
of hearing; visually impaired; hospital/homebound; dual-sensory impaired; traumatic brain injury; and established
conditions identified by age two. Because “established conditions” could reflect either physical or cognitive conditions,
we investigate whether our estimated relationships are sensitive to our categorization of established conditions as
physical versus cognitive/behavioral. The results are robust to these diﬀerent categorizations.
45
Children can potentially have both physical and cognitive/behavioral disabilities. We assign each child with a
disability to the “primary exceptionality” (physical vs. cognitive/behavioral) first observed (temporally) in their school
record. In practice, this breakdown is nearly identical to using the last observed major category of disability.
46
This physical disability diﬀerential is driven almost entirely by speech impairments. High-SES families appear to
be more likely to identify and seek treatment for speech impairments, which are either more prevalent or more often
treated in boys.

24

ioral disabilities. This is also seen in the interaction between the boy dummy and the composite
SES index (column 3). A one standard deviation increase in the SES index predicts a 1.1 percentage
point reduction (t-ratio of 7.12) in the excess probability that a boy is classified as cognitively or
behaviorally disabled. Accounting for SES reduces the excess gender gap in cognitive/behavioral
disabilities between blacks and whites from 4.0 to 2.0 percentage points—a 50 percent reduction.
Conversely, there is small and insignificant SES gradient in the gender gap in physical disability
(panel B). The large and pronounced SES gradient in the gender gap in cognitive and behavioral
disabilities, with no corresponding SES gradient in the gender gap in physical disabilities, supports
the inference that post-natal environmental factors drive the SES gradient in the gender gap in
educational and behavioral outcomes.

4.2

Oaxaca restrictions

Our econometric framework imposes the restriction that the diﬀerential impact of SES on boys’
and girls’ behavioral and educational outcomes is constant across race-ethnicity groups, as noted in
section 2.1. If the impact of SES on the gender gap diﬀered substantially by demographic group,
this would complicate interpretation of an SES “eﬀect” on the cross race-ethnicity gender gap.
We test this restriction by estimating an augmented version of equation (8) that includes all
second and third-level interactions between gender, SES, and race-ethnicity:
Yij

= ↵j +
+

1 Boyi

5 (Boyi

+

2 (Boyi ⇥Dj )

+

3 (Boyi ⇥Racej )

⇥ Racej ⇥ Dj ) + F0j + X0i + eij ,

+

4 (Racej

⇥ Dj )

(10)

where Dj is the SES (disadvantage) measure and we suppress notation of main eﬀects of raceethnicity and disadvantage.47 The assumption that SES aﬀects minority and non-minority boys
equally implies that

5

' 0 in the equation above. Online Appendix Tables O6 and O7 present

these augmented specifications.

Focusing first on school absences in Table O6, we find no evidence of cross-race-ethnicity variation
in the SES gradient in the gender gap. A Wald test for cross-race-ethnicity heterogeneity in the SES
gradient in the gender gap fails to reject the null at p = 0.74. For combined reading/math scores,
we also do not detect much heterogeneity. Finally, for suspensions, there is statistically significant
heterogeneity in slopes. The negative coeﬃcient on Boy ⇥ SES in column 2 of panel B implies that
a one standard deviation increase in SES reduces the suspension rate of white boys relative to their

female siblings by 2.48 percentage points. The positive third-level interaction of 0.86 among boy,
black, and SES in this model indicates that SES has a smaller beneficial eﬀect ( 1.62 =

2.48+0.86)

on the gender suspension gap among black siblings relative to white siblings. We find a similar
pattern for Hispanics. While these cross-group discrepancies in slopes do not change the qualitative
pattern of findings, they nevertheless suggest that part of the protective eﬀect of SES in reducing
suspensions among white males is not present for minority males. A plausible interpretation of this
47

Regression specifications include main eﬀects for all variables that can diﬀer across siblings, including family
disadvantage measures (since, e.g., marital status may change between births).

25

pattern, though not one that we are able to explore in our data, is that public schools suspension
policies are diﬀerentially punitive towards non-white males.
Table O7 applies our test of the Oaxaca restrictions to on-time high school graduation, high
school grade repetition, and high school dropout. Because we do not have all components of the
SES variable for the high school age cohorts in our sample, we instead include a full set of main
eﬀects and second and third-level interactions for marital status and mother’s education (a total of
six third-level interactions among disadvantage, boy, and race/ethnicity). For on-time high school
graduation, we cannot reject the null of no heterogeneity in the family advantage gradient in the
gender gap (p

0.75). Among those not completing high school on time, we find some evidence

that Hispanic boys in married families are diﬀerentially likely to repeat a grade rather than drop
out of high school.48

5

Exploring mechanisms: Schools and neighborhoods

Family disadvantage may amplify the female favorable gap in childhood outcomes not because boys
are more aﬀected by family environment per se but because the neighborhoods and schools in which
disadvantaged children are raised are particularly adverse for boys. Boys may be more vulnerable to
the risks of violence and gang activity found in low-SES neighborhoods and schools, or boys may be
treated more harshly by authority figures in these settings, perhaps facing greater disciplinary and
criminal sanctions from teachers and police. We formally test whether family advantage operates
primarily through these channels rather than directly through family environment per se. While
school and neighborhood appear less important for explaining the gender gap than the direct eﬀect of
family environment itself, the results in this section lend broad support to the hypothesis that early
outcomes of boys—particularly, behavioral and disciplinary outcomes—are diﬀerentially impacted
by disadvantage, whether manifested in family disadvantage, neighborhood quality, or school quality.
For this analysis, we augment our data with measures of school and neighborhood quality. As
described in section 1, we construct a measure of the quality of elementary and middle schools from
the school-level gain scores calculated by the Florida Department of Education, reflecting schools’
average contribution to student outcomes. Using these school level gain measures, we calculate for
each student a years-weighted average of the rank quality of all schools attended from grade three
to eight. We use two sets of variables to proxy for neighborhood quality: the median income of the
zip code of residence observed at birth; and a measure of the causal eﬀects of place of residence
on economic mobility by Florida county from Chetty and Hendren (2015). The Chetty-Hendren
mobility measure corresponds to the estimated percentage gain (or loss) in income at age 26 from
spending one more year of childhood in each county in the U.S. We extract the causal exposure
eﬀects as percentage gains (or losses) in income at age 26 relative to the national mean for parents
at the 25th and 75th percentile of the national household income distribution. We then average the
two values to obtain one treatment eﬀect for each county. Due to linearity in ranks this measure is
48

Murnane (2013) observes that black and Hispanic students are more likely than whites to complete high school in
five-plus years. Thus, race gaps in eventual high school completion are smaller than race gaps in on-time graduation.

26

the same as the treatment eﬀect on the median person.49
Table 8a presents estimates for absences and suspensions. Columns 1 and 2 replicate our baseline
mother fixed eﬀects specification for the gender gap in school absences, while subsequent columns
augment this specification with school and neighborhood controls, in each case interacted with
gender.50 Columns 3 and 4 show that the gender gap in absences is lower in higher income zip codes
and areas with higher economic mobility, but these relationships are not statistically significant. The
brother-sister gap in absences is smaller, however, for children who attend higher quality Florida
public schools relative to those attending lower quality schools (column 5). Moving from the 25th
to the 75th percentile in school quality is predicted to reduce the gender gap in absenteeism by
0.0025 percentage points. The sixth column includes all three school and neighborhood measures
simultaneously. School quality remains robustly predictive of the gender gap in absences and the
economic mobility coeﬃcient increases and becomes marginally significant.51
We use two metrics to interpret the magnitude of these relationships: how much of the SES
gradient in that gap do they explain; and how much of the race-ethnicity gender gap in absences
do they explain? The first question can be answered by comparing the coeﬃcients on the Boy ⇥
SES interaction term across columns of Table 8a when including versus excluding the neighborhood
and school quality interaction terms. The coeﬃcient on Boy ⇥ SES of
baseline specification falls in magnitude to

0.07 in the column 2

0.06 in the final specification that accounts for both

school and neighborhood quality. Thus, only 24 percent (1

0.056/0.074) of the eﬀect of SES

on the gender gap in absences is accounted for by measures of school quality and neighborhood.
The remainder is implicitly accounted for by family level eﬀects that operate across siblings within
schools and neighborhoods. Of course, this decomposition provides a lower bound on the explanatory
power of school and neighborhood since more complete measures of school and neighborhood quality
could potentially explain more. We address this issue non-parametrically in Appendix Table O8,
summarized below.
The answer to the second question—what share of the race-ethnicity gender gap is explained
by family, school, and neighborhood—is summarized in Figure 3. As reported in Table 8a, the
regression adjusted excess gender gap in school absences among blacks relative to whites is 0.31
percentage points. Controlling for the diﬀerential impact of family advantage on boys explains 46
percent of this gap. Adding neighborhood income explains an additional 4 percentage points (50
percent in total), while controlling school quality and neighborhood economic mobility increases this
explanatory power to 59 percent. Of course, school and neighborhood controls have substantially
49

We thank Jeremy Majerovitz for expert assistance with the Chetty-Hendren data. We use data from their Online
Data Table 2 (available at http://equality-of-opportunity.org/index.php/data): Preferred Estimates of Causal
Place Eﬀects by County.
50
Samples (and hence point estimates) diﬀer very slightly from our main estimates in Table 3 due to the fact that
school quality measures are missing for the subset of schools that are new or have small numbers of students who
contribute scores for student gain measures.
51
Because neighborhood mobility (based on county) and neighborhood income (based on zip code) diﬀer relatively
rarely between siblings, the main eﬀects for these variables are only weakly identified and hence are not included in
the table. Main eﬀects for school quality are, however, always large and significant with the expected sign (reducing
absences and suspensions, increasing test scores).

27

greater incremental explanatory power for the excess gender gap in absences when SES is excluded
from the model: controlling for these factors alone, absent the gender-SES interaction explains 36
percent of the excess black gender gap in absences versus 46 percent for SES alone (column 7 of Table
8a). In summary, 78 percent of the explained impact of family advantage on the excess gender gap
in absences appears to operate between siblings within schools and neighborhoods; the combination
of family SES, school and neighborhoods can jointly explain 59 percent of the black excess gender
gap in absences. The high correlation between the two sets of variables means that either set can
proximately account for a substantial share of the explained excess gap. That said, family SES on
its own explains more of the excess gender gap than do the neighborhood/school measures and the
inclusion of family SES in the neighborhoods/schools specification substantially improves the extent
to which the excess gap can be explained.
Panel B of Table 8a implements this exercise for grade three through eight suspensions. In
contrast to the results for absence rates, here we find that neighborhood income is a significant
predictor of the boy-girl gap in suspensions, with the female-favorable gap smaller in wealthier
neighborhoods. A neighborhood’s economic mobility again is not statistically significant, though
is of sizable magnitude and it becomes significant in the specification that controls for all three
measures (column 6). As with absences, school quality makes a substantial contribution, with
suspension rates of boys reduced relative to girls in higher quality schools. Notably, inclusion of all
three neighborhood and school quality measures only minimally aﬀects the family-level impact of
SES on the gender gap: the SES ⇥ gender interaction term falls by approximately one fifth when

conditioning on these detailed measures (thus 80 percent of the explained impact of family advantage

on the excess gender gap in suspensions appears to operate within schools and neighborhoods). As
visually depicted in panel B of Figure 3, family disadvantage alone accounts for 64 percent of the
excess gender gap among black relative to white siblings, with school and neighborhood quality
accounting for an incremental 15 percentage points.52 The final column of Table 8a indicates that
when the gender-SES interaction is excluded from the statistical model, schools and neighborhoods
alone can explain 44 percent of the excess gender gap in suspensions.
Table 8b presents the corresponding analysis for combined math and reading scores. Relative
to the behavioral outcomes, these academic indicators are less central to our analysis since they
have comparatively modest relationships to high school completion, grade repetition, and dropout
(and have only a modest SES gender gradient, as shown above). Qualitatively, we find a similar
pattern of results: greater neighborhood economic mobility and higher school quality significantly
reduce the boy-girl disadvantage in early academic performance, though for these outcomes we do
not find a consistently significant eﬀect of neighborhood income. Accounting for neighborhood and
school quality attenuates the relationship between SES and the gender gap in math and reading and
in some specifications the coeﬃcient is statistically insignificant. However, none of these measures
(individually or in combination) accounts for even a fifth of the excess gender gap in academic
outcomes among black relative to white children.
52

Our models tend to over-explain the modest boy-girl gaps in suspensions among Hispanics.

28

As a final robustness test, we estimate a set of companion models for absences, suspensions,
and combined math and reading scores that are saturated with a full set of zip code ⇥ boy and
school ⇥ boy interactions. This extension allows the impact of neighborhoods and schools on the
gender gap to vary non-parametrically up to the level of granularity available in the data. These

non-parametric estimates are reported in Online Appendix Table O8. Comparing across columns
of this table documents the robustness of our findings for the contribution of family disadvantage
to the gender gap in behavioral outcomes. Relative to the Table 8a models that control directly
for neighborhood and school quality, adding non-parametric school and neighborhood controls has
almost no discernible eﬀect on the estimated impact of family disadvantage on the gender gap in
absences and suspensions—again confirming the centrality of family environment in determining the
gender gap in behavioral outcomes.53 For combined reading/math scores, the attenuation is larger
than in the parametric approach (about 66 percent), and SES is no longer a significant predictor
of the gender gap in the models with gender interactions. Family disadvantage appears, however,
to account for only a modest component of the gender gap in test scores, as noted above, and test
scores in turn play only a modest role in the gender gap in high school graduations.

6

Conclusions

This paper investigates whether family disadvantage exerts a diﬀerential eﬀect on the educational
outcomes of boys relative to girls. Utilizing a unique data set of Florida births from 1992 to 2002
linked to schooling records, and an empirical design that employs within-family brother-sister comparisons, we find that family disadvantage disproportionately negatively aﬀects the behavioral and
academic outcomes of school-age boys relative to girls. The diﬀerential eﬀect of family disadvantage
on the outcomes of boys relative to girls is already evident by the time of kindergarten entry, is further
manifested in behavioral and educational gaps in elementary and middle-school performance, and
crystalizes into sharp diﬀerences in high school graduations by age 18. These SES gradients are especially strong for behavioral outcomes measured during the third through eighth grades, and though
more modest for combined math and reading test scores, the gradient persists through high school
graduation. Our results imply that a sizable portion of the documented minority-white diﬀerence
in educational and behavioral gender gaps is attributable to higher degrees of family disadvantage
among minority families.
The causal eﬀect of family disadvantage on the gender gap may accrue through two primary
channels. One is that the skills development of boys and girls respond diﬀerently to the same
stimuli. An alternative, non-mutually exclusive, explanation is that parental investments in boys
versus girls diﬀer systematically according to family disadvantage. For example, parents in low-SES
53
Controlling non-parametrically for the diﬀerential eﬀect of schools and neighborhoods on boys relative to girls
attenuates by 18 and 26 percent, respectively, the SES gradient in the gender gap in absences and suspensions;
this is almost indistinguishable from the 24 percent and 19 percent attenuation in this gradient when controlling
parametrically for neighborhood and school quality in Table 8a. The similarity of the results between the parametric
and non-parametric specifications also suggests that our parametric school and neighborhood quality measures are
reasonable proxies for school and neighborhood disadvantage.

29

households, which are disproportionately female-headed, may spend relatively more time mentoring
and interacting with daughters than sons (Lundberg et al., 2007; Baker and Milligan, 2013; Bertrand
and Pan, 2013; Gayle et al., 2014), or, similarly, parents in high-SES households may make larger
compensatory investments in sons than daughters.54 Our data do not allow us to evaluate the
relative importance of these causal channels, though the evidence in Bertrand and Pan (2013) does
not provide strong support for the diﬀerential investment hypothesis. We view this as a worthy topic
for further research.
While our paper is deliberately agnostic about the specific channels through which post-natal
exposure to family disadvantage generates the observed gender gap in outcomes, we are able to
rigorously test and, for the most part, reject two natural competing explanations for our main
findings. One explanation for the SES gradient in the gender gap is a “fetal origins” hypothesis, in
which the SES gradient in potential outcomes is imparted prior to birth. Across a large number of
measures of neonatal health—birthweight, infant and maternal health, and numerous indicators of
prenatal care and medical complications before and during delivery—we detect no evidence that the
SES gradient in the gender gap in outcomes is already present at birth. These results strongly suggest
that there is no latent gender gap in potential outcomes that varies with SES, and allows us to infer
that the divergent behavioral and cognitive development of boys relative to girls in low-SES versus
high-SES families reflects the causal eﬀect of the post-natal environment on child development.
The second explanation for the SES gradient in the gender gap is an environmental factors hypothesis. We document that neighborhood quality makes a small contribution to the SES gradient
in the gender gap, while school quality matters more—low quality schools are particularly disadvantageous for boys. Nevertheless, accounting non-parametrically for the diﬀerential impact of schools
and neighborhoods on boys relative to girls reduces the estimated impact of family disadvantage on
the sibling gender gap in behavioral outcomes by less than a quarter. These results imply that family
disadvantage makes both a substantial direct contribution to the gender gap as well as an indirect
contribution through schools and neighborhoods. Though not observable in our data, we suspect
that these early diﬀerences in behavioral and educational outcomes continue into adulthood, as boys
and girls exit the compulsory school system and matriculate into employment, higher education,
and potentially parenthood.

54

We have examined this hypothesis using parental time use data from the American Time Use Survey as well as
data from the Florida State Department of Education on whether parents send children to pre-school, an indicator of
early childhood investment. With regard to parental time use, we find little support for diﬀerential investment in boys
versus girls that varies systematically with SES. For the likelihood of sending a child to pre-kindergarten programs,
we find that boys are more likely to attend pre-kindergarten programs, and particularly so in relatively advantaged
families.

30

References
Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie, “The intergenerational transmission of inequality: Maternal
disadvantage and health at birth,” Science, 2014, 344 (6186), 856–861.
Almond, D and L Edlund, “Trivers-Willard at Birth and One year: Evidence from US Natality
Data 1983-2001,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2007, 274 (1624), 2491–
2496.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder, “Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment:
The Eﬀect of Ramadan Observance During Pregnancy,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2011, 3 (4), 56–85.
and Janet Currie, “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 153–172.
and Maya Rossin-Slater, “Paternity Acknowledgment in 2 Million Birth Records from Michigan,” PloS ONE, 2013, 8 (7).
, Bhashkar Mazumder, and Reyn van Ewijk, “In Utero Ramadan Exposure and Children’s
Academic Performance,” The Economic Journal, 2014.
, Kenneth Y Chay, and David S Lee, “The Costs of Low Birth Weight,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2005, pp. 1031–1083.
Autor, David and Melanie Wasserman, “Wayward Sons: The Emerging Gender Gap in Education and Labor Markets,” Technical Report, Third Way, Washington, DC 2013.
, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeﬀrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman, “Family
Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes,” NBER Working
Paper #22267, 2016.
Autor, David H, “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the "Other 99
Percent",” Science, 2014, 344 (6186), 843–851.
, David N Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeﬀrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman, “School
Quality and the Gender Gap in Educational Achievement,” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, 2016.
Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan, “Boy-Girl Diﬀerences in Parental Time Investments: Evidence from Three Countries,” NBER Working Paper No. 18893, 2013.
, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan, “Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor Supply, and
Family Well-Being,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (4), 709–745.
Becker, Gary S., William H. J. Hubbard, and Kevin M. Murphy, “Explaining the Worldwide Boom in Higher Education of Women,” Journal of Human Capital, 2010, 4 (3), 203–241.
Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan, “The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the
Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5
(1), 32–64.

31

Beyers, Jennifer M, John E Bates, Gregory S Pettit, and Kenneth A Dodge, “Neighborhood Structure, Parenting Processes, and the Development of Youths’ Externalizing Behaviors:
A Multilevel Analysis,” American Journal of Community Psychology, 2003, 31 (1-2), 35–53.
Black, Sandra E., Paul T. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes, “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Eﬀect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007,
122 (1), 409–439.
Brenoe, Anne Ardila and Shelly Lundberg, “Gender gaps in the eﬀects of childhood family
environment: Do they persist into adulthood?,” European Economic Review, 2017, 0, 1–21.
Buchmann, C. and T. a. DiPrete, “The Growing Female Advantage in College Completion: The
Role of Family Background and Academic Achievement,” American Sociological Review, 2006, 71
(4), 515–541.
Cherlin, Andrew, The Marriage-Go-Round: The State of Marriage and the Family in America
Today, New York: Knopf, 2009.
Cherlin, Andrew J, Labor’s Love Lost: The Rise and Fall of the Working-Class Family in America,
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2014.
Chetty, Raj and Nathan Hendren, “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility: Childhood Exposure Eﬀects and County-Level Estimates,” 2015.
, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F Katz, “The Eﬀects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment,” American
Economic Review, 2016, 106 (4), 855–902.
,

, Frina Lin, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Benjamin Scuderi, “Childhood Environment and

Gender Gaps in Adulthood,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2016.
Cullen, Mark R, Michael Baiocchi, Karen Eggleston, Pooja Loftus, and Victor Fuchs,
“The Weaker Sex? Vulnerable Men, Resilient Women, and Variations in Sex Diﬀerences in Mortality since 1900,” NBER Working Paper #21114, 2015, (April).
Dahl, Gordon B. and Enrico Moretti, “The Demand for Sons,” Review of Economic Studies,
2008, 75 (4), 1085–1120.
DiPrete, Thomas A. and Claudia Buchmann, The Rise of Women, New York, NY: Russell
Sage Foundation, 2013.
DiPrete, Thomas and Jennifer L Jennings, “Social and Behavioral Skills and the Gender Gap
in Early Educational Achievement,” Social Science Research, 2012, 41 (1), 1–15.
Duckworth, Angela L and Martin E P Seligman, “Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting
academic performance of adolescents.,” Psychological science, 2005, 16 (12), 939–44.
Fan, Xiaodong, Hanming Fang, and Simen Markussen, “Mothers’ Employment and Children’s Educational Gender Gap,” NBER Working Paper #21183, 2015, (May).
Farrell, Albert D., Terri N. Sullivan, Layla E. Esposito, Aleta L. Meyer, and Robert F.
Valois, “A latent growth curve analysis of the structure of aggression, drug use, and delinquent
32

behaviors and their interrelations over time in urban and rural adolescents,” Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 2005, 15 (2), 179–204.
Field, Erica, Omar Robles, and Maximo Torero, “Iodine Deficiency and Schooling Attainment
in Tanzania,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4), 140–169.
Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeﬀrey Roth, “The Eﬀects of
Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development,” American Economic Review, 2014,
104 (12), 3921–3955.
Figlio, David N, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeﬀrey Roth, “The Eﬀects
of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development,” 2013.
Fortin, Nicole M, Philip Oreopoulos, and Shelley Phipps, “Leaving Boys Behind: Gender
Disparities in High Academic Achievement,” Journal of Human Resources, 2015, 50 (3).
Gayle, George-Levi, Limor Golan, and Mehmet A. Soytas, “What Accounts for the Racial
Gap in Time Allocation and Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital?,” Washington
University in St. Louis Working Paper, 2014, (October).
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko, “The Homecoming of American
College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” 2006.
Greve, Jane, Marie Louise Schultz-nielsen, Jane Greve, and Marie Louise Schultznielsen, “Fetal Malnutrition And Academic Success: Evidence From Muslim Immigrants In Denmark,” NBER Working Paper No. 21545, 2015.
Heckman, James J. and Tim Kautz, “Hard evidence on soft skills,” Labour Economics, 2012,
19 (4), 451–464.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond, “Long Run Impacts
of Childhood Access to the Safety Net,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (4), 903–934.
Ingoldsby, E M and D S Shaw, “Neighborhood contextual factors and ealry-starting antisocial
pathways,” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 2002, 5 (1), 21–55.
Karbownik, Krzysztof and Michal Myck, “Who Gets to Look Nice and Who Gets to Play?
Eﬀects of Child Gender on Household Expenditure,” Review of Economics of the Household, 2017,
15 (3), 925–944.
Karriker-Jaﬀe, Katherine J., Vangie A. Foshee, Susan T. Ennett, and Chirayath Suchindran, “Sex diﬀerences in the eﬀects of neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage and social organization on rural adolescents’ aggression trajectories,” American Journal of Community Psychology,
2009, 43 (3-4), 189–203.
Leventhal, T and J Brooks-Gunn, “Moving to Opportunity: An experimental study of neighborhood eﬀects on mental health,” American Journal of Public Health, 2003, 93 (9), 1576–1582.
Lundberg, Shelly, “Father Absence and the Educational Gender Gap,” IZA Discussion Paper No.
10814, 2017.
and Robert A Pollak, “The American Family and Family Economics,” Journal of Economic
33

Perspectives, 2007, 21 (2), 3–26.
, Sabrina Wulﬀ Pabilonia, and Jennifer Ward-Batts, “Time Allocation of Parents and
Investments in Sons and Daughters,” Unpublished paper, 2007.
Maccini, Sharon and Dean Yang, “Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 1006–1026.
Mincy, Ronald, Irwin Garfinkel, and Lenna Nepomnyaschy, “In-hospital paternity establishment and father involvement in fragile families,” Journal of Marriage and Family, 2005, 67
(3), 611–626.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L Smith, and Abigail Wozniak, “Internal Migration in the
United States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 173–196.
Murnane, Richard J, “U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations,” Journal
of Economic Literature, jun 2013, 51 (2), 370–422.
Norberg, Karen, “Partnership Status and the Human Sex Ratio at Birth,” Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, nov 2004, 271 (1555), 2403–2410.
OECD, Education at a Glance 2013 Education at a Glance, OECD Publishing, 2013.
Owens, Jayanti, “Early Childhood Behavior Problems and the Gender Gap in Educational Attainment in the United States,” Sociology of Education, 2016, 3 (89), 236–258.
Prevoo, Tyas and Bas ter Weel, “The Eﬀect of Family Disruption on Children’s Personality
Development: Evidence from British Longitudinal Data,” IZA DP No. 8217, 2014, (December).
Ramirez-Valles, J, M A Zimmerman, and L Juarez, “Gender diﬀerences of neighborhood
and social control process: A study of the timing of first intercourse among low-achieving, urban,
African American youth,” Youth and Society, 2002, 33 (3), 418–441.
Riphahn, Regina T and Caroline Schwientek, “What Drives the Reversal of the Gender
Education Gap? Evidence from Germany,” Applied Economics, 2015, 6846 (October), 1–28.
Sampson, Robert J., Jeﬀrey D. Morenoﬀ, and Stephen Raudenbush, “Social anatomy
of racial and ethnic disparities in violence,” American Journal of Public Health, 2005, 95 (2),
224–232.
Segal, Carmit, “Misbehavior, Education, and Labor Market Outcomes,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, aug 2013, 11 (4), 743–779.
Trivers, Rorbert L and Dan E Willard, “Natural Selection of Parental Ability to Vary the Sex
Ratio of Oﬀspring,” Science, 1973, 179 (4068), 90–92.
U.S. National Center for Education Statistics, “Digest of Education Statistics 2013,” Technical
Report, Washington, DC 2013.
Woessmann, Ludger, “Single-Parent Families and Student Achievement: An International Perspective,” Ifo Institute at the University of Munich, 2015, (January).

34

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Boy-Girl Gaps in Absences, Math Scores, On-Time High School Completion and
Kindergarten Readiness by Family Characteristics

Math+Reading
Scores (SD)

On-Time HS
Grad (1=Yes)

p-value: p < 0.001

p-value: p < 0.001

p-value: p < 0.001

.6

Absence Rate (%)

p-value: p < 0.001

Kindergarten
Ready (1=Yes)

Absence Rate (%)

Math+Reading
Scores (SD)

On-Time HS
Grad (1=Yes)

p-value: p< 0.001

p-value: p< 0.001

p-value: p< 0.001

p-value: p< 0.001

.5

Kindergarten
Ready (1=Yes)

.7

B. By Mother’s Education

-.2

-.2

-.1

-.1

0

0

.1

.1

.2

.2

.3

.3

.4

.4

.5

.6

.7

A. By Race-Ethnicity

Black

Hispanic

High school dropout
College graduate

White

Absence Rate (%)

Math+Reading
Scores (SD)

p-value: p < 0.001

p-value: p < 0.001

p-value: p < 0.001

.6

Kindergarten
Ready (1=Yes)

.7

D. By SES Quartile
Kindergarten
Ready (1=Yes)

Absence Rate (%)

Math+Reading
Scores (SD)

p-value: < 0.001

p-value: < 0.001

p-value: < 0.001

-.2

-.2

-.1

-.1

0

0

.1

.1

.2

.2

.3

.3

.4

.4

.5

.5

.6

.7

.8

C. By Marital Status at Birth

High school graduate

Father absent

Father present

Parents married

SES quartiles:

Bottom

Q2

Q3

Note: This figure plots mean kindergarten readiness rates, absence rates, averaged FCAT math and reading scores, and ontime high school completion rates, by gender and family demographics. Absence rates and FCAT math and reading scores are
computed from the pooled sample of non-twin siblings spanning grades three through eight. On-time high school completion
indicates a high school diploma within four years of entering and is computed from the pooled sample of non-twin singletons
who were observed in Florida public schools until at least ninth grade. Data are limited to the 1992 and 1993 birth cohorts,
the only students old enough to be observed in the high school outcomes data. Kindergarten readiness rates are computed from
the pooled sample of non-twin siblings born in cohorts 1994 to 1996 and 2000 to 2002. The SES measure is constructed as the
first component of a principal components analysis of years of maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator, and marital
status/family structure (married, father present, father absent) at birth. 95% confidence intervals are represented by whiskers
on each bar.

35

Top

Figure 2: Boy-Girl Gap in Behavioral and Academic Outcomes by Family SES at Birth
B. Suspension Rate (%)

slope: -2.14

0

-.5

5

Estimate
10

slope: -0.088

0

Estimate
.5

1

15

20

1.5

A. Absence Rate (%)

Low

High

Low

High

SES index

SES index

.05

C. Math and Reading Scores

-.15

-.1

Estimate
-.05

0

slope: 0.005

Low

High
SES index

Note: This figure plots regression-adjusted mean absence rates, suspension rates, and FCAT math and reading scores against the
mean values of the SES index, for 94 bins of the SES index. Graphs suppress bins with very small sample sizes for expositional
clarity. Lines come from OLS regressions fitted through all bins and weighted by bin size. The sample is non-twin siblings born
1994-2002. The regression controls include child gender, year and month of birth, maternal age at birth, birth order within
family/sibling composition, the main eﬀect of the SES index, and the race-ethnicity of the mother and their interactions with
child gender. The SES measure is constructed as the first component of a principal components analysis of years of maternal
education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father present, father absent) at birth.

36

Figure 3: Sibling Gender Gaps in Behavioral and Academic Outcomes: Observed and Explained
B. Suspension Rate (%)

-2

.4

0

0

.1

2

.2

4

.3

6

8

.4

A. Absence Rate (%)

Boy*Black

Boy*Hispanic

Boy*Hispanic

.3

Boy*Black

Conditional Mean Boy-Girl Gap

Conditional Mean Boy-Girl Gap

With Family Boy*Disadvantage

With Family Boy*Disadvantage

C. Math and Reading Scores

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income

.2

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality & Boy*Intergenerational mobility

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality & Boy*Intergenerational mobility

-.05
-.1
-.15

0

.1

0

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality

Boy*Black

Boy*Hispanic

Boy*Black

Boy*Hispanic

Conditional Mean Boy-Girl Gap
Conditional Mean Boy-Girl
Gap
With Family Boy*Disadvantage

With Family Boy*Disadvantage
With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income
With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality & Boy*Intergenerational mobility

With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality
With Boy*Family Disadvantage & Boy*Neighborhood income & Boy*School quality & Boy*Intergenerational mobility

Note: This figure plots the regression-adjusted race-ethnicity gender gap in absence rates, suspension rates, FCAT math and
reading scores from sibling fixed eﬀects models in Tables 8a and 8b. 95% confidence intervals are represented by whiskers on
each bar.

37

Table 1: Sample Selection: Matched Florida Birth and Public School Records
White, black
and Hispanic
Births
(1)

With
Complete
Data
(2)

Matched to
Florida School
Records
(3)

Matched to
3rd Grade
Test Score
(4)

Sibling Sample
w/ 3rd Grade
Test Score
(5)

White non-Hispanic
Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic

67.7
21.7
10.6

67.6
21.7
10.7

65.1
24.1
10.8

64.0
25.1
10.9

59.2
29.5
11.4

High school dropout
High school graduate
College graduate

18.7
60.1
20.9

18.6
60.3
21.1

20.4
61.8
17.8

21.0
62.3
16.7

22.7
59.4
17.9

Age 21 or below
Age between 22 and 29
Age between 30 and 35
Age 36 or above

24.1
41.9
24.9
9.1

24.0
41.9
25.0
9.1

26.1
42.0
23.4
8.5

26.8
42.0
23.0
8.2

27.9
44.8
21.5
5.8

Non-married, father absent
Non-married, father present
Married at time of birth

14.4
21.9
63.5

14.3
22.0
63.7

15.7
23.8
60.5

16.2
24.6
59.2

17.7
22.9
59.4

Medicaid-funded birth

49.9

51.3

51.0

50.5

50.8

Boy

51.3

51.3

51.0

50.5

50.8

Birth weight (grams)

3,337

3,337

3,324

3,322

3,325

1,209,870

1,157,930

935,993

770,384

301,709

N

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the Florida statewide data. The first column is the full sample of Florida births
1994-2002, excluding immigrants; the second column drops the 4% of records that are missing key variables; the third column
contains the 81% of column 2 records that were matched to Florida school records; the fourth column is the subset of column
3 for children who remained in Florida public schools through third grade and had at least one test score; and the fifth column
is the subset of column 4 in the matched sibling sample – children in families with two or more children born 1994-2002. All
demographic characteristics are derived from the birth certificate. White, black, and Hispanic are mutually exclusive categories.

38

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics: Selected Parent and Child Characteristics, by Race and Ethnicity
White Non- Black NonHispanic
Hispanic
Native
Native
(2)
(3)

All
(1)

Hispanic
Native
(4)

Unmarried: Father absent
Unmarried: Father present
Married

17.7
22.9
59.4

6.5
16.4
77.1

42.5
34.6
22.9

12.0
26.4
61.7

Mother HS dropout
Mother HS grad
Mother college grad

22.7
59.4
17.9

15.8
59.3
24.9

34.6
60.5
5.0

28.0
57.2
14.8

Non-medicaid birth

50.1

66.0

19.6

46.4

N

44,989
(13,723)
301,709

49,182
(13,373)
178,517

36,761
(10,411)
88,894

44,492
(13,325)
34,298

Chetty/Hendren CZ mobility
measure
N

-0.27
(0.19)
301,680

-0.27
(0.19)
178,491

-0.26
(0.19)
88,892

-0.29
(0.18)
34,297

School quality

51.1
(15.3)
283,635

55.5
(14.9)
166,856

41.8
(12.3)
85,057

52.9
(14.0)
31,722

Median zip code income

N

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the sample of non-twin siblings born 1994-2002, by race and ethnicity of the
mother. Standard deviations for continuous measures are given in parentheses. The sample is reduced for the Chetty/Hendren
CZ mobility and the school quality variables due to the lack of availability of these measures for a subset of Florida counties
and schools.

39

40
4.89
301,128

0.07 ~
(0.04)

0.08 ~
(0.04)

0.16
(0.30)

6.36 **
(0.27)

12.37
301,128

-1.50 **
(0.30)

2.34 **
(0.31)

14.20 **
(0.41)

-3.71 **
(0.27)

-5.30 **
(0.36)

-2.28 **
(0.33)

-2.44 **
(0.41)

-1.06 **
(0.41)

-1.28 **
(0.30)

2.27 **
(0.30)

7.99 **
(0.12)

-2.16 **
(0.07)

B. Suspension Rate (%)
(2)
(3)

6.99 **
(0.11)

(1)

-0.02
(0.01)

-0.11
(0.01)

-0.03
(0.00)

~

**

**

0.05
298,055

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.10 **
(0.01)

-0.06 **
(0.01)

0.01 ~
(0.01)

0.05 **
(0.01)

0.02 *
(0.01)

-0.00
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.10 **
(0.01)

-0.04 **
(0.00)

0.01 **
(0.00)

C. Math and Reading Scores (SD)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Note: This table reports the results of OLS models that include sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variable is, in turn, the absence rate, the suspension rate, and combined
standardized FCAT math and reading test scores, from grades three through eight. All columns include controls for child year and month of birth, maternal race-ethnicity,
maternal age at birth and birth order within family. Columns 1 and 2 further control for maternal education, Medicaid funded birth, and family structure/marital status at
birth. Columns (3) control for the main eﬀect of our SES index. The SES measure is constructed as the first component of a principal components analysis of years of maternal
education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father present, father absent) at birth. Standard errors are clustered at the family level.
Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Mean of Y
# children

0.14 **
(0.04)

Boy×Hispanic

0.17 **
(0.04)

0.33 **
(0.04)

Boy×Black

0.13 **
(0.04)

0.25 **
(0.02)

0.56 **
(0.06)

-0.15 **
(0.04)

Boy×Non-medicaid
birth

0.22 **
(0.02)

-0.10 ~
(0.05)

Boy×
College graduate

Boy

-0.01
(0.05)

Boy×
HS graduate

-0.08 **
(0.01)

-0.24 **
(0.06)

Boy×
Married

Boy×
SES index

-0.20 **
(0.06)

A. Absence Rate (%)
(2)
(3)

Boy×
Father present

(1)

Table 3: Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Academic and Behavioral Outcomes

Table 4: Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in High School Graduation
A. On-time HS grad
(1)
(2)

B. 5+ years of HS
(1)
(2)

C. HS dropout
(1)
(2)

Boy×
Married

3.22 **
(0.59)

-1.22 **
(0.45)

-2.01 **
(0.50)

Boy×
HS graduate

0.63
(0.64)

-0.44
(0.51)

-0.19
(0.57)

Boy×
College graduate

3.17 **
(0.76)

-2.30 **
(0.57)

-0.88
(0.66)

Boy

-6.04 **
(0.25)

-9.61 **
(0.66)

3.92 **
(0.18)

5.60 **
(0.53)

2.12 **
(0.22)

4.00 **
(0.60)

Boy×Black

-6.65 **
(0.53)

-4.56 **
(0.60)

2.94 **
(0.43)

2.01 **
(0.48)

3.71 **
(0.43)

2.55 **
(0.50)

Boy×Hispanic

-2.17 *
(0.91)

-1.46
(0.91)

0.37
(0.69)

0.01
(0.69)

1.81 *
(0.76)

1.45 ~
(0.77)

Mean of Y
# children

70.4
161,537

12.8
161,537

16.8
161,537

Note: This table reports the results of OLS models where the dependent variable is, in turn, on-time graduation, continuation
in high school, and dropout, from the sample of non-twin singletons who were observed in Florida public schools until at least
ninth grade. Data are limited to the 1992 and 1993 birth cohorts, the only students old enough to be observed in the high school
outcomes data. On-time high school completion takes on a value of one hundred if a student obtains a high school diploma
within four years of entering, and is zero otherwise. 5+ years of high school takes on a value of one hundred if the student is
enrolled in high school more than four years after entry but has not yet dropped out, and is zero otherwise. High school dropout
takes on a value of one hundred if a student does not earn a high school diploma and is no longer enrolled in high school 5+
years after entry, and is zero otherwise. All columns include controls for child year and month of birth as well as maternal age
at birth, birth order, maternal education, marital status at birth, and maternal race-ethnicity. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

41

Table 5: The Relationship Between Elementary and Middle School Behavioral and Academic
Measures and On-Time High School Completion
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

A. OLS Estimates: KG Readiness, Behavioral and
Academic Measures, and On-Time HS Graduation
Absence rate

-13.81 **
(0.16)

Suspension rate
Math+Reading score
KG readiness
N

-10.44
(0.17)
-12.92 **
-8.28
(0.18)
(0.19)
12.08 **
7.75
(0.18)
(0.18)
2.99 ** 0.42
(0.17)
(0.16)
82,553

**
**
**
**

B. 100 × Standardized Coefficients on SES x Boy from
Primary Causal Models
Absence rate
-2.60
Suspension rate
Math+Reading score
KG readiness

-6.10
0.70
3.00

-2.60
-6.10
0.70
3.00

C. Implied Contribution of Cognitive/Behavioral
Gender Gaps in SES to HS Graduation Gender Gaps

One SES s
Black-White
Hispanic-White

Math+
Absence Suspension Reading
score
rate
rate
0.43
0.79
0.09
0.44
0.82
0.09
0.16
0.30
0.03

KG
readiness
0.02
0.02
0.01

All
1.32
1.37
0.49

Note: Panel A of this table reports the results from regression of on-time high school graduation on absence rates, suspension
rates, averaged reading and math scores, and kindergarten readiness, respectively, each standardized with mean zero and unit
variance. All regressions also include controls for gender, race, ethnicity, interactions between racial-ethnic categories and gender,
marital status at birth, maternal education, maternal age at birth, child year/month of birth and number of births. Panel B
reports the coeﬃcients on the interaction term Boy ⇥ SES in a standardized form based on the models estimated in Table 3 and
Appendix Table A4. Due to data limitations necessitating the use of grades five to eight in Panel A, we re-estimate our models
from Table 3 using only grades five through eight for the purpose of this exercise. Panel C reports the implied contribution of
the estimated SES gradient in the gender gap on the gender gap in high school graduation, by multiplying the coeﬃcients from
panels A and B, and scaling the result by the standard deviation in SES, black/white SES gap, and Hispanic/white SES gap.

42

43

-3.18
(9.67)
1.76
(7.36)
1.19
(10.01)
12.87 ~
(7.27)

Boy×
Married

Boy×
HS graduate

Boy×
College graduate
Boy×
Non-medicaid birth

3,325
301,709

-9.64
(8.48)

-10.21
(8.47)

0.42
(0.43)

-0.45
(0.32)

5.43
301,709

0.35
(0.44)

-0.50
(0.39)

0.91 ** 0.67
(0.19)
(0.49)

-0.09
(0.54)
-0.28
(0.40)

0.01
(0.40)

0.42
(0.50)

0.72
(0.47)

0.37
(0.44)

-0.61
(0.38)

0.95 **
(0.20)

-0.08
(0.10)

-0.30
(0.83)

0.09
(0.60)

-0.06
(0.34)

24.86
301,709

-0.25
(0.84)

-0.00
(0.72)

0.00
(0.90)

0.26
(1.00)
0.65
(0.71)

0.30
(0.71)

-0.89
(0.93)

-0.25
(0.87)

-0.30
(0.84)

0.04
(0.70)

-0.05
(0.35)

-0.03
(0.19)

C. Maternal Health
Problems (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

0.20
(0.16)

0.10
(0.65)

0.25
(0.54)

85.02
301,709

0.21
(0.65)

0.63
(0.64)

0.20
(0.65)

0.61
(0.62)

-0.43 ~ -1.41 ~ -0.51 ~
(0.24)
(0.85)
(0.27)

0.20
(0.78)
-0.10
(0.58)

0.55
(0.68)

0.81
(0.87)

0.29
(0.84)

D. Prenatal Care
Adequacy (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Note: This table reports estimates from OLS models that include sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variables are birthweight in grams, abnormal conditions at birth,
maternal health problems, or adequacy of prenatal care. Infant birthweight is measured in grams. Abnormal conditions are coded as equal to one hundred if any of the following
conditions are observed (and zero otherwise): anemia; birth injury; fetal alcohol syndrome; hyaline membrane disease; meconium aspiration syndrome; assisted ventilation <30
minutes; assisted ventilation>30 minutes; seizure; or other specified abnormal conditions. Mother health issues during pregnancy is equal to one hundred if the mother suﬀered
from any of a large set of chronic or pregnancy-related disorders (anemia; cardiac disease; acute or chronic lung disease; diabetes; genital herpes, hydramnios/oligohydramnios;
hemoglobinopathy; chronic hypertension; pregnancy associated hypertension; eclampsia; incompetent cervix; previous infant 4000+ grams; previous preterm or small for
gestational age infant; renal disease; RH sensitization; uterine bleeding; other specified health problem). Prenatal care adequacy is defined according to the Kessner Adequacy
of Prenatal Care Utilization index (APCU), which is equal to one hundred if the mother received standard prenatal care services during pregnancy (and zero otherwise). All
columns include controls for child year and month of birth, maternal race-ethnicity, maternal age at birth and birth order within family. Columns 1 and 2 further control for
maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and family structure/marital status at birth. Columns 3 control for the main eﬀect of our SES index, which is constructed as
the first component of a principal components analysis of years of maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father present,
father absent) at birth. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels, respectively.

Mean of Y
# children

-11.47
(8.37)

Boy×Hispanic

-2.27
(7.28)

-5.54
(6.20)

Boy×Black
-1.79
(7.49)

124.31 ** 116.32 ** 123.55 **
(3.34)
(9.35)
(3.49)

1.80
(1.92)

Boy

Boy×
SES index

4.16
(9.06)

Boy×
Father present

A. Infant Birth Weight (g)
(1)
(2)
(3)

B. Abnormal
Conditions at Birth (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Table 6: Testing for a Family Disadvantage Eﬀect on the Gender Gap in Neonatal and Maternal Health

Table 7: Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Physical and Cognitive/Behavioral
Disabilities

A. Cognitive/Behavioral
Disability (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

B. Physical Disability (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Boy×
Father present

-0.42
(0.75)

0.04
(0.57)

Boy×
Married

-1.02
(0.79)

0.21
(0.63)

Boy×
HS graduate

-2.32 **
(0.63)

0.05
(0.50)

Boy×
College graduate

-3.41 **
(0.77)

0.40
(0.75)

Boy×
Non-medicaid birth

-1.45 *
(0.56)

0.01
(0.52)

Boy×
SES index

0.11
(0.14)

-1.08 **
(0.15)

Boy

6.59 ** 10.61 ** 7.04 **
(0.25)
(0.78)
(0.27)

6.42 ** 6.12 ** 6.38 **
(0.28)
(0.62)
(0.28)

Boy×Black

4.01 ** 2.18 ** 2.01 **
(0.50)
(0.59)
(0.58)

-1.58 ** -1.39 ** -1.37 **
(0.41)
(0.49)
(0.48)

Boy×Hispanic

2.16 ** 1.33 ~ 1.44 *
(0.69)
(0.70)
(0.70)

-2.29 ** -2.21 ** -2.22 **
(0.55)
(0.56)
(0.56)

13.40

10.84

Mean of Y
# children

301,709

Note: This table reports estimates from OLS models that include sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variables are the
incidence of cognitive/behavioral disabilities and physical disabilities. Cognitive/behavioral disability takes on a value of one
hundred if the child has one of the following conditions (and is zero otherwise): language impaired; intellectual disability –
subdivided in the early years of the data into educable mentally handicapped, trainable mentally handicapped, and profoundly
mentally handicapped; developmental delay; specific learning disability; emotionally handicapped; severely emotionally disturbed; or autism spectrum disorders. Physical disability takes on a value of one hundred if the child has one of the following
conditions (and is zero otherwise): orthopedically impaired; speech impaired; deaf or hard of hearing; visually impaired; hospital/homebound; dual-sensory impaired; traumatic brain injury; or established conditions. All columns include controls for child
year and month of birth, maternal race-ethnicity, maternal age at birth and birth order within family. Columns 1 and 2 further
control for maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and family structure/marital status at birth. Column 3 controls
for the main eﬀect of our SES index, which is constructed as the first component of a principal components analysis of years of
maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father present, father absent)
at birth. Standard errors are clustered at the family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at
the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

44

Table 8a: Determinants of the Gender Gap in Behavioral Outcomes: Neighborhood Income, School
Quality and Economic Mobility
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

A. Absence Rate (%)
Boy×
SES index

-0.074 ** -0.070 ** -0.075 ** -0.056 ** -0.056 **
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.012)

Boy×Income in
10000 USD

-0.016
(0.011)

Boy×
Mobility

-0.104
(0.080)

Boy×
School Quality

-0.001
(0.012)

-0.013
(0.011)

-0.140 ~
(0.081)

-0.147 ~
(0.081)

-0.005 ** -0.005 ** -0.007 **
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)

Boy

0.203 ** 0.238 ** 0.315 ** 0.209 ** 0.520 ** 0.494 ** 0.604 **
(0.018)
(0.020)
(0.057)
(0.030)
(0.061)
(0.072)
(0.072)

Boy×Black

0.307 ** 0.166 ** 0.153 ** 0.166 ** 0.126 ** 0.125 ** 0.197 **
(0.036)
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.044)
(0.040)

Boy×Hispanic

0.123 ** 0.073
(0.045)
(0.046)

0.068
(0.046)

Mean of Y
# children

0.071
(0.046)
4.83
280,916

0.071
(0.046)

0.068
(0.046)

0.096 *
(0.045)

B. Suspension Rate (%)
Boy×
SES index

-2.15 **
(0.08)

-1.98 **
(0.08)

-2.15 **
(0.08)

-1.79 **
(0.08)

-0.62 **
(0.08)

Boy×Income in
10000 USD

-0.32 **
(0.08)

-0.70 **
(0.08)

-1.03 ~
(0.59)

-1.25 *
(0.60)

-0.10 **
(0.01)

-0.10 **
(0.01)

-0.14 **
(0.01)

-0.09
(0.58)

Boy×
Mobility
Boy×
School Quality

-1.74 **
(0.08)

Boy

6.91 **
(0.11)

7.90 **
(0.13)

10.88 **
(0.40)

7.88 **
(0.21)

13.48 **
(0.42)

14.33 **
(0.50)

17.74 **
(0.49)

Boy×Black

6.44 **
(0.28)

2.34 **
(0.32)

1.86 **
(0.33)

2.34 **
(0.32)

1.56 **
(0.32)

1.38 **
(0.33)

3.59 **
(0.31)

Boy×Hispanic

0.09
(0.32)

-1.35 **
(0.32)

-1.54 **
(0.32)

-1.35 **
(0.32)
12.21
280,916

-1.39 **
(0.32)

-1.51 **
(0.32)

-0.65 *
(0.31)

Mean of Y
# children
Note: See note to Table 8b.

45

Table 8b: Determinants of the Gender Gap in Academic Outcomes: Neighborhood Income, School
Quality and Economic Mobility
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Math+Reading Scores (SD)
Boy×
SES index

0.007 ** 0.005 *
(0.002)
(0.002)

Boy×Income in
10000 USD

0.007 ** 0.004
(0.002)
(0.002)

0.005 ~
(0.003)

Boy×
Mobility

0.031 ~
(0.017)

Boy×
School Quality

0.003
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)

0.004
(0.003)

0.039 *
(0.018)

0.039 *
(0.018)

0.001 ** 0.001 ** 0.001 **
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)

Boy

-0.028 ** -0.031 ** -0.055 ** -0.023 ** -0.076 ** -0.078 ** -0.085 **
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.014)
(0.006)
(0.013)
(0.016)
(0.016)

Boy×Black

-0.110 ** -0.097 ** -0.094 ** -0.098 ** -0.091 ** -0.089 ** -0.093 **
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.008)

Boy×Hispanic

-0.019 ~
(0.011)

-0.014
(0.011)

-0.013
(0.011)

Mean of Y
# children

-0.014
(0.011)
0.050
280,908

-0.014
(0.011)

-0.013
(0.011)

-0.014
(0.011)

Note: These tables presents results from OLS models that include sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variables are the
absence rate, suspension rate, or combined standardized FCAT math and reading test scores, from grades three through eight.
All columns include controls for child year and month of birth, maternal race-ethnicity, maternal age at birth, and birth order
within family, the SES index, income of the zip code of residence at the time of birth, the Chetty-Hendren mobility measure,
and the school quality measure. Column 2 additionally includes the interaction of boy and the SES index. Column 3 further
includes the interaction of boy and income of the zip code of residence at the time of birth. Column 4 includes the interaction of
boy and the Chetty-Hendren mobility measure. Column 5 includes the interaction of boy and school quality. Column 6 includes
the interactions of all four measures with boy simultaneously. Column 7 replicates column 6 but excludes interaction between
boy and SES index. The sample excludes families for whom zip code or school quality are not known. Standard errors are
clustered at the family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels,
respectively.

46

Appendix Tables
Table A1: Descriptive Statistics: Behavioral and Academic Outcomes in Grades 3 - 8

All
(1)

White NonHispanic
(2)

Black NonHispanic
(3)

Hispanic
(4)

A. Means
83.05
(37.52)
55,419

87.18
(33.43)
30,329

77.26
(41.92)
18,787

80.47
(39.65)
6,303

Absence
rate (%)

4.89
(5.30)
1,099,317

4.68
(4.96)
654,896

5.28
(5.99)
323,400

4.93
(5.04)
121,021

Suspension
rate (%)

12.37
(32.92)
1,099,317

7.30
(26.01)
654,896

23.86
(42.62)
323,400

9.11
(28.78)
121,021

Math+Reading
score (SD)

0.05
(0.92)
1,274,816

0.32
(0.86)
758,127

-0.49
(0.83)
374,255

-0.01
(0.86)
142,434

Kindergarten
ready (%)

B. Boy-Girl Differences
-6.90
(0.32)
55,419

-5.83
(0.38)
30,329

-8.42
(0.61)
18,787

-8.24
(0.99)
6,303

Absence
rate (%)

0.26
(0.01)
1,099,317

0.14
(0.01)
654,896

0.53
(0.02)
323,400

0.27
(0.03)
121,021

Suspension
rate (%)

8.60
(0.06)
1,099,317

6.97
(0.06)
654,896

13.14
(0.15)
323,400

7.38
(0.16)
121,021

Math+Reading
score (SD)

-0.06
(0.00)
1,274,816

-0.04
(0.00)
758,127

-0.14
(0.00)
374,255

-0.06
(0.00)
142,434

Kindergarten
ready (%)

Note: This table reports mean absence rates (multiplied by 100), ever suspended rates (multiplied by 100), and standardized
Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT) math and reading scores, by race-ethnicity category, from the pooled sample
of non-twin siblings, spanning grades three through eight, with each child contributing up to one observation per grade observed
in each year. Absence and suspension rates as well as test scores are for birth cohorts 1994-2002. It additionally reports
kindergarten readiness rates (multiplied by 100), computed from the pooled sample of non-twin siblings born in cohorts 1994 to
1996 and 2000 to 2002. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Numbers of observations are recorded beneath each
standard deviation.

47

Table A2: High School Completion Rates (1992 and 1993 Birth Cohorts)

All
(1)

White NonHispanic
(2)

Black NonHispanic
(3)

Hispanic
(4)

A. Means (%)
On-time graduate

70.42

72.70

64.63

68.00

5+ years

12.75

10.39

19.15

13.78

Dropout

16.83

16.91

16.22

18.22

B. Boy-Girl Differences
On-time graduate

-7.43
(0.23)

-5.69
(0.27)

-12.74
(0.48)

-8.04
(0.90)

5+ years

4.40
(0.17)

3.78
(0.18)

6.83
(0.39)

4.20
(0.67)

Dropout

3.02
(0.19)

1.91
(0.22)

5.91
(0.37)

3.85
(0.75)

161,537

111,454

39,517

10,566

# students

Note: This table reports on-time high graduation rates, continuation in high school rates, and high school dropout rates, by
race-ethnicity category, from the sample of non-twin singletons who were observed in Florida public schools until at least ninth
grade. All rates and boy-girl diﬀerences are multiplied by 100. On-time high school completion indicates a high school diploma
within four years of entering. 5+ years of high school indicates that student is enrolled in high school more than four years after
entry but had not yet dropped out. High school dropout indicates that an individual does not earn a high school diploma and is
no longer enrolled in high school 5+ years after entry. Standard deviations for male-female contrasts are reported in parentheses
in panel B.

48

49
5.11
792,729

4.89
301,128

-2.30 **
(0.06)

12.82
792,729

-0.48 ** -1.55 ** 0.35
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.23)

12.37
301,128

-1.12 **
(0.23)

4.49 ** 1.36 ** 6.05 ** 1.75 **
(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.21)
(0.25)

8.07 ** 8.66 ** 7.07 ** 8.13 **
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.09)
(0.10)

-1.96 **
(0.03)

B. Suspension Rate (%)
Singletons OLS
Siblings OLS

0.008 **
(0.002)

0.07
785,785

0.05
298,055

-0.016 ** -0.016 ** -0.017 ~ -0.013
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.009)

-0.094 ** -0.089 ** -0.094 ** -0.082 **
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.007)

-0.058 ** -0.058 ** -0.046 ** -0.048 **
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.004)

0.004 **
(0.001)

C. Math and Reading Scores (SD)
Singletons OLS
Siblings OLS

Note: This table reports the results of OLS models where the dependent variables are the absence rate, the suspension rate, and combined standardized FCAT math and reading
test scores, from grades three through eight. All columns include controls for child year and month of birth, maternal race-ethnicity, maternal age at birth, birth order, and the
main eﬀect of our SES index. The SES measure is constructed as the first component of a principal components analysis of years of maternal education, non-Medicaid birth
indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father present, father absent) at birth. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the student level (with multiple
observations per student) for the singleton analysis and at the family level for the sibling analysis. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Mean of Y
# children

0.07 * 0.03
(0.03)
(0.03)

Boy×Hispanic
0.12 * 0.06
(0.05)
(0.05)

0.26 ** 0.14 ** 0.36 ** 0.19 **
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.05)

Boy×Black

-0.10 **
(0.01)

0.19 ** 0.21 ** 0.17 ** 0.21 **
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)

-0.08 **
(0.01)

Boy

Boy×
SES index

A. Absence Rate (%)
Singletons OLS
Siblings OLS

Table A3: Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Academic and Behavioral Outcomes: Additional Specifications

Table A4: Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Kindergarten Readiness
A. Singletons OLS
(1)
(2)
Boy×
SES index

B. Siblings OLS
(1)
(2)

C. Mother FE
(1)
(2)

1.08 **
(0.08)

0.87 **
(0.22)

Boy

-5.80 ** -6.08 **
(0.12)
(0.13)

-5.96 ** -6.14 **
(0.37)
(0.39)

-5.88 ** -6.09 **
(0.70)
(0.72)

Boy×Black

-2.06 ** -0.34
(0.28)
(0.31)

-2.46 ** -0.97
(0.70)
(0.82)

-2.75 * -1.10
(1.31)
(1.53)

Boy×Hispanic -0.34
(0.38)
Mean of Y
# children

0.23
(0.38)

-2.26 *
(1.02)

85.82
396,074

-1.72 ~
(1.04)

83.05
55,419

0.96 *
(0.41)

-1.88
(1.93)

-1.25
(1.95)
83.05
55,419

Note: This table reports the results of OLS models with and without sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variable is the
kindergarten readiness, which takes on a value of one hundred if the child is determined to be ready for kindergarten, and
zero otherwise. All columns include controls for child year and month of birth, maternal race-ethnicity, maternal age at birth,
birth order within family or sibling composition, and the main eﬀect of our SES index. The SES measure is constructed as the
first component of a principal components analysis of years of maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital
status/family structure (married, father present, father absent) at birth. In panel A, we use robust standard errors. In panels
B and C, standard errors are clustered at the family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at
the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

50

Table A5: The Sibling Gender Gap in Behavioral Outcomes in Complex Families:
Distinct Fathers with Same or Diﬀerent Marital Status at Birth
A. Absence Rate (%)
All
Same
Different
Marital
Marital
Marital
Statuses
Status
Status
(1)
(2)
(3)

B. Suspension Rate (%)
All
Same
Different
Marital
Marital
Marital
Statuses
Status
Status
(1)
(2)
(3)

Boy×
Father present

-0.16 *
(0.07)

-0.39 ** -0.04
(0.12)
(0.08)

-0.64
(0.47)

Boy×
Married

-0.21 *
(0.09)

-0.35 *
(0.15)

-0.13
(0.11)

-2.32 ** -4.52 ** -1.12
(0.59)
(1.07)
(0.73)

Boy×
HS graduate

-0.01
(0.06)

-0.03
(0.11)

0.01
(0.08)

-1.98 ** -1.09
(0.45)
(0.75)

-0.06
Boy×
College graduate (0.13)

-0.18
(0.18)

0.20
(0.21)

-5.25 ** -4.03 ** -4.81 **
(0.91)
(1.19)
(1.61)

-0.13
(0.12)

-1.77 *
(0.87)

-0.16
(0.57)

-2.40 **
(0.56)

Boy×Nonmedicaid birth

-0.17 *
(0.07)

-0.17 ~
(0.10)

-3.05 ** -2.85 ** -2.80 **
(0.52)
(0.85)
(0.68)

Boy

0.57 ** 0.70 ** 0.49 **
(0.08)
(0.13)
(0.10)

14.84 ** 14.69 ** 14.94 **
(0.51)
(0.90)
(0.64)

Boy×Black

0.13 ~ 0.08
(0.07)
(0.12)

0.12
(0.09)

1.21 ** 1.21
(0.47)
(0.85)

0.96 ~
(0.57)

Boy×Hispanic

0.02
(0.10)

0.05
(0.16)

0.01
(0.13)

-2.16 ** -1.58
(0.66)
(1.06)

-2.54 **
(0.84)

Mean of Y
# Families

5.83
49,467

5.88
21,331

5.81
28,136

21.05
49,467

20.86
28,136

21.34
21,331

Note: This table presents the results of OLS models with sibling fixed eﬀects in which the sample includes only siblings born
to distinct fathers with the same mother. Births for which no paternity is claimed are coded as having a distinct father. The
sample in column 1 includes siblings with concordant and discordant marital statuses at birth. The sample in column 2 uses
siblings with concordant marital statuses at birth, while column 3 uses siblings with discordant marital statuses. In all cases,
marital status indicates the mother’s marital status at the time of birth. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the
family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

51

Table A6: Descriptive Statistics: Neonatal and Medium-Term Health Outcomes

All
(1)

White Non- Black NonHispanic
Hispanic
(2)
(3)

Hispanic
(4)

A. Means
Infant birth weight (g)

3325

3414

3149

3319

Apgar 5 score

8.97

8.98

8.93

8.97

Adequate prenatal care (%)

85.02

90.36

73.67

86.62

Maternal health issues (%)

24.86

24.12

27.81

21.09

Abnormal conditions (%)

5.43

5.63

5.23

4.85

Congenital anomalies (%)

0.67

0.67

0.74

0.54

Complications of delivery (%)

27.51

27.50

27.98

26.35

Weeks of gestation

38.77

38.91

38.49

38.76

Cognitive/Behavioral disability (%)

13.40

11.05

17.71

14.48

Physical disability (%)

10.84

13.36

7.25

7.01

B. Boy-Girl Differences
Infant birth weight (g)

122
(2)

119
(2)

123
(4)

106
(6)

Apgar 5 score

-0.01
(0.00)

-0.01
(0.00)

-0.01
(0.00)

-0.01
(0.01)

Adequate prenatal care (%)

-0.02
(0.13)

-0.30
(0.14)

-0.05
(0.30)

-0.37
(0.37)

Maternal health issues (%)

-0.02
(0.16)

-0.04
(0.20)

0.28
(0.30)

-0.21
(0.44)

Abnormal conditions (%)

0.78
(0.08)

0.94
(0.11)

0.37
(0.15)

0.98
(0.23)

Congenital anomalies (%)

0.12
(0.03)

0.15
(0.04)

0.02
(0.06)

0.23
(0.08)

Complications of delivery (%)

0.90
(0.16)

0.66
(0.21)

1.07
(0.30)

1.83
(0.48)

Weeks of gestation

-0.03
(0.01)

-0.07
(0.01)

0.04
(0.02)

-0.05
(0.02)

Cognitive/Behavioral disability (%)

8.03
(0.12)

6.94
(0.15)

10.32
(0.25)

8.46
(0.38)

Physical disability (%)

5.65
(0.11)

6.28
(0.16)

4.87
(0.17)

3.75
(0.27)

52

Note: This table presents summary statistics for children’s at-birth and medium-run health outcomes. Prenatal care adequacy
is defined according to the Kessner Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization index (APCU), which is equal to one hundred if the
mother received standard prenatal care services during pregnancy (and zero otherwise). Maternal health issues during pregnancy
is equal to one hundred if the mother suﬀered from any of a large set of chronic or pregnancy-related disorders during pregnancy or delivery: anemia; cardiac disease; acute or chronic lung disease; diabetes; genital herpes, hydramnios/oligohydramnios;
hemoglobinopathy; chronic hypertension; pregnancy associated hypertension; eclampsia; incompetent cervix; previous infant
4000+ grams; previous preterm or small for gestational age infant; renal disease; RH sensitization; uterine bleeding; other specified health problem. Abnormal conditions are coded as equal to one hundred if any of the following conditions are observed (and
zero otherwise): anemia; birth injury; fetal alcohol syndrome; hyaline membrane disease; meconium aspiration syndrome; assisted
ventilation <30 minutes; assisted ventilation>30 minutes; seizure; or other specified abnormal conditions. Congenital anomalies
are coded as equal to one hundred if any of the following conditions are observed: anencephalus; spina bifida/meninocele; hydrocephalus; microcephalus; other central nervous system anomalies; heart malformations; other circulatory/respiratory anomalies;
rectal atresia/stenosis; trachea esophageal fistula/esophageal atresia; omphalocele/gastroschisis; other gastrointestinal anomalies; malformed genitalia; renal agenisis; other urogenital anomalies; cleft lip/palate; polydactyly/syndactyly/adactyly; club foot;
diaphragmatic hernia; other musculoskeletal/integumental anomalies; Downs Syndrome; other chromosomal anomalies; or other
specified congenital anomalies. Complications of labor and delivery are coded as equal to one hundred if any of the following conditions are observed: febrile; moderate/heavy meconium; premature rupture of membranes; abruptio placenta; placenta previa;
other excessive bleeding; seizures during labor; precipitous labor; prolonged labor; dysfunctional labor; breech/malpresentation;
cephalopelvic disproportion; cord prolapse; anesthetic complications; fetal distress; or other specified complication. Cognitive
and behavioral disabilities include language impaired; intellectual disability (subdivided in the early years of the data into
educable mentally handicapped, trainable mentally handicapped, and profoundly mentally handicapped); developmental delay;
specific learning disability; emotionally handicapped; severely emotionally disturbed; and autism spectrum disorders. Physical
disabilities include orthopedically impaired; speech impaired; deaf or hard of hearing; visually impaired; hospital/homebound;
dual-sensory impaired; traumatic brain injury; and established conditions identified by age two. Numbers of observations for
infant birthweight and disabilities: 301,709 for all; 178,517 for white non-Hispanic; 88,894 for black non-Hispanic and 34,298 for
Hispanic mother. Sample sizes vary slightly (by less that 0.1%) for the other birth outcomes.

53

For Online Publication: Online Appendix
Figure O1: Boy-Girl Gaps in Infant birthweight, Abnormal Conditions at Birth, Maternal Health
Problems, and Prenatal Care Adequacy, by SES
B. Abnormal Conditions at Birth

4
2

slope: -0.072

Estimate
0

slope: 1.967

-6

60

-4

80

-2

100

Estimate
120
140

160

6

180

A. Infant Birthweight

Low

High

Low

High

SES index

SES index

C. Maternal Health Issues

D. Prenatal Care Adequacy

10

slope: 0.196

6
4

Estimate
0
2

Estimate
0
-2

4

2

6

8

in Pregnancy

-8

-10

-6

-8

-4

-6

-2

-4

slope: -0.014

Low

High
SES index

Low

High
SES index

Note: This figure plots the regression-adjusted male-female gap against the mean value of the SES index, for 95 bins of the
SES index. Graphs suppress bins of less than 360 children for expositional clarity. Lines come from OLS regressions fitted
through all bins and weighted by bin size. The SES measure is constructed as the first component of a principal components
analysis of years of maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father
present, father absent) at birth. The sample is non-twin siblings born 1994-2002. Infant birthweight is in grams. Abnormal
conditions are coded as equal to one hundred if any of the following conditions are observed: anemia; birth injury; fetal alcohol
syndrome; hyaline membrane disease; meconium aspiration syndrome; assisted ventilation <30 minutes; assisted ventilation>30
minutes; seizure; or other specified abnormal conditions. Maternal health issues during pregnancy is equal to one hundred if the
mother suﬀered from any of a large set of chronic or pregnancy-related disorders (anemia; cardiac disease; acute or chronic lung
disease; diabetes; genital herpes, hydramnios/oligohydramnios; hemoglobinopathy; chronic hypertension; pregnancy-associated
hypertension; eclampsia; incompetent cervix; previous infant 4000+ grams; previous preterm or small for gestational age infant;
renal disease; RH sensitization; uterine bleeding; other specified health problem). Prenatal care adequacy is defined according
to the Kessner Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization index (APCU), which is equal to one hundred if the mother received
standard prenatal care services during pregnancy (and zero otherwise).

54

Table O1: Construction of Principal Components SES Index for Family Disadvantage

Mother's education
Married
Father present
Father absent
Non-medicaid birth
Eigenvalue

Mean
SD

First
component
0.41
0.58
-0.40
-0.33
0.48
2.46

Second
component
0.14
-0.10
0.70
-0.69
0.10
1.22

Summary statistics for the first component
0.00
(1.57)

Mean White
SD White

0.42
(1.43)

Mean Black
SD Black

-1.21
(1.37)

Mean Hispanic
SD Hispanics

-0.17
(1.58)

Note: This table reports the results of a principal components analysis of mother’s education (in years), non-Medicaid birth
indicator and marital status/family structure at birth (married, unmarried-father present, unmarried-father absent). The
eigenvectors associated with the first and second components are reported, as well as their associated eigenvalues. The bottom
panel reports summary statistics of the SES index, defined as the first component of the principal components analysis, for the
overall sample of siblings as well as the white, black and Hispanic subsamples.

55

56
38.77
301,709

0.03
(0.03)

0.00
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

8.97
301,059

0.00
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.02 ** -0.02
(0.00)
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

0.02 ~
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.00
(0.01)

0.00
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.02 **
(0.00)

-0.00
(0.00)

B. Five Minute Apgar Score
(1)
(2)
(3)

0.23
(0.17)

-0.09
(0.13)

0.15 *
(0.07)

0.67
301,709

0.21
(0.17)

-0.10
(0.15)

0.21
(0.19)

-0.10
(0.15)

0.11
(0.20)

-0.17
(0.15)

0.08
(0.20)

0.15
(0.18)

0.22
(0.17)

-0.12
(0.15)

0.16 *
(0.07)

-0.02
(0.04)

C. Congenital Anomalies (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

1.44
(0.92)

0.11
(0.64)

27.51
301,709

1.63 ~
(0.94)

0.58
(0.77)

1.19 ** 0.23
(0.37)
(0.96)

0.32
(0.77)

0.34
(1.09)

0.53
(0.76)

0.46
(0.99)

-0.01
(0.92)

1.65 ~
(0.93)

0.65
(0.75)

1.06 **
(0.39)

0.29
(0.21)

D. Labor and Delivery
Complications (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Note: This table reports the results of OLS models with sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variables are gestation weeks, five minute Apgar score, congenital anomalies, and
labor and delivery complications. Congenital anomalies are coded as equal to one hundred if any of the following conditions are observed: anencephalus; spina bifida/meninocele;
hydrocephalus; microcephalus; other central nervous system anomalies; heart malformations; other circulatory/respiratory anomalies; rectal atresia/stenosis; trachea esophageal
fistula/esophageal atresia; omphalocele/gastroschisis; other gastrointestinal anomalies; malformed genitalia; renal agenisis; other urogenital anomalies; cleft lip/palate; polydactyly/syndactyly/adactyly; club foot; diaphragmatic hernia; other musculoskeletal/integumental anomalies; Downs Syndrome; other chromosomal anomalies; or other specified
congenital anomalies. Complications of labor and delivery are coded as equal to one hundred if any of the following conditions are observed: febrile; moderate/heavy meconium;
premature rupture of membranes; abruptio placenta; placenta previa; other excessive bleeding; seizures during labor; precipitous labor; prolonged labor; dysfunctional labor;
breech/malpresentation; cephalopelvic disproportion; cord prolapse; anesthetic complications; fetal distress; or other specified complication. The SES measure is constructed as
the first component of a principal components analysis of years of maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father present,
father absent) at birth. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels, respectively.

Mean of Y
# children

0.03
(0.03)

Boy×Hispanic
0.03
(0.03)

0.08 ** 0.08 *
(0.03)
(0.03)

Boy×Black
0.08 **
(0.03)

-0.06 **
(0.01)

0.02
(0.03)

Boy×Nonmedicaid birth

-0.06 ** -0.06
(0.01)
(0.04)

0.03
(0.04)

Boy×
College graduate

Boy

0.01
(0.03)

Boy×
HS graduate

0.00
(0.01)

-0.04
(0.04)

Boy×
Married

Boy×
SES index

-0.01
(0.04)

Boy×
Father present

A. Gestation Weeks
(1)
(2)
(3)

Table O2: Testing for a Household Disadvantage Gender Gap in Neonatal Health: Additional Outcomes

Table O3: Testing for a Household Disadvantage Gender Gap in Neonatal Health: Log Birthweight
and Composite Index

(1)

A. Log Birth Weight
(2)
(3)

(1)

B. Birth Index (PCA)
(2)
(3)

Boy×
Father present

0.00
(0.00)

-0.02
(0.03)

Boy×
Married

-0.00
(0.00)

-0.03
(0.03)

Boy×
HS graduate

0.00
(0.00)

0.02
(0.02)

Boy×
College graduate

0.00
(0.00)

0.03
(0.03)

Boy×Nonmedicaid birth

0.00
(0.00)

0.01
(0.02)

Boy×
SES index

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.01)

Boy

0.04 ** 0.03 ** 0.04 **
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)

0.02 *
(0.01)

0.02
(0.03)

0.02 *
(0.01)

Boy×Black

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.05 *
(0.02)

0.05 *
(0.02)

0.05 *
(0.02)

Boy×Hispanic

-0.00
(0.00)

-0.00
(0.00)

-0.00
(0.00)

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.02)

Mean of Y
# children

8.09
301,709

-0.02
300,984

Note: This table reports the results of OLS models with sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variable is the log birthweight,
or a birth index coming from a principal component analysis of all birth outcomes in Table 6 and Appendix Table O2 as well as
one minute Apgar scores. The SES measure is constructed as the first component of a principal components analysis of years of
maternal education, non-Medicaid birth indicator and marital status/family structure (married, father present, father absent)
at birth. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically
significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

57

Table O4: Testing for a Household Disadvantage Gender Gap in Neonatal Health: OLS Singletons
and Siblings Sample

A. Infant Birth Weight (g)
(1)
(2)
(3)

B. Abnormal
Conditions at Birth (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

C. Maternal Health
Problems (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

D. Prenatal Care
Adequacy (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Panel I: Singletons Sample
Boy×
Father present

3.15
(4.11)

0.08
(0.17)

-0.32
(0.33)

0.02
(0.30)

Boy×
Married

2.79
(4.32)

0.30
(0.18)

0.02
(0.34)

0.16
(0.30)

Boy×
HS graduate

2.53
(3.37)

0.25 ~
(0.15)

0.18
(0.27)

0.10
(0.24)

Boy×College
graduate

4.92
(4.62)

-0.02
(0.20)

0.36
(0.38)

-0.15
(0.28)

Boy×Nonmedicaid birth

7.54 *
(3.14)

-0.12
(0.14)

-0.06
(0.25)

0.19
(0.19)

Boy×
SES index

2.72 **
(0.85)

0.04
(0.04)

0.10
(0.07)

0.06
(0.05)

Boy

120.58 ** 110.56 ** 119.90 ** 0.96 ** 0.65 ** 0.94 ** 0.16
(1.49)
(4.18)
(1.53)
(0.07)
(0.18)
(0.07)
(0.12)

0.06
(0.33)

0.13
(0.12)

-0.32 ** -0.59 ~ -0.33 **
(0.08)
(0.31)
(0.09)

Boy×Black

-0.58
(2.95)

0.06
(0.27)

0.15
(0.26)

0.00
(0.20)

0.13
(0.22)

0.09
(0.22)

0.08
(0.31)

0.10
(0.31)

-0.07
(0.23)

-0.02
(0.23)

-0.07
(0.23)

3.89
(3.37)

3.62
(3.29)

-0.59 ** -0.51 ** -0.52 ** -0.03
(0.12)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.24)

Boy×Hispanic -16.11 ** -14.31 ** -14.80 ** -0.30 ~ -0.28 ~ -0.27
(3.88)
(3.91)
(3.91)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.17)
3,320
796,701

Mean of Y
# children

0.02
(0.31)

5.842
796,701

26.33
796,701

86.50
796,701

Panel II: Siblings Sample
Boy×
Father present

2.87
(6.53)

0.55 *
(0.27)

-0.50
(0.52)

0.24
(0.51)

Boy×
Married

-4.76
(7.00)

0.21
(0.29)

-0.51
(0.56)

0.77
(0.52)

Boy×
HS graduate

2.78
(5.35)

0.13
(0.23)

0.22
(0.43)

-0.17
(0.41)

Boy×College
graduate

3.51
(7.32)

-0.07
(0.31)

0.44
(0.60)

-0.19
(0.46)

Boy×Nonmedicaid birth

16.94 **
(5.27)

-0.15
(0.23)

0.24
(0.42)

0.19
(0.34)

Boy×
SES index

2.79 *
(1.39)

-0.08
(0.06)

0.07
(0.11)

0.21 *
(0.09)

Boy

118.81 ** 108.30 ** 117.64 ** 0.94 ** 0.73 * 0.97 ** -0.01
(2.45)
(6.70)
(2.56)
(0.11)
(0.29)
(0.11)
(0.20)

0.07
(0.54)

-0.04
(0.21)

-0.47 ** -1.09 * -0.56 **
(0.14)
(0.51)
(0.15)

Boy×Black

4.76
(4.48)

-0.58 ** -0.65 ** -0.72 ** 0.25
(0.18)
(0.22)
(0.21)
(0.36)

0.26
(0.43)

0.39
(0.42)

0.45
(0.32)

0.88 * 0.80 *
(0.38)
(0.37)

0.01
(0.26)

-0.12
(0.49)

-0.14
(0.49)

-0.10
(0.38)

0.01
(0.38)

10.18 ~ 9.66 ~
(5.39)
(5.24)

Boy×Hispanic -13.06 * -10.35 ~ -11.10 ~
(6.03)
(6.12)
(6.12)
Mean of Y
# children

3,325
301,709

-0.05
(0.26)

-0.04
(0.26)

5.425
301,709

-0.19
(0.48)

24.86
301,709

0.03
(0.38)

85.02
301,709

Note: This table reports estimates from OLS models where the dependent variables are birthweight in grams, abnormal conditions
at birth, maternal health problems, or adequacy of prenatal care. See note to Table 6 for the definition of the dependent variables.
Panel I uses the full sample of singleton births matched to Florida educational outcomes, while panel II uses the sibling sample.
Standard errors are in parentheses, with robust standard errors utilized for the singleton analysis and standard errors clustered
at the family level utilized for the sibling analysis. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent levels, respectively.

58

Table O5: Main Estimates for Grade 3 through 8 Outcomes Augmented with Log Birthweight

A. Absence Rate (%)
Singletons
Siblings

B. Suspension Rate (%)
Singletons
Siblings

C. Math+Reading
Scores (SD)
Singletons
Siblings

I. Primary Estimates for SES and Gender Gap: Controlling for Child Birthweight
Boy×
SES index

-0.08 **
(0.01)

-0.08 **
(0.01)

-1.96 **
(0.03)

-2.15 **
(0.07)

0.003 ** 0.006 **
(0.001)
(0.002)

Boy

0.46
(0.43)

0.47
(0.72)

13.96 **
(2.04)

16.44 **
(4.63)

-0.209 ** 0.080
(0.075)
(0.148)

Boy×Black

0.14 **
(0.03)

0.17 **
(0.04)

1.31 **
(0.15)

2.19 **
(0.31)

-0.089 ** -0.099 **
(0.004)
(0.008)

Boy×Hispanic

0.03
(0.03)

0.08 ~
(0.04)

-1.56 **
(0.14)

-1.29 **
(0.30)

-0.014 *
(0.006)

-0.014
(0.010)

Boy×
ln(Birth-weight)

-0.03
(0.05)

-0.03
(0.09)

-0.66 **
(0.25)

-1.05 ~
(0.57)

0.017 ~
(0.009)

-0.015
(0.018)

ln(Birth-weight)

-0.39 **
(0.04)

0.15 *
(0.07)

1.16 **
(0.14)

3.03 **
(0.44)

0.284 ** 0.237 **
(0.006)
(0.015)

II. Comparison SES Coefficient from Models Excluding Birthweight
Boy×
SES index
Mother FE
N

-0.08 **
(0.01)
N
792,729

-0.08 **
(0.01)
Y
301,128

-1.96 **
(0.03)
N
792,729

-2.16 **
(0.07)
Y
301,128

0.004 ** 0.006 **
(0.001)
(0.002)
N
785,785

Y
298,055

Note: Panel I of this table presents results from OLS regressions on the sample of singleton births, grades three through eight,
and results from sibling fixed eﬀect models for the sample of siblings, grades three through eight. The dependent variables are
absence rates, suspension rates, and FCAT math and reading scores, as previously defined. All columns include controls for child
year and month of birth, maternal age at birth, birth order, and the main eﬀect of the SES index. The singleton specifications
additionally include main eﬀects for mother race-ethnicity. Panel II reports the coeﬃcient on the interaction term Boy ⇥ SES
from Table 3 and Appendix Table A3, from the corresponding singleton or sibling fixed eﬀects models. Standard errors are
clustered at the student level in the singleton specifications and the family level in the siblings specifications. Point estimates
marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

59

Table O6: Testing for Heterogeneous Eﬀects of Family Disadvantage on the Gender Gap in
Behavioral and Academic Outcomes among Race Groups
A. Absence
Rate (%)
(1)
(2)

B. Suspension
Rate (%)
(1)
(2)

C. Math+Reading
Scores (SD)
(1)
(2)

Boy×
SES×Black (A1)

-0.01
(0.02)

0.86*** **
(0.19)

-0.01*
(0.01)

Boy×
SES×Hispanic (A2)

0.01
(0.03)

0.72*** **
(0.20)

0.00
(0.01)

Boy×
SES index

-0.08 ** -0.08 **
(0.01)
(0.01)

-2.16 ** -2.48 **
(0.07)
(0.09)

0.01 ** 0.01 **
(0.00)
(0.00)

Boy×Black

0.17 ** 0.15 **
(0.04)
(0.04)

2.27 ** 2.89 **
(0.30)
(0.33)

-0.1 ** -0.11 **
(0.01)
(0.01)

Boy×Hispanic

0.08 ~ 0.08 *
(0.04)
(0.04)

-1.28 ** -1.34 **
(0.30)
(0.29)

-0.02
(0.01)

Boy

0.25 ** 0.25 **
(0.02)
(0.02)

7.99 ** 8.14 **
(0.12)
(0.13)

-0.03 ** -0.04 **
(0.00)
(0.00)

0.74
301,128

0.00
301,128

H0(A1=A2=0)
# children

-0.01
(0.01)

0.16
298,055

Note: This table presents results from OLS models with sibling fixed eﬀects in which the dependent variables are absence rates,
suspension rates, and FCAT math and reading scores, as previously defined. All columns include controls for child year and
month of birth, maternal age at birth, birth order within family, and the main eﬀect of the SES index. Standard errors are
clustered at the family level. P-values associated with the Wald tests of coeﬃcient equality are reported at the bottom of the
table. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

60

Table O7: Testing for Heterogeneous Eﬀects of Family Disadvantage on the Gender Gap in High
School Outcomes among Race Groups
A. On-Time HS
Grad (%)

B. 5+ Years
High School (%)

C. HS Dropout
(%)

Boy×
Black×Married (A1)

0.35
(1.30)

-0.42
(1.04)

0.06
(1.04)

Boy×
Hispanic×Married (A2)

-0.23
(2.21)

4.37
(1.71)

*

-4.14
(1.89)

Boy×
Black×HS graduate (B1)

-0.99
(1.38)

1.91
(1.14)

~

-0.91
(1.19)

Boy×
Hispanic×HS graduate (B2)

-0.91
(2.38)

0.17
(1.85)

0.74
(2.10)

Boy×
Black×College graduate (C1)

-0.14
(2.06)

1.64
(1.64)

-1.50
(1.61)

Boy×
Hispanic×College graduate (C2)

0.84
(3.02)

0.27
(2.27)

-1.11
(2.52)

Boy×Black

-4.04
(1.22)

0.64
(1.02)

3.41
(1.09)

**

Boy×Hispanic

-0.79
(2.13)

Boy

-9.80
(0.84)

H0(A1=A2=0)
H0(B1=B2=0)
H0(C1=C2=0)
H0(A=B=C=0)
# children

0.95
0.75
0.96
0.97

**

**

*

-3.11
(1.68)

~

3.90
(1.94)

*

6.36
(0.64)

**

3.44
(0.79)

**

0.03
0.24
0.60
0.09
161,537

0.08
0.64
0.62
0.22

Note: This table presents the results of OLS models for the set of singletons born in 1992-1993. On-time high school completion
takes on a value of one hundred if a student obtains a high school diploma within four years of entering, and is zero otherwise.
5+ years of high school takes on a value of one hundred if the student is enrolled in high school more than four years after entry
but has not yet dropped out, and is zero otherwise. High school dropout takes on a value of one hundred if a student does not
earn a high school diploma and is no longer enrolled in high school 5+ years after entry, and is zero otherwise. All columns
include main eﬀects for race-ethnicity of mother, child year and month of birth, maternal age at birth, birth order, maternal
education, and marital status at birth. P-values associated with the Wald tests of coeﬃcient equality are reported at the bottom
of the table. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the
1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

61

62

x

x
x
x
4.83
280,916

x

0.019
(0.048)
x
x
x

0.011
(0.049)

B. Suspension Rate (%)
(2)
(3)
(4)

x

x
x

x

-0.755 *
(0.329)

x
12.21
280,916

-1.485 ** -0.825 *
(0.290)
(0.326)

x
x
x

-0.792 *
(0.334)

2.359 ** 2.656 ** 2.666 ** 2.577 **
(0.292)
(0.337)
(0.343)
(0.362)

-2.127 ** -1.688 ** -1.809 ** -1.578 **
(0.071)
(0.078)
(0.076)
(0.079)

(1)

0.004
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

x

-0.013
(0.010)

x
x

x
0.05
280,908

x

x
x
x

-0.021 ~ -0.022 ~ -0.025 *
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.012)

-0.097 ** -0.101 ** -0.103 ** -0.106 **
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.010)

0.006 ** 0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)

C. Math+Reading Test Scores (SD)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Note: This table presents results from OLS regressions with sibling fixed eﬀects where the dependent variables are absence rates, suspension rates, and FCAT math and reading
scores, as previously defined. All columns include controls for child year and month of birth, maternal age at birth and birth order within family. All specifications include zip
code fixed eﬀects and school fixed eﬀects. Column 2 additionally includes boy x school fixed eﬀects, column 3 includes boy x zip code fixed eﬀects, and column 4 includes both
boy x school and boy x zip code fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the family level. Point estimates marked **, *, and ~ are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.

Zip & School FE
Boy×School FE
Boy×Zip FE
Mean of Y
# children

0.007
(0.047)

0.061
(0.042)

Boy×Hispanic

0.148 ** 0.112 *
(0.045)
(0.048)

0.155 ** 0.072
(0.039)
(0.045)

Boy×Black

(4)

-0.066 ** -0.055 ** -0.062 ** -0.054 **
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)

A. Absence Rate (%)
(2)
(3)

Boy×SES index

(1)

Table O8: Accounting Non-Parametrically for Neighborhood and School Eﬀects on the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Academic
Outcomes

