                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE IMPACT OF HEALTH INSURANCE ON PREVENTIVE CARE AND HEALTH BEHAVIORS:
             EVIDENCE FROM THE 2014 ACA MEDICAID EXPANSIONS

                                            Kosali Simon
                                            Aparna Soni
                                            John Cawley

                                         Working Paper 22265
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22265


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2016




  For helpful comments, we thank editor Ken Couch, four anonymous referees, Robert Kaestner,
  Christopher Robertson, Christopher Carpenter, Thomas DeLeire, Haizhen Lin, Daniel Sacks, and
  seminar participants at Northwestern University and Indiana University. Cawley thanks the
  Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for financial support through an Investigator Award in Health
  Policy Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
  research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22265.ack

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2016 by Kosali Simon, Aparna Soni, and John Cawley. All rights reserved. Short sections of
  text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
  credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care and Health Behaviors: Evidence from
the 2014 ACA Medicaid Expansions
Kosali Simon, Aparna Soni, and John Cawley
NBER Working Paper No. 22265
May 2016, Revised September 2016
JEL No. I12,I13,I28

                                          ABSTRACT

The U.S. population receives suboptimal levels of preventive care and has a high prevalence of
risky health behaviors. One goal of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was to increase preventive
care and improve health behaviors by expanding access to health insurance.

This paper estimates how the ACA-facilitated state-level expansions of Medicaid in 2014
affected these outcomes. Using data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, and a
difference-in-differences model that compares states that did and did not expand Medicaid, we
examine the impact of the expansions on preventive care (e.g. dental visits, immunizations,
mammograms, cancer screenings), risky health behaviors (e.g. smoking, heavy drinking, lack of
exercise, obesity), and self-assessed health.

We find that the expansions increased insurance coverage and access to care among the targeted
population of low-income childless adults. The expansions also increased use of certain forms of
preventive care but there is no evidence that they increased ex ante moral hazard (i.e., there is no
evidence that risky health behaviors increased in response to health insurance coverage). The
Medicaid expansions also modestly improved self-assessed health.

Kosali Simon                                      John Cawley
School of Public and Environmental Affairs        2312 MVR Hall
Indiana University                                Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Rm 443                                            and Department of Economics
1315 East Tenth Street                            Cornell University
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701                        Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER                                          and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu                              JHC38@cornell.edu

Aparna Soni
Business Economics and Public Policy
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
1309 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405
apsoni@indiana.edu
      1. Introduction

         In the United States and other developed countries, failure to utilize preventive care and

participation in risky health behaviors are major contributors to morbidity, health disparities,

medical care costs, and mortality (NCHS, 2015; US PSTF, 2014; US DHHS, 2011; US DHHS,

2000). Examples of relevant preventive care include flu vaccinations and cancer screenings, and

examples of relevant risky health behaviors include physical inactivity and tobacco use (US

DHHS, 2011). The need to increase preventive care and improve health behaviors has been

emphasized by the U.S. Surgeon General (US DHHS, 2014; US DHHS, 2010a), the U.S.

Preventive Services Task Force (US PSTF, 2005), the National Prevention Council (NPC, 2011),

and the Healthy People 2020 initiative (US DHHS, 2010b, 2000). Particular emphasis has been

put on improving such behaviors among low-income and otherwise disadvantaged populations,

with the goal of reducing health disparities (e.g. US DHHS, 2011; US DHHS, 2010b).

         Health insurance is seen as an important mechanism for increasing use of preventive care

and improving health behaviors; this was a stated rationale of the Patient Protection and

Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 (ASPE, 2015; US DHHS, 2016). 2 The ACA mandates that

health insurance plans, including Medicaid, cover preventive services without cost-sharing as

part of the “10 Essential Benefits” package. The law also expands insurance to vulnerable

populations, increasing their contact with the healthcare system and exposing them to healthcare

professionals’ advice regarding healthy behaviors (Trust for America’s Health, 2013). In this

paper we examine whether the insurance expansions that took place under the ACA had their

intended effects of increasing preventive care and improving health behaviors.

  2
     The ACA also sought to promote healthy behaviors by expanding the scope for wellness programs to offer
financial rewards for smoking cessation and weight loss; see Cawley (2014). This change took place nationwide on
January 1, 2014, unlike the Medicaid expansion, which was at the discretion of states and varied by year. Wehby et
al. (2015) finds a strong genetic influence on preferences toward prevention, overall prevention effort, and routine
checkups, which raises the possibility that genes may modify the effects of the ACA on preventive care.

                                                          2
        The ACA had many insurance expansion components; the one that we examine concerns

the Medicaid program. The ACA originally required that all states expand Medicaid to all adults

whose income was below 138% of the federal poverty line (FPL). However, in 2012, the

Supreme Court allowed states to opt out of this requirement, with the result that only 31 states

plus DC had expanded Medicaid by the end of 2015: two in 2011, four in 2012, 22 in 2014, and

three in 2015 (Sommers, Kenney, & Epstein, 2014; Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015). In these

expansion states, Medicaid was made available to a key demographic group that was previously

largely ineligible for any public health insurance: low-income, non-elderly, non-disabled

childless adults (henceforth referred to as “childless adults”). 3 This is a key group that we

examine in this study.

        In theory, the impact of gaining health insurance coverage on preventive care seems

clear: the law of demand implies that a reduction in the out-of-pocket cost of preventive care

should result in increased utilization. However, consumers may not be very sensitive to the price

of preventive care; the RAND Health Insurance Experiment estimated that the price elasticity of

demand for preventive care is in the range of -0.17 to -0.43 (Newhouse & The Insurance

Experiment Group, 1993; Aron-Dine, Einav, & Finkelstein, 2013; Ringel et al., 2002). Reasons

that the demand for preventive care may be relatively inelastic include long wait times at

provider offices (Anderson, Camacho, & Balkrishnan, 2007), the discomfort associated with

screenings such as mammograms and colonoscopies (Takahashi, et al., 2005), and the anxiety

associated with screenings for conditions such as cancer or HIV (Lerman et al. 1993; Kash et al.,

1992). The RAND Health Insurance Experiment found that, even in the zero-copay (free) plan,



  3
    The eligibility of parents was also affected, but to a much lesser degree because of a pre-existing avenue for
access to Medicaid. Among expansion states, parents’ eligibility increased from a median 100% FPL to 138% FPL
whereas childless adults’ eligibility increased from a median 0% to 138% (Artiga & Cornachione, 2016).

                                                         3
the majority of adult males used no preventive services at all for the entire three-year period of

the study; thus, the authors note that even with free care, uptake of preventive services can fall

far short of accepted standards (Newhouse & The Insurance Experiment Group 1993).

       The impact of health insurance on health behaviors is ambiguous. Any increase in contact

with health care providers resulting from health insurance could reduce risky health behaviors.

Primary care physicians are recommended to screen their patients for tobacco use, alcohol

misuse, obesity, and HIV infection, and to provide behavioral counseling for persons engaged in

risky health behaviors (US PSTF, 2014). On the other hand, insurance coverage may cause ex

ante moral hazard; patients have less incentive to reduce their risky health behaviors because

they no longer pay the full financial cost of their future illness (Ehrlich & Becker, 1972). For

example, Dave & Kaestner (2009) find that Medicare coverage increases the probability of daily

alcohol consumption among men. However, health insurance does not reduce the non-financial

consequences of illness, such as physical pain and suffering, which could limit the extent of ex

ante moral hazard (Ehrlich & Becker, 1972).

       One final mechanism by which health insurance may affect these outcomes is the income

effect. The newly-insured may allocate some of the funds they would have otherwise devoted to

health care towards risky health behaviors (e.g. cigarettes or eating more) or towards health

improvements. Evidence of income effects on health behaviors is mixed. To take the example of

weight, studies have found that income increases BMI among lower-income youths (Akee et al.,

2013) and lower-income women (Schmeiser, 2009) but not among lower-income men

(Schmeiser, 2009) or Social Security recipients (Cawley, Moran, & Simon, 2010). In summary,

health insurance coverage may affect health behaviors through multiple channels; the net impact

is theoretically ambiguous and thus is ultimately an empirical question.



                                                   4
        Although studies have looked at the impact of the 2014 Medicaid expansions on

insurance coverage, hospital stays, and diagnoses of diabetes and cholesterol (Wherry & Miller,

2016), 4 this paper is the first to estimate the impact of the 2014 Medicaid expansions on health

behaviors. More broadly, it contributes to the growing literature on the effects of the ACA, and

on the effects of health insurance in general. The existing studies of the 2014 expansions have

found that they increased insurance coverage and improved access to care (ASPE, 2015;

Sommers et al., 2015; Shartzer, Long, & Anderson, 2015; Sommers, Blendon, & Orav, 2016;

Kaestner et al., 2015; Wherry & Miller, 2016; Frean, Gruber, & Sommers, 2016; Courtemanche

et al., 2016) with no discernible effects on labor market outcomes (Gooptu, et al., 2016;

Kaestner, et al., 2015).

        Others have studied the effects of the state Medicaid expansions that took place prior to

2014 and found that these “early” Medicaid expansions increased insurance coverage (Sommers,

Kenney, & Epstein, 2014), lowered mortality, reduced cost barriers to care, and improved self-

assessed health (Sommers, Baicker, & Epstein, 2012). There is little evidence of how these early

Medicaid expansions affected health behaviors.

        While this paper is the first to study the effect of the 2014 Medicaid expansions on

preventive care and health behaviors, prior research has studied the effects on these outcomes

from earlier expansions of health insurance, such as the ACA’s mandate to cover young adults

(Barbaresco, Courtemanche, & Qi, 2015), the Oregon Medicaid experiment (Finkelstein et al.,

2012), the Massachusetts healthcare reform of 2006 (Van Der Wees, Zaslavsky, & Ayanian,

2013; Courtmanche & Zapata, 2014; Miller, 2012), the Medicaid and CHIP expansions for

  4
    Wherry & Miller (2016) examine the National Health Interview Survey data through 2014, whereas this paper
examines the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System through 2015. The papers have some overlap in
outcomes (insurance coverage, access, self-assessed health), but this paper examines numerous measures of
preventive care and health behavior, as well as effects among sub-populations of childless adults and parents, men
and women, that are not studied in Wherry & Miller (2016).

                                                         5
children and low-income parents in the 1990s (Epstein & Newhouse, 1998), and the RAND

health insurance experiment (Newhouse & The Insurance Experiment Group, 1993; Brook et al.,

1983). In the concluding section of this paper we compare our results with those of these prior

studies.

          We contribute to the literature on insurance and health behaviors in four ways. First, we

add to the growing body of research on the effects of one of the largest insurance expansions to

date – the ACA Medicaid expansion. Second, we provide the first evidence of the effect of these

expansions on preventive care and health behaviors. Much of the current research on the ACA

Medicaid expansions studies their impact on use of acute care rather than preventive care. This is

likely due to the ready availability of large-scale administrative datasets on hospital discharges.

However, a key motivation expressed by policy-makers for the expansions is the potential for

cost savings from increased preventive care and improved health behaviors. We examine an

extensive set of measures of each, such as routine checkups, flu shots, HIV tests, dental visits,

cancer screenings, smoking, exercise, risky drinking, and obesity. In addition, we examine the

effect on insurance coverage and perceived access to care (which are likely preconditions for

improvements in preventive care and health behaviors) and the ultimate outcome of self-assessed

health.

          Third, by separately estimating effects for childless adults, we examine the impact of

insurance coverage for a novel population. Earlier insurance expansions primarily benefitted

children, pregnant women, and low-income parents. The 2010 dependent insurance provision of

the ACA affected young adults whose parents had access to employer-sponsored insurance; this

group was likely to be higher income than the Medicaid eligible population. In contrast, the 2014

Medicaid expansions that we study primarily benefitted low-income childless adults, which is a



                                                    6
population with reduced eligibility for other public welfare programs and higher risk for poor

health behaviors and outcomes. Therefore, the low-income population we study may respond

differently than those affected by earlier expansions. Fourth, we are the first to use a second year

of post-expansion data to estimate their effects.

   The outline of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we describe our data. In Section 3, we

describe our difference-in-differences model. Section 4 presents the empirical results, and

Section 5 concludes.



   2.   Data: Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)

        Our primary data source is the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), an

annual telephone survey conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and state

governments to collect information on health behaviors, insurance coverage, and health

outcomes. The survey is conducted every month in all 50 states and the District of Columbia

through random-digit dialing. The survey is designed to be representative of the non-

institutionalized adult population in the United States.

        The BRFSS has several advantages that make it useful for our analysis. First, it includes

many outcome variables of interest: insurance status, access to care, preventive care usage,

health behaviors, and self-assessed health. It also includes state identifiers and relevant

demographic characteristics. The large sample size of nearly 500,000 each year ensures that

there is a substantial sample of the people most affected by the recent Medicaid expansions: low-

income childless adults. The BRFSS also has its limitations; prior to 2014 it does not record the

source of insurance, so while we know whether people have health insurance in those earlier

years, we do not know if it is Medicaid. In addition, the BRFSS is a repeated cross-section, so it



                                                    7
is not possible to observe transitions from uninsured to coverage through Medicaid. Despite

these limitations, the dataset’s size, comprehensiveness, and timely availability offer an

important opportunity to learn about the early effects of the Medicaid expansions on preventive

care and health behaviors. 5

         For our primary analysis, we use the BRFSS data for 2010-2015. 6 The BRFSS provides

information about date of interview, so our unit of time is quarter; using quarter rather than year

allows us to examine pre-trends in more detail, which is important because our difference-in-

differences model (explained in the next section) relies on the assumption of parallel trends

between the expansion and non-expansion states.

         We restrict the BRFSS sample to the group targeted by the Medicaid expansion: low-

income adults below age 65. The criteria for inclusion in the estimation sample are that

respondents must be aged 19-64 and report household incomes below 100% of the FPL. 7 We

also conduct subsample analysis in which we stratify our sample by gender (women vs. men) and

parental status (childless adults vs. parents). Although BRFSS records income only in categories,

household income is reported in $5,000 to $7,500 brackets at the lower income levels and the

specific cutoffs of $10,000 and $15,000 match fairly well with the federal poverty level. We use

  5
     Another advantage of the BRFSS is that at 49%, its response rate is relatively high compared to other surveys
such as the Gallup Healthways Wellbeing Index which has a response rate of only 5-10 percent. The high response
rate reduces the risk of sample selection bias. Although other datasets such as the National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS) have higher response rates, their sample sizes are much lower than the BRFSS. The NHIS sample size, for
example, is about one-sixth the size of the BRFSS, and may not allow for the subsample analysis we are able to
conduct using the BRFSS.
   6
     There was a change in BRFSS weighting methodology in 2011, which we account for by reconstructing each
individual’s sample weight as the fraction of their assigned BRFSS sample weight over the sum of all individuals’
sample weights for that year. Also, we exclude Q3 2011 and Q4 2011 due to data quality issues with the insurance
variable in BRFSS. While most states experienced minimal change in insurance rate of low-income adults in 2011
going from Q3 to Q4, the following experienced changes greater than 10 percentage points in that time period:
 NH (+18 pp), SD (+15 pp), AK (-12 pp), WI (-14 pp), IN (+11 pp), MN (+11 pp), CO (+10 pp), TN (-10 pp), UT
(+10 pp). These changes are too large to be plausible. Furthermore, these anomalies represent spikes in Q4 2011,
with returns to previous levels in Q1 2012 onwards. This data quality problem occurs only in the last two quarters of
2011; thus we remove these two quarters from our dataset.
   7
     Approximately 12.5% of observations in our sample are missing income data (response was “unsure,” “refused
to answer,” or otherwise missing); we dropped these observations for our analysis.

                                                          8
the upper threshold of the BRFSS income category as well as the reported household size to

assign each respondent a percentage of the FPL, 8 and we drop from the sample individuals with

FPL values greater than 100%. Although the Medicaid expansion was available for adults up to

138% FPL, we only examine those under 100% FPL because adults with income 100%-138%

FPL in non-expansion states received another insurance expansion treatment – they became

eligible for exchange subsidies in 2014. 9

        We define treatment states as those states that expanded Medicaid by December 2015

(i.e. AK, AZ, AR, CA, CO, CT, DE, DC, HI, IL, IN, IA, KY, MD, MA, MI, MN, NH, NJ, NY,

ND, NM, NV, OH, OR, PA, RI, VT, WA, WI, 10 and WV) and control states as those states that

did not expand Medicaid or expanded later than December 2015 (i.e. AL, FL, GA, ID, KS, LA,

ME, MS, MO, MT, NE, NC, OK, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, VA, and WY). The Medicaid expansion

became effective in January 2014 for all expansion states except for the following: AK

(September 2015), IN (February 2015), LA (July 2016), MI (April 2014), MT (January 2016),

NH (August 2014), and PA (January 2015). Since our data go through 2015, we identified those

states that expanded after January 2014 but before January 2016 as expansion states only in the

quarters after the expansion was implemented.



    8
       For example, in 2012, the federal poverty level for a family of 2 was $15,930. Respondents who had a
household size of 2 and income in the “less than $10,000” were coded as 63% FPL ($10,000/$15,930), income in
the “$10,000-$15,000” category were coded as 94% FPL ($15,000/$15,930), and income in the “$15,000-20,000”
category were coded as 126% FPL ($20,000/$15,930).
    9
      Kaestner et al. (2015) use low education to identify those eligible for Medicaid because the ACA could affect
income through the mechanism of health. We chose to use low income to define Medicaid eligibility, given that
there has been no detectable labor market impact of the Medicaid expansions (Gooptu et al., 2015), and because
income and education are only weakly correlated in the BRFSS data; e.g. among non-elderly, childless adults
earning under the poverty line in the BRFSS in 2012, only 21% reported education less than high school.
Furthermore, only 31% of those with education less than high school reported that their income was below the
poverty level. As a robustness check later in the paper, we use low education rather than low income to define
eligibility for Medicaid.
    10
       Although Wisconsin was not an ACA expansion state, the state received federal approval to offer Medicaid to
childless adults below 100% FPL through the BadgerCare program (Gates & Rudowitz, 2014). We therefore include
it in our treatment group.

                                                         9
       Some states in our treatment group partially expanded public insurance to low-income

adults before 2014. (For more information on the categorization of states, and the details of each

state expansion, see Table A1.) However, most of these expansions were limited compared to the

2014 and after expansions both in terms of eligibility and generosity of insurance benefits. Most

states that offered Medicaid or Medicaid-like benefits to low-income adults before 2014 still

experienced considerable expansion in or after 2014. Therefore, for our main specification, we

include all 30 expansion states plus DC in our treatment group and all 20 non-expansion states in

our control group. This approach follows Courtemanche, et al. (2016). As sensitivity checks, we

also estimate a set of models in which we drop nine states plus DC that partially expanded

Medicaid to childless adults before 2014, and another in which we drop the four states plus DC

that had the strongest Medicaid expansions before 2014, in order to focus on treatment and

control groups of states that are as “clean” as possible; results for these “clean” expansion

models are provided in Appendix A.

       Our outcomes of interest are categorized into five groups. When we have multiple

measures for the same category of outcome, we create an index variable that reflects all of the

measures in that category. We briefly describe the outcomes below; Appendix B provides

additional details on the definitions of the variables and the language of the BRFSS questions on

which they are based.

       Insurance Coverage. We first assess the impact of the Medicaid expansion on insurance

status, because any impact of the expansion on health behaviors and preventive care is assumed

to operate through changes in insurance coverage. Insurance is coded as a binary variable equal

to 1 if the respondent answered yes to having any form of healthcare coverage at the time of the




                                                  10
interview, 0 if the respondent answered no, and missing if the respondent was unsure or refused a

response.

        Access to care. We examine access to care because we see it as another important

mechanism for any impacts on preventive care or health behaviors. Our two measures of access

to care are: 1) an indicator variable for whether the subject has a primary care physician at the

time of the interview; and 2) an indicator variable for whether the subject answered “yes” to the

question, “Was there a time in the past 12 months when you needed to see a doctor but could not

because of cost?” Each is treated as a separate outcome, and we also create an index variable

that equals one if the subject either has a primary care physician or replied that cost was not a

barrier to care.

        Preventive care. We construct binary variables for having received a routine checkup in

the past year, a flu vaccination (shot or spray) in the past year, an HIV screening ever, and a

dental visit in the past year. 11 Certain types of preventive care are relevant only for women:

whether received a pap test in the past year (recommended for women aged 21 and older), a

clinical breast exam in the past year (recommended for women aged 21 and older), and a

mammogram in the past year (recommended for women aged 50 and older); see US PSTF

(2014). Data on dentist visits, cancer screenings index, clinical breast exams, Pap tests, and

mammograms were not available for most states in BRFSS 2011 and 2013, and so we drop the

years 2011 and 2013 only for these outcomes. We also construct an index that measures the total

number of such preventive care services (routine checkups, flu vaccination, HIV test, and dentist

visits) an individual received in the past year. For women, we construct an index for whether

  11
    Most of the ACA expansion states only provide “limited” dental coverage for adults; see Buchmueller, Miller,
and Vujicic (2016) for details on state Medicaid dental provision generosity. Medicaid generally does not cover
major restorative procedures like crowns, but the dental coverage provided in almost all of our expansion states is
generous enough to at least cover routine cleanings and inexpensive care. Thus, it is plausible that the Medicaid
expansion could affect whether adults visited a dentist at least once in the past year.

                                                         11
they received at least one recommended cancer screening (pap test, breast exam, or

mammogram) for their age group.

         Health behaviors. We examine six measures of health behaviors: 1) an indicator variable

for whether the person has smoked in the past month; 2) an indicator for whether the person has

engaged in heavy drinking (defined as averaging two drinks per day for men and one drink per

day for women) in the past month; 3) an indicator for whether the person has engaged in binge

drinking (defined as having x or more drinks on one occasion, where x=5 for men and x=4 for

women) in the past month; 4) an indicator for whether the person has participated in any physical

activities or exercise in the past month; 5) body mass index or BMI (calculated as weight in kg

divided by height in meters squared 12; and 6) an indicator for whether the person is obese (i.e.

BMI ≥ 30); see Appendix B for more detail on the BRFSS questions on which these variables are

based. We also create an index that equals one if the individual is a smoker, has not exercised in

the past month, is a heavy drinker, is a binge drinker, or is obese.

         Self-assessed health. We examine four measures of self-assessed health: 1) the

individual’s self-rated health on a scale of 1 to 5 13; 2) the number of days in the past month that

physical health was not good, reported by the respondent; 3) the number of days in the past

month that mental health was not good, reported by the respondent; and 4) the number of days in

the past month that the individual’s poor health prevented usual activities such as work. In




  12
     The BRFSS collects only self-reports, not measurements, of weight and height, so BMI is likely underestimated
(Cawley et al., 2015). Because weight is a dependent variable rather than independent variable, this error will not
necessarily bias coefficients but it will increase the standard errors.
  13
     This outcome (individual’s self-rated general health) is measured on an ordinal 5-point scale in our main
specification, which implies that the distance between a 1 and a 2 (poor vs. fair health) has the same meaning as the
distance between a 4 and 5 (very good vs. excellent). To better assess changes in self-assessed health, we
dichotomized the “general health” index into a series of indicator variables and estimated separate models for each
of these three outcomes. Results for the dichotomized models are in Appendix D.


                                                          12
addition, we construct an index of number of unhealthy days that is the sum of days in the past

month that the respondent had physical or mental health that was not good, top-coded at 30.

       We examine a large number of diverse outcomes. Following the literature (e.g.

Barbaresco, Courtemanche, & Qi, 2015), we do not use multiple hypothesis test adjustments

such as the Bonferroni adjustment in our main analysis. The Bonferroni adjustment is

appropriate when, e.g., a large number of outcomes are used without preplanned hypotheses (i.e.

data mining), or one is more interested in whether all tests are jointly not significant as opposed

to being interested in the results of individual tests (Armstrong, 2014). Our outcomes are diverse,

but all are plausibly affected by health insurance coverage, and we are more interested in the

results of individual tests than a single test of whether we cannot reject any null hypotheses. Still,

our model involves estimating 25 equations, and it may be unrealistic to assume no correlation in

the error terms across outcomes. In order to assess multiple inference, we follow the approach

used in Autor and Houseman (2010), i.e. Seemingly Unrelated Regression. Results and a detailed

explanation of the method are in Appendix G.

       Our models control for the following regressors: indicator variables for marital status, age

in years, employment status, gender, race/ethnicity, household income category, education,

household size, and whether the individual is part of the BRFSS cell phone sample as opposed to

the land line sample. Additionally, we control for the quarterly state unemployment rate,

obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, to account for possible different impacts of the

post-2009 economic recovery in different states.



   3. Methods




                                                   13
            We estimate difference-in-differences (DD) models that compare changes in outcomes in

the treatment states to changes in the same outcomes in the control states. The sample consists

solely of low-income adults below age 65. The “pre” period is 2010-13, and the “post” period is

2014-15. The treatment states are the 30 states plus DC that by December 2015 expanded

Medicaid to low-income adults, and the control states are the 20 states that had not yet expanded

Medicaid to this population; see Table A1. For each of our outcome variables, we estimate the

following DD regression:

       Yist = α + β(Treatments*Postt)+ γXist + ηUnempRatest + δStates + ϑTimet + ε                        (1)

where Yist represents a health-related outcome for individual i living in state s at time t, expressed

as a quarter/year combination. For the binary outcomes, we estimate linear probability models

because they typically give reliable estimates of average effects (Angrist & Pischke, 2008);

however, as a robustness check, we also estimate these models as logits.

            Treatment is a binary variable equal to 1 if the individual lives in a treatment state and

equal to 0 if the respondent lives in a control state. Post is a binary variable equal to 1 if the time

period is after the policy implementation (i.e. any quarter of 2014-15) and equals 0 if the time

period is prior to the policy implementation (i.e. any quarter of 2010-2013). X is the vector of

control variables: household income, education, gender, race, unemployment status, age, gender,

marital status, household size, and cell phone sample indicator. UnempRate is a continuous

variable measuring the state unemployment rate in a given quarter/year. State is a vector of state

fixed effects, and Time is a vector of quarter/year-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by

state. 14


  14
    Although we have 51 clusters which may be considered a sufficient number (Cameron, Gelbach, & Miller,
2008), we note that standard asymptotic tests may over-reject the null hypothesis with a small number of clusters. In
Appendix E, we assess whether our results are robust to an alternative method of conducting inference. Following
examples in Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) and Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013), we use as our left-

                                                          14
        Identification of the treatment effect relies upon the parallel trends assumption: that the

control states are a good counterfactual for the treatment states; i.e. that in the absence of the

treatment, outcomes in the treatment states would have followed the same trend as those in the

control states. If true, then the DD coefficient β identifies the effect of Medicaid expansions on

the outcome.

        The decision to expand Medicaid was controversial and highly politicized in many states

(Jacobs & Callaghan, 2013). Given that more liberal states tended to expand while more

conservative states chose not to expand, there may be violations of the parallel trends assumption

that could cause bias. For this reason, we first assess the validity of this assumption by

comparing pre-treatment trends in outcomes in the treatment and control states. We do this by

first visually assessing graphs of the trends. We then formalize the pre-policy trends test by

estimating regressions that interact the treatment group indicator with year indicator variables for

all years except 2013 which is the base year. The coefficients on these interaction terms reflect

the impact in the expansion states relative to non-expansion states, compared to the base year

2013. If expansion and non-expansion states trended similarly before the treatment, then the

coefficient on the pre-2014 interaction terms should be close to 0. We jointly test the null

hypothesis that all pre-2014 interaction terms equal 0 using an F test.

        Our main models are estimated for men and women pooled, but we also estimate models

separately by sex. Past literature suggests that men and women are different in their levels of risk

aversion and may respond differently to insurance coverage (Jianakoplos & Bernasek, 1998;

Barbaresco, Courtemanche, & Qi, 2015). We also estimate models separately by parental status


hand variable the mean of each outcome variable calculated at year-quarter level for treatment and control groups.
This reduces the number of observations to 44, and we cluster at year-quarter level of 22 clusters. Our right-hand
side variables are an indicator for expansion, an indicator for the period following the start of Medicaid expansion
(January 2014 and onwards), and an interaction of these. As shown in Table A4, using the wild cluster bootstrap-t
procedure does not affect the statistical significance of the majority of our results.

                                                         15
to assess whether childless adults responded differently to the expansion than parents. This is

important as in some expansion states, low-income parents had limited eligibility for public

insurance programs prior to 2014 whereas childless adults were largely ineligible for coverage in

all states, so we expect the impact of expansion to be stronger for childless adults than for

parents.

       One might be concerned that there were shocks to outcomes in expansion states (but not

control states) that could create bias. For example, one might be concerned that states that were

experiencing a strong macroeconomy or had a strong budget outlook might expand not just

Medicaid but other programs as well, which would cause upward bias in estimates of the effect

of the expansions. On the other hand, one might be concerned that, to fund the Medicaid

expansion, states cut back on other state programs, which could cause attenuation bias in

estimates of the effect of the expansions. If either occurred, that would violate the identifying

assumptions of the DD model. For suggestive evidence on whether the possibility of

simultaneous changes in other programs should be a concern, we conduct two falsification tests.

Specifically, we estimate the same models for populations whose eligibility for health insurance

was unaffected by the 2014 Medicaid expansions: low-income adults over age 65 (continually

eligible for Medicare, with eligibility for Medicaid unchanged) and high-income adults (defined

as adults with household income above 400% of the FPL and thus never eligible for Medicaid).

Because the Medicaid eligibility of each of these two groups was not affected by the 2014

expansions, we expect to find no effect of the expansions on their preventive care or health

behaviors; if we find such effects, it would imply that the model is biased due to violations in the

parallel trends assumption. Failure to find such effects is of course not proof that the parallel




                                                  16
trends assumption is correct, but the failure to reject the null hypothesis of no effect provides

some additional confidence in the approach.

          Finally, we assess the robustness of the findings of the main model to numerous

variations in the sample and model specification.



       4. Empirical Results

Summary Statistics

          We first compare, in Appendix I (Table A8), the sample means of our outcomes and

selected control variables for the treatment and control groups, both before and after expansion.

Although t-tests suggest that treatment and control states are significantly different in terms of

mean age, education, gender, unemployment status, and race/ethnicity, the differences tend to be

small (e.g. just over a year of age, less than a quarter of a year of education), and we account for

these differences by controlling for these variables in our regression models. The identifying

assumption of the DD model does not concern equal means, but parallel trends; examining this

assumption is the subject of the next subsection. 15



Plausibility of the Parallel Trends Assumption




  15
     We also examine the sample sizes and BRFSS response rates in our main study sample of low-income adults in
the treatment and control states before and after expansion to ensure that the composition of individuals responding
to the survey is not changing differentially between the two groups of states. In expansion states, we calculate a
response rate of 44.1% in 2013 and 44.8% in 2014 (i.e. a change of 0.7 percentage points). In non-expansion states,
we calculate a response rate of 44.8% in 2013 and 45.6% in 2014 (i.e. a change of 0.8 percentage points). We
conclude that there is no evidence that individuals are more or less likely to respond to the BRFSS if their state
expands Medicaid.

                                                         17
        We examine the visual evidence concerning parallel trends in Figure 1, which presents

the trends in outcomes for our study sample, separately for the treatment and control groups. 16 In

each graph, the vertical line on the left indicates Q4 of 2013, and the vertical line on the right

indicates Q1 of 2014; thus, the Medicaid expansion of January 2014 happened in between the

vertical lines. The top-left graph in Figure 1 shows that the treatment and control states had

similar trends in insurance coverage before the expansion. After the expansion, insurance

coverage rises in the treatment states relative to the control states, as one would expect. We

provide graphs illustrating the trends in our other outcome variables in Figure 1 and Appendix C;

the other outcomes also exhibit similar pre-trends for the expansion and non-expansion states.

                                           [ Insert Figure 1 here ]

        We more formally test for equality of the pre-expansion trends using the event-study

method. We estimate regressions that interact the treatment group dummy with year dummy

variables (omitting 2013 as the reference year). We jointly test the null hypothesis that all pre-

2014 interaction terms are equal to 0 using an F test. If we were to find that outcomes were

changing for the treatment group relative to the control group even before the policy change, that

would suggest that the DD estimate is biased. Results are presented in Appendix J (Table A9).

The first two columns of Table A9 show the coefficients on the interaction of the expansion

states with the indicator variables for 2015 (column 1) and 2014 (column 2); these represent the

policy effects against which to judge the prior trends.

        Panel 1 of Table A9 shows that the trends in insurance coverage prior to the Medicaid

expansions are not significantly different between the treatment and control groups; column 7

  16
      We note that even prior to the Medicaid expansion, approximately 56% of childless adults in our treatment
states and 52% of childless adults in our control states had some form of health insurance. Although the pre-2014
BRFSS does not provide us with the source of insurance, data from the American Community Survey and Current
Population Survey suggest that this population was mostly covered by Medicaid or state-funded program, employer-
sponsored coverage, or self-insurance.

                                                        18
indicates that we cannot reject the hypothesis that all pre-2014 interaction coefficients are jointly

equal to zero. Panels 2-5 report the results of the pre-expansion trend test for outcomes related to

access to care, preventive care, health behaviors, and self-assessed health. For the vast majority

of the 25 outcomes we examine, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of equal trends. Overall,

these results, while not definitive, are reassuring evidence that the key assumption of the DD

study design is generally satisfied.



Baseline DD Model: Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Low-Income Adults

          Table 1, column 2, presents the full results of our baseline DD model. Results are

presented by category of outcome, with panel 1 presenting results on insurance coverage, panel 2

access to care, panel 3 preventive care, panel 4 health behaviors, and panel 5 self-assessed

health.

          Insurance. Table 1, panel 1 shows that the expansion of Medicaid eligibility in 2014

increased the probability that low-income adults had health insurance coverage by 5.4 percentage

points (9%). Subsequent columns show that increases in insurance were experienced by women

(3.4 percentage points or 5%) and men (8.1 percentage points or 14%) and mostly from childless

adults (10.1 percentage points or 17%). There is no statistically significant increase in insurance

coverage for parents.

          Access to care. Table 1, panel 2 indicates that the Medicaid expansions increased the

access to care index for the pooled sample, women, and childless adults. Examining the

individual access measures, the expansion increased the proportion of low-income adults who

reported having a personal doctor by 3.4 percentage points (6%). Looking at subgroups, the

impact of the expansion on access to care was strongest for childless adults; for that group, the



                                                   19
probability of having a personal doctor increased by 4.1 percentage points (7%), and the

probability of reporting cost as a barrier to care reduced by 3.9 percentage points (11%).

       Preventive care. Table 1, panel 3 indicates that the Medicaid expansion significantly

increased the probability of receiving an HIV test in the past year by 2.3 percentage points (5%)

for the pooled sample. This increase came mostly from adult men. There was no detectable

change for the pooled sample in routine checkups, flu shots, dental visits, or cancer screenings.

Among childless adults, we observed a 0.08 increase (5%) in the number of preventive services

received and a 4.1 percentage point (9%) increase in the probability of a dental visit. The cancer

screening index for women, as well as the probability of receiving specific cancer screenings, did

not significantly change for either the pooled sample or any subsamples.

       Health behaviors. Table 1, panel 4 indicates that, in virtually all cases for the overall

sample and each subgroup, there was no detectable impact of the expansion on any health

behavior, including heavy drinking, binge drinking, exercise, BMI, or obesity. The one

exception is that smoking participation decreased 1.9 percentage points (6%) among childless

adults. In other words, we find no evidence that the Medicaid expansion led to moral hazard; i.e.

no evidence that the expansions led to increased risky health behaviors.

       Self-assessed health. Table 1, panel 5 indicates that the expansion was associated with

small improvements in self-rated general health for the pooled sample (specifically, an increase

of 0.07 point on a 5-point scale, or 2%). For childless adults, we observed larger improvements

in self-rated health. Specifically, there was a 0.14 point (5%) increase in general health, a

decrease in the number of unhealthy days in the past 30 days of 1.27 (10%), a decrease in the

number of days of poor mental health in the past 30 days of 1.06 (13%), a decrease in the

number of days of poor physical health in the past 30 days of 0.84 (11%), and a decrease in the



                                                  20
number of days that poor health prevented individuals’ usual activities in the past 30 days of 1.44

(15%). There was no detectable effect of the expansion on the parents’ sample.

                                             [ Insert Table 1 Here ]



Falsification Tests

         We conduct falsification tests using two populations whose eligibility for Medicaid was

unaffected by the expansion: low-income adults over age 65 and high-income adults aged 19-64

(defined as above 400% FPL). Results of these falsification tests are provided in Appendix K

(Table A10). As expected, the Medicaid expansion had no impact on the probability of insurance

coverage and little impact on access to care, preventive care utilization, health behaviors, and

self-assessed health for these populations. In other words, these falsification tests yield no

evidence that the improvements seen for the low-income childless adults targeted by the

expansions are due to differences in trends or other potential sources of bias.



Sensitivity Analyses

         We examine the sensitivity of our main results to modifications of the sample or model,

presented in Table 2. 17 First, we estimate a logit model for binary outcomes for our pooled

sample, rather than the linear probability model used in our baseline model. The statistical

significance of the results (marginal effects shown in column 1 of Table 2) is quite similar to our

main results, with the exception that the logit model also suggests that the expansion reduced the

probability that cost was a barrier to care by 2.5 percentage points (7%).




  17
    We conducted tests for parallel trends for each of these alternative specifications. We conclude that for the vast
majority of the outcomes we examine, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of equal trends. Results are available on
request.

                                                          21
       Second, we estimate our models on our pooled sample without using BRFSS sample

weights. The results (in column 2 of Table 2) are very similar to the main results; the notable

change is that the expansion significantly reduces the probability that cost was a barrier to care

by 2.6 percentage points (7%), reduces the probability of being a current smoker (0.9 percentage

points or 4%), and reduces the probability of engaging in heavy drinking (0.6 percentage points

or 15%). This is consistent with the overall conclusion arising from the main models, that the

expansions improved access to care.

       Third, we explore adding a linear state specific time trend. We exclude state-specific

time trends from the main model because they may pick up the effect of the policy and not just

preexisting trends (Wolfers, 2006). The results, in column 3 of Table 2, are remarkably similar

to the main model, with the exception that in the linear state time trend model there is a

significant increase in routine checkups (3.5 percentage points or 6%) and marginally significant

reduction in the probability that cost is a barrier to care (3.2 percentage points or 10%).

       Fourth, we define the eligibility of childless adults using low education (less than college

degree) rather than low income. The results, shown in column 4 of Table 2, indicate that the

increase in insurance coverage is smaller for the low-education sample than the low-income

sample (1.2 percentage points compared to 5.4 percentage points), and as a result the access to

care and behavioral changes are smaller and virtually none are statistically significant. This is

consistent with our assessment that in the BRFSS low education is not a strong predictor of low

income and thus of Medicaid eligibility (see footnote 6).

       Fifth, we define the eligibility of childless adults using a more liberal income threshold

(less than 200% FPL). As expected, the results (shown in column 5 of Table 2) indicate that the

increase in insurance coverage is smaller for this group than then below-poverty group (3.8



                                                  22
percentage points compared to 5.4 percentage points). Consequently, we observe smaller

increases in access to care and little impact on preventive care, health behaviors, and self-

assessed health for this population.

        Finally, we estimate the DD model using only the six expansion states with the lowest

pre-2014 insurance rates (NV, IL, AR, OH, WA, and OR) because these states are ones where

we expect the impact of Medicaid expansion to be strongest. Results for this model are displayed

in Table 2, column 6. As expected, we found a larger impact of these six strongest Medicaid

expansions on insurance (12.1 percentage point increase), access to care (3.8 percentage point

increase), the likelihood of certain forms of preventive care (routine checkups, flu shots, HIV

tests, and pap tests), certain health behaviors (decreased heavy drinking), and self-assessed

health (0.14 point increase in general health) than for all Medicaid expansions presented in Table

1.

        In summary, the finding that the 2014 Medicaid expansions increased access to care and

improved self-rated health is robust to a wide variety of modifications of the sample and the

model specification. The models also consistently yield little evidence of changes in preventive

care and risky health behaviors.

                                       [ Insert Table 2 Here ]



     5. Conclusion

        The ACA, motivated in part by concern about low use of preventive care and high

engagement in risky health behaviors, sought to improve these outcomes by expanding

Medicaid. This paper provides early evidence on the impact of Medicaid expansions in 30 states

and DC, focusing on the low-income adults who benefited from the expansions. Our particular



                                                  23
contribution is that we provide the first evidence of the impact of these expansions on preventive

care and health behaviors.

       Results of difference-in-differences (DD) models indicate that the expansions increased

insurance coverage by 9%, the probability of having a personal doctor by 6%, the probability of

getting an HIV test by 5%, and self-assessed health by 2% for low-income adults. Low-income

childless adults, the targets of the expansion, experienced larger increases in insurance coverage

(17%), plus increases in probability of having a personal doctor (7%), decreases in probability of

cost being a barrier to care (11%), increases in the probability of dental visits (9%), larger

improvements in self-assessed health (5%), decreases in number of unhealthy days (-10%), and

decreases in the number of days that poor health prevented usual activities (-15%). It is

appropriate to ask whether these magnitudes are plausible; the increase in coverage for low-

income childless adults (the primary beneficiaries of the expansion) was 10.1 percentage points,

which implies that the effect sizes for compliers (i.e. those who gained actual insurance coverage

– not just eligibility - as a result of the expansion) is roughly 10 times larger than the estimates

above for all low-income childless adults. The implied estimates for preventive care and self-

assessed health seem reasonable (roughly 20-60% improvements) while the implied decrease in

days that poor health prevented usual activities are potentially implausibly high (roughly 150%

decrease). This is perhaps especially true given that we examine short-run effects. In

comparison, the Oregon Medicaid experiment found that health insurance raised the probability

that people reported their health as good, very good, or excellent by roughly 25%, increased the

number of days of good physical and mental health by 6-11% and improved the number of days

that poor physical or mental health did not impair usual activities by 8% (Finkelstein et al.,

2012). In summary, we interpret the magnitude of the results for preventive care and self-



                                                   24
assessed health as plausible, but are cautious that the effects for healthy days may be implausibly

large.

         The fact that these benefits were experienced by low-income individuals suggests that

these expansions reduced health-related disparities, which is a major goal of public health policy

in the United States (e.g. CDC, 2016; US DHHS, 2011; US DHHS 2010b). We confirm the

finding in Sommers et al. (2015) that the 2014 Medicaid expansions improved self-rated

health. 18 This is an important finding, as it shows that the Medicaid expansions led to a

significant increase in the ultimate endpoint of good health. We find little evidence that the

expansions affected risky health behaviors such as smoking, alcohol abuse, lack of exercise, or

obesity. Although the magnitude of the point estimates is somewhat sensitive to changes in the

sample or model specification, the overall conclusions listed above are generally robust.

         The finding that the expansions increased insurance coverage and access to care is

consistent with several other recent studies of the 2014 Medicaid expansions (ASPE, 2015;

Sommers et al., 2015, Shartzer, Long, & Anderson, 2015; Sommers, Blendon, & Orav, 2016;

Kaestner et al., 2015; Wherry & Miller, 2016; Courtemanche et al 2016; Frean, Gruber, &

Sommers, 2016).

         Perhaps the most relevant comparison is to Wherry & Miller (2016), who studied the

impact of the 2014 Medicaid expansions using the NHIS. We find in the BRFSS that the

Medicaid expansions increased health insurance coverage by 5.4 percentage points for low-

income adults; this lies in between the estimates of 2.9 percentage points in Courtemanche et al.

(2016) and 7.4 percentage points in Wherry and Miller (2016).




  18
     By combining the results for insurance with those for other outcomes, we are able to calculate elasticities of
health behaviors with respect to insurance; these are provided in Appendix C.

                                                         25
        Both this paper and Wherry and Miller (2016) find that the expansions had no statistically

significant impact on the probability that affected populations would report that cost was a

barrier to care to their care; the point estimates in both papers are also similar (-1.6 to -2.3

percentage points). Another relevant comparison is to the Oregon Medicaid experiment.

Finkelstein, et al. (2012) estimated that the intention to treat with Medicaid (via the

randomization) increased the probability of having a personal doctor by 16.5%; in comparison,

we find that the 2014 Medicaid expansions increased the probability of having a personal doctor

by 6% for all low-income adults; the latter estimate is smaller than the former because

presumably take-up of the offer of Medicaid in the Oregon experiment was greater than the

increase in eligibility and takeup among all low-income adults in the 2014 expansions.

        Our results are consistent with studies of the effects of earlier expansions of health

insurance (i.e., not the 2014 Medicaid expansions but earlier extensions of health insurance,

whether Medicaid or other types) on access to care, preventive care utilization, and health

outcomes. The literature almost unanimously has found that insurance expansions improve

access to medical care (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Miller, 2012). Other studies have also found

positive impacts on preventive care utilization; for example, Finkelstein et al. (2012) examines

data from the Oregon Medicaid experiment and finds that Medicaid expansion led to a higher

probability of receiving cholesterol checks, and blood tests. Whereas we find no significant

impact of the 2014 expansions on mammograms or Pap tests, Finkelstein et al. (2012) find that

the intention to treat in the Oregon Medicaid experiment increased the probability of a

mammogram by 18.4% and the probability of a pap test by 12.5%. Likewise, Van Der Wees,

Zaslavsky, & Ayanian, (2013) exploits the 2006 Massachusetts healthcare reform and find a

significant increase in the usage of Pap tests, colonoscopies, and cholesterol screenings. Miller



                                                   26
(2012) also finds that the Massachusetts reform resulted in increased probability of getting an

annual check-up among children.

       There are inconsistent results in the literature regarding the effect of health insurance

coverage on health. While some studies find that insurance expansions result in increased self-

reported health (Sommers, Baicker, & Epstein, 2012; Finkelstein et al., 2012; Barbaresco,

Courtemanche, & Qi, 2015), others have found little evidence of improved health, perhaps

because of individual heterogeneity in preferences over prevention and seeking of routine care;

e.g. Wehby et al. (2015) argue that genetics may play a role in use of preventive care. Wherry

and Miller (2016), which uses a similar identification strategy (DD models) to study the impact

of the 2014 Medicaid expansion, does not find any significant impact of the expansion on self-

assessed health. In contrast, we find that the expansion improved self-rated health and, for

childless adults, reduced the number of days that poor health prevented usual activities.

       One might be concerned that, because of provider capacity constraints, increased care for

one group could lead to less care for another. In this case, benefits for low-income childless

adults might crowd out other low-income individuals from care. In our subgroup analyses, we

estimate models for both childless adults and low-income parents. The results indicate that, for

low-income parents (who benefitted less than low-income childless adults from the expansions),

the probability of receiving each type of preventive care was not statistically significant, but the

point estimates are positive. In addition, our falsification test yields no evidence that the

Medicaid expansions reduced the probability that elderly individuals received preventive care.

In other words, there is no evidence of crowd-out.

       We also contribute to the literature on the impact of health insurance coverage on ex ante

moral hazard. Compared to insurance for events that have solely financial costs, health



                                                  27
insurance may not lead to as much ex ante moral hazard because the insured individual would

still endure the pain and suffering of illness, and pay the opportunity cost of time spent seeking

treatment and recovering (Ehrlich & Becker, 1972). The extent of ex ante moral hazard is

important because it increases the deadweight loss associated with negative externalities that are

due to smoking, sedentary lifestyles, and obesity that operate through the health insurance

system. Specifically, if health insurance coverage leads to more smoking, less exercise, and more

obesity, then the deadweight loss of the externalities in medical care costs from those activities is

even greater (Bhattacharya & Sood, 2011; Bhattacharya & Sood, 2007). Our models yield no

evidence that health insurance coverage increases smoking, increases heavy or binge drinking,

decreases exercise, or increases obesity. Not only are the coefficients statistically insignificant,

the point estimates are quite small; for example, for all low-income adults, the effect of the

expansion on the probability of being a current smoker is -0.6 percentage point, of being a heavy

drinker is -0.4 percentage point, and the probability of exercising is 0.8 percentage point.

Although the 95% confidence intervals do include meaningful effect sizes, we overall find no

evidence of moral hazard in those activities associated with health insurance. (However, the

extent of moral hazard may vary by context or subpopulation and thus there may be behavioral

responses that we do not observe.)

       The previous empirical literature is mixed in whether it finds evidence of such moral

hazard. Some of the earlier studies also examined the effect of Medicaid. The randomized

experiment in Oregon found that Medicaid coverage had no statistically significant impact on the

probability of obesity, although the confidence intervals were very wide (Baicker et al., 2013). In

contrast, two studies that exploit the 1990s state Medicaid expansions as natural experiments find




                                                  28
evidence that health insurance coverage raises BMI (Kelly & Markowitz, 2009; Bhattacharya &

Sood, 2011).

       There is also evidence on ex ante moral hazard for health insurance programs other than

Medicaid. Barbaresco, Courtemanche, and Qi (2015) examine the effect of the ACA’s dependent

care provision and estimate that health insurance coverage lowers BMI but increases alcohol

abuse. Courtemanche and Zapata (2014) examine the Massachusetts healthcare reform and find

that health insurance coverage reduced BMI but did not affect smoking or physical activity.

Dave and Kaestner (2009) examine those who newly qualify for Medicare and find that,

controlling for employment status and number of doctor visits, gaining Medicare coverage

reduced vigorous physical exercise and increased daily drinking and smoking, all among men.

Other research on Medicare receipt confirmed a reduction in physical activity but found no clear

effect on alcohol consumption or smoking (De Preux, 2011). The RAND Health Insurance

Experiment found no evidence that generosity of health insurance (i.e. the intensive rather than

extensive margin of coverage) had an impact on weight, physical activity, smoking, or alcohol

consumption (Newhouse & The Insurance Experiment Group, 1993; Brook et al., 1983). The

findings from this paper do not fully resolve this debate, but do add further weight to the body of

research that finds no evidence that health insurance coverage leads to ex ante moral hazard in

the form of increased risky health behaviors.

       Comparisons with the earlier literature are complicated by the fact that the population of

low-income childless adults treated by the 2014 Medicaid expansions are quite different from

those treated by the ACA’s young adult mandate, the 2006 Massachusetts health care reform,

Medicare, and the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. The income effect of insurance access

presumably is larger for the relatively lower-income group that we study. However, it is also



                                                 29
possible that because low-income populations have greater access to charity care that their

quantity of care demanded may not rise as much as otherwise.

       We acknowledge the limitations of our analysis. We have eight quarters (two years) of

data from after the expansion, so what we measure are the short-run effects of the expansions.

There is clearly interest in the short-run effects, even after only two years, from other reforms of

health insurance (see, e.g., Finkelstein et al., 2012, which concerns first-year effects). This is

especially the case for the ACA Medicaid expansions, as early evidence is useful in the ongoing

debates among the states that have thus far not expanded Medicaid. The short-run nature of our

estimates makes the finding of improved access to care, increases in certain preventive care, and

improvements in self-assessed health, more striking. Future studies should estimate the longer-

run effects of the 2014 Medicaid expansions, to see whether the effects dissipate, are maintained,

or increase over time.

       A related limitation is that individuals living in treatment states who were interviewed

early in 2014 will have spent relatively less time treated by the expansion, while those

interviewed late in 2014 will have spent almost the full year treated by the expansion. This is

relevant because a subset of the outcomes we examine are based on BRFSS questions that ask

about experiences in the past year (specifically: cost as a barrier to care, and each of the

preventive care measures). All of the respondents in the 2015 data have spent an entire year

treated by the expansions, but the partial exposure in 2014 may mean that we underestimate the

effects of Medicaid expansion on the subset of outcomes that are based on the past 12 months.

This is far less of an issue for the outcomes we examine that are based on questions about the

past month (drinking, smoking, exercise, self-assessed health) or the moment of the interview

(health insurance coverage, have a personal doctor, weight).



                                                   30
       The BRFSS is a repeated cross-section, so we cannot observe changes in specific

individuals’ behavior after gaining health insurance the way we could in a panel dataset. The

income reported in BRFSS is categorical rather than continuous, so we may misclassify the

Medicaid eligibility of some childless adults. Prior to 2014, BRFSS does not publish the source

of individuals’ health insurance, so we are unable to observe which low-income childless adults

are covered by Medicaid after the expansion. However, prior studies of the 2014 expansions

have verified that the insurance gains among low-income childless adults are due to Medicaid

(Sommers, et al., 2015; Frean, Gruber, & Sommers, 2016; Courtemanche et al., 2016). Despite

these limitations, this paper provides important early information about the effects of the 2014

Medicaid expansions on preventive care, health behaviors, and self-assessed health.




                                                 31
                                         Works Cited
Akee, R., Simeonova E., Copeland W., Angold A., & Costello, E.J. (2013). Young adult obesity
        and household income: Effects of unconditional cash transfers. American Economic
        Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 1-28.
Anderson, R.T., Camacho, F.T., & Balkrishnan, R. (2007). Willing to wait?: The influence of
        patient wait time on satisfaction with primary care. BMC Health Services Research, 7,
        31.
Angrist, J.D., & Pischke, J.S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s companion.
        Princeton University Press.
Akosa Antwi, Y., Moriya, A.S., & Simon, K.I. (2013). Effects of federal policy to insure young
        adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act’s dependent-coverage mandate.
        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5, 1-28.
Armstrong, R.A. (2014). When to use the Bonferroni correction. Ophthalmic and Physiological
        Optics, 34, 502-508.
Aron-Dine, A., Einav, L., & Finkelstein, A. (2013). The RAND health insurance experiment,
        three decades later. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27, 197–222.
Artiga, S., & Cornachione, E. (2016). Trends in Medicaid and CHIP eligibility over time. Kaiser
        Family Foundation. Retrieved April 20, 2016 from http://kff.org/report-section/trends-in-
        medicaid-and-chip-eligibility-over-time-section-3-eligibility-trends-by-medicaid-
        expansion-status-2016-update/.
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human
        Services. (2015). HHS strategic plan. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from
        http://www.hhs.gov/about/strategic-plan/strategic-goal-1/.
Autor, D.H., & Houseman, S.N. (2010). Do temporary-help jobs improve labor market outcomes
        for low-skilled workers? Evidence from “Work First.” American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics, 2, 96-128.
Baicker, K., Taubman, S.L., Allen, H.L., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J.H., Newhouse, J.P.,Schneider,
        E.C., Wright, B.J., Zaslavsky, A.M., Finkelstein, A.N., & Oregon Health Study Group.
        (2013). The Oregon experiment – effects of Medicaid on clinical outcomes. New England
        Journal of Medicine, 368, 1713–1722.
Barbaresco, S., Courtemanche, C.J., & Qi, Y. (2015). Impacts of the Affordable Care Act
        dependent coverage provision on health-related outcomes of young adults. Journal of
        Health Economics, 40, 54-68.
Bhattacharya, J., & Sood, N. (2007). Health insurance and the obesity externality. Advances in
        Health Economics and Health Services Research, 17, 279–318.
Bhattacharya, J., & Sood, N. (2011). Who pays for obesity? Journal of Economic Perspectives,
        25, 139–158.
Brook, R.H., Ware Jr, J.E., Rogers, W.H., Keeler, E.B., Davies, A.R., Donald, C.A., Goldberg,
        G.A., Lohr, K.N., Masthay, P.C., & Newhouse, J.P. (1983). Does free care improve
        adults’ health?: Results from a randomized controlled trial. New England Journal of
        Medicine, 309, 1426-1434.
Buchmueller, T, Miller, S., & Vujicic, M. (2016). How do providers respond to changes in
        public health insurance coverage? Evidence from Medicaid adult dental coverage.
        American Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., & Miller, D. L. (2008). Bootstrap-based improvements for
        inference with clustered errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 414-427.

                                                32
Cawley, J. (2014). The Affordable Care Act permits greater financial rewards for weight loss: A
       good idea in principle, but many practical concerns remain. Journal of Policy Analysis
       and Management, 33, 810-820.
Cawley, J., Maclean, J.C., Hammer, M., & Wintfeld, N. (2015). Reporting error in weight and
       its implications for estimates of the economic consequences of obesity. Economics and
       Human Biology, 19, 27-44.
Cawley, J., Moran, J., & Simon, K.I. (2010). The impact of income on the weight of elderly
       Americans. Health Economics, 19, 979-993.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). Strategies for reducing health disparities –
       selected cdc-sponsored interventions. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 65, 1-70.
Courtemanche, C.J., & Zapata, D. (2014). Does universal coverage improve health? The
       Massachusetts experience. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33, 36-69.
Courtemanche, C., Marton, J., Ukert, B., Yelowitz, A., & Zapata, D. (2016). Impacts of the
       Affordable Care Act on health insurance coverage in Medicaid expansion and non-
       expansion states. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 22182.
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Damiano, P., Bentler, S.E., Momany, E.T., Park, K.H., & Robinson, E. (2013). Evaluation of the
       IowaCare program: Information about the medical home expansion. The University of
       Iowa Public Policy Center.
Dave, D., & Kaestner, R. (2009). Health insurance and ex ante moral hazard: evidence from
       Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 9, 367–390.
De Preux, L.B. (2011). Anticipatory ex-ante moral hazard and the effect of Medicare on
       prevention. Health Economics, 20, 1056-1072.
Ehrlich, I., & Becker, G.S. (1972). Market insurance, self-insurance, and self-protection. Journal
       of Political Economy, 80, 623-648.
Epstein, A.M., & Newhouse, J.P. (1998). Impact of Medicaid expansion on early prenatal care
       and health outcomes. Health Care Financing Review, 19, 85-99.
Finkelstein, A., Taubman, S., Wright, B., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J.P., Allen, H.,
       Baicker, K., & The Oregon Health Study Group. (2012). The Oregon health insurance
       experiment: Evidence from the first year. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1057-
       1106.
Frean, M., Gruber, J., & Sommers, B.D. (2016). Premium subsidies, the mandate, and Medicaid
       expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act. National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper No. 22213. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
       Research.
Gates, A., & Rudowitz, R. (2014). Wisconsin’s BadgerCare program and the ACA. Kaiser
       Family Foundation.
Gooptu, A., Moriya, A.S., Simon, K.I. & Sommers, B.D. (2016). Reductions in 2014 Medicaid
       expansion did not result in significant employment changes. Health Affairs, 35, 111-118
Heberlein, M., Brooks, T., Guyer, J., Artiga, S., & Stephens, J. (2011). Holding steady, looking
       ahead: Annual findings of a 50-state survey of eligibility rules, enrollment and renewal
       procedures, and cost-sharing practices in Medicaid and CHIP, 2010–2011. Kaiser
       Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.
Jacobs, L.R., & Callaghan, T. (2013). Why states expand Medicaid: Party, resources, and
       history. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 38, 1023-1050.
Jianakoplos, N.A., & Bernasek, A. (1998). Are women more risk averse? Economic Inquiry, 36,


                                                 33
        620–630.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013). Medicaid and the uninsured: Where are states today?
        Medicaid and CHIP eligibility levels for children and non-disabled adults. The Henry J.
        Kaiser Family Foundation.
Kaestner, R., Garrett, B., Gangopadhyaya, A., & Fleming, C. (2015). Effects of ACA Medicaid
        expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply. National Bureau of Economic
        Research Working Paper No. 21836. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
        Research.
Kash, K.M., Holland, J.C., Halper, M.S., & Miller, D.G. (1992). Psychological distress and
        surveillance behaviors of women with a family history of breast cancer. Journal of the
        National Cancer Institute, 84, 24-30.
Kelly, I.R., & Markowitz, S. (2009). Incentives in obesity and health insurance. Inquiry, 46,
        418–432.
Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., & Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood
        effects. Econometrica, 75, 83-119.
Lerman, C., Daly, M., Sands, C., Balshem, A., Lustbader, E., Heggan, T., Goldstein, L., James,
        J., & Engstrom, P. (1993). Mammography adherence and psychological distress among
        women at risk for breast cancer. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 85, 1074-1080.
Miller, S. (2012). The impact of the Massachusetts health care reform on health care use among
        children. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102, 502-507.
National Center for Health Statistics. (2015). Health, United States, 2014: With special feature
        on adults aged 55–64. Hyattsville, MD: Centers for Disease Control.
Newhouse, J.P., & The Insurance Experiment Group. (1993). Free for all? Lessons from the
        RAND health insurance experiment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ringel, J.S., Hosek S.D., Vollaard, B.A., Mahnovski S. (2002). The Elasticity of demand for
        health care. A review of the literature and its application to the military health system.
        Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Schmeiser, M. D. (2009). Expanding wallets and waistlines: The impact of family income on the
        BMI of women and men eligible for the earned income tax credit. Health Economics, 18,
        1277-1294.
Shartzer, A., Long, S.K., & Anderson, N. (2015). Access to care and affordability have improved
        following Affordable Care Act implementation; problems remain. Health Affairs, 10.
        https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2015/demo/p60-
        253.pdf.
Sommers, B.D., Baicker, K., & Epstein, A.M. (2012). Mortality and access to care among adults
        after state Medicaid expansions. New England Journal of Medicine, 367, 1025- 1034.
Sommers, B. D., Buchmueller, T., Decker, S. L., Carey, C., & Kronick, R. (2013). The
        Affordable Care Act has led to significant gains in health insurance and access to care for
        young adults. Health affairs, 32, 165-174.
Sommers, B.D., Kenney, G.M. & Epstein, A.M. (2014). New evidence on the Affordable Care
        Act: Coverage impacts of early Medicaid expansions. Health Affairs, 33, 78-87.
Sommers, B.D., Gunja, M.Z., Finegold, K., & Musco, T. (2015). Changes in self-reported
        insurance coverage, access to care, and health under the Affordable Care Act. Journal of
        the American Medical Association, 314, 366-374.
Sommers, B.D., Blendon, R.J., & Orav, E.J. (2016). Both the ‘private option’ and traditional
        Medicaid expansions improved access to care for low-income adults. Health Affairs, 35,


                                                 34
        96-105.
Takahashi, Y., Tanaka, H., Kinjo, M., & Sakumoto, K. (2005). Sedation-free colonoscopy.
        Diseases of the Colon & Rectum, 48, 855-859.
Trust for America’s Health. (2013). A Healthier America 2013: Strategies to move from sick
        care to health care in the next four years. Retrieved December 23, 2015, from
        http://www.rwjf.org/content/dam/farm/reports/reports/2013/rwjf403989.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2000). Healthy people 2000: Understanding
        and improving health. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2010a). The surgeon general's vision for a
        healthy and fit nation. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
        Office of the Surgeon General.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2010b). Healthy people 2010: Understanding
        and improving health, 2nd ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon General. (2011). National
        prevention strategy: America’s plan for better health and wellness. Retrieved December
        23, 2015, from http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/priorities/prevention/strategy/report.pdf.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). The health consequences of smoking:
        50 years of progress. A report of the surgeon general. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of
        Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center
        for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2016). Affordable Care Act rules on
        expanding access to preventive services for women. Retrieved April 17, 2016, from
        http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts-and-features/fact-sheets/aca-rules-on-expanding-
        access-to-preventive-services-for-women/index.html.
U. S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2005). Guide to community preventive services. New
        York: Oxford University Press.
U. S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2014). The guide to clinical preventive services 2014:
        Recommendations of the U.S. preventive services task force. AHRQ Pub. No. 14-05158.
Van der Wees, P.J., Zaslavsky, A.M., & Ayanian, J.Z. (2013). Improvements in health status
        after Massachusetts health care reform. Milbank Quarterly, 91, 663-689.
Wehby, G. L., Domingue, B. W. and Boardman, J. D. (2015),. Prevention, use of health services,
        and genes: Implications of genetics for policy formation. Journal of Policy Analysis and
        Management, 34, 519–536.
Wherry, L., & Miller, S. (2016). Early coverage, access, utilization, and health effects associated
       with the Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansions: A quasi-experimental study. Annals
       of Internal Medicine, 164, 795-803.
Wolfers, J. (2006). Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? A reconciliation and new
       results. American Economic Review, 96, 1802-1820.
Zellner, A. (1962). An efﬁcient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regressions and tests
        for aggregation bias. Journal of American Statistical Association, 57, 348-368.




                                                 35
          Figure 1. Trends in Insurance Rates, Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States




Notes: Source is BRFSS 2010-2015. Sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. Data are
adjusted by BRFSS sample weight. See Table A1 for states in expansion and non-expansion categories. The vertical
lines indicate Q4 of 2013 and Q1 of 2014; thus, ACA Medicaid expansions took place in between the two vertical
lines. See Appendix C for graphs for the remaining outcomes.




                                                       36
Table 1. DD Estimates for Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Insurance and Behaviors for Low-Income, Non-Elderly Adults

                                 All adults             All women               All men           Childless adults only        Parents only
                                        Estimate              Estimate                Estimate                 Estimate                 Estimate
                           Pre-2014                Pre-2014              Pre-2014                Pre-2014                 Pre-2014
                                            (2)                  (4)                     (6)                      (8)                     (10)
                           mean (1)                mean (3)              mean (5)                mean (7)                 mean (9)

Panel 1: Insurance
Have insurance                         0.054***                0.034*                0.081***                0.101***                   0.023
                             0.62                    0.67                  0.56                    0.61                     0.62
                                        (0.014)                (0.018)                (0.019)                 (0.021)                  (0.016)
                            (0.49)                  (0.47)                (0.50)                  (0.49)                   (0.48)
                                      N=147,353               N=97,410               N=49,943                N=68,465                 N=78,888

Panel 2: Access to
care
Good access to                         0.017**                 0.019*                  0.011                 0.023***                   0.013
                             0.83                    0.85                  0.80                    0.83                     0.82
care index                             (0.008)                 (0.011)                (0.010)                 (0.008)                  (0.011)
                            (0.38)                  (0.36)                (0.40)                  (0.37)                   (0.38)
                                      N=147,610               N=97,491               N=50,119                N=68,645                 N=78,965
  Have personal doctor                  0.034***               0.027*                 0.042***                0.041***                  0.028*
                             0.59                    0.67                   0.50                    0.62                     0.58
                                         (0.011)               (0.014)                 (0.013)                 (0.013)                  (0.014)
                            (0.49)                  (0.47)                 (0.50)                  (0.49)                   (0.49)
                                       N=147,351              N=97,359                N=49,992                N=68,511                 N=78,840
  Cost a barrier to care                -0.016                 -0.010                  -0.017                 -0.039***                 -0.002
                             0.34                    0.34                   0.33                    0.34                     0.34
                                        (0.010)                (0.015)                 (0.011)                 (0.011)                  (0.013)
                            (0.47)                  (0.47)                 (0.47)                  (0.47)                   (0.47)
                                       N=147,504              N=97,435                N=50,069                N=68,546                 N=78,958


Panel 3:
Preventive care
Number of                                0.018                  -0.016                0.072*                  0.083*                    -0.026
                             1.58                    1.76                  1.36                    1.53                     1.61
preventive services                     (0.039)                (0.047)                (0.041)                 (0.048)                  (0.040)
                            (1.05)                  (1.03)                (1.04)                  (1.05)                   (1.05)
received                               N=80,513               N=53,397               N=27,116                N=37,554                 N=42,959
  Routine checkup                        0.007                 -0.017                  0.039**                  0.028                   -0.006
                             0.57                    0.64                   0.48                    0.57                     0.57
                                        (0.014)                (0.018)                 (0.018)                 (0.019)                  (0.016)
                            (0.49)                  (0.48)                 (0.50)                  (0.50)                   (0.49)
                                       N=145,641              N=96,198                N=49,443                N=67,630                 N=78,011
  Flu shot                               0.013                  0.004                  0.028**                  0.013                    0.014
                             0.19                    0.21                   0.16                    0.21                     0.18
                                        (0.009)                (0.009)                 (0.013)                 (0.015)                  (0.013)
                            (0.39)                  (0.41)                 (0.37)                  (0.40)                   (0.38)
                                       N=137,909              N=91,329                N=46,580                N=64,809                 N=73,100
  HIV test                              0.023***                0.015                  0.038**                  0.029                    0.016
                             0.48                    0.54                   0.40                    0.41                     0.52
                                         (0.009)               (0.013)                 (0.015)                 (0.018)                  (0.011)
                            (0.50)                  (0.50)                 (0.49)                  (0.49)                   (0.50)
                                       N=133,114              N=88,215                N=44,899                N=62,328                 N=70,786
  Dentist visit              0.48         0.001      0.52      -0.008       0.44         0.02       0.47      0.041***       0.49       -0.026
                            (0.50)       (0.014)    (0.50)     (0.017)     (0.50)      (0.020)     (0.50)      (0.015)      (0.50)      (0.022)


                                                                          37
                                     N=79,701              N=52,887              N=26,814              N=37,124              N==42,577
Received any                          0.016                  0.016                                       0.018                0.011
                          0.62                   0.62                                        0.61                  0.62
cancer screenings                    (0.029)                (0.029)                                     (0.031)              (0.041)
                         (0.49)                 (0.49)                                      (0.49)                (0.49)
index                               N=18,861               N=18,861                                    N=13,902              N=4,959
  Clinical breast exam                 0.004                 0.004                                       0.007                 0.001
                           0.49                   0.49                                        0.48                  0.49
                                      (0.015)               (0.015)                                     (0.023)               (0.019)
                          (0.50)                 (0.50)                                      (0.50)                (0.50)
                                     N=46,080              N=46,080                                    N=19,389              N=26,691
  Pap test                             0.010                 0.010                                      -0.016                 0.019
                           0.53                   0.53                                        0.42                  0.58
                                      (0.016)               (0.016)                                     (0.030)               (0.021)
                          (0.50)                 (0.50)                                      (0.49)                (0.49)
                                     N=45,916              N=45,916                                    N=19,327              N=26,589
  Mammogram                           -0.008                -0.008                                       0.008                 -0.013
                           0.50                   0.50                                        0.50                  0.50
                                      (0.031)               (0.031)                                     (0.028)               (0.047)
                          (0.50)                 (0.50)                                      (0.50)                (0.50)
                                     N=18,922              N=18,922                                    N=13,951               N=4,971




Panel 4: Health
behaviors
Unhealthy                             -0.008                 -0.007                -0.006                -0.017                -0.004
                          0.74                   0.73                  0.75                  0.75                  0.73
behavior index                       (0.009)                (0.008)               (0.016)               (0.015)               (0.011)
                         (0.44)                 (0.44)                (0.44)                (0.44)                (0.44)
                                    N=139,632              N=91,541              N=48,091              N=65,902              N=73,730
  Current smoker                     -0.006                 -0.004                -0.010               -0.019**                0.002
                           0.28                   0.25                  0.32                  0.32                  0.26
                                     (0.007)                (0.008)               (0.015)               (0.009)               (0.010)
                          (0.45)                 (0.43)                (0.47)                (0.47)                (0.44)
                                    N=144,646              N=95,612              N=49,034              N=67,410              N=77,236
  Heavy drinking                     -0.004                 -0.008                -0.0001               -0.005                -0.003
                           0.05                   0.04                  0.06                  0.06                  0.04
                                     (0.004)                (0.005)               (0.007)               (0.06)                (0.004)
                          (0.21)                 (0.19)                (0.23)                (0.24)                (0.19)
                                    N=140,090              N=93,028              N=47,062              N=65,410              N=74,680
  Binge drinking                     -0.002                 -0.003                -0.004                 0.004                -0.006
                           0.16                   0.11                  0.23                  0.18                  0.15
                                     (0.006)                (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.013)               (0.007)
                          (0.37)                 (0.32)                (0.42)                (0.38)                (0.36)
                                    N=140,255              N=93,094              N=47,161              N=65,411              N=74,844
  Exercise                            0.008                  0.005                 0.008                 0.034                -0.007
                           0.67                   0.66                  0.69                  0.67                  0.67
                                     (0.010)                (0.008)               (0.019)               (0.021)               (0.010)
                          (0.47)                 (0.47)                (0.46)                (0.47)                (0.47)
                                    N=142,055              N=94,004              N=48,051              N=66,452              N=75,603

  BMI (x100)                          8.85                   19.57                 -1.27                 21.67                 -1.74
                         2833.20                2869.90               2789.08               2792.49               2856.97
                                     (14.96)                (24.28)               (28.09)               (23.19)               (17.47)
                         (719.05)               (761.07)              (662.36)              (739.44)              (705.80)
                                    N=138,170              N=89,434              N=48,736              N=65,644              N=72,526
  Obese                               0.004                  0.010                -0.001                0.005                  0.001
                           0.33                   0.35                  0.30                  0.31                  0.34
                                     (0.010)                (0.016)               (0.023)               (0.011                (0.013)
                          (0.47)                 (0.48)                (0.46)                (0.46)                (0.47)
                                    N=138,170              N=89,434              N=48,736              N=65,644              N=72,526




                                                                      38
Panel 5: Self-
assessed health
General health                       0.073***                    0.045**                     0.116**                    0.135***                     0.038
                         3.03                         3.01                       3.06                        2.95                       3.08
                                      (0.019)                    (0.021)                     (0.051)                     (0.025)                    (0.030)
                        (1.14)                       (1.11)                     (1.17)                      (1.23)                     (1.08)
                                    N=147,363                   N=97,333                    N=50,030                   N=68,460                    N=78,903
Number of                              -0.312                     -0.134                      -0.591                   -1.266***                     0.271
                         10.45                       10.98                      9.78                        12.17                       9.49
unhealthy days                        (0.291)                    (0.436)                     (0.363)                     (0.292)                    (0.387)
                        (11.95)                     (12.01)                    (11.84)                     (12.52)                     (11.51)
                                    N=148,039                   N=97,731                    N=50,308                   N=68,845                    N=79,194
  Number days mental                  -0.174                       0.031                      -0.472*                   -1.063***                     0.379
                         6.79                         7.34                       6.08                        7.92                        6.16
  health not good                     (0.227)                     (0.316)                     (0.268)                    (0.230)                     (0.301)
                        (10.22)                      (10.46)                    (9.85)                      (10.83)                     (9.80)
                                     N=144,734                   N=95,665                    N=49,069                   N=66,919                    N=77,815
  Number days                         -0.123                      -0.064                       -0.281                   -0.842***                     0.304
                          6.17                        6.29                       6.03                        7.78                        5.28
  physical health not                 (0.222)                     (0.298)                     (0.340)                    (0.261)                     (0.276)
                         (9.89)                      (9.82)                     (9.98)                      (11.05)                     (9.06)
  good                               N=144,148                   N=95,263                    N=48,885                   N=66,673                    N=77,475
Number days poor                      -0.327                      0.099                     -1.048**                   -1.436***                     0.379
                         7.46                        7.21                       7.82                        9.35                        6.29
health prevented        (10.46)      (0.292)                     (0.324)                     (0.521)                     (0.342)                    (0.364)
                                                    (10.14)                    (10.88)                     (11.44)                     (9.61)
usual activities                    N=102,250                   N=69,496                    N=32,754                   N=50,549                    N=51,701


Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. In columns 1-2, sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. In columns 3-4, sample
includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL women. Columns 5-6 includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL men. Columns 7-8 includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL
adults without children below 18. Columns 9-10 includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults with children below 18. The cancer screenings regressions are
limited to women above age 21, and the mammogram regression is limited to women over age 50. State-clustered standard errors are in parentheses for DD
estimates. All regressions also control for gender, marital status, household size, race, unemployment status, age, education, state unemployment rate, whether
the respondent was part of the cell-phone sample, state-fixed effects, and quarter/year-fixed effects. Data is adjusted by BRFSS sample weights. See Table A1 for
states in expansion and non-expansion categories. Columns 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 display variable’s mean value for the expansion group in 2010-13, adjusted by
BRFSS sample weight. Standard deviations are in parentheses for pre-treatment means. Larger fonts indicate summary measures and smaller fonts indicate
detailed outcomes. See Appendix B for variable definitions. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10
percent level.




                                                                                39
Table 2. Sensitivity Analyses for All Low-Income Adults (for Comparison to Column 2 of Table 3)

                                             Without BRFSS                                                        Highest baseline
                                                             Linear state time   Low education   Less than 200%
                           Logit model (1)      weights                                                           uninsurance rates
                                                                 trend (3)        sample (4)        FPL (5)
                                                  (2)                                                                    (6)
Panel 1: Insurance
Have insurance                0.068***         0.063***         0.062***           0.012**          0.038***         0.121***
                               (0.015)          (0.016)          (0.016)           (0.005)           (0.011)          (0.020)
                             N=147,353        N=147,353        N=147,353          N=880,993        N=388,612         N=88,347

Panel 2: Access to
care
Good access to                0.029***         0.021***         0.026*              0.004           0.015**          0.038***
care index                     (0.009)          (0.006)         (0.014)            (0.004)          (0.006)           (0.013)
                             N=147,610        N=147,610        N=147,610          N=882,157        N=389,114         N=88,457
  Have personal doctor         0.035***         0.024***         0.028**             0.018*          0.033***          0.035**
                                (0.011)          (0.006)         (0.012)            (0.010)           (0.011)          (0.013)
                              N=147,351        N=147,351        N=147,351          N=880,741        N=388,553         N=88,315
  Cost a barrier to care       -0.025**        -0.026***         -0.032*            -0.0001          -0.014**         -0.045***
                                (0.010)          (0.009)         (0.018)            (0.005)           (0.006)          (0.015)
                              N=147,504        N=147,504        N=147,504          N=881,523        N=388,771         N=88,424

Panel 3:
Preventive care
Number of                                        -0.023           0.024             -0.005           0.015            0.113**
preventive services                             (0.030)          (0.052)           (0.019)          (0.029)           (0.050)
received                                       N=80,513         N=80,513          N=481,404        N=214,814         N=48,938
  Routine checkup                0.008           0.015           0.035***             0.001            0.012           0.035*
                                (0.014)         (0.011)           (0.010)            (0.007)          (0.009)          (0.017)
                              N=145,641        N=145,641        N=145,641          N=873,722        N=384,476         N=87,145
  Flu shot                       0.002           0.014             0.004              0.003          0.015**          0.036***
                                (0.007)         (0.009)           (0.012)            (0.008)          (0.007)          (0.012)
                              N=137,909        N=137,909        N=137,909          N=835,870        N=365,994         N=83,589
  HIV test                     0.023***          0.005            -0.001            0.013***         0.019***          0.036*
                                (0.009)         (0.009)           (0.015)            (0.004)          (0.006)          (0.019)
                              N=133,114        N=133,114        N=133,114          N=808,084        N=353,427         N=80,673
  Dentist visit                  0.001          -0.022*            0.010             -0.009           -0.004            0.008
                                (0.014)         (0.012)           (0.024)            (0.008)          (0.012)          (0.024)
                              N=79,701         N=79,701         N=79,701           N=478,561        N=212,999         N=48,406
Received any                   0.015             0.019            0.052             -0.001           0.005             -0.011
cancer screenings             (0.028)           (0.019)          (0.044)           (0.012)          (0.016)           (0.040)
index                        N=18,861          N=18,861         N=18,861          N=136,440        N=54,323          N=11,754
  Clinical breast exam          0.005            -0.001           -0.026            -0.002            0.014             0.025
                               (0.015)           (0.013)          (0.026)           (0.010)          (0.012)           (0.015)


                                                                       40
                        N=46,080    N=46,080    N=46,080   N=250,022   N=119,609   N=28,641
  Pap test                0.010      -0.018       0.003     -0.002      0.020**     0.058*
                         (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.020)    (0.011)     (0.009)     (0.031)
                        N=45,916    N=45,916    N=45,916   N=249,406   N=119,212   N=28,549
  Mammogram              -0.008       0.009       .0001      0.006       0.002      -0.033
                         (0.031)     (0.017)     (0.052)    (0.013)     (0.017)     (0.037)
                        N=18,922    N=18,922    N=18,922   N=136,711   N=54,475    N=11,791



Panel 4: Health
behaviors
Unhealthy                -0.010     -0.00002     -0.012      -0.001      0.001      -0.021*
behavior index          (0.010)      (0.006)    (0.015)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.011)
                       N=139,632   N=139,632   N=139,632   N=839,812   N=369,376   N=84,126
  Current smoker        -0.006      -0.009*      0.001      -0.004      -0.008       0.009
                        (0.007)     (0.005)     (0.015)     (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.008)
                       N=144,646   N=144,646   N=144,646   N=866,793   N=381,792   N=86,995
  Heavy drinking        -0.004     -0.006***     0.002      -0.0002     -0.002      -0.007*
                        (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.007)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.004)
                       N=140,090   N=140,090   N=140,090   N=845,607   N=370,999   N=84,498
  Binge drinking        -0.002      -0.004       0.003      -0.003      -0.005      -0.003
                        (0.006)     (0.004)     (0.014)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.009)
                       N=140,255   N=140,255   N=140,255   N=846,108   N=371,344   N=84,589
  Exercise               0.007       0.001      -0.004      -0.007      -0.001       0.009
                        (0.010)     (0.006)     (0.017)     (0.004)     (0.007)     (0.021)
                       N=142,055   N=142,055   N=142,055   N=855,012   N=375,875   N=85,658
  BMI (x100)                          7.17       13.21        -1.41       1.73        0.12
                                    (13.10)     (27.61)      (5.33)      (9.32)     (21.86)
                                   N=138,170   N=138,170   N=841,312   N=367,567   N=82,811
  Obese                  0.005       0.009       0.003       0.001       0.004       -0.002
                        (0.010)     (0.006)     (0.016)     (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.011)
                       N=138,170   N=138,170   N=138,170   N=841,312   N=367,567   N=82,811

Panel 5: Self-
assessed health
General health                      0.030**     0.077**      -0.005      0.023     0.137***
                                    (0.014)     (0.038)     (0.008)     (0.014)     (0.049)
                                   N=147,363   N=147,363   N=881,077   N=388,643   N=88,289
Number of                            -0.225      -0.284      0.004       -0.088      -0.594
unhealthy days                      (0.170)     (0.253)     (0.144)     (0.262)     (0.375)
                                   N=148,039   N=148,039   N=883,394   N=390,079   N=88,765
  Number days mental                -0.185      -0.152      -0.070      -0.056      -0.528*
  health not good                   (0.147)     (0.298)     (0.125)     (0.224)     (0.309)
                                   N=144,734   N=144,734   N=871,742   N=382,773   N=86,599


                                                     41
  Number days                                      -0.145                  0.153                  0.100                  0.056                 -0.479*
  physical health not                              (0.148)                (0.189)                (0.092)                (0.185)                (0.272)
  good                                            N=144,148              N=144,148              N=870,217              N=381,556              N=86,192
Number days poor                                   -0.057                 -0.200                 -0.090                -0.085                  -0.183
health prevented                                  (0.163)                (0.387)                (0.121)               (0.224)                 (0.385)
usual activities                                 N=102,250              N=102,250              N=492,178             N=255,186               N=61,887

Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. Column 1 displays marginal effects. The cancer screenings regressions are limited to women above age 21,
and the mammogram regression is limited to women over age 50. State-clustered standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions also control for gender,
marital status, household size, race, unemployment status, age, education, state unemployment rate, whether the respondent was part of the cell-phone sample,
state-fixed effects, and quarter/year-fixed effects. Data is adjusted by BRFSS sample weights. See Table A1 for states in expansion and non-expansion
categories. Larger fonts indicate summary measures and smaller fonts indicate detailed outcomes. See Appendix B for variable definitions. *** Significant at the
1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                               42
  Appendix A: Models Excluding Mild Expansion States

       In order to focus on treatment and control groups of states that are as “clean” as possible,

we first drop nine states plus DC that had partial eligibility for low-income adults before 2014

and thus experienced what we term only “mild” or “substantial” (but not full) expansion in 2014.

Excluded states include three states plus DC that that enacted the ACA Medicaid expansion in

2011-12 (CA, CT, MN, DC), five states that partially expanded Medicaid to childless adults

before 2014 (DE, HI, MA, NY, and VT), and one1 non-expansion state that made

comprehensive insurance coverage available to childless adults through alternate programs (WI).

Next, we implement a specification in which we drop just the four states plus DC that had the

strongest Medicaid expansions prior to 2014, and thus mild expansion in 2014. These include

DC, DE, MA, NY, and VT; this categorization corresponds to Wherry and Miller (2016). Our

final categorizations of states in these specifications are displayed in Table A1. States in column

1 are considered “expansion” states, those in column 4 are considered “non-expansion” states,

and those in columns 2 and 3 are excluded from analysis successively.

       Results from the models excluding substantial and mild expansion states are displayed in

Table A2. As expected, the impact of Medicaid expansion is stronger on these “clean” groups of

expansion states, in terms of both magnitude and statistical significant of coefficients. In the

model that excludes both mild and substantial expansion states, Table A2, panel 1 shows that the

expansion of Medicaid eligibility in 2014 increased the probability that low-income adults had

health insurance coverage by 8.9 percentage points (15%). The increase in insurance rate for

childless adults was even larger (14.0 percentage points or 25%). In the model that excludes only

mild expansion states, Table A2, panel 1 shows that expansion of Medicaid eligibility increased

the probability that all low-income adults had insurance by 6.6 percentage points (11%) and that



                                                  43
low-income childless adults had insurance by 11.4 percentage points (19%). In both models, the

impact of Medicaid expansion on the remaining outcomes is similar to our main model, with

improvements in access to care, improvements in certain forms of preventive care such as HIV

tests and dentist visits, little impact on health behaviors, and significant improvement in self-

assessed health.




                                                  44
Table A1. Classification of Expansion and Non-Expansion States
       Full Expansion (1)     Substantial Expansion (2)     Mild Expansion (3)         Non-expansion (4)
              1                          6                           10
  1     Alaska                   California                    Delaware                   Alabama
  2     Arizona2                 Connecticut6                  District of Columbia6      Florida
  3     Arkansas3                Hawaii8                       Massachusetts11            Georgia
  4     Colorado 4               Minnesota6                    New York12                 Idaho
  5     Illinois                 Wisconsin9                    Vermont13                  Kansas
  6     Indiana1                                                                          Louisiana1
              5
  7     Iowa                                                                              Maine
  8     Kentucky                                                                          Mississippi
  9     Maryland                                                                          Missouri
  10 Michigan1                                                                            Montana1
                         1
  11 New Hampshire                                                                        Nebraska
  12 New Jersey6                                                                          North Carolina
  13 North Dakota                                                                         Oklahoma
  14 New Mexico                                                                           South Carolina
  15 Nevada                                                                               South Dakota
  16 Ohio                                                                                 Tennessee
  17 Oregon7                                                                              Texas
  18 Pennsylvania1                                                                        Utah
  19 Rhode Island                                                                         Virginia
  20 Washington6                                                                          Wyoming
  21 West Virginia
Note: This table shows the state classification as regards Medicaid eligibility for adults. These are mutually
exclusive lists of states. In our primary specification in the main paper, states in columns 1-3 are considered
“expansion” states, and those in column 4 are considered “non-expansion” states. In the sensitivity checks
in Appendix A, states in column 1 are considered “expansion” states, those in column 4 are considered
“non-expansion” states, and those in columns 2-3 are successively excluded from analysis.
1
  The Medicaid expansion became effective in January 2014 for all expansion states except for the
following: Alaska (September 2015), Indiana (February 2015), Louisiana (July 2016), Michigan (April
2014), Montana (January 2016), New Hampshire (August 2014), and Pennsylvania (January 2015). Since
our data go through 2015, we identified those states that expanded in after January 2014 but before January
2016 as expansion states only in the quarters after the expansion was implemented.
2
  Since 2000, Arizona offered Medicaid-equivalent benefits to childless adults with incomes below 100% FPL
through a Section 1115 waiver program. However, the state closed the program to new enrollees in July 2011
(Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015) and consequently experienced a significant expansion for childless adults in 2014.
3
  Arkansas operated a limited-benefit premium-assistance program for childless adults who worked for small
uninsured employers (ARHealthNetworks waiver) (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015) prior to the ACA.
4
  Colorado had only very limited eligibility before 2014. Adults with income up to 10% FPL were eligible for
Medicaid as of May 2012, and enrollment was capped to 10,000 adults (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015).
5
  Under the IowaCare program, childless adults with income below 200% FPL were eligible for public health
insurance since 2005. However, IowaCare provided limited services in a limited network, and so low-income adults
in Iowa effectively underwent substantial expansion in coverage in 2014 (Damiano et al., 2013).
6
  California, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Minnesota, New Jersey, and Washington elected to enact the ACA
Medicaid expansion in 2010-11. However, New Jersey’s early expansion only extended to 23% FPL while the other
five states extended at least until 50% FPL (Sommers et al., 2013). Also, Washington’s early expansion was limited
to prior state plan enrollees (Sommers et al., 2013). Therefore we treat New Jersey and Washington as full 2014
expansion states.
7
  In 2008, Oregon enacted a small Medicaid expansion for low-income adults through lottery drawings from a
waitlist. However, less than one-third of the 90,000 people on the waitlist were selected to apply for Medicaid in
2008 (Baicker et al., 2013) and so the 2014 expansion represented a significant increase in eligibility for low-income
adults.
8
  In Hawaii, childless adults with incomes up to 100% FPL were eligible for the state’s QUEST Medicaid managed
care waiver program (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015).


                                                          45
9
  Although Wisconsin was not an ACA expansion state, the state received federal approval to offer Medicaid to
childless adults below 100% FPL through the BadgerCare program as of 2009 (Gates & Rudowitz, 2014).
10
   In Delaware, childless adults with incomes up to 100% FPL were eligible for Medicaid benefits through the
Diamond State Health Plan waiver (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015).
11
    Massachusetts implemented reforms to expand insurance coverage to low-income adults in 2006 (Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2015).
12
   In New York, childless adults up to 78% FPL were eligible for the Medicaid (Home Relief) waiver program and
childless adults up to 100% FPL were eligible for the Family Health Plus waiver program (Heberlein et al., 2011).
13
    In Vermont, childless adults up to 150% FPL were eligible for Medicaid-equivalent coverage through the
Vermont Health Access Plan waiver program (Heberlein et al., 2011).




                                                        46
Table A2. DD Estimates excluding Mild Expansion States
                              Excluding mild and substantial expansion states                   Excluding mild expansion states
                                  All adults              Childless adults only             All adults              Childless adults only
                           Pre-2014      Estimate (2)   Pre-2014      Estimate (4)   Pre-2014      Estimate (6)   Pre-2014      Estimate (8)
                           mean (1)                     mean (3)                     mean (5)                     mean (7)
Panel 1: Insurance
Have insurance                            0.089***                     0.140***                     0.066***                     0.114***
                             0.58                          0.57                        0.60                          0.59
                                           (0.017)                      (0.021)                      (0.015)                      (0.023)
                            (0.49)                        (0.50)                      (0.49)                        (0.49)
                                         N=118,854                     N=55,541                    N=136,189                     N=62,957

Panel 2: Access to
care
Good access to                            0.024**                       0.027**                     0.024***                     0.028***
                             0.82                          0.83                        0.81                          0.82
care index                                (0.010)                       (0.010)                      (0.007)                      (0.008)
                            (0.38)                        (0.38)                      (0.39)                        (0.38)
                                         N=119,041                     N=55,674                    N=136,425                     N=63,120
  Have personal doctor                      0.022*                       0.043**                     0.035***                      0.045***
                              0.63                          0.64                        0.57                          0.60
                                            (0.012)                      (0.016)                      (0.012)                       (0.014)
                             (0.48)                        (0.48)                      (0.49)                        (0.49)
                                          N=118,841                     N=55,575                    N=136,191                     N-62,997
  Cost a barrier to care                   -0.026**                     -0.037**                    -0.026***                     -0.045***
                              0.37                          0.37                        0.35                          0.35
                                            0.012)                       (0.014)                      (0.009)                       (0.012)
                             (0.48)                        (0.48)                      (0.48)                        (0.48)
                                          N=118,967                     N=55,592                    N=136,343                     N=63,033


Panel 3:
Preventive care
Number of                                  0.028                        0.100*                       0.007                        0.079*
                             1.58                          1.50                        1.53                          1.47
preventive services                       (0.046)                       (0.059)                     (0.037)                       (0.046)
                            (1.04)                        (1.03)                      (1.04)                        (1.04)
received                                 N=65,254                      N=30,581                    N=74,550                      N=34,543
  Routine checkup                           0.010                         0.039                       0.008                        0.039*
                              0.57                          0.56                        0.55                          0.55
                                           (0.018)                       (0.029)                     (0.014)                       (0.020)
                             (0.50)                        (0.50)                      (0.50)                        (0.50)
                                          N=117,295                     N=54,780                    N=134,554                     N=62,155
  Flu shot                                  0.013                         0.013                       0.013                         0.015
                              0.19                          0.21                        0.18                          0.20
                                           (0.012)                       (0.018)                     (0.010)                       (0.015)
                             (0.39)                        (0.40)                      (0.39)                        (0.40)
                                          N=112,220                     N=52,959                    N=127,632                     N=59,684
  HIV test                                 0.028**                        0.015                      0.022**                        0.027
                              0.48                          0.42                        0.46                          0.39
                                           (0.011)                       (0.021)                     (0.009)                       (0.019)
                             (0.50)                        (0.49)                      (0.50)                        (0.49)
                                          N=108,333                     N=50,923                    N=123,197                     N=57,408
  Dentist visit                            -0.007                       0.055***                     0.0001                        0.043**
                              0.46                          0.43                        0.47                          0.45
                                           (0.017)                       (0.019)                     (0.015)                       (0.016)
                             (0.50)                        (0.49)                      (0.50)                        (0.50)
                                          N=64,549                      N=30,207                    N=73,801                      N=34,149



                                                                               47
Received any                          0.021      0.42        0.035                  0.021                  0.034
                          0.45                                          0.59                   0.46
cancer screenings                    (0.033)    (0.49)      (0.039)                (0.030)                (0.033)
                         (0.50)                                        (0.49)                 (0.50)
index                               N=15,768               N=11,619               N=17,415               N=12,805
  Clinical breast exam                 0.018                0.035*                   0.003                 0.006
                           0.57                   0.56                   0.48                   0.58
                                      (0.016)               (0.020)                 (0.016)               (0.023)
                          (0.50)                 (0.50)                 (0.50)                 (0.49)
                                     N=38,140              N=16,167                N=42,726              N=17,859
  Pap test                             0.023                 0.016                   0.010                -0.019
                           0.44                   0.43                   0.53                   0.48
                                      (0.021)               (0.025)                 (0.018)               (0.029)
                          (0.50)                 (0.50)                 (0.50)                 (0.50)
                                     N=38,021              N=16,120                N=42,592              N=17,809
  Mammogram                            0.001                 0.027                  -0.009                 0.019
                           0.48                   0.36                   0.48                   0.40
                                      (0.035)               (0.033)                 (0.032)               (0.030)
                          (0.50)                 (0.48)                 (0.50)                 (0.49)
                                     N=15,813              N=11,656                N=17,467              N=12,848




Panel 4: Health
behaviors
Unhealthy                             -0.012                 -0.027                 -0.014                 -0.022
                          0.78                   0.79                   0.74                   0.75
behavior index                       (0.010)                (0.018)                (0.009)                (0.016)
                         (0.42)                 (0.41)                 (0.44)                 (0.43)
                                    N=113,207              N=53,661               N=129,124              N=60,623
  Current smoker                     -0.005                -0.019**                -0.003                 -0.018*
                           0.36                   0.38                   0.28                   0.32
                                     (0.008)                (0.010)                (0.007)                (0.009)
                          (0.48)                 (0.48)                 (0.45)                 (0.47)
                                    N=116,980              N=54,785               N=133,762              N=62,018
  Heavy drinking                     -0.006                 -0.006                 -0.003                 -0.003
                           0.05                   0.07                   0.05                   0.07
                                     (0.004)                (0.007)                (0.004)                (0.006)
                          (0.22)                 (0.26)                 (0.21)                 (0.25)
                                    N=113,656              N=53,292               N=129,549              N=60,188
  Binge drinking                     -0.002                 -0.002                 -0.001                 0.0002
                           0.17                   0.19                   0.17                   0.19
                                     (0.007)                (0.016)                (0.006)                (0.014)
                          (0.37)                 (0.39)                 (0.37)                 (0.39)
                                    N=113,801              N=53,290               N=129,706              N=60,185
  Exercise                            0.015                  0.034                  0.013                 0.038*
                           0.65                   0.64                   0.68                   0.67
                                     (0.011)                (0.023)                (0.010)                (0.022)
                          (0.48)                 (0.48)                 (0.47)                 (0.47)
                                    N=115,100              N=54,123               N=131,420              N=61,158

  BMI (x100)                          6.37                   19.59                  3.98                   22.87
                         2868.98                2825.92                2836.95                2793.55
                                     (18.20)                (31.75)                (15.44)                (24.93)
                         (764.37)               (759.57)               (722.40)               (748.07)
                                    N=111,529              N=53,275               N=127,725              N=60,398
  Obese                              -0.001                  0.002                 -0.003                 0.0002
                           0.35                   0.33                   0.33                   0.31
                                     (0.009)                (0.014)                (0.009)                (0.011)
                          (0.48)                 (0.47)                 (0.47)                 (0.46)
                                    N=111,529              N=53,275               N=127,725              N=60,398


Panel 5: Self-


                                                                  48
assessed health
General health                          0.084***                         0.128***                       0.084***                         0.140***
                          2.98                             2.84                            3.01                            2.93
                                         (0.027)                          (0.026)                        (0.021)                          (0.025)
                         (1.15)                           (1.22)                          (1.14)                          (1.23)
                                       N=118,822                        N=55,521                       N=136,208                        N=62,962
Number of                                 -0.358                        -1.279***                         -0.359                        -1.310***
                          11.61                           13.25                           10.49                           12.28
unhealthy days                           (0.307)                          (0.339)                        (0.287)                          (0.296)
                         (12.43)                         (12.95)                         (11.98)                         (12.52)
                                       N=119,407                        N=55,846                       N=136,827                        N=63,310
  Number days mental                     -0.238                          -1.097***                       -0.262                          -1.140***
                          7.76                             8.81                            6.80                            8.00
  health not good                        (0.271)                          (0.244)                        (0.221)                          (0.231)
                         (10.90)                          (11.45)                         (10.22)                         (10.86)
                                        N=116,605                        N=54,219                       N=133,813                        N=61,553
  Number days                            -0.300                          -1.182***                       -0.152                          -0.959***
                          7.05                             8.77                            6.19                            7.81
  physical health not                    (0.222)                          (0.302)                        (0.226)                          (0.273)
                         (10.67)                          (11.65)                         (9.93)                          (11.07)
  good                                  N=116,098                        N=53,996                       N=133,284                        N=61,345
Number days poor                         -0.296                         -1.584***                         -0.328                        -1.388***
                          8.41                            10.34                           7.47                            9.41
health prevented                        (0.331)                           (0.342)                        (0.289)                          (0.324)
                         (11.07)                         (11.94)                         (10.44)                         (11.43)
usual activities                       N=83,132                         N=41,244                        N=94,489                        N=46,541


Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. In columns 2 and 6, sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. Columns 4 and 8
include only non-elderly, <100% FPL without children below 18. The cancer screenings regressions are limited to women above age 21, and the mammogram
regression is limited to women over age 50. State-clustered standard errors are in parentheses for DD estimates. All regressions also control for gender, marital
status, household size, race, unemployment status, age, education, state unemployment rate, whether the respondent was part of the cell-phone sample, state-fixed
effects, and quarter/year-fixed effects. Data is adjusted by BRFSS sample weights. See Table A1 for states in expansion and non-expansion categories. Columns
1-4 exclude “substantial” and “mild” expansion states listed in Table A1, columns 2-3. Columns 5-8 exclude only “mild” expansion states listed in Table A1,
column 3. Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 display variable’s mean value for the expansion group in 2010-13, adjusted by BRFSS sample weight. Standard deviations are
in parentheses for pre-treatment means. Larger fonts indicate summary measures and smaller fonts indicate detailed outcomes. See Appendix B for variable
definitions. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                49
Appendix B: Variable Definitions

       Below, we describe in detail each outcome we analyze, which fall into the categories of:

insurance coverage, access to care, preventive care, health behaviors, and self-assessed health.

For categories with multiple measures, we construct an overall index and also examine the

individual components as outcomes.         The text of the questions is from the BRFSS

questionnaires.

   •   Have Insurance: Individuals were asked, “Do you have any kind of healthcare coverage,

       including health insurance, prepaid plans such as HMOs, or government plans such as

       Medicare or Indian Health Service?” Those who responded “Yes” were coded as “1,”

       those who responded “No” were coded as “0,” and those who responded “Don’t

       know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

   •   Good access to care index: We constructed this variable as a binary variable equal to 1 if

       the individual either responded “no” when asked if cost was a barrier to care or “yes”

       when asked if they had a primary care physician. The outcome was coded as 0 if the

       individual responded “yes” when asked if cost was a barrier to care and “no” when asked

       if they had a primary care physician.

           o Have personal doctor: Individuals were asked, “Do you have one person you

              think of as your personal doctor or healthcare provider?” We coded the variable

              as 1 if the response was either “Yes, only one” or “Yes, more than one,” and

              coded it as 0 if the response was “No.” Those who responded “Don’t know/not

              sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

           o Cost a barrier to care: Individuals were asked, “Was there a time in the past 12

              months when you needed to see a doctor but could not because of cost?” Those



                                                50
           who responded “Yes” were coded as “1,” those who responded “No” were coded

           as “0,” and those who responded “Don’t know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded

           as missing.

•   Number of preventive services received: We constructed this index as the sum of the four

    components below. The index can theoretically range from 0 (for someone who received

    none of the four services below) to 4 (for someone who received all of the services

    below). Because one component of the index (dentist visits) is only available for even

    years, our models for this index outcome incorporate only even years of BRFSS data.

       o Routine checkup: Individuals were asked, “About how long has it been since you

           last visited a doctor for a routine checkup? (A routine checkup is a general

           physical exam, not an exam for a specific injury, illness, or condition.)” Those

           who responded “Within past year” were coded as 1. Those who responded

           “Within past 2 years ([more than] 1 year but less than 2 years ago),” “Within past

           5 years ([more than] 2 years but less than 5 years ago),” “5 or more years ago,” or

           “Never” were coded as 0. Those who responded “Don’t know/not sure” or

           “Refused” were coded as missing.

       o Flu shot: Individuals were asked, “During the past 12 months, have you had

           either a flu shot or a flu vaccine that was sprayed in your nose?” Those who

           responded “Yes” were coded as “1,” those who responded “No” were coded as

           “0,” and those who responded “Don’t know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded as

           missing.

       o HIV test: Individuals were asked, “Have you ever been tested for HIV? Do not

           count tests you may have had as part of a blood donation. Include testing fluid



                                             51
           from your mouth.” Those who responded “Yes” were coded as “1,” those who

           responded “No” were coded as “0,” and those who responded “Don’t know/not

           sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

       o Dentist visit: Individuals were asked, “How long has it been since you last visited

           a dentist or a dental clinic for any reason? Include visits to dental specialists, such

           as orthodontists.” Those who responded “Within past year” were coded as 1.

           Those who responded “Within past 2 years ([more than] 1 year but less than 2

           years ago),” “Within past 5 years ([more than] 2 years but less than 5 years ago),”

           “5 or more years ago,” or “Never” were coded as 0. Those who responded “Don’t

           know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

•   Received any cancer screenings: We constructed this index only for women using the

    three components below. The variable was coded as 1 if the individual responded “yes”

    to having received any of the cancer screenings below in the past year and as 0 if the

    individual responded “no” for all of the cancer screenings below in the past year. It was

    coded as missing for individuals who had missing data for all three screenings.

       o Clinical breast exam: Women were asked the questions, “A clinical breast exam

           is when a doctor, nurse, or other health professional feels the breast for lumps.

           Have you had a clinical breast exam?” and “How long has it been since your last

           breast exam?” We coded our outcome variable as 1 if the individual responded

           “yes” to the first question and “within past year” to the second question. We

           coded our outcome variable as 0 if the individual responded “no” or “don’t

           know/not sure” to the first question or responded “yes” to the first question and

           “within past 2 years ([more than] 1 year but less than 2 years ago),” “within past 3



                                              52
   years ([more than] 2 years but less than 3 years ago),” “within past 5 years ([more

   than] 3 years but less than 5 years ago),” “5 or more years ago,” or “Don’t

   know/not sure” to the second question. We coded our outcome variable as

   missing if the response to either question was “Refused” or if the individual was

   not a woman above 21.

o Pap test: Women were asked the questions, “A Pap test is a test for cancer of the

   cervix. Have you ever had a Pap test?” and “How long has it been since you had

   your last Pap test?” We coded our outcome variable as 1 if the individual

   responded “yes” to the first question and “within past year” to the second

   question. We coded our outcome variable as 0 if the individual responded “no” to

   the first question or responded “yes” to the first question and “within past 2 years

   ([more than] 1 year but less than 2 years ago),” “within past 3 years ([more than]

   2 years but less than 3 years ago),” “within past 5 years ([more than] 3 years but

   less than 5 years ago),” “5 or more years ago,” or “Don’t know/not sure” to the

   second question. We coded our outcome variable as missing if the response to

   either question was “Refused” or if the individual was not a woman above 21.

o Mammogram: Women were asked the questions, “A mammogram is an x-ray of

   each breast to look for breast cancer. Have you ever had a mammogram?” and

   “How long has it been since you had your last mammogram?” We coded our

   outcome variable as 1 if the individual responded “yes” to the first question and

   “within past year” to the second question. We coded our outcome variable as 0 if

   the individual responded “no” to the first question or responded “yes” to the first

   question and “within past 2 years ([more than] 1 year but less than 2 years ago),”



                                     53
           “within past 3 years ([more than] 2 years but less than 3 years ago),” “within past

           5 years ([more than] 3 years but less than 5 years ago),” “5 or more years ago,”

           “Don’t know/not sure,” or “Refused” to the second question. We coded our

           outcome variable as missing if the response to the first question was “Refused” or

           “Don’t know/not sure,” or if the individual was not a woman above 50.

•   Unhealthy behavior index: We constructed this index using the components below. The

    variable was coded as 1 if the individual responded “yes” to being a current smoker,

    engaging in heavy drinking, or engaging in binge drinking, or “no” to having exercised in

    the past month, or if their reported height/weight qualifies as overweight/obese. The

    variable was coded as 0 if the individual is not obese and responded “no” to being a

    current smoker, engaging in heavy drinking, and engaging in binge drinking, and “yes”

    to having exercised in the past month. It was coded as missing for individuals who had

    missing data for all three variables.

       o Current smoker: We constructed this using the BRFSS-calculated variable

           “Adults who are current smokers.” Those who currently smoke either every day

           or some days were coded as 1, and those who formerly smoked or never smoked

           were coded as 0. Those who responded “don’t know/not sure” or “refused” were

           coded as missing.

       o Heavy drinking: We constructed this using the BRFSS-calculated variable

           “Heavy drinkers (adult men having more than two drinks per day and adult

           women having more than one drink per day)” during the past 30 days. Those who

           engaged in heavy drinking were coded as 1, and those who did not were coded as




                                             54
           0. Those who responded “don’t know/not sure” or “refused” were coded as

           missing.

       o Binge drinking: We constructed this using the BRFSS calculated variable “Binge

           drinkers (males having five or more drinks on one occasion, females having four

           or more drinks on one occasion)” during the past 30 days. Those who engaged in

           binge drinking were coded as 1, and those who did not were coded as 0. Those

           who responded “don’t know/not sure” or “refused” were coded as missing.

       o Exercise: Individuals were asked, “During the past month, other than your regular

           job, did you participate in any physical activities or exercises such as running,

           calisthenics, golf, gardening, or walking for exercise?” Those who responded

           “Yes” were coded as “1,” those who responded “No” were coded as “0,” and

           those who responded “Don’t know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

       o BMI (x100): This was a BRFSS-calculated variable using individuals’ reported

           height and weight. BRFSS divided weight by the square of height, and so the

           value has two implied decimal places. Those who reported height or weight as

           “Don’t know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

       o Obese: We used the BRFSS-calculated BMI to construct this variable. Those

           whose BMI(x100) was calculated as greater than or equal to 3,000 but less than

           9,999 were coded as 1. Those whose BMI(x100) was calculated as less than 2,500

           were coded as 0. Those whose BMI was missing were coded as missing.

•   General Health: Individuals were asked, “Would you say that in general your health is

    excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor?” We coded “Excellent” as 5, “Very good” as 4,




                                             55
    “Good” as 3, “Fair” as 2, and “Poor” as 1. Those who responded “Don’t know/not sure”

    or “Refused” were coded as missing.

•   Number of unhealthy days: We constructed this index by taking the sum of the two

    components below and setting the max to 30.

       o Number of days mental health not good: Individuals were asked, “Now thinking

           about your mental health, which includes stress, depression, and problems with

           emotions, for how many days during the past 30 days was your mental health not

           good?” This variable can theoretically range from 0 to 30. Those who responded

           “Don’t know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

       o Number of days physical health not good: Individuals were asked, “Now thinking

           about your physical health, which includes physical illness and injury, for how

           many days during the past 30 days was your mental health not good?” This

           variable can theoretically range from 0 to 30. Those who responded “Don’t

           know/not sure” or “Refused” were coded as missing.

•   Number of days poor health prevented usual activities: Individuals were asked, “During

    the past 30 days, for about how many days did poor physical or mental health keep you

    from doing your usual activities, such as self-care, work, or recreation?” This variable

    can theoretically range from 0 to 30. Those who responded “Don’t know/not sure” or

    “Refused” were coded as missing.




                                              56
Appendix C: Trends in Outcomes, Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States




                                          57
58
59
Notes: Source is BRFSS 2010-2015. Sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. Data are
adjusted by BRFSS sample weight. See Table 1 for states in expansion and non-expansion categories. The vertical
lines indicate Q4 of 2013 and Q1 of 2014; thus, Medicaid expansions took place in between the two vertical lines.
   Data on dentist visits, cancer screenings index, clinical breast exams, Pap tests, and mammograms was not
available for most states in odd years, so we drop the years 2011, 2013, and 2015 only for these outcomes.
Consequently, the number of preventive services received index (which sums dentist visits, flu shots, HIV tests, and
routine checkups) drops for all groups in odd years because data for one component of the index (dentist visits) is
not available in these years.




                                                         60
Appendix D: Dichotomized General Health Outcome


       Because the outcome “general health” is measured on an ordinal 5‐point scale, the linear

model estimated in our main paper implies that the distance between a 1 and a 2 (poor vs. fair

health) has the same meaning as the distance between a 4 and 5 (very good vs. excellent). To

better assess changes in self-assessed health, we dichotomized the “general health” index into a

series of indicators: “Good or better,” which equals 1 if the “general health” value is 3 or higher;

“Very good or better,” which equals 1 if the “general health” value is 4 or higher; and

“Excellent,” which equals 1 if the “general health” value is 5. We estimated separate models for

each of these three outcomes.

       Results are displayed in Table A3, and corresponding trends graphs are displayed in

Figure A1. For the pooled sample, there was a 2.2 percentage point increase in the probability of

reporting “good” or better health (3% rise from pre-expansion level), a 2.8 percentage point (9%)

increase in the probability of reporting “very good” or better health, and a 1.8 percentage point

(14%) increase in the probability of reporting “excellent” health. For childless adults, there was a

5.4 percentage point (9%) increase in the probability of reporting “good” or better health, a 3.6

percentage point (11%) increase in the probability of reporting “very good” or better health, and

2.0 percentage point increase (15%) in the probability of reporting “excellent” health. This

suggests that the observed increases in the linear general health outcome in the main paper came

primarily from increases in reports of “good,” “very good,” and “excellent” health.




                                                  61
Table A3. DD Estimates for Dichotomized “General Health” for Low-Income, Non-Elderly Adults

                            All adults                 All women                   All men              Childless adults only          Parents only
                                   Estimate                  Estimate                    Estimate                    Estimate                   Estimate
                      Pre-2014                    Pre-2014                  Pre-2014                   Pre-2014                   Pre-2014
                                       (2)                      (4)                         (6)                         (8)                       (10)
                      mean (1)                    mean (3)                  mean (5)                   mean (7)                   mean (9)

General health                      0.022***                    0.013                     0.037**                   0.054***                     0.003
                         0.68                       0.67                       0.68                       0.63                       0.71
“Good” or better                     (0.006)                   (0.010)                    (0.015)                    (0.013)                    (0.009)
                        (0.47)                     (0.47)                     (0.47)                     (0.48)                     (0.46)
                                   N=148,039                  N=97,731                   N=50,308                   N=68,845                   N=79,194
General health                      0.028***                   0.020**                    0.039**                   0.036***                    0.025*
                         0.32                       0.31                       0.34                       0.33                       0.32
“Very good” or                       (0.007)                   (0.009)                    (0.017)                    (0.007)                    (0.013)
                        (0.47)                     (0.46)                     (0.47)                     (0.47)                     (0.47)
better                             N=148,039                  N=97,731                   N=50,308                   N=68,845                   N=79,194
General health                      0.018***                  0.019***                     0.015                     0.020**                    0.018*
                         0.13                       0.12                       0.14                       0.13                       0.13
“Excellent”                          (0.006)                   (0.007)                    (0.012)                    (0.008)                    (0.010)
                        (0.34)                     (0.32)                     (0.35)                     (0.34)                     (0.33)
                                   N=148,039                  N=97,731                   N=50,308                   N=68,845                   N=79,194

Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. In columns 1-2, sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. In columns 3-4, sample
includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL women. Columns 5-6 includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL men. Columns 7-8 includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL
without children below 18. Columns 9-10 includes only non-elderly, <100% FPL with children below 18. State-clustered standard errors are in parentheses for
DD estimates. All regressions also control for gender, marital status, household size, race, unemployment status, age, education, state unemployment rate,
whether the respondent was part of the cell-phone sample, state-fixed effects, and quarter/year-fixed effects. Data is adjusted by BRFSS sample weights. See
Table A1 for states in expansion and non-expansion categories.




                                                                              62
Figure A1. Trends for Dichotomized “General Health” for Low-Income, Non-Elderly
Adults




Notes: Source is BRFSS 2010-2015. Sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. Data are
adjusted by BRFSS sample weight. See Table 1 for states in expansion and non-expansion categories. The vertical
lines indicate Q4 of 2013 and Q1 of 2014; thus, Medicaid expansions took place in between the two vertical lines.




                                                        63
Appendix E: Wild Cluster Bootstrap-t Procedure

       In our main DD model, we cluster standard errors by state. However, standard asymptotic

tests may over-reject the null hypothesis with a small number of clusters. We assess whether our

results are robust to an alternative method of conducting inference. Following an example in

Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008), we use as our left-hand variable the mean of each

outcome variable calculated at year-quarter level for treatment and control groups. This reduces

the number of observations to 44, and we cluster at year-quarter level of 22 clusters. Our right-

hand side variables are an indicator for expansion, an indicator for the period following the start

of Medicaid expansion (January 2014 and onwards), and an interaction of these. A similar

method was used in Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013).

       As shown in Table A4, using the wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure does not affect the

significance of the majority of our results. For the sample of all low-income adults, we observe

statistically significant increases in insurance, access to care, and self-assessed general health,

with little impact on preventive care and health behaviors. For the childless adults sample, we

observe larger increases in insurance, access to care, and self-assessed health. The only notable

difference in the wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure is that dentist visits are not significant for

childless adults (whereas we observed a significant increase in dentist visits in our main DD

model), and we observe a significant 4.1 percentage point increase in probability of receiving a

routine checkup (whereas routine checkups were insignificant in our main DD model). Overall,

using this alternative form of inference testing does not change the significance of our results.




                                                   64
Table A4. DD Results using Aggregated Quarterly Data and Wild Cluster Bootstrap-t
Procedure

                                    All adults                Childless adults
                           Estimate (1)    p-value (2)   Estimate (3)    p-value (4)
Panel 1: Insurance
Have insurance              0.062***         0.001        0.126***         0.001

Panel 2: Access to
care
Good access to
                            0.029***         0.001        0.039***         0.008
care index
  Have personal doctor       0.061***         0.008        0.074***         0.002
  Cost a barrier to care     -0.023**         0.016        -0.048***        0.004


Panel 3:
Preventive care
Number of
preventive services           0.030          0.419         0.097**         0.041
received
  Routine checkup             0.001           0.598        0.041**          0.032
  Flu shot                    0.012           0.132          0.019          0.158
  HIV test                    0.021           0.182          0.031          0.104
  Dentist visit               0.002           0.903          0.034          0.207
Received any
cancer screenings             0.025          0.395          0.023          0.419
index
  Clinical breast exam        0.008           0.657          0.005          0.807
  Pap test                    0.001           0.981         -0.011          0.777
  Mammogram                   -0.002          0.929          0.006          0.865




Panel 4: Health
behaviors
Unhealthy
                             -0.004          0.728         -0.002          0.914
behavior index
  Current smoker
                              0.009           0.406         -0.007          0.662

  Heavy drinking
                              -0.005          0.396         -0.006          0.464

  Binge drinking
                              -0.007          0.350         -0.001          0.930

  Exercise
                              -0.002          0.824          0.016          0.362


  BMI (x100)
                              8.608           0.748         41.73*          0.080



                                                           65
  Obese                   0.005            0.744           0.014            0.412


Panel 5: Self-
assessed health
General health           0.057*           0.086          0.087**           0.048
Number of
                          -0.057          0.814           -0.685           0.132
unhealthy days
  Number days mental
                          0.002            0.976          -0.730*           0.086
  health not good
  Number days
  physical health not     0.090            0.750           -0.375           0.342
  good
Number days poor
health prevented          -0.137          0.528           -1.039*          0.056
usual activities

Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. Dependent variable is mean (weighted by BRFSS sample
weights) of outcome calculated at year-quarter level for treatment and control states. Number of observations is 44.
Explanatory variables are an indicator for the quarters after the expansion, an indicator for expansion status, and an
interaction of these two terms. We perform wild cluster bootstrap-t test with 999 replications and cluster on year-
quarter, following examples in Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) and Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013).
In columns 1-2, sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. Columns 3-4 include only non-
elderly, <100% FPL without children below 18. The cancer screenings regressions are limited to women above age
21, and the mammogram regression is limited to women over age 50. See Table A1 for states in expansion and non-
expansion categories. Larger fonts indicate summary measures and smaller fonts indicate detailed outcomes. See
Appendix B for variable definitions. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, *
Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                          66
Appendix F: Instrumental Variables Model

       We estimated a set of instrumental variables (IV) models with insurance as the binary

endogenous variable and the DD interaction “Treat X Post” as the instrument. The IV models

suggest that insurance caused a significant increase in access to care, certain forms of preventive

care (HIV tests for all low-income adults and dentist visits for childless adults), and self-assessed

health and that insurance did not result in any significant change in risky health behaviors. These

results confirm our findings in our main DD model. Also, the magnitudes of the IV estimates

largely fall in line with the implied elasticities of the DD approach, detailed in Appendix H.




                                                  67
Table A5. Instrumental Variables Specification

                                           All adults                       Childless adults
                                 Pre-2014 mean     Estimate (2)   Pre-2014 mean        Estimate (4)
                                       (1)                              (3)

Panel 1: Access to care
Good access to care index                            0.305**                           0.283***
                                      0.83                             0.83
                                                     (0.141)                            (0.081)
                                     (0.38)                           (0.37)
                                                    N=146,944                          N=68,279
  Have personal doctor                                0.595**                           0.405***
                                      0.59                              0.62
                                                      (0.246)                            (0.118)
                                     (0.49)                            (0.49)
                                                     N=146,708                          N=68,160
  Cost a barrier to care                              -0.310*                           -0.403***
                                      0.34                              0.34
                                                      (0.161)                            (0.117)
                                     (0.47)                            (0.47)
                                                     N=146,830                          N=68,173


Panel 2: Preventive care
Number of preventive services                         0.409                             0.800**
                                      1.58                             1.53
received                                             (0.754)                            (0.355)
                                     (1.05)                           (1.05)
                                                    N=80,170                           N=37,364
  Routine checkup                                      0.137                              0.282
                                      0.57                              0.57
                                                      (0.256)                            (0.176)
                                     (0.49)                            (0.50)
                                                     N=144,996                          N=67,266
  Flu shot                                             0.240                              0.144
                                      0.19                              0.21
                                                      (0.156)                            (0.147)
                                     (0.39)                            (0.40)
                                                     N=137,295                          N=64,473
  HIV test                                            0.379*                             0.295*
                                      0.48                              0.41
                                                      (0.165)                            (0.178)
                                     (0.50)                            (0.49)
                                                     N=132,525                          N=62,009
  Dentist visit                                       -0.015                            0.364***
                                      0.48                              0.47
                                                      (0.319)                            (0.101)
                                     (0.50)                            (0.50)
                                                     N=79,366                           N=36,939
Received any cancer screenings                        0.260                              0.155
                                      0.62                             0.61
index                                                (0.520)                            (0.283)
                                     (0.49)                           (0.49)
                                                    N=18,815                           N=13,868
  Clinical breast exam                                 0.106                              0.082
                                      0.49                              0.48
                                                      (0.893)                            (0.340)
                                     (0.50)                            (0.50)
                                                     N=45,961                           N=19,334
  Pap test                                             0.574                             -0.304
                                      0.53                              0.42
                                                      (0.906)                            (0.569)
                                     (0.50)                            (0.49)
                                                     N=45,799                           N=19,272
  Mammogram                                           -0.244                              0.074
                                      0.50                              0.50
                                                      (0.854)                            (0.299)
                                     (0.50)                            (0.50)
                                                     N=18,876                           N=13,917




Panel 3: Health behaviors
Unhealthy behavior index                              -0.165                             -0.176
                                      0.74                             0.75
                                                     (0.188)                            (0.153)
                                     (0.44)                           (0.44)
                                                    N=139,023                          N=65,563
  Current smoker                                      -0.117                            -0.202**
                                      0.28                              0.32             (0.103)
                                                      (0.133)
                                     (0.45)                            (0.47)           N=67,056
                                                     N=143,995




                                                    68
  Heavy drinking                                           -0.070                                -0.051
                                           0.05                                 0.06             (0.053)
                                                           (0.066)
                                          (0.21)                               (0.24)           N=65,069
                                                          N=139,470
  Binge drinking                                           -0.056                                 0.028
                                           0.16                                 0.18             (0.127)
                                                           (0.096)
                                          (0.37)                               (0.38)           N=65,071
                                                          N=139,631
  Exercise                                                  0.146                                 0.349
                                           0.67                                 0.67             (0.225)
                                                           (0.172)
                                          (0.47)                               (0.47)           N=66,098
                                                          N=141,413

  BMI (x100)                                                229.20                               232.30
                                         2833.20                              2792.49           (208.30)
                                                           (319.60)
                                         (719.05)                             (739.44)          N=65,291
                                                          N=137,557
  Obese                                                     0.095                                 0.053
                                           0.33                                 0.31
                                                           (0.209)                               (0.107)
                                          (0.47)                               (0.46)
                                                          N=137,557                             N=65,291


Panel 4: Self-assessed health
General health                                            1.351***                              1.319***
                                          3.03                                 2.95
                                                           (-0.477)                              (0.442)
                                         (1.14)                               (1.23)
                                                         N=146,685                              N=68,085
Number of unhealthy days                                     -5.938                            -12.840***
                                          10.45                                12.17
                                                            (5.858)                              (4.446)
                                         (11.95)                              (12.52)
                                                         N=147,353                              N=68,465
  Number days mental health not good                       -2.588                               -9.208***
                                          6.79                                  7.92
                                                           (4.162)                               (2.974)
                                         (10.22)                               (10.83)
                                                          N=144,087                             N=66,565
  Number days physical health not good                     -2.766                               -9.054***
                                           6.17                                 7.78
                                                           (4.026)                               (3.150)
                                          (9.89)                               (11.05)
                                                          N=143,506                             N=66,322
Number days poor health                                    -5.638                              -12.930***
                                          7.46                                 9.35
prevented usual activities                                (5.302)                                (3.655)
                                         (10.46)                              (11.44)
                                                         N=101,856                              N=50,318

Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. We estimate a set of instrumental variables models with
insurance as the binary endogenous variable and the DD interaction “Treat X Post” as the instrument. In columns 1-
2, sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. Columns 3-4 include only non-elderly,
<100% FPL without children below 18. The cancer screenings regressions are limited to women above age 21, and
the mammogram regression is limited to women over age 50. See Table A1 for states in expansion and non-
expansion categories. Larger fonts indicate summary measures and smaller fonts indicate detailed outcomes. See
Appendix B for variable definitions. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, *
Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                          69
Appendix G: Adjustments for Multiple Inference

       In our main analysis, we examine 25 different outcomes. We fit 25 models and then use t-

tests to determine whether the DD coefficient is significantly different from zero in each of the

equations. One potential issue with this analysis is that the errors of each equation may be

correlated, and the t-tests may not be independent of each other. The probability that we reject

the null incorrectly on at least one of the 25 is higher than the nominal significance level of the

test. To account for multiple hypothesis bias, we use Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR)

methods that allow us to use a single variance-covariance matrix across multiple seemingly

unrelated regression equations (Zellner, 1962). Following examples in Finkelstein, et al., (2012),

Autor and Houseman (2010), and Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007), we use F-tests to evaluate

the compound null hypothesis that all coefficients within a given category of outcomes –

insurance, access to care, preventive care, health behaviors, and self-assessed health – are jointly

equal to zero.

       Results from the SUR analysis are displayed in Table A6. The reported p-values

represent category-wise error rates, i.e. represent the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis

of at least one type I error in the category. We perform this test individually for the four

categories that have multiple outcomes (rows 1-4). We also perform this test for all 25 outcomes

together (results in row 5). Stacking the data and using SUR estimation across outcomes, we

reject the hypothesis that the 25 coefficients are jointly equal to zero (P<0.001).




                                                  70
Table A6. Seemingly Unrelated Regression Results

                                 All adults                    Childless adults
                      F statistic (1)   p-value (2)    F statistic (3)    p-value (4)
All access to care
                           16.10           <0.001            18.64           <0.001
outcomes
All preventive
                            3.37            0.001             2.74            0.005
services outcomes
All unhealthy
                            2.12            0.038             6.00           <0.001
behavior outcomes
All self-assessed
                            7.31           <0.001            15.26           <0.001
health outcomes
All outcomes                3.35           <0.001             5.21           <0.001
Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. We estimate a set of stacked regression models and use F-tests
to evaluate the compound null hypothesis that all coefficients within a given category of outcomes – insurance,
access to care, preventive care (ignoring the results that were run on different samples, including cancer screenings
index, clinical breast exams, Pap tests, and mammograms), health behaviors, and self-assessed health – are jointly
equal to zero.




                                                           71
Appendix H: Implied Elasticities of Health Behaviors with Respect to Insurance

         We estimate that the Medicaid expansion resulted in a 5.4-percentage-point increase in

the probability of having insurance coverage for low-income adults. The pre-2014 insurance rate

for this population in treatment states was 62%, so our estimate implies that after controlling for

other factors, the Medicaid expansion caused the insurance rate to rise from 62% to 67%. This

represents a 9% rise in the insurance rate.

         By combining the results for insurance with those for other outcomes, we are able to

calculate elasticities of health behaviors with respect to insurance, assuming that insurance

coverage is the sole pathway through which reform changes these outcomes. 19 To account for the

fact that the sample size may be different for each outcome (due to missing data for certain

individuals or certain years), we recalculate the DD estimate on insurance for each outcome,

using only those individuals for whom the outcome variable is not missing. We use this revised

estimate to calculate an elasticity for each outcome.

         For example, for individuals with non-missing access to care data, the Medicaid

expansion caused a 5.5-percentage-point increase in the probability of having insurance as well

as a 1.7-percentage-point increase in the probability of having good access to care. This implies

that 31% (1.7/5.5=0.31) of the newly insured received routine checkups in the past year. Table

A7 presents elasticities with respect to insurance for all the statistically significant binary

outcomes. In general, these outcomes are relatively inelastic with respect to health insurance; the

most responsive outcome is personal doctor, which has an elasticity with respect to health



  19
     This would not be the case, for example, if the option to acquire insurance coverage in the future causes ex ante
moral hazard—that is, if uninsured individuals, knowing that they can enroll in Medicaid should they fall ill, engage
in more risky behaviors. In this case, even individuals who are uninsured changed their health behaviors in response
to the expansion. We set aside that possibility in these calculations, but note that it would make our elasticities
smaller.

                                                          72
insurance of 0.62. The least responsive of these outcomes is good access to care for childless

adults, which has an elasticity with respect to health insurance of 0.23.




                                                  73
Table A7: Implied Elasticities of Binary Health Outcomes with Respect to Insurance

                                                    All adults                                                    Childless adults
                             Pre-         DD           DD                                                DD             DD
                                                                  Implied      Implied                                                Implied      Implied
                             2014      estimate,    estimate,                             Pre-2014    estimate,      estimate,
    Outcome Variable                                             elasticity   post-2014                                              elasticity   post-2014
                             mean      outcome      insurance                             mean (6)    outcome        insurance
                                                                    (4)       mean (5)                                                  (9)       mean (10)
                              (1)         (2)          (3)                                               (7)            (8)
Panel 1: Access to care
                              0.83      0.017**     0.055***                                0.83      0.023***       0.101***
Good access to care index                                         0.309            0.85                                               0.228         0.85
                             (0.38)     (0.008)      (0.014)                               (0.37)      (0.008)        (0.021)

                              0.59     0.034***     0.055***                                0.62      0.041***       0.101***
Have personal doctor                                              0.618            0.62                                               0.406         0.66
                             (0.49)     (0.016)      (0.014)                               (0.49)      (0.013)        (0.021)

                                                                                            0.34     -0.039***       0.102***
Cost a barrier to care                                                                                                                -0.382        0.38
                                                                                           (0.47)      (0.011)        (0.021)

Panel 2: Preventive care
                              0.48     0.023***     0.062***
HIV test                                                          0.371            0.50
                             (0.50)     (0.009)      (0.013)

                                                                                            0.47      0.041***       0.113***
Dentist visit                                                                                                                         0.363         0.51
                                                                                           (0.50)      (0.015)        (0.023)

   Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. Columns 4 and 9 are the DD estimate on outcome divided by DD estimate on insurance. For each outcome
x, we re-estimate the DD estimate on insurance using only data for which x is not missing. Columns 5 and 10 are the pre-2014 mean plus the DD estimate on
outcome. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                              74
Appendix I: Descriptive Statistics

Table A8. Descriptive Statistics of Low-Income, Non-Elderly, Childless Adults Sample

                                     Expansion states                           Non-expansion states          Pre-2014 difference
                         2010-13 (1)               2014-15 (2)     2010-13 (3)                  2014-15 (4)           (5)

Panel 1: Demographics

                            36.98                        38.27          38.19                      38.90
Age                        (12.78)                                                                                 -1.21***
                                                        (13.00)        (12.67)                    (12.95)
                          $14,802                   $14,186            $14,803                   $14,320
Household Income          ($5,838)                                                                                    $-1
                                                    ($5,443)           ($5,810)                  ($5,457)
                           11.22                        11.26           11.46                     11.38
Years Schooling                                                                                                    -0.24***
                           (3.24)                       (3.27)          (2.91)                    (3.02)
                            0.56                         0.60            0.58                      0.64
Female                                                                                                             -0.02***
                           (0.50)                       (0.49)          (0.49)                    (0.48)
                            0.31                         0.28            0.31                      0.27
Married                                                                                                              -0.01
                           (0.46)                       (0.45)          (0.46)                    (0.44)
                            0.22                         0.18            0.23                      0.19
Unemployed                                                                                                         -0.01***
                           (0.41)                       (0.38)          (0.42)                    (0.40)
Race
  White (non-Hispanic)      0.35                         0.35            0.42                          0.40         -0.07***
  Black                     0.14                         0.15            0.25                          0.27         -0.11***
  Native American           0.03                         0.02            0.02                          0.02         -0.01***
  Asian                     0.03                         0.06            0.01                          0.01         0.02***
  Pacific Islander          0.01                         0.003           0.01                      0.002             0.001
  Other                     0.01                         0.01            0.01                      0.004             0.003
  Multiracial               0.02                         0.02            0.02                          0.02          0.001
  Hispanic                  0.42                         0.39            0.27                          0.27         0.15***


Panel 2: Insurance
                            0.62                         0.75            0.49                      0.56
Have insurance                                                                                                     0.13***
                           (0.49)                       (0.43)          (0.50)                    (0.50)

                                                                  75
Panel 3: Access to care
Good access to care         0.83     0.88          0.78     0.81
index                                                               0.05***
                           (0.38)   (0.32)        (0.41)   (0.40)
  Have personal doctor      0.59     0.66          0.58     0.58
                                                                     0.02***
                           (0.49)   (0.47)        (0.49)   (0.49)
  Cost a barrier to care
                            0.34     0.26          0.43     0.39
                                                                    -0.10***
                           (0.47)   (0.44)        (0.50)   (0.49)


Panel 4: Preventive
Number of preventive        1.58     1.78          1.54     1.71
services received                                                   0.04**
                           (1.05)   (1.10)        (1.06)   (1.10)
  Routine checkup           0.57     0.63          0.55     0.60
                                                                     0.02***
                           (0.49)   (0.48)        (0.50)   (0.49)
  Flu shot
                            0.19     0.30          0.18     0.28
                                                                      0.01
                           (0.39)   (0.46)        (0.39)   (0.45)
  HIV test                  0.48     0.51          0.53     0.54
                                                                    -0.05***
                           (0.50)   (0.50)        (0.50)   (0.50)
  Dentist visit             0.48     0.48          0.40     0.39
                                                                     0.08***
                           (0.50)   (0.50)        (0.49)   (0.49)
Received any cancer
                            0.62     0.64          0.59     0.58
screenings index                                                      0.03
                           (0.49)   (0.48)        (0.49)   (0.49)
  Clinical breast exam
                            0.49     0.50          0.45     0.42
                                                                     0.04***
                           (0.50)   (0.50)        (0.50)   (0.49)

  Pap test
                            0.53     0.49          0.47     0.43
                                                                     0.06***
                           (0.50)   (0.50)        (0.50)   (0.50)

  Mammogram
                            0.50     0.52          0.46     0.48
                                                                     0.04**
                           (0.50)   (0.50)        (0.50)   (0.50)


Panel 5: Health
behaviors
Unhealthy behavior          0.74     0.75          0.79     0.81
index                                                               -0.05***
                           (0.44)   (0.43)        (0.41)   (0.40)


                                             76
  Current smoker
                                    0.28                    0.28                      0.34                    0.33
                                                                                                                                     -0.06***
                                   (0.45)                  (0.45)                    (0.47)                  (0.47)
  Heavy drinking
                                    0.05                    0.05                      0.04                    0.05
                                                                                                                                       0.01
                                   (0.21)                  (0.21)                    (0.20)                  (0.21)
  Binge drinking
                                    0.16                    0.15                      0.14                    0.13
                                                                                                                                     0.02***
                                   (0.37)                  (0.36)                    (0.35)                  (0.34)
  Exercise
                                    0.67                    0.66                      0.62                    0.61
                                                                                                                                     0.05***
                                   (0.47)                  (0.47)                    (0.49)                  (0.49)
  BMI (x100)                      2833.20                 2859.55                   2917.62                 2940.48
                                                                                                            (792.66)                -84.63***
                                  (719.05)                (744.43)                  (777.45)
  Obese                             0.33                    0.34                      0.38                    0.39
                                                                                                                                     -0.05***
                                   (0.47)                  (0.47)                    (0.48)                  (0.49)


Panel 6: Self-assessed
health
General health                     3.03                     3.04                     2.97                    2.93
                                                                                                                                    0.06***
                                  (1.14)                   (1.16)                   (1.18)                  (1.18)
Number of unhealthy               10.45                    10.31                     11.31                   11.26
days                                                                                                                                -0.86***
                                 (11.95)                  (12.06)                   (12.44)                 (12.56)
  Number days mental health        6.79                     6.65                     7.67                     7.56
  not good                                                                                                                           -0.89***
                                  (10.22)                  (10.24)                  (10.92)                  (11.01)
  Number days physical
  health not good                   6.17                    6.37                     7.02                     7.10
                                                                                                                                     -0.85***
                                   (9.89)                  (10.24)                  (10.70)                  (10.73)

Number days poor
                                   7.46                     7.58                     8.47                     8.72
health prevented usual            (10.46)                  (10.61)                  (11.21)                  (11.21)
                                                                                                                                     -1.01***
activities

Notes: Source: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL
adults. N=74,423 for the expansion group and N=77,140 for the non-expansion group. However, because of missing data (respondents either refused to answer,
responded “unsure,” or were not asked the question), the number of valid observations varies for each outcome. Data is adjusted by BRFSS sample weights. See
Table 1 for states in expansion and non-expansion categories. *** Difference significant at 1% level, **Significant at 5% level, * Significant at 1% level. See
Appendix B for variable definitions.




                                                                               77
Appendix J: Tests for Parallel Trends

       We test for equality of the pre-expansion trends using an event-study method. We

estimate regressions that interact the treatment group dummy with year dummy variables

(omitting 2013 as the reference year). We jointly test the null hypothesis that all pre-2014

interaction terms are equal to 0 using an F test.

       Results are presented in Table A9. The first two columns of Table A9 show the

coefficients on the interaction of the expansion states with the indicator variables for 2015

(column 1) and 2014 (column 2); these represent the policy effects against which to judge the

prior trends. For the vast majority of the 25 outcomes we examine, we cannot reject the null

hypothesis of equal trends. There are three outcomes, however, for which we reject that all pre-

2014 interactions are jointly equal to zero: cost a barrier to care (p=0.04), clinical breast exam

(p=0.02), and exercise (p=0.03). However, the first outcome was increasing and the next two

outcomes were declining in the expansion states relative to the control states, which is the

opposite of the expected treatment effect; thus, any violation of the parallel trends assumption

appears to bias the DD model against finding a beneficial effect of Medicaid expansion on these

outcomes. Overall, these results, while not definitive, are reassuring evidence that the key

assumption of the DD study design is generally satisfied.




                                                    78
      Table A9. Results for Parallel Trends Tests
                                                               Event History Estimates (base year 2013)
                                                                                                                     p-value for
                                                                                                                     test that all
                       Expansion       Expansion       Expansion       Expansion         Expansion
                                                                                                          Sample      pre-2014
                       Dummy X         Dummy X         Dummy X         Dummy X           Dummy X
                                                                                                          size (6)   interaction
                      Year 2015 (1)   Year 2014 (2)   Year 2012 (3)   Year 2011 (4)     Year 2010 (5)
                                                                                                                     coefficients
                                                                                                                     are zero (7)
Panel 1:
Insurance
Have insurance          0.067***        0.051**           -0.011          0.024             0.018
                                                                                                          147.353       0.264
                         (0.014)        (0.022)          (0.022)         (0.015)           (0.014)

Panel 2: Access
to care
Good access to            0.019          0.023*           0.004           0.011             0.007
                                                                                                          147,610       0.874
care index               (0.014)         (0.013)         (0.011)         (0.014)          (0.0133)
  Have personal          0.031*          0.027**          0.002          -0.006            -0.019
                                                                                                          147,351       0.553
  doctor                 (0.016)         (0.011)         (0.013)         (0.014)           (0.017)
  Cost a barrier to      -0.013          -0.013          0.019**         -0.007            -0.007
                                                                                                          147,504       0.044
  care                   (0.017)         (0.013)         (0.008)         (0.018)           (0.016)


Panel 3:
Preventive care
Number of
                                          0.042                           0.048             0.023
preventive                                                                                                101,142       0.442
                                         (0.034)                         (0.046)           (0.064)
services received1
  Routine checkup                        0.029***        0.034*           0.028            0.045**
                                                                                                          127,915       0.231
                                          (0.010)        (0.019)         (0.018)           (0.020)
  Flu shot                               0.026***        -0.009           0.014            -0.011
                                                                                                          122,271       0.433
                                          (0.009)        (0.008)         (0.018)           (0.016)
  HIV test                               -0.009          -0.016          -0.013            -0.029**
                                                                                                          117,871       0.521
                                         (0.009)         (0.021)         (0.012)            (0.014)
                  1                       0.015                           0.028              0.009
  Dentist visit                                                                                           100,156       0.245
                                         (0.013)                         (0.019)            (0.020)
Received any                              0.027                           0.020             -0.006
                                                                                                          23,755        0.251
cancer screenings                        (0.027)                         (0.023)           (0.032)


                                                                                   79
index1
  Clinical breast              -0.015              -0.038**        -0.0003
       1                                                                      58,929   0.017
  exam                         (0.017)              (0.015)        (0.028)
             1                  0.006              -0.004           0.020
  Pap test                                                                    58,728   0.557
                               (0.015)             (0.016)         (0.020)
                 1             -0.012              -0.010          -0.026
  Mammogram                                                                   23,825   0.618
                               (0.033)             (0.023)         (0.027)




Panel 4: Health
behaviors
Unhealthy             -0.021    0.007     -0.003   0.031*           -0.009
                                                                             139,632   0.132
behavior index       (0.021)   (0.011)   (0.010)   (0.018)         (0.015)
  Current smoker
                     -0.007     0.007    -0.003     0.023           0.006
                                                                             144,646   0.359
                     (0.017)   (0.012)   (0.015)   (0.021)         (0.017)

  Heavy drinking                                    0.007
                     -0.001     0.003     0.008                     0.008
                                                                             140,090   0.533
                     (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.006)                   (0.007)
                                                   (0.007)
  Binge drinking
                     -0.002     0.011     0.014     0.025           0.001
                                                                             140,255   0.248
                     (0.011)   (0.012)   (0.013)   (0.015)         (0.015)

  Exercise
                     -0.005     0.005     0.004    -0.040**        -0.009
                                                                             142,055   0.029
                     (0.020)   (0.013)   (0.015)    (0.017)        (0.018)

  BMI (x100)
                      50.68     11.30     22.80     25.98           39.59
                                                                             138,170   0.565
                     (31.30)   (25.25)   (28.69)   (39.86)         (28.04)

  Obese               0.014     0.008     0.006     0.002           0.016
                                                                             138,170   0.747
                     (0.016)   (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.017)         (0.016)


Panel 5: Self-
assessed health
General health        0.061    0.068*     0.012     -0.038          -0.012
                                                                             147,363   0.600
                     (0.045)   (0.034)   (0.038)   (0.052)         (0.047)
Number of             -0.393    -0.165    0.031     0.431           -0.251
                                                                             148,039   0.410
unhealthy days       (0.308)   (0.322)   (0.254)   (0.269)         (0.484)


                                                              80
  Number days
                        -0.271           -0.214           -0.154            0.249           -0.330
  mental health not                                                                                        144,734         0.716
                        (0.261)          (0.312)          (0.231)          (0.285)          (0.331)
  good
  Number days
                         0.020            0.243            0.219           0.608**           0.391
  physical health not                                                                                      144,148         0.265
                        (0.218)          (0.261)          (0.171)          (0.301)          (0.419)
  good
Number days
poor health              -0.133           -0.040          0.283           0.801**           0.124
                                                                                                          102,250         0.132
prevented usual         (0.370)          (0.451)         (0.340)          (0.350)          (0.360)
activities


     Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. Sample is restricted to include only non-elderly, <100% FPL adults. All regressions also control for
     gender, marital status, household size, race, unemployment status, age, education, state unemployment rate, whether the respondent was part of the cell-
     phone sample, state-fixed effects, and quarter/year-fixed effects. Data is adjusted by BRFSS sample weights. See Table A1 for states in expansion and
     non-expansion categories. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.
     1
       For the outcomes “Number of preventive services received,” “Dentist visit,” “Received any cancer screenings index,” “Clinical breast exam,” “Pap
     test,” and “Mammogram,” data was available for only even-number years. For these five outcomes, the base year is 2012; column (4) represents
     “Expansion Dummy X Year 2010”; and column (5) represents “Expansion Dummy X Year 2008.”




                                                                                     81
Appendix K: Falsification Tests

       We conduct falsification tests using two populations whose eligibility for Medicaid was

unaffected by the expansion: low-income adults over age 65 and high-income adults aged 19-64

(defined as above 400% FPL). Table A10, panel 2 shows that the expansions were associated

with a small (1.3%) decrease in the access to care index for the elderly, although we also find it

led to an increase in probability of having a personal doctor for the high-income population,

which is marginally significant at the 10% level. Panel 3 shows that the expansions had no

impact on preventive care for these populations, with the exception of an increase in probability

of receiving an HIV test for the over-65 population (0.05 percentage points or 31%) and small

increase in probability of receiving a routine checkup (1.3 percentage points or 2%) for the high-

income population. Panel 4 shows that the Medicaid expansions were not associated with

changes in health behaviors in these populations, with the exception that smoking increased

among the over-65 population (3.9 percentage points or 33%) and there was a slight increase in

the unhealthy behavior index (0.01 percentage points or 1%) for the high-income population. In

Table A10, panel 5, most of the outcomes related to health status are not significantly affected,

except that general health decreased for both populations, which is the opposite sign of the

expected effect of the expansion on treated individuals. In summary, the results found for the

populations affected by the Medicaid expansions are not mirrored in these populations that were

unaffected by the expansions.




                                                 82
Table A10. DD Results for Falsification Tests

                                    Over age 65 (1)                       High income (2)
                           Pre-2014 mean         Estimate        Pre-2014 mean        Estimate
Panel 1: Insurance
Have insurance                                    -0.007                              0.001
                                0.95                                  0.94
                                                 (0.010)                             (0.002)
                               (0.23)                                (0.24)
                                                N=40,313                            N=568,932

Panel 2: Access to
care
Good access to                                  -0.013**                              0.002
                                0.97                                  0.98
care index                                       (0.005)                             (0.002)
                               (0.16)                                (0.14)
                                                N=40,359                            N=569,350
  Have personal doctor                             0.009                              0.012*
                                0.89                                  0.84
                                                  (0.013)                             (0.007)
                               (0.32)                                (0.36)
                                                 N=40,231                            N=568,617
  Cost a barrier to care                           0.003              0.07            -0.001
                                0.13
                                                  (0.016)            (0.25)           (0.004)
                               (0.34)
                                                 N=40,169                            N=569,092


Panel 3:
Preventive care
Number of                                         0.033                               -0.001
                                1.56                                  2.03
preventive services                              (0.072)                             (0.015)
                               (0.86)                                (0.95)
received                                        N=22,572                            N=310,276
  Routine checkup                                 -0.018                              0.013**
                                0.84                                  0.68
                                                  (0.015)                             (0.005)
                               (0.37)                                (0.47)
                                                 N=39,554                            N=565,891
  Flu shot                                         0.009                               0.004
                                0.39                                  0.27
                                                  (0.025)                             (0.011)
                               (0.49)                                (0.44)
                                                 N=38,057                            N=546,943
  HIV test                                       0.050***                              0.004
                                0.16                                  0.39
                                                  (0.017)                             (0.006)
                               (0.37)                                (0.49)
                                                 N=29,229                            N=529,639
  Dentist visit                                    0.008                              -0.001
                                0.42                                  0.80
                                                  (0.027)                             (0.006)
                               (0.49)                                (0.40)
                                                 N=22,068                            N=309,635
Received any                                      -0.018                              0.002
                                0.63                                  0.81
cancer screenings                                (0.027)                             (0.012)
                               (0.48)                                (0.39)
index                                           N=16,056                            N=104,372
  Clinical breast exam                            -0.026                              -0.007
                                0.45                                  0.72
                                                  (0.032)                             (0.011)
                               (0.50)                                (0.45)
                                                 N=16,166                            N=159,618
  Pap test                                         0.026                              -0.017
                                0.24                                  0.63
                                                  (0.033)                             (0.012)
                               (0.43)                                (0.48)
                                                 N=15,992                            N=159,386
  Mammogram                                       -0.030                              -0.006
                                0.53                                  0.70
                                                  (0.029)                             (0.013)
                               (0.50)                                (0.46)
                                                 N=16,202                            N=104,492




Panel 4: Health
behaviors
Unhealthy                      0.68               0.018              0.58             0.009**

                                                            83
behavior index             (0.47)              (0.018)              (0.49)            (0.004)
                                              N=38,347                               N=541,726
  Current smoker                               0.039***                                  0.003
                             0.12                                    0.14
                                                (0.013)                                 (0.003)
                            (0.33)                                  (0.35)
                                               N=39,399                                N=560,994
  Heavy drinking                                -0.0002                                  0.003
                             0.02                                    0.08
                                                (0.005)                                 (0.002)
                            (0.13)                                  (0.27)
                                               N=38,620                                N=551,679
  Binge drinking                                0.0003                                   0.003
                             0.04                                    023
                                                (0.007)                                 (0.005)
                            (0.19)                                  (0.42)
                                               N=38,658                                N=55,932
  Exercise                                      -0.002                                  -0.006
                             0.58                                    0.85
                                                (0.018)                                 (0.005)
                            (0.49)                                  (0.36)
                                               N=39,084                                N=556,252

  BMI (x100)                                     24.24                                    4.69
                           2808.75                                 2715.09
                                                (20.21)                                  (7.50)
                           (631.85)                                (552.71)
                                               N=38,601                                N=548,591
  Obese                                          0.013                                   0.004
                             0.32                                    0.25
                                                (0.018)                                 (0.004)
                            (0.47)                                  (0.43)
                                               N=38,601                                N=548,591


Panel 5: Self-
assessed health
General health                                 -0.056*                               -0.026***
                            2.56                                     3.85
                                               (0.028)                                 (0.007)
                           (1.10)                                   (0.92)
                                              N=40,065                               N=568,699
Number of                                       -0.088                                  0.153
                            11.01                                    4.64
unhealthy days                                 (0.388)                                 (0.148)
                           (12.43)                                  (8.25)
                                              N=40,438                               N=569,559
  Number days mental                             0.078                                   0.052
                             4.93                                    2.78
  health not good                               (0.606)                                 (0.107)
                            (9.16)                                  (6.44)
                                               N=38,655                                N=565,729
  Number days                                   -0.293                                   0.098
                            8.99                                     2.32
  physical health not                           (0.302)                                 (0.089)
                           (11.53)                                  (6.11)
  good                                         N=37,941                                N=565,906
Number days poor                                0.427                                  -0.058
                            8.34                                     2.80
health prevented                               (0.484)                                (0.078)
                           (11.30)                                  (6.46)
usual activities                              N=24,529                               N=265,385

Notes: Author estimates based on BRFSS 2010-15. In columns 1-2, sample is restricted to include only <100% FPL
adults age 65 and older. In columns 3-4, sample includes only adults aged 19-64 >400% FPL. The cancer screenings
regressions are limited to women above age 21, and the mammogram regression is limited to women over age 50.
State-clustered standard errors are in parentheses for DD estimates. All regressions also control for gender, marital
status, household size, race, unemployment status, age, education, state unemployment rate, whether the respondent
was part of the cell-phone sample, state-fixed effects, and quarter/year-fixed effects. Data is adjusted by BRFSS
sample weights. See Table A1 for states in expansion and non-expansion categories. Columns 1 and 3 display
variable’s mean value for the expansion group in 2010-13, adjusted by BRFSS sample weight. Standard deviations
are in parentheses for pre-treatment means. Larger fonts indicate summary measures and smaller fonts indicate
detailed outcomes. See Appendix B for variable definitions. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at
the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                          84
