NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRIVATE PROVISION OF SOCIAL INSURANCE:
DRUG-SPECIFIC PRICE ELASTICITIES AND COST SHARING IN MEDICARE PART D
Liran Einav
Amy Finkelstein
Maria Polyakova
Working Paper 22277
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22277

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

We thank Belinda Tang and Martina Uccioli for outstanding research assistance. Einav and
Finkelstein gratefully acknowledge support from the National Institute of Aging
(R01AG032449). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22277.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Maria Polyakova. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Provision of Social Insurance: Drug-specific Price Elasticities and Cost Sharing in
Medicare Part D
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Maria Polyakova
NBER Working Paper No. 22277
May 2016
JEL No. D12,G22,H51,I13
ABSTRACT
Standard theory suggests that optimal consumer cost-sharing in health insurance increases with
the price elasticity of demand, yet publicly-provided drug coverage typically involves uniform
cost-sharing across drugs. We investigate how private drug plans set cost-sharing in the context
of Medicare Part D. We document substantial heterogeneity in the price elasticities of demand
across more than 150 drugs and across more than 100 therapeutic classes, as well as substantial
heterogeneity in the cost-sharing for different drugs within privately-provided plans. We find that
private plans set higher consumer cost-sharing for drugs or classes with more elastic demand. Our
findings suggest that benefit design may be more efficient in privately rather than publicly
provided insurance.

Liran Einav
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu

Maria Polyakova
Department of Health Research & Policy
Stanford University
Redwood Building T111
150 Governor's Lane
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
maria.polyakova@stanford.edu

Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

A Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22277

1

Introduction

Social insurance is a key function of modern governments. Historically, the public sector
directly provided social insurance products, most importantly pensions and health insurance.
Increasingly, however, social insurance is privately provided. Public pension systems in many
countries now involve publicly-regulated but privately-run investment funds and annuities,
and public health insurance is increasingly provided by private companies that are subsidized
and regulated by the government.
What are the implications of this move toward privately-provided social insurance? Recently, a sizable academic literature has empirically examined the efficiency tradeoffs inherent
in the increased reliance on consumer choice in privately-provided insurance.1 Other aspects
that vary between public provision and private provision of social insurance have received
much less empirical attention. In this paper, we attempt to start closing this gap.
We focus on one design aspect of health insurance: the management of moral hazard
through the setting of consumer cost-sharing. Optimal consumer cost-sharing involves a
classic tradeoff between risk protection and incentives. As we lower the share of the cost
that the consumer is required to pay, consumers are less exposed to risk, but at the same time
may be more likely to over-utilize healthcare services they do not fully value. The classic
theory (Feldstein, 1973; Besley, 1988) emphasizes that the socially optimal consumer costsharing mimics standard Ramsey-style optimal commodity taxation results: health events
that are more prone to moral hazard, i.e. have a higher price elasticity of demand, should
be associated with higher consumer cost-sharing (i.e. share of the cost paid out of pocket
by the consumer, also known as co-insurance) and thus less risk protection.
Curiously, however, there is little variation in consumer cost-sharing provisions when
health insurance is directly administered by the public sector. For example, a summary of
consumer cost-sharing provisions in public prescription drug plans in 34 OECD countries
reveals that there is essentially no variation in cost-sharing across drugs in these plans.2
1

For welfare analysis of choice in privately-provided aspects of public pension systems, see for example
Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2010); Duarte and Hastings (2012); Hastings, Hortacsu, and Syverson
(2015). For welfare analysis of choice in privately-provided, publicly-designed health insurance systems, see
for example Abaluck and Gruber (2011, 2013); Ketcham et al. (2012, 2015); Kling et al. (2012).
2
See Barnieh et al. (2014), Table 1, which we reproduce in Appendix Table A1 and which shows uniform
cost-sharing across drugs in virtually all countries’ publicly-provided prescription drug plans. The table
records only a few exceptions. For example, in some public insurance systems cost-sharing terms may be
more (less) favorable if patients buy cheaper (more expensive) versions of certain medications. Switzerland differentiates cost-sharing between generic and branded drugs at certain spending levels. Greece and
Sweden charge no cost-sharing for insulin; in the Netherlands and Germany, cost-sharing may be related
to the difference between the drug’s retail and reference prices, which could lead to differential out-of-

2

In contrast, private insurance plans commonly set complex multi-tiered cost-sharing menus
across different health care services.3 This raises the natural question, which is the focus
of this paper: do private plans vary consumer cost sharing across healthcare services in the
socially optimal direction?
Our empirical context is Medicare Part D, the large federal insurance program that
subsidizes and regulates the private provision of prescription drug insurance to the elderly in
the United States. This setting is no exception to the general pattern of uniform public costsharing. The government-designed benchmark standard contract in Part D has a uniform, 25
percent consumer co-insurance for any drug in the cost-sharing arm above the deductible and
below the famous “donut hole.” Part D insurance, however, is in practice offered by private
insurers, who have substantial discretion in designing their insurance contracts relative to
the benchmark “standard contract”, including the ability to vary cost sharing across drugs.
The paper has two main parts. In the first part, we estimate the elasticity of demand
with respect to the co-insurance rate for more than 150 common drugs and 100 common
therapeutic classes. To do so, we use detailed micro data on prescription drug claims from
almost 6 million beneficiary-years from 2007-2011. To estimate the demand response to
price we exploit the variation in the out-of-pocket price for a drug created by the famous
donut hole or “gap” in Part D coverage. This coverage gap makes insurance discontinuously
much less generous at the margin, thus allowing us to observe the utilization response to a
sharp increase in the out-of-pocket price. We previously used this research design to study
the average behavioral response of drug utilization to cost-sharing and heterogeneity across
consumers in this behavioral response (Einav et al., 2015, 2016a, 2016b). Here, we use a
similar approach to estimate individual demand elasticities for specific drugs and therapeutic
classes with respect to the out-of-pocket price.
We find considerable heterogeneity in the price elasticity of demand across products.
Across the approximately 150 common drugs, we estimate an average elasticity of -0.24 with
a standard deviation of 0.59. Across the approximately 100 common therapeutic classes,
we estimate an average elasticity of -0.14, with a standard deviation of 0.15. The variation
appears intuitive. For example, drugs for chronic conditions exhibit a higher elasticity than
drugs for acute (and hence likely more symptomatic) conditions. Since these product-specific
pocket costs. While Barnieh et al. (2014) limit their discussion to Medicare in the context of the US,
we note that the US Department of Veterans Affairs also sets a uniform $8 co-pay for all drugs (Source:
http://www.va.gov/healthbenefits/resources/publications/IB10-430 copay rates.pdf).
3
One example (of many) would be the tiered formularies of Blue Cross Blue Shield of California which
they use for Medicare, the California Exchange that was established under the ACA, as well as for small
and large group coverage. Source: https://www.blueshieldca.com/bsca/pharmacy/formulary/home.sp

3

elasticities may also be of interest in other contexts, we provide a complete listing of the
product-specific estimates in the appendix.
In the second part of the paper we analyze consumer-cost sharing across drugs and classes
in thousands of private Part D plans - with hundreds of unique plan designs (known as
formularies) - from 2007-2011. We document substantial variation in consumer cost-sharing
across drugs within private plans. On average, the co-insurance rate for our common drugs
was just over 40 percent, with a within-plan standard deviation of co-insurance across these
drugs of 25 percent.4
Our key finding is that within a plan, private insurers set higher co-insurance (i.e. the
share of the drug’s cost that must be paid out of pocket) for drugs with more elastic demand.
This empirical pattern is a robust feature of the data. Moreover, in the final section of the
paper we also show that, at least within the context of the highly stylized model, this is
the socially optimal direction of cost-sharing across drugs, and our empirical finding that
private plans vary consumer cost sharing in this socially optimal direction is consistent with
the incentives of private, profit-maximizing firms.
Our findings have implications for the textbook public finance treatment of government
intervention in insurance markets, which generally concludes that the government may have
a comparative advantage at combating adverse selection (Akerlof, 1970; Rothschild and
Stiglitz, 1976), but not in combating the moral hazard “costs” associated with insurance. By
contrast, our findings suggest a potential comparative disadvantage for the public sector in
handling moral hazard through optimal cost-sharing; they suggest that benefit design may
be more efficient under privately provided than publicly provided insurance.
Our paper relates to several specific research topics in social insurance. Our empirical
analysis of how private insurers vary cost-sharing across drugs complements the theoretical
literature on optimal health insurance design that trades-off moral hazard and risk protection
(Crew, 1969; Feldstein, 1973; Besley, 1988; Ellis and Manning, 2007; Goldman and Philipson, 2007; Ellis et al., 2015). Our analysis of the relative efficiency of private and public
benefit design contributes to a small but growing literature analyzing the relative efficiency
of private and public health insurance, such as Medicare Advantage compared to Traditional
Medicare (Brown et al., 2014; Cabral et al., 2014; Curto et al., 2015; Duggan et al., 2015), or
service prices charged to providers by private insurance relative to public Medicare (Clemens
et al., 2015). Our analysis of drug-specific consumer cost-sharing intersects with the growing
4

As we explain in more detail below, Part D plans are highly non-linear in their cost-sharing rules.
Throughout the paper, we use “co-insurance rate” to refer to the co-insurance rate in the cost-sharing arm
above the deductible and below the donut hole. About three-quarters of purchases occur in this range.

4

discussion of value-based health insurance design (VBID) (e.g. Chernew et al., 2007).
Naturally, our work also relates to the voluminous empirical literature examining moral
hazard in health insurance (e.g. Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2000; Einav et al., 2013; Aron-Dine
et al., 2015), and the growing empirical literature on Medicare Part D (e.g. Abaluck and
Gruber, 2011, 2013; Ketcham and Simon, 2008; Ketcham et al., 2012, 2015; Kling et al., 2012;
Decarolis et al., 2015; Decarolis, 2015; Polyakova, 2016). Our estimation of drug-specific
elasticities contributes to the empirical literature that has estimated the price responsiveness
of demand for specific drugs (e.g. Fisher Ellison et al. 1997; Goldman et al. 2004; Crawford
and Shum 2005; Chandra et al. 2010).
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional setting of Medicare Part D, and the multiple data sources that we use in the empirical analysis. Section
3 presents our first set of empirical results, estimating product-specific demand elasticities.
Section 4 presents our second set of empirical results on consumer cost-sharing in private
plans. In Section 5 we develop a simple model which suggests that the empirical patterns
we find are a natural prediction of standard economic theory. Section 6 concludes.

2
2.1

Setting and data
Setting

Medicare Part D is a large federal insurance program that provides prescription drug coverage for seniors. Unlike traditional Medicare coverage for physician and hospital services,
Medicare Part D, which was launched in 2006, is administered exclusively by private insurers. In 2015 the program covered about 42 million individuals and generated approximately
$77 billion in budgetary outlays (Congressional Budget Office, 2015). Part D coverage can
be bundled with more comprehensive insurance provided by private plans (via Medicare
Advantage), or can be purchased as a “stand-alone” coverage by Medicare beneficiaries who
enroll in traditional, fee-for-service Medicare. In this paper we focus exclusively on this
“stand-alone” segment of the market.
Enrollment in Part D is voluntary, but premiums are heavily subsidized. Those who
choose to enroll can choose from among dozens of plans (about 30 on average) available in
their (geographic) market. Part D plan design has two primary components: the overall
coverage level and the detailed coverage and cost-sharing rules for specific drugs. Private
insurers are required to offer coverage that is actuarially equivalent to or more generous than
the standard benefit design, depicted (for 2008) in Figure 1. However, subject to this overall
5

requirement regarding plan generosity, private insurers are given considerable flexibility as
to which drugs to cover and how to assign the out-of-pocket cost to the consumers associated
with each purchased drug. This latter aspect of the plan design is our primary focus.

2.2

Data

We use two administrative data sets. The first is a 20 percent random sample of Medicare
Part D beneficiaries from 2007-2011, their plan enrollment, and their drug claims. We use
these data to compute cost-sharing by plan for different drugs and therapeutic classes, and
to estimate drug-specific and class-specific elasticities.
For each beneficiary, we observe the plan they enrolled in and its coverage details, as well
as some basic demographics. Crucially, we also observe detailed, claim-level data on each
prescription drug claim, including the date of the claim, the drug identifier (NDC code),
the quantity purchased, the total amount spent on the claim, the amount paid by the plan,
and the amount paid by the consumer out of pocket. We use the NDC code, together with
additional data sources, to group claims by drug and by therapeutic class, to classify drugs
as branded or generic, and to classify drugs as chronic or acute, and as maintenance or
non-maintenance; the online appendix provides more detail on these additional data sources
and how we use them. The classification of NDC codes into therapeutic classes allows us to
group drugs that have similar chemical structures or mechanism of action and are frequently
used to treat the same or related diseases. Thus, drugs within a therapeutic class are more
likely to be substitutes than drugs across therapeutic classes.
The second data set consists of publicly-released, monthly files from the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services with detailed information about the formularies of all standalone Part D plans offered in 2007-2011.5 As we describe in more detail below, formularies
are complete lists of covered drugs, partitioned into distinct sets of cost-sharing “tiers.” We
use these data to identify on which tier each drug was placed in each formulary. Because
there is plan and formulary entry, exit, and re-design year to year, we treat each plan-year
as a distinct plan and each formulary-year as a distinct formulary; for convenience we refer
to each simply as a “plan” or a “formulary” rather than a plan-year or a formulary-year.
5

Specifically, we use the “Prescription Drug Plan Formulary, Pharmacy Network, and Pricing Information” files.

6

3
3.1

Drug- and class-specific elasticities
Sample construction

Baseline sample
The 20 percent random sample of Medicare Part D beneficiaries from 2007-2011 consists of
about 50 million beneficiary-years. We make a number of key sample restrictions to create
our baseline analysis sample in this section. First, we limit to individuals who are enrolled in
stand-alone Part D plans (whose design is the focus of the second half of the paper). Second,
we exclude individuals who are younger than 65 and those older than 65 that were eligible
for Medicare for reasons other than the old age (e.g. due to disability). Third, we exclude
individuals who receive third-party assistance with their out-of-pocket spending, such as dual
Medicare/Medicaid eligibles or individuals receiving low-income subsidies; such individuals
do not face the sharp change in cost-sharing at the donut hole that is key to our empirical
strategy. Finally, and more trivially quantitatively, we exclude beneficiary-years who switch
plans or die within the year. The final sample covers 6.5 million beneficiary-years, which are
based on just over 2 million unique beneficiaries
Table 1 shows some descriptive statistics for our resulting, baseline sample. The unit
of observation is a beneficiary-year. The average age is around 76, about two-thirds of the
sample are females, and the vast majority (95%) are white.
Beneficiaries in our baseline sample buy on average $1,910 worth of prescription drugs per
year. About 5% do not fill any prescription drug claim during the year. The spending level
at which beneficiaries enter the donut hole – $2,250 to $2,840 of total annual drug spending
(depending on the year) – is around the 75th percentile of the expenditure distribution.
The average annual out-of-pocket spending in our sample is $757. Beneficiaries fill, on
average, around 31 claims a year, almost evenly split between branded and generic drugs.
Our empirical strategy described below is focused on claiming propensity late in the calendar
year, and about 75% of individuals fill at least one claim in December. Conditional on having
at least one December claim, individuals have approximately 4 claims in December.
“Common” drugs and “common” therapeutic classes
In order to have sufficient power to estimate class-specific and drug-specific elasticities, we
limit our analysis to frequently-claimed therapeutic classes and frequently-claimed drugs; we
refer to these throughout as “common” therapeutic classes and “common” drugs, respec-

7

tively.
We define therapeutic classes using the American Hospital Formulary Service® (AHFS)
8-level classification of 256 therapeutic classes. This classification groups drugs that have
similar chemical structures or mechanism of action and are frequently used to treat the same
or related diseases. We define “common” classes as ones that have at least 100,000 claims in
the 2007-2011 data. This results in 108 therapeutic classes, constituting 86% of claims and
85% of expenditures. The first column of Appendix Table A4 provides a complete list.
The most frequently-claimed therapeutic class, representing 8% of total claims and 10%
of total expenditures (around $1.2 billion in total) in our baseline sample, is MGH-CoA
Reducase Inhibitors; this class includes anti-cholesterol drugs (e.g. Lipitor). The next most
common therapeutic class is beta-Adrenergic Blocking agents, which represents 7% of claims
and 3% of expenditures; this class includes Beta-blockers, which are used to treat heart
attacks, arrhythmias, and high blood pressure.
We define a “drug” by its chemical compound (what the FDA refers to as “non-proprietary
names”) and whether it is branded or generic. We define a drug as “common” if the sum of its
branded and generic versions have at least 100,000 claims in the 2007-2011 data. Specifically,
to identify “common drugs,” we begin with CMS’ 2011 list of the most frequently claimed
drugs in stand-alone Prescription Drug Plans.6 CMS reports the most frequently claimed
drugs at a chemical compound level, treating branded drugs and their generic equivalent as
separate products; we amend their list to include both the generic and the branded version
of each chemical if a generic is available. We apply the 100,000 claims frequency threshold
to the number of claims at the chemical level, thus retaining, for example, small branded
drugs that would not otherwise meet the frequency threshold.7
The result is 160 “common drugs,” where a “drug” is a chemical compound sold either as
a brand or a generic. For example, “Atorvastatin Calcium” and its branded version (Lipitor)
are counted as two different drugs. However, different packaging, dosages and strengths are
not counted as separate drugs. There are 85 branded drugs and 75 generic drugs. The first
column of Appendix Table A5 provides a complete list.
The 160 common drugs in our analysis account for around 65 percent of total claims and
54 percent of total expenditures in our baseline sample. The top 10 drugs in our sample
of common drugs constitute 20 percent of all claims. A generic statin Simvastatin (generic
6
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 2011 Medicare Part D Utilization Trends (December 2013), Table
“2011 Part D Top 100 Drugs By Total Fills for PDPs.”
7
It is useful to keep track of both brand and generic version of each drug, as we will later distinguish
between elasticities for branded and generic drugs.

8

version of Zocor) has the highest market share, accounting for 3% of total claims (6.9 million
claims) and 1% of expenditures. The drug with the highest spending share in our sample is
Lipitor, with almost 5.5% expenditure share. The least-frequently-claimed of our “common”
drugs represents less than a 0.001% of claims (around 500 claims in total) in our baseline
sample; in our empirical analysis in Section 4.2, we explore the sensitivity of our results to
the exclusion of infrequently-claimed “common” drugs.

3.2

Empirical strategy

Our goal is to measure the elasticity of demand for the product (a specific drug or therapeutic
class) with respect to its out-of-pocket price. Our empirical strategy takes advantage of the
sharp increase in the out-of-pocket price individuals face when they hit the “donut hole”
associated with essentially every Part D insurance contract. All the plans are based around
a government-defined standard benefit design, which includes four separate coverage arms
for the calendar year.
Figure 1 illustrates this standard design in 2008; the kink points for the coverage arms
change year-to-year but the basic structure has remained constant. In the initial deductible
arm, the individual pays for all expenses out of pocket. Once she has spent $275, she enters a
cost-sharing arm in which she pays only 25% of subsequent drug expenditures until her total
drug spending reaches the kink in the budget set at $2,510. At this point the individual
enters the famed “donut hole” (or “gap”), within which she must once again pay for all
expenses out of pocket until total drug expenditures reach $5,726, the amount at which
catastrophic coverage sets in and the marginal out-of-pocket price of additional spending
drops substantially, to about 7%.
Insurers may offer plans that are actuarially equivalent to, or offer more coverage than
the standard plan, so that the exact contract design varies across plans and hence across
their enrollees. Nonetheless, a common feature of these plans is the existence of a sharp
increase in the out-of-pocket price at the kink location. On average, in our baseline sample,
out of pocket payments per drug more than triple when an individual enters the donut hole,
from $17 in average out-of-pocket payments between the deductible and donut hole for a
drug, to $58 in the donut hole. The co-insurance rate approximately doubles going from an
average of 48% for pre-gap (but post-deductible) claims to 83% average co-insurance in the
gap.
Our basic empirical strategy is to compare the propensity to purchase a specific drug
(or therapeutic class) between individuals whose total annual spending is “just below” and
9

individuals whose total spending is “just above” the kink location. Standard price theory
suggests that individuals’ annual spending will “bunch” around the convex kink in the budget
set at the donut hole. In previous work we documented a behavioral response to the price
at the kink. For example, we showed an “excess mass” of individuals with annual drug
spending right around the kink (Einav et al. 2015, 2016a). Here, we use the same basic
empirical design – with several additional years of data – to examine the behavioral response
separately for different drugs and therapeutic classes and to translate this behavioral response
into product-specific elasticities.
Our measure of demand is the probability of purchasing that product in the last month of
the year (December). We focus on December because at that point forward looking behavior
is less important, individuals have less uncertainty about their end-of-year price, and the
relevant price associated with purchasing the drug is straightforward to measure (Einav
et al., 2015). The strategy would be even cleaner if we focused on purchasing decisions on
December 31 of each year, but in order to gain statistical power a month seems a natural
unit of time.
Empirical elasticities For each drug (or therapeutic class) d, we define its drug-specific
(or class-specific) elasticity of demand by:
(P rdobs (Dec) − P rdpred (Dec))/P rdpred (Dec)
%4P rd (Dec)
=
.
σd =
%4OOPd
(OOPdgap − OOPdpregap )/OOPdpregap

(1)

The changes are associated with the event of entering the donut hole. The denominator
of the elasticity is the percentage change in the average (per claim) out-of-pocket cost of a
given drug (or class) that occurs at the kink. OOPdgap measures the average out-of-pocket
payment (in absolute $) for a given drug (or class) in the donut hole (which comes quite
close to the total cost of the drug in the vast majority of plans), and OOPdpregrap measures
the average out-of-pocket payment for that drug between the deductible and the kink.8
8

For our drug-level measure of average out-of-pocket cost we simply average claim-level out of pocket
payment across all claims observed for that drug in a given cost sharing arm (i.e. in the donut hole or
between the deductible and the donut hole). For the therapeutic class level measure of average out-of-pocket
cost, we take the same approach pre-gap, but post-gap we calculate average out-of-pocket cost separately
for each drug (at the NDC11 level) in the therapeutic class and then weight each drug (again, at the NDC11
level) by its pre-gap share of claims, so that any substitution across drugs within a therapeutic class in
response to the price change does not affect our measure of the price change. We have experimented with
a variety of other ways of defining the average out-of-pocket cost, e.g. by averaging first within individuals
or plans and then across individuals and plans. The estimates of the percentage change in the out-of-pocket
cost turns out to not be particularly sensitive to these variants.

10

The numerator of the elasticity is the corresponding percentage change in the probability
of a December purchase for a given drug (or class). We define this as the difference between
the actual probability of a December purchase, P rdobs (Dec), and the predicted probability of
a December purchase, P rdpred (Dec) in the (counterfactual) absence of the donut hole. Both
actual and predicted probabilities are measured for individuals whose annual spending is
just above the kink; specifically, we focus on individuals who entered the donut hole, but
whose annual spending is no more than $400 higher than the kink location. We then define
the actual probability of a December purchase as the share of these individuals who have a
purchase of drug (or class) d in December.
Estimating the change in demand To construct the counterfactual (in the absence of
the kink) December purchase probability for individuals whose annual spending is between
$0 and $400 above the kink, we estimate the statistical relationship between claim propensity
and annual spending for individuals whose annual spending is below the kink. Specifically,
we fit the following statistical relationship, separately for each drug or therapeutic class:
log(sdb ) = αd − γd eb + db ,

(2)

where the unit of observation is a total annual spending bin b, sdb is the share of individuals
within the spending bin b without a claim for drug (or class) d in December, and eb is the
mid-point of the spending bin b (we use spending bins of $20 each). This specification is
designed to make the probability of a December purchase monotone in the spending bin (as
would be expected given that higher total spending is associated with sicker individuals and
would mechanically correspond to greater claim propensities) and asymptote to one as the
bin amount approaches infinity. Importantly, we fit this regression using only observations
from individuals with total expenditures that are sufficiently below the kink location (we
use all spending bins that are between $2,000 and $500 below the kink), assuming that late
in the year individuals who are $500 or more below the kink are sufficiently certain to not
hit the kink by the end of the year. We use the estimates from equation (2) to project it
(out of sample) for spending bins that are above the kink, thus constructing the predicted
December claim propensity P rdpred (Dec) for individuals with total spending of zero to $400
above the kink.
Figures 2 and 3 present our core approach to estimating the change in demand at the
kink graphically. For illustrative purposes, Figure 2 shows results for any drug, any common
drug, and any common therapeutic class. Since our core estimates are product specific,
11

Figure 3 shows results for the top three common drugs and the top three therapeutic classes.
In all figures, the horizontal axis reflects the annual total drug spending (across all drugs) of
each individual, relative to the year-specific kink location. The vertical axis shows the share
of beneficiaries in each $20-bin of annual spending who purchased that drug or therapeutic
class in December. As would be expected, this purchase probability is increasing in total
annual expenditures, reflecting the fact that individuals who spend more on drugs annually
are more likely to purchase any given drug. However, for some of the products we see a
sharp slowdown in the probability of a December purchase as individuals get close to the
donut hole. Once they enter the coverage gap, the pattern reverts to the original monotone
pattern (in which the probability of purchasing is rising with total annual spending), albeit
at a lower probability of December purchases, presumably reflecting the higher cost-sharing
in the gap.
The dotted lines in Figures 2 and 3 record our in- and out-of sample predictions of the
probability of filling at least one claim in December for each product. These predictions are
based on the predicted values from the estimation of equation (2). The fit appears quite
good in sample (i.e. below -$500).
The comparison of predicted and observed probabilities of purchase right around the
donut hole allows us to quantify the demand response for each drug (or class) on our list.
For example, for those products presented in Figure 3, we see a fairly large demand response
for two products (top left and bottom right) and a much smaller one for the rest. To
assess the statistical precision of our elasticity estimates, we use 100 bootstrap samples to
repeat the same procedure and generate confidence intervals for quantity response. We then
combine these estimates of the quantity response with the empirically observed change in
out-of-pocket price at the donut hole to obtain elasticity estimates in each case.

3.3

Results

Elasticity estimates
Pooled estimates We start by estimating an elasticity of purchasing any drug (common
or not) in December to the change in out-of-pocket cost at the kink. Figure 2 showed the
change in the probability of December purchases overall at the kink, relative to the predicted
probability; we estimate a 9% decrease in the probability of claiming any drug in December
once individuals enter the gap. As described earlier, we separately calculate that the average
out-of-pocket price increases by 241 percent (from $17 to $58). These two estimates together

12

imply that drugs are in general quite inelastic, with an elasticity of -0.037 (s.e. 0.0003); a
one percent increase in out-of-pocket cost leads to a 0.037 percent decrease in the probability
of filling a claim.
To see how representative our common drugs and common therapeutic classes are to the
overall universe of drugs claimed within the Part D program, we calculated a pooled elasticity
measures for all 160 common drugs and for all 108 therapeutic classes. The pooled elasticity
measures the response of the probability of purchasing any common drug (or, respectively
therapeutic class) to a one percent increase in the average out-of-pocket cost of all common
drugs (or therapeutic classes). We found the pooled elasticity estimates to be very similar
for our common drugs, common therapeutic classes, and all drugs samples; the percentage
changes in the probability of purchase and in the average out-of-pocket price were also quite
similar across these three groups. Specifically, we estimate an elasticity of -0.047 (s.e. 0.0003)
for common drugs, and of -0.044 (s.e. 0.0003) for common therapeutic classes.9
The price elasticities of demand that we estimate should be interpreted in their specific
context. As emphasized by Aron-Dine et al. (2013, 2015), “the” price elasticity of demand
is not a clearly defined object when individuals face a non-linear price schedule. Here, the
elasticity we measure is the “short-run” elasticity of demand with respect to an end-of-year
increase in the spot price of a drug. It does not measure the entire response to the nonlinear budget set the individual faces, which may include “anticipatory” behavioral changes
in advance of reaching the donut hole, as well as inter-temporal substitution of purchases
to the following year once in the donut hole. We explored such dynamic considerations
and cross-year substitution in previous work (Einav et al., 2015). Our results there suggest
that our focus here on December claim propensities make dynamic considerations relatively
unimportant. They also showed that products with a greater behavioral response at the kink
also tend to exhibit greater inter-temporal substitution to the following year; this suggests
that the ranking of our spot elasticities across drugs or across therapeutic classes, which we
now turn to examining, would likely remain similar if estimated net of cross-year substitution.
9

For common drugs, we estimate that the probability of claiming any common drug at the kink decreases
by 11.7 percent, while the average out-of-pocket price increases by 247 percent. For the common therapeutic
classes, we estimate that the probability of purchase drops by 10.2 percent at the kink in response to a
233 percent increase in the average out-of-pocket cost. Note that the estimates of the pooled elasticities
for common drugs and therapeutic classes are not comparable to the average elasticities we report next, as
the pooled measures only reflect the “extensive” margin of whether any of the common drugs or classes are
claimed.

13

Drug (or class) specific estimates Figure 4 documents the distribution of the estimated
elasticities across the common drugs and common therapeutic classes. The top panel reports
the estimated distribution of elasticities across the 108 common therapeutic classes. The
average (unweighted) elasticity across therapeutic classes is -0.14. They are all less than 1 in
absolute value; we estimate 11 elasticities that are slightly greater than 0, which presumably
reflects sampling error. There is substantial heterogeneity in the elasticities, with a standard
deviation across therapeutic classes of 0.15. Panel A of Table 2 lists the elasticity estimates –
as well as the denominator and numerator separately – for the top 10 most frequently claimed
therapeutic classes. The elasticities are estimated quite precisely: Panel A in Appendix
Figure A1 plots bootstrapped confidence intervals for the elasticity estimates for the top 10
common therapeutic classes, suggesting that the heterogeneity in the sensitivity of demand
to changes in out-of-pocket is not driven by sampling variation. Appendix Table A4 provides
a complete list of elasticity estimates for all common therapeutic classes. This “look-up”
table also documents that the variation in elasticity estimates comes both from variation in
the numerator and the denominator. The average change in the probability of purchase at
the kink is -15%, with a standard deviation of 13%. The average increase in out-of-pocket
cost is 155%, with a standard deviation of 81%.
It is important to bear in mind that the price of all drugs increase at the donut hole, so
that the demand response reflects any impact of own price changes and cross price changes.
An attraction of estimating the elasticity of demand for therapeutic classes is that cross-price
elasticities are likely close to zero across therapeutic classes; any substitution across drugs
should happen within a therapeutic class, either between branded and generic versions of the
same chemical compound or between chemical compounds that have a similar therapeutic
action. Thus, even though the price of all drugs increases at the donut hole, we are reasonably
comfortable interpreting our estimated elasticities of demand for different therapeutic classes
as own-price elasticities of demand for drugs in that class.
The interpretation of drug-specific elasticities is less clean, since an overall price increase
in all drugs at the donut hole may induce substitution across drugs within a therapeutic
class. Thus, the drug-specific elasticity that we estimate likely reflects both own-price and
cross-price effects. This is common issue in the existing literature estimating drug-specific
elasticities, since pricing variation is usually not drug-specific (see e.g. Goldman et al. 2004;
Chandra et al. 2010). Still, pricing decisions are set at the drug level – different drugs within
a therapeutic class may well face different consumer cost-sharing in a given insurance plan –
making the drug a more natural unit of analysis for the relationship between elasticity and

14

consumer cost-sharing in the next section.10
The bottom panel of Figure 4 reports the drug-specific estimates across our 160 “common” drugs. The bottom panel of Table 2 lists the elasticity estimates for the top 10 most
frequently claimed drugs; Appendix Table A5 provides a complete list. Panel B of Appendix
Figure A1 plots the confidence intervals for the 10 largest common drugs, again suggesting
that the variation in elasticities does not simply reflecting sampling variation.
The average (unweighted) price elasticity of demand for a given drug is about -0.24;
the standard deviation of estimated elasticities across drugs is 0.59. The higher (in absolute
value) average elasticity for drugs than for therapeutic classes is consistent with the idea that
some of the drug-level elasticity estimates may be capturing substitution, while therapeutic
class-level elasticities are more likely to only reflect the own-price response. Once again we
estimate heterogeneity in elasticities, stemming both from variation in the probability of
purchase response as well as variation in the change in out-of-pocket price. For the full set
of common drugs the average change in the probability of purchase around the kink is -14%
with a standard deviation of 18%. The average increase in out-of-pocket price is 150%, with
a standard deviation of 115%.
Elasticity patterns across drug and class types
The above results documented that there is considerable heterogeneity in the price elasticity of demand across drugs and therapeutic classes. We examined some potential systematic sources of this heterogeneity. Table 3 reveals intuitive patterns. Drugs that treat
chronic conditions are associated with elasticities that are 0.33 greater (in absolute value)
on average relative to drugs that treat acute conditions; the latter presumably treat more
symptomatic conditions for which the impact of interrupting treatment is likely more immediate and salient. Maintenance drugs – another way to define drugs associated with ongoing,
chronic conditions (see the online appendix for details) – are likewise associated with greater
elasticity than non-maintenance drugs, as are therapeutic classes which are predominantly
composed of maintenance drugs.
We also find that generic drugs are associated with elasticities that are about 0.2 lower
(in absolute value) than branded drugs. This might reflect lower own-price elasticities for
generic than branded drugs, but it might also be driven by the substitution effect described
10

For both the drug- and therapeutic-class specific elasticities, there may of course be income effects from
the aggregate price change for all drugs at the donut hole; however, given the relatively small out-of-pocket
cost of most drugs, we are reasonably comfortable abstracting from such income effects (i.e., assuming
quasi-linear demand for each product).

15

earlier; for generics, the change in the probability of purchase at the donut hole likely reflects
both the (presumably negative) response to an increase in its own price and the (presumably
positive) response to an increase in the (more expensive) branded price, which may cause
substitution to the generic version. (In principle, there may also be substitution from one
branded drug to another drug within a therapeutic class, but it is presumably less common).
This highlights the need for caution in interpreting our estimated drug-specific elasticities;
they are likely to be more biased downward (in absolute value) as measures of own-price
elasticities for cheaper drugs that serve as substitutes for more expensive drugs within the
therapeutic class.
As one way of addressing this issue empirically, we constructed a subset of our common
drugs for which substitution is less likely, and for which therefore our drug-specific elasticity
estimates may more closely approximate own-price elasticities. We refer to this subset of 38
of our 160 common drugs as “lower substitution” drugs. We identified this subset of common
drugs using one of two criteria. First, we selected those common drugs that account for more
than 90% of all claims in their therapeutic class; seven drugs met this criterion. Second, we
selected those pairs of branded and generic drugs for which the differences in out-of-pocket
cost between the brand and generic was less than $5 in absolute value both before and after
the kink. In other words, in the latter restriction we selected brand-generic pairs that did
not really differ in price for consumers before or after the kink, and hence the substitution
effect after the kink should be limited. 31 drugs satisfied this criterion.
Appendix Table A5 provides descriptive statistics for the drugs in the “lower substitution”
sub-sample. They account for 33 percent of all claims and 35 percent of spending in our
common drugs sample. They display a similar skewness to our full sample of “common
drugs” in the distribution of claim and spending shares across drugs. The distribution of
elasticities for the lower substitution sub-sample of common drugs is similar to the full sample
of common drugs. The unweighted average elasticity is -0.28, with a standard deviation of
0.63. This makes the set of lower substitution drugs only slightly more elastic on average
than the entire set of common drugs. Overall, this is reassuring that our full set of common
drug-specific elasticities may not be greatly affected by substitution.

4

Private plan design: drug-specific cost-sharing

In Section 3 we estimated product-specific elasticities, and provided evidence of substantial
heterogeneity in the price elasticity of demand across therapeutic classes and across drugs.

16

We now use this as an input for examining how private plans set cost-sharing across drugs
with different elasticities. We begin by documenting the heterogeneity in cost-sharing across
drugs within private part D plans, and then examine the empirical correlation between a
product’s cost-sharing and its price elasticity of demand.

4.1

Heterogeneity in cost-sharing across drugs

The private insurer makes two distinct decisions in setting coverage rules in a specific plan.
First, it creates a formulary.11 This is a list of covered drugs, partitioned into a distinct set
of cost-sharing “tiers.” In any plan, all drugs in a given tier within a formulary are assigned
the same co-pay or co-insurance rate.12 While there are no explicit regulatory requirements
of cost-sharing levels across tiers (as long as plans satisfy the minimum actuarial requirement
described earlier), CMS emphasizes that tier numbers should reflect an increasing level of
cost-sharing, with the drugs in Tier 1 having the lowest cost-sharing (CMS, 2011). CMS also
requires that private Part D plans include a sufficient number of drugs on their formularies to
cover all disease states; moreover, for all therapeutic classes, at least two chemically distinct
drugs per class should be included on the formulary, while for six “protected” therapeutic
classes all drugs have to be included (CMS, 2011). It is common for a given formulary to be
used in multiple plans by the same insurer; overall, we observe 7,996 plans and 429 distinct
formularies.
When plans use the same formulary, they have the same set of drugs in each tier but
the mapping between tiers and the level of cost-sharing may vary across plans. This creates the second decision the insurer must make: the level of consumer cost-sharing rates
associated with the tiers of a plan’s chosen formulary. As noted, insurers face little regulatory constraints on how to vary cost-sharing across tiers, provided that their plan meets
the minimum actuarial coverage required by the standard benefit design described in Figure
1. Consumer cost-sharing can be either in the form of co-pay (a fixed out-of-pocket dollar amount per prescription) or a co-insurance rate (a fixed percentage of the drug-specific
pharmacy price that is paid out of pocket). For example, in 4-tier plans (which enrolled over
80% of beneficiary-years in our sample), tiers 1 through 3 are often associated with co-pays,
11

In practice, according to CMS requirements, the insurer contracts with an independent scientific committee that makes formulary recommendations (CMS, 2011). Moreover, an insurer may use and alter if
necessary a standard formulary from independent organizations, such as US Pharmacopedia.
12
In practice, there may be additional variation in out-of-pocket prices that stems from the quantity of
the drug purchased, and the type of pharmacy it is purchased from. For example, a 30-day supply of Lipitor
bought at a “preferred” pharmacy may have a different out-of-pocket price than the same 30-day supply of
Lipitor filled through a mail-order, or at a non-preferred pharmacy.

17

while drugs in tier 4 often have co-insurance.
To operationalize the comparison across plans, drugs, and tiers, we convert all pricing
decisions to co-insurance rates at the drug-plan level. Specifically, we calculate claim-level
co-insurance as the ratio of out-of-pocket spending to total spending on that claim, using
only claims between the deductible and the donut hole. We then average across claims to
produce co-insurance estimates for each drug-plan pair.
In contrast to publicly provided drug insurance, we find a high degree of variation in
consumer cost sharing across drugs within private plans. The average (pre-gap) co-insurance
for common drugs is about 40%, while the average standard deviation of (pre-gap) coinsurance within plans across common drugs is about 25%.
Table 4 provides some summary statistics on plan design and drug pricing. It shows
results for 3-tier, 4-tier and 5-tier plans which enroll, respectively, 8%, 81%, and 9% of
our baseline sample. A few other plans (not reported) have 1, 2, or 6 tiers. We focus our
discussion on 4-tier plans, but the patterns are similar for other types of plans.
About half of drugs are placed in tier 1, with another 20% in tier 2, and another 20% in
tier 3 (column 1). This distribution of drugs across tiers is roughly similar for our subsample
of common drugs (column 2). Almost two thirds of drugs in tier 1 are generic; generics are
fairly uncommon in higher tiers (column 3).
The insurer chooses the out-of-pocket prices associated with different tiers on the formulary for each plan. There is a clear pattern of increasing average out-of-pocket costs paid
by consumers in higher tiers. This is shown in column 4, which reports the average outof-pocket payments per claim in each tier for claims made between the deductible and the
donut hole (“pre-gap” claims). The average out-of-pocket cost goes up from $6 per claim
for tier 1 drugs to $41 per claim for tier 2 drugs, and $68 per claim for tier 3 drugs. Tier 4,
which is sometimes designated as a “specialty” tier, has expensive, rarely claimed drugs for
which consumers pay on average $200 per claim out of pocket (but it accounts for less than
1% of claims, so we focus our analysis on tiers 1 through 3).
Some other patterns across tiers are worth noting. Total drug costs per claim are much
higher in tier 2 or tier 3 than in tier 1 (column 5); this presumably reflects the disproportionate positioning of the often cheaper generic drugs on tier 1. Not surprisingly, given the
differences in out-of-pocket costs for drugs across tiers (column 4), utilization is even more
concentrated in the lower tiers than drugs; over 70 percent of claims are for tier 1 drugs, and
another quarter are for tier 2 drugs (see columns 7 and 8).
Our main object of interest is variation in consumer cost-sharing. As noted, consumer-

18

cost sharing can either be in the form of a fixed out-of-pocket dollar amount (co-pay) per
claim or a co-insurance rate. Differences in out-of-pocket payments may therefore reflect both
cost-sharing rules and (in the case of co-insurance) total drug costs. The theory regarding
optimal consumer-cost sharing (i.e. Ramsey-style pricing) is based on co-insurance. In
column 6, therefore, we report the average co-insurance for each tier (pre-gap) that we
computed empirically from the observations of out-of-pocket payments and total cost of each
claim. The result is a somewhat more nuanced pattern. Tiers 1 and 2 have quite similar
co-insurance of about 30%, while tier 3 drugs have markedly higher consumer cost-sharing
(of 50% percent).
The key empirical pattern in column 6 is that “higher cost-sharing” corresponds to tier
3 drug placement. We investigate this more systematically by analyzing cost-sharing by tier
within plans. Table A2 in the Appendix shows that this pattern is even more pronounced
when we include plan fixed effects. Co-insurance between tier 1 and tier 2 is substantively
and statistically indistinguishable, but is 20 percentage points higher for tier 3 drugs. As
a result, in our empirical analysis of the correlation of tier-placement and drug elasticity
below, we will focus on the distinction between drugs in tier 3 relative to tier 1 and tier 2.

4.2

Correlations between drug elasticities and cost sharing

Drug Elasticities and Tier Placement
We begin by analyzing the relationship between a drug’s elasticity and whether it is placed
on tier 3 (versus any other tier), which, as just shown, has systematically higher co-insurance
than other tiers. Figure 5 shows an initial look at this pattern. Specifically, for our common
drugs, it reports the frequency of tier-3 placement as a function of the elasticity for each
drug (we bin drugs into 0.05 elasticity bins in the figure), which was estimated in Section
3. The figure shows a clear pattern: drugs with more elastic demand are more likely to be
placed in tier 3, where consumer cost-sharing is the higher.
To analyze more systematically the relationship between a drug’s elasticity and its tier
in a formulary, we run the following linear regression at the drug-by-formulary-by-tier level:
σ d = αf +

K
X

βk 1{T ierdf = k} + df ,

(3)

k=1

where σd is the estimated elasticity of demand for drug d from equation (1), and αf denotes
fixed effects for each of the 429 formularies. We include a series of indicator variables
19

1{T ierdf = k} for whether drug d is located on tier k in formulary f . We include separate
indicators for tiers 3, 4, 5, and 6. The omitted tier category is tiers 1 and 2. The key
coefficient of interest is β3 , which measure the within-formulary difference in average elasticity
of drugs in tier 3 relative to the reference tiers 1 and 2. By including formulary fixed effects,
we are examining the relationship between drug elasticity and (ordinal) tier placement within
a formulary.
Table 5 reports the results. Column (1) reports results without formulary fixed effects;
it is therefore similar in spirit to the variation presented in Figure 5 although the exact
estimates will differ because of differences in the implicit weighting and functional form.
Column (2) shows the results with formulary fixed effects, which are quite similar. We
estimate that, on average, drugs on tier 3 have 0.12 higher elasticity (in absolute value)
relative to drugs on lower tiers.
The remainder of the columns investigate the sensitivity of this main result. As we saw
in Table 4, the vast majority of enrollees and claims are in plans that use 4-tier formularies.
Therefore, in column 3 we repeat the regression analysis separately for 4-tier formularies
only. The results are quite similar. In column 4 we re-estimate the baseline specification from
column 2, restricting to a higher frequency sub-sample of our common drugs. Specifically,
we limited the sample to the 96 (out of 160) common drugs that have more than 300,000
claims, and hence presumably more precisely estimated elasticities. The magnitude of the
estimated β3 is lower but remains statistically significant.
In column 5, we address a potential confounding variable by repeating the analysis in
column 2 with the addition of a control for the average (total) price of the drug.13 There
are two reasons to control for price levels. First, it makes the estimates between drugs with
co-pay and co-insurance more compatible, as controlling for price in principle translates copays to co-insurance. Second, if price itself is a strong predictor of where insurers place their
drugs, then controlling for prices allows us to explore whether conditional on the price of a
drug, the insurer is more likely to place higher elasticity drugs on higher tiers. We find that
controlling for price levels makes the relationship between drug elasticity and tier placement
more pronounced.
Finally, as discussed, a limitation to our drug-specific elasticities is that they reflect
a combination of own- and cross-price elasticities. Therefore, in column 6, we repeat the
analysis in column 2 limited to the sub-sample of 38 “lower substitution” drugs; as described
13

We compute the average total price for each drug for each year to be consistent with our treatment of
each formulary-year or plan-year as separate observations.

20

in Section 3, these are drugs for which substitution concerns are less likely, and therefore
the estimated elasticities may more closely approximate own-price elasticities. Comparing
columns 2 and 6, we find that the magnitude of the relationship between a drug’s elasticity
and placement on tier 3 is in fact somewhat larger for this sub-sample of drugs.
Drug elasticities and co-insurance
The preceding analysis allows for a relatively straightforward examination of the drug’s
elasticity and its tier placement. This has the attraction of corresponding closely to the
decision the insurer makes (which tier to place a drug on). However, it stops short of
the economic object of interest which is the relationship between a product’s elasticity and
its co-insurance rate; this co-insurance rate depends both on the formulary chosen (which
determines the drug’s tier) and the insurer’s decision regarding the level of consumer cost
sharing in each tier of the chosen formulary. Here, therefore, we analyze the relationship
between a drug’s average co-insurance rate and its elasticity.
One again, we begin with graphical evidence. Panel A in Figure 6 shows the correlation
between the elasticity of a drug and the average co-insurance for that drug (for “pre-gap”
claims, as described earlier).
The figure shows a clear negative relationship: drugs with higher (in absolute value)
elasticities have higher average co-insurance rates.14 One concern with this analysis is that
we have already seen that generic drugs are disproportionately on tier 1 (i.e. lower consumer
co-insurance) and, as discussed, our estimated elasticities are likely biased downward (in
absolute value) for generic drugs relative to branded drugs due to likely substitution within
a therapeutic class from branded to generic drugs at the donut hole. Therefore, in the
second and third panel of Figure 6 we plot the same relationship separately for generic
or branded drugs. As can be seen, the qualitative relationship remains stable in each case,
although it is quantitatively stronger for generics. To more directly tackle this concern about
substitution, the final panel of Figure 6 illustrates similar patterns for therapeutic classes
which, as discussed, likely have little cross-class substitution. We observe that therapeutic
classes for which we estimate higher elasticities (in absolute value) have higher co-insurance.
Since cost-sharing is set separately by plan, we also analyze the within-plan relationship
between cost-sharing and drug elasticity. To do so, we run the following linear regression at
14

Interestingly, while the slope is consistent with the theoretical optimum of higher cost-sharing for more
elastic drugs, the intercept (average cost-sharing around 40 percent for drugs with zero elasticity of demand)
suggests much lower average coverage than theory would suggest is optimal (full coverage for completely
inelastic drugs).

21

the drug (d) by plan (j) level:
ppregap
= αj + βσd + dj ,
dj

(4)

denotes the pre-gap co-insurance rate for a drug (or class) in plan j, αj denotes
where ppregap
dj
the plan fixed effects, and σd denotes the elasticity of product d estimated in Section 3.
The coefficient of interest, β, measures the correlation between pre-gap co-insurance and
elasticity.
Table 6 reports the estimates of β. Panel A reports drug-level analysis, and Panel B
reports therapeutic-class level analysis. We start in column (1) with a specification that uses
all common drugs or therapeutic classes, thus effectively reproducing Figure 6 panel A or D
(albeit with differences in implicit weighting and functional form). Column (2) repeats this
specification, adding plan fixed effects; the results are quite similar. We estimate that, on
average, a drug with a 0.1 higher (in absolute value) elasticity has a 0.02 higher co-insurance
rate, and a therapeutic class with a 0.1 higher (in absolute value) elasticity has a 0.03 higher
co-insurance rate.
The remainder of the columns investigate the sensitivity of this main result. In column
(3) we re-run the baseline specification on the sub-sample of 96 out of 160 “common” drugs
with high frequency of claims in our sample, which restricts the sample of common drugs
or common therapeutic classes to the set with more than 300,000 claims in the sample that
arguably have more precisely estimated elasticities. The coefficient of interest increases in
magnitude with this restriction, both for the drugs and for the therapeutic classes, as would
be expected with classical measurement error in our estimates of σd .
An important limitation to our result is that it is inherently cross-sectional. Therefore
any omitted variable correlated with elasticity and co-insurance may be driving the estimated
relationship. One natural possibility is the total price of the drug – perhaps lower priced
drugs both have lower consumer cost-sharing (to encourage their use) and are less elastic.
This is particularly a concern at the drug level where we are concerned that our elasticity
estimates are biased toward zero for cheaper drugs that are substitutes for more expensive
drugs; it is arguably less of a concern at the therapeutic class level since substitution should
primarily occur within, not across classes. In either case, controlling for the total drug price
in column (4) slightly attenuates the magnitude of the relationship between elasticity and
cost sharing but does not change the sign.
Finally, the last three columns investigate an issue specific to the analysis at the drug
level in Panel A, and discussed in the context of the previous analysis as well: the drug22

specific elasticity estimates may reflect cross-drug substitution in response to the overall
price increase, as well as the own-price effect. As noted, this issue is less likely to arise at
the therapeutic class level in Panel B. As one way of addressing this issue for the drug-level
analysis in Panel A, column (5) shows the results of limiting to the “lower substitution” subsample of drugs; the estimated relationship changes very little. A further way of addressing
this concern is reported in columns (6) and (7). Here, we separate the results by branded and
generic drugs, so that we can test our theoretical prediction on branded drugs only, which
we believe are less likely to include a significant degree of cross-price elasticities in their
elasticity estimates. The estimated coefficient is much lower for branded relative to generic
drugs, and in both cases the estimated magnitudes of the correlation are far from zero,
statistically significant, and continue to show more elastic drugs facing higher consumer cost
sharing. The results from these alternative drug-level specifications – as well as the results
by therapeutic class – leave us relatively sanguine that substitution effects are not driving
our primary findings.

5

Private provider incentives for drug-specific cost-sharing

Our findings suggest that, unlike public prescription drug plans, private plans vary cost
sharing considerably across drugs, setting greater cost-sharing for more elastic drugs. This
qualitative relationship appears robust to attempts to address a variety of potential contaminants in what is, in the end, a cross-sectional correlation. In this final section, we provide
additional corroborative support for our analysis by showing that it is not merely an empirical regularity but also one that, at least within the context of the highly stylized theoretical
model, is the socially optimal direction to set cost-sharing and is also the optimal strategy
for a profit maximizing monopolist or duopolist.
The intuition for why a private firm’s incentives are aligned with the social optimum
is quite simple for the case of a monopoly provider. An insurance contract is essentially a
two-part tariff in which the provider can charge both a fixed fee (premium) and a variable
price per claim (co-insurance). The optimal strategy for this type of two-part tariff is wellknown: a profit maximizing monopolist should set the variable price to maximize consumer
surplus, and then extract as much of this surplus as possible via the premium. Thus, the coinsurance design should maximize consumer (and hence social) surplus. While the intuition
for the duopoly case is more nuanced, the same forces are in play: the duopolists attempt
to maximize consumer surplus through the co-insurance, and then compete with each other

23

for market share via premium setting. We formalize this intuition below.15

5.1

Setup

We consider an environment where there exists only one drug. The social marginal cost of
producing the drug is w, which we normalize to be a unit cost w = 1. There exists a mass
of individuals, who all have the same probability of a health shock λ. We assume that the
health shock can be completely mitigated if the individual takes the drug. The monetized
disutility from the health shock is x, which we assume to be homogeneous across individuals.
We assume that the disutility from the untreated health shock is unknown ex ante, and
is drawn from a uniform distribution x ∼ U [0, K]. K > 1 is the key parameter that guides
the extent of moral hazard (i.e. the price elasticity of demand in our empirical results). If
x > 1, the individual would purchase the drug even at full cost (of w = 1); in this case there
is no moral hazard and full insurance is efficient. Once x < 1, however, individuals would
respond to price, and only purchase the drug if the coverage is generous enough. Thus, the
higher is K, the more likely it is that x > 1, and the less responsive individuals are to the
price of the drug.
Individuals are risk averse and have a CARA utility over realized utility ui (z) = −exp(−ϕi zi ),
where zi is the individual’s realized utility and ϕi is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion.
The coefficient is individual-specific and guides the heterogeneity in insurance preferences
across individuals. Each individual has the opportunity to purchase an insurance contract.
The insurance contract is a pair of premium π and out-of-pocket price p < 1. The out-ofpocket price is the theoretical analog of the empirical co-insurance rate. The individual’s
certainty equivalent V (p; φ) for a contract (π, p) equates the utility from paying V with
certainty to the expected utility from having coverage p. In other words, V implicitly solves
−exp(−ϕi (zi − V )) =

(5)
ˆp

−(1 − λ)exp(−ϕi zi ) − λP r(x > p)exp(−ϕ(z − p)) − λ

1
exp(−ϕi (zi − x))dx,
K

0

where with probability (1−λ) individuals do not experience a health shock. With probability
λ they experience a health shock x, and either pay p if the disutility from the health shock
15
We have not worked out the case of perfect competition, but we think that the predictions for equilibrium
cost-sharing across drugs of different elasticities are less obvious there, and would likely depend on a variety
of modeling assumptions, such as the order of decisions, the rationing of consumers, etc.

24

is greater than p, or pay x if the disutility of the shock is less than p. Rearranging terms
and simplifying, we obtain:


1
1 1
V (p; ϕi ) =
ln (1 − λ) + λ Pr(x > p) exp(ϕi p) + λ
(exp(ϕi p) − 1) .
ϕi
K ϕi

(6)

Using this framework, no insurance is equivalent to a contract of (π = 0, p = 1). Individual’s willingness to pay for a contract that offers co-insurance p is given by the difference
between her certainty equivalent for that co-insurance and her certainty equivalent from no
insurance:
W T Pi (p) = V (1; ϕi ) − V (p; ϕi ).
(7)
Insurer’s expected profits from a contract (π, p) that is sold to consumer i is:
Πi = π − λ(1 − p) Pr(x > p).

(8)

That is, the insurer collects the premium π and with probability λ has to pay (1 − p) for
the drug if the individual decides to purchase the drug. The latter happens if the realization
of the monetized value of the health shock is greater than the out of pocket price p, i.e. if
x > p. Insurer’s total profits from selling a contract (π, p) is
ˆ
Π=

I(W T Pi (p) > π)Πi di,

(9)

and total welfare from selling (π, p) is then:
ˆ
TS =

I(W T Pi (p) > π)(Πi + W T Pi (p) − π)di.

(10)

We now consider several scenarios of market structure to highlight the equilibrium relationship between moral hazard – measured by K – and risk exposure in the contract,
measured by the co-insurance rate p. A higher K implies lower moral hazard, since it implies a higher chance that the monetized value of the health shock x is greater than the social
cost of the drug w, and hence the individual would want to purchase the drug regardless of
the share of the cost p that she must pay out of pocket. The individual’s exposure to risk
is increasing in the out-of-pocket price p; with p = 0 the individual is fully insured against
fluctuations in her realized utility resulting from health shocks.

25

5.2

Relationship between co-insurance and moral hazard

Social Optimum We start with a social optimum that demonstrates the classic trade-off
between moral hazard and risk protection in an optimal insurance setting. The socially
optimal price p maximizes total welfare (defined by equation 10); it is given by the p that
solves λ(1 − p) = V (1; ϕi ) − V (p; ϕi ), i.e. that equates the expected cost of coverage with
the willingness to pay for insurance. Appendix Figure A2 demonstrates the solution to this
problem graphically for a selected set of parameter values. As expected , the social planner
sets higher levels of risk protection (lower p) in cases where the extent of moral hazard is
lower (K is higher).
This results is not specific to our highly stylized setting. As noted in the introduction,
it is a classic theoretical result (Feldstein, 1973; Besley, 1988). It does, however, rely on
a key assumption that absent insurance (i.e. with no consumer cost sharing) individuals
would purchase the socially optimal amount of drugs. Recent papers have challenged this
assumption, noting that the patent system marks up drug prices above social marginal
costs and thus inefficiently reduces unsubsidized drug consumption (Lakdawalla and Sood,
2009). In addition, failures of rationality may produce sub-optimal drug purchase decisions
(Baicker et al., 2015). Our analysis of the social optimum also abstracts from the possibility
that individuals may have different social welfare weights. If, for example, drugs with higher
elasticities of demand tend to be consumed by individuals who are sicker and thus perhaps
assigned higher weights in the social planner’s objective, this would affect the social optimum;
it would not however affect the private firm’s optimal cost sharing which depends only on
the extent of moral hazard and not on the characteristics of the affected individuals.
Private monopoly Consider now the case of a monopolist insurer. In this case, the monopolist sets price p that maximizes profits, given by equation (9). We solve this problem
numerically for a range of parameter values; Appendix Table A3 reports the results. Comparing the results across different values of K, we see that the optimal level of cost sharing
p decreases with K. That is, the monopolist offers more risk protection in cases that have
less moral hazard, which is qualitatively similar to the direction by which p would change
with K in the social optimum. The intuition is simple and well understood. Demand is
decreasing in both the price of insurance π and the cost sharing rate p. Comparing increases
in π and in p that would result in the same increase of expected profits, the latter would raise
risk exposure, and thus would lead to a greater demand response by risk averse individuals.
This means that the monopolist would optimally set p at its socially efficient level, and then
26

set premium to maximize profits. While this sharp result is driven by our assumption that
moral hazard is homogeneous and is not correlated with risk aversion, the overall qualitative
intuition is more general.
Private duopoly In the duopoly problem, each insurer sets premiums and prices (π, p) in
a Nash equilibrium. To avoid boundary cases, we assume that each insurer is a monopolist
against a fraction κ < 0.5 of the people, and competes for the remaining 1 − 2κ share of the
market. If the other firm sets (π−j , p−j ), firm j solves:
ˆ
max Π = κ
πj,pj

ˆ
+(1 − 2κ)

I(W T Pi (pj ) > πj )Πi di +

(11)

I(W T Pi (pj ) > πj & W T Pi (pj ) − W T Pi (p−j ) > πj − π−j )Πi di.

To solve the duopoly problem, we need to find (π ∗ , p∗ ) for each (π−j , p−j ); we then look for
a symmetric Nash equilibrium in which π ∗ = π−j and p∗ = p−j .
In the duopoly case, we have the extra parameter κ that indexes the degree of competition
between the two insurers. The monopoly case is a special case when κ = 0.5, while κ = 0
results in perfect competition with total surplus equal to the social planner’s case. In all
intermediate values of the competition parameter, we find a large multiplicity of equilibria;
the monopoly solution is almost always an equilibrium, and therefore in Appendix Table
A3 we report, in each case, the most competitive equilibrium, which generates the lowest
profits. Consider an intermediate case with κ = 0.4; we get patterns that are very similar to
the monopolist case. The insurers set lower cost-sharing and higher premiums for more risk
averse consumers, and total surplus increases when individuals are more risk averse. Turning
to our key comparison, the simulation of the model predicts that for all combinations of
parameter values on consumer risk aversion and competition, increasing the moral hazard
parameter K leads to lower cost-sharing for the drug. Hence, profit-maximizing incentives in
this set-up of the model lead to an inverse gradient between moral hazard and risk protection
that is also present in the social planner’s solution.

6

Conclusion

In debates over whether to have private provision of public insurance, two arguments are
often advanced in favor of private provision. First, private provisions may result in more and
better choices for consumers. Second, competition among private insurers may lead to more
27

efficient provision of the goods or services in question. A substantial empirical literature has
analyzed the first of these arguments, but there is relatively little work on the second.
In this paper we investigate a specific efficiency issue: the design of consumer cost-sharing,
which trades off risk protection and moral hazard. The textbook public finance discussion
assumes that while the public sector has a comparative advantage in combating adverse
selection, it does not have a comparative advantage over the private market in ameliorating
moral hazard. Our results here go further, to suggest that in fact, the private sector may
have a comparative advantage in addressing moral hazard through efficient benefit design.
Our empirical setting is Medicare Part D. We have three main findings. First, we exploit
the discrete change in price at the donut hole to estimate and document substantial variation
in the price elasticity of demand across drugs. This heterogeneity exists within and across
broad therapeutic classes and exhibits intuitive patterns.
It also suggests that optimal cost-sharing may differ across drugs and therapeutic classes.
However, as with many other publicly provided prescription drug plans, the governmentdefined standard benefit plan for Part D features uniform consumer cost-sharing across
drugs. By contrast, our second finding is that private insurers in Medicare Part D vary
cost-sharing substantially across drugs within a plan.
Third, we find that private insurers in Medicare Part D vary cost-sharing in the socially
optimal direction: they set higher consumer cost sharing (less risk protection) for drugs that
exhibit a higher price elasticity of demand (i.e. greater degree of moral hazard). Consistent
with this empirical finding, we provide a stylized conceptual framework which suggests that
market forces may indeed lead to efficient benefit design: profit-maximization incentives
lead to the same gradient in the trade-off between risk protection and moral hazard as in
the optimal insurance contract. Our empirical and theoretical results thus suggest that the
private sector may have a comparative advantage over the public sector in the “production”
of insurance.
An interesting question that our analysis does not address is why public insurance plans
do not also vary pricing of drugs in what the neo-classical theory would suggest is the
socially optimal direction. One possible explanation is a basic “costs of complexity” story
to determine drug-specific demand elasticities and set cost-sharing accordingly, interacted
with the lack of profit-seeking incentives that might induce designers to incur those costs.
Alternatively, there may be political economy concerns about who and how the pricing
decisions would be made, thus pushing toward uniformity in cost sharing. Finally, there
may be equity concerns across individuals; for example, if the social planner assigns different

28

social welfare weights to individuals with different diseases (treated by different drugs), that
could affect the socially optimal cost-sharing across drugs relative to the benchmark model.

References
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2011). Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence
from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program. American Economic Review 101(4),
1180–1210.
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2013). Evolving Choice Inconsistencies in Choice of Prescription
Drug Insurance. NBER Working Paper no. 19163 .
Akerlof, G. (1970). The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3), 488–500.
Aron-Dine, A., L. Einav, and A. Finkelstein (2013). The RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Three Decades Later. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(1), 197–222.
Aron-Dine, A., L. Einav, A. Finkelstein, and M. Cullen (2015). Moral Hazard in Health
Insurance: Do Dynamic Incentives Matter? Review of Economics and Statistics 97(4),
725–741.
Baicker, K., S. Mullainathan, and J. Schwartzstein (2015). Behavioral Hazard in Health
Insurance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(4), 1623–1667.
Barnieh, L., F. Clement, A. Harris, M. Blom, C. Donaldson, S. Klarenbach, D. Husereau,
D. Lorenzetti, and B. Manns (2014). A Systematic Review of Cost-Sharing Strategies
Used within Publicly-Funded Drug Plans in Member Countries of the Organisation for
Economic Co-Operation and Development. PLoS ONE 9(3), e90434.
Besley, T. J. (1988). Optimal reimbursement health insurance and the theory of Ramsey
taxation. Journal of Health Economics 7(4), 321–336.
Brown, J., M. Duggan, I. Kuziemko, and W. Woolston (2014). How Does Risk Selection
Respond to Risk Adjustment? New Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program.
American Economic Review 104(10), 3335–64.

29

Cabral, M., M. Geruso, and N. Mahoney (2014). Does Privatized Health Insurance Benefit
Patients or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage. NBER Working Paper no.
20470 .
Chandra, A., J. Gruber, and R. McKnight (2010). Patient Cost-Sharing and Hospitalization
Offsets in the Elderly. American Economic Review 100(1), 193–213.
Chernew, M. E., A. B. Rosen, and A. M. Fendrick (2007). Value-Based Insurance Design.
Health Affairs 26(2), w195–w203.
Clemens, J., J. Gottlieb, and T. Molnar (2015). The Anatomy of Physician Payments:
Contracting Subject to Complexity. NBER Working Paper No. 21642 .
CMS (2011). Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Part D Prescription Drug Benefit
Manual. Chapter 6.
Congressional Budget Office (2015). March Medicare Baseline.
Crawford, G. and M. Shum (2005). Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical Demand.
Econometrica 73(4), 1137–1173.
Crew, M. A. (1969). Coinsurance and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. American
Economic Review 59(5), 906–08.
Curto, V., L. Einav, J. Levin, and J. Bhattacharya (2015). Can Health Insurance Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage. NBER Working Paper no. 20818 .
Cutler, D. and R. Zeckhauser (2000). The Anatomy of Health Insurance. Handbook of Health
Economics, 563–643.
Decarolis, F. (2015). Medicare Part D: Are Insurers Gaming the Low Income Subsidy Design?
American Economic Review 105(4), 1547–80.
Decarolis, F., M. Polyakova, and S. Ryan (2015). Welfare Effects of Supply-Side Regulation
in Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper No. 21298 .
Duarte, F. and J. Hastings (2012). Fettered Consumers and Sophisticated Firms: Evidence
from Mexico’s Privatized Social Security Market. NBER Working Paper no. 18582 .

30

Duggan, M., J. Gruber, and B. Vabson (2015). The Efficiency Consequences of Health
Care Privatization: Evidence from Medicare Advantage Exits. NBER Working Paper no.
21650 .
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, R. Kluender, and P. Schrimpf (2016a). Beyond Statistics: The
Economic Content of Risk Scores. American Economic Journal: Applied 8(2), 195–224.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, S. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. Cullen (2013). Selection on Moral
Hazard in Health Insurance. American Economic Review 103(1), 178–219.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2010). Optimal Mandates and The Welfare
Cost of Asymmetric Information: Evidence From the U.K. Annuity Market. Econometrica 78(3), 1031–1092.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2015). The Response of Drug Expenditure
to Nonlinear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 130(2), 841–899.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2016b). Bunching at The Kink: Implications for
Spending Responses to Health Insurance Contracts. Unpublished mimeo.
Ellis, R. P., S. Jiang, and W. G. Manning (2015). Optimal health insurance for multiple
goods and time periods. Journal of Health Economics 41, 89–106.
Ellis, R. P. and W. G. Manning (2007). Optimal health insurance for prevention and treatment. Journal of Health Economics 26(6), 1128–50.
Feldstein, M. (1973). The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance. Journal of Political
Economy 81(2), 251–280.
Fisher Ellison, S., I. Cockburn, Z. Griliches, and J. Hausman (1997). Characteristics of
Demand for Pharmaceutical Products: An Exploration of Four Cephalosporins. RAND
Journal of Economics 28(3), 426–446.
Goldman, D., G. Joyce, J. Escarce, J. Pace, M. Solomon, M. Laouri, P. Landsman, and
S. Teutsch (2004). Pharmacy Benefits and the Use of Drugs by the Chronically Ill. Journal
of American Medical Association 291(19), 2344–50.
Goldman, D. and T. J. Philipson (2007). Integrated Insurance Design in the Presence of
Multiple Medical Technologies. American Economic Review 97 (2), 427–432.
31

Hastings, J., A. Hortacsu, and C. Syverson (2015). Sales Force And Competition In Financial
Product Markets: The Case Of Mexico’s Social Security Privatization. NBER Working
Paper no. 18881 .
Ketcham, J., C. Lucarelli, and C. Powers (2015). Paying Attention or Paying Too Much in
Medicare Part D. American Economic Review 105(1), 204–233.
Ketcham, J. and K. Simon (2008). Medicare Part D’s Effects on Elderly Drug Costs and
Utilization. American Journal of Managed Care 14(11), 14–22.
Ketcham, J. D., C. Lucarelli, E. J. Miravete, and M. C. Roebuck (2012). Sinking, Swimming,
or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review 102(6), 2639–2673.
Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. C. Vermeulen, and M. V. Wrobel (2012). Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 127(1), 199–235.
Lakdawalla, D. and N. Sood (2009). Innovation and the welfare effects of public drug insurance. Journal of Public Economics 93(3-4), 541–548.
Polyakova, M. (2016). Regulation of Insurance with Adverse Selection and Switching Costs:
Evidence from Medicare Part D. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics (forthcoming).
Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz (1976). Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An
Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information. Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4),
629–649.

32

Figure 1: Standard Defined Benefit (2008)
4,500
5,726
4,000
3,500
"Gap" / "Donut Hole"
(100% Coinsurance)

Out-of-Pocket Cost

3,000

Catastrophic coverage
(~7% Coinsurance )
2,500
2,000
Deductible
(100% Coinsurance)

1,500
1,000

2,510

500

Pre-Kink coverage
(25% Coinsurance)

275

0
0

500

1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 5,000 5,500 6,000 6,500 7,000
Total Expenditure

Figure shows the Part D Standard Defined Benefit (SDB) in 2008. The exact thresholds of
the deductible, donut hole, and the catastrophic level increased over time. For example, the
deductible increased from $250 in 2006 to $310 in 2011, and the donut hole level increased
from $2,250 in 2006 to $2,840 in 2011.

33

Figure 2: Claim propensity in December as a function of annual spending - pooled estimates

Fraction with at least one drug purchase during December

100%

95%

90%

85%

80%

75%
Any drug
Any common therapeutic class

70%

Any common drug
65%
-2,000

-1,500

-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
Total Annual Expenditure relative to the Kink Location

1,500

These three graphs plot the share of individuals within a $20 dollar spending bin that filled
a claim in December for (i) any drug - marked with dark gray squares; (ii) any common
therapeutic class - marked with light gray triangles; or (iii) any common drug - marked with
black dots. The top scatterplot for “any drug” is an updated version (that is, additional years
of data are included) of Figure IV in Einav et al. (2015). The spending bins are recorded on
the x-axis; the spending is calculated as relative to the kink location in the corresponding
year. Each of the three dotted lines plots predictions from a regression described in Section
3.2, which is fitted using observations that are to the left of -$500.

34

35

Fraction with at least one drug purchase during December

-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
Total Annual Expenditure relative to the Kink Location

1,500

-1,500

-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
Total Annual Expenditure relative to the Kink Location

1,500

0%
-2,000

1,500

0%
-2,000

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

16%

18%

20%

2%

-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
Total Annual Expenditure relative to the Kink Location

Lisinopril (generic)

0%
-2,000

0%
-2,000

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

16%

18%

20%

1,500

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

45%

50%

2%

-1,500

Simvastatin (generic)

-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
Total Annual Expenditure relative to the Kink Location

(b) Top 3 Common Drugs

-1,500

beta-Adrenergic Blocking Agents

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

16%

18%

20%

0%
-2,000

0%
-2,000

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

45%

50%

5%

-1,500

HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

45%

(a) Top 3 Common Therapeutic Classes

Fraction with at least one drug purchase during December

-1,500

-1,500

-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
Total Annual Expenditure relative to the Kink Location

Atorvastatin calcium (branded) (Lipitor)

-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
Total Annual Expenditure relative to the Kink Location

Angiotensin-Convertizing Enzyme Inhibitors

1,500

1,500

Figure shows the probability of filling a claim in December, for the top three “common” therapeutic classes (top panel)
and the top three “common” drugs (bottom panel). The horizontal axis is the individuals’ total annual drug spending
relative to the (year-specific) kink location; we bin spending in $20 bins. The vertical axis is the fraction of individuals
within each bin with at least one claim in December associated with the drug (or class). The dashed lines are generated
from the estimates of equation (2), as described in Section 3, where we fit the line on all individuals whose spending is
$500 below the kink location and lower.

Fraction with at least one drug purchase during December

50%

Fraction with at least one drug purchase during December

Figure 3: Claim propensity in December as a function of annual spending

Fraction with at least one drug purchase during December
Fraction with at least one drug purchase during December

36
>1

0.9 to 1

0.8 to 0.9

0.7 to 0.8

0.6 to 0.7

0.5 to 0.6

0.4 to 0.5

0.3 to 0.4

0.2 to 0.3

0.1 to 0.2

0 to 0.1

-0.1 to 0

-0.2 to -0.1

-0.3 to -0.2

-0.4 to -0.3

-0.5 to -0.4

-0.6 to -0.5

-0.7 to -0.6

-0.8 to -0.7

-0.9 to -0.8

-1 to -0.9

< -1

Number of drugs

< -1

>1

0.9 to 1

0.8 to 0.9

0.7 to 0.8

0.6 to 0.7

0.5 to 0.6

0.4 to 0.5

0.3 to 0.4

0.2 to 0.3

0.1 to 0.2

0 to 0.1

-0.1 to 0

-0.2 to -0.1

-0.3 to -0.2

-0.4 to -0.3

-0.5 to -0.4

-0.6 to -0.5

-0.7 to -0.6

-0.8 to -0.7

-0.9 to -0.8

-1 to -0.9

Number of therapeutic classes

Figure 4: Distribution of elasticity estimates
(a) Common Therapeutic Classes

50

45

40

35

30

25
Average elasticity: -0.14 (std. dev. 0.15)

20

15

10

5

0

Estimated elasticity

(b) Common Drugs

60

50

40

30
Average elasticity: -0.24 (std. dev. 0.59)

20

10

0

Estimated elasticity

Figures show the distribution of the estimated elasticities across the 108 “common” therapeutic classes (top panel) and 160 “common” drugs (bottom pane). Appendix Tables A4
and A5 report the complete list.

Figure 5: Correlation between Tier 3 placement and Drug Elasticity
0.8
0.7

Frequency of Tier-3 placement

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-4

-3.5

-3

-2.5

-2

-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

Estimated elasticity

Figure shows the correlation between the probability of a drug being placed in Tier 3 (which
corresponds to the highest consumer cost-sharing) on the vertical axis and the estimated
drug elasticity (on the horizontal axis). Each circle represent a set of drugs whose estimated
elasticity falls in the same elasticity bin of size 0.05. The size of the circle represents the
number of drugs in each bin. The vertical axis is the frequency (across formularies) with
which drugs in the set are placed in Tier 3. The regression line is the fitted line across all
the circles, weighting each data point by the number of drugs in that bin.

37

Figure 6: Correlation between Co-insurance and Elasticity
(a)

(b)
0.8

0.8

"Common" branded drugs
0.7

0.6

0.6
Average coinsurance rate

Average coinsurance rate

All "common" drugs
0.7

0.5
0.4

0.3

0.5
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0

0
-1.4

-1.2

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

-1.4

0.4

-1.2

-1

-0.8

(c)

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

(d)
0.8

0.8

All therapeutic classes

"Common" generic drugs
0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6
Average coinsurance rate

Average coinsurance rate

-0.6

Estimated elasticity

Estimated elasticity

0.5
0.4

0.3

0.5
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0

0
-1.4

-1.2

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

-1.4

0.4

-1.2

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

Estimated elasticity

Estimated elasticity

Figures shows the correlation between the average co-insurance for a drug (or class) on
the vertical axis and the estimated elasticity for the drug (or class) on the horizontal axis.
Average co-insurance is defined as the pre-gap co-insurance rate. Each circle corresponds to
a specific drug (or class); circle sizes are proportional to the number of claims for each drug
(or class) in the data. For ease of graphical presentation, the figures are limited to estimated
elasticities between 0 and -1. This omits 11% of claims from panel a (common drugs), 27%
of claims from figure b (common branded drugs), 2% of claims from panel c (common generic
drugs), and 6% of claims from panel d (common therapeutic classes). Fitted regression lines
are in all panels; these are fitted using equal weights for all drugs, and include the data
points that are outside of the elasticity range shown.

38

Table 1: Baseline Beneficiary Sample
Mean

Std. Dev.

10th pctile

90th pctile

Age
Female indicator
Whilte indicator

75.6
0.65
0.95

7.7

67

87

Annual total spending ($US)
Annual out-of-pocket spending ($US)

1,910
757

2,977
937

76
27

3,977
1,872

Annual claim propensity
Number of claims
Number of branded claims
Number of generic claims
Share with at least one claim
Share with at least one branded claim
Share with at least one generic claim

31.2
13.7
17.5
0.95
0.86
0.90

26.6
14.9
17.2

3
0
1

67
33
40

December claim propensity
Number of claims
Number of branded claims
Number of generic claims
Share with at least one claim
Share with at least one branded claim
Share with at least one generic claim

2.71
1.10
1.61
0.75
0.53
0.63

2.80
1.51
1.93

0
0
0

6
3
4

Table based on our baseline sample described in Section 3. The unit of observation is a beneficiary-year. The
sample covers 6,520,707 beneficiary-years that represent 2,022,527 unique beneficiaries.

39

Table 2: Elasticity estimates for ten largest common drugs and therapeutic classes
Therapeutic Class
(1)
HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors
beta-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Thiazide Diuretics
Thyroid Agents
Dihydropyridines
Proton-pump Inhibitors
Selective Serotonin-reuptake Inhibitors
Angiotensin II Receptor Antagonists
Opiate Agonists
Drug name
(1)
Simvastatin
Lisinopril
Atorvastatincalcium
Levothyroxinesodium
Levothyroxinesodium
Amlodipinebesylate
Omeprazole
Warfarinsodium
Hydrocodonebitartrateandac
Hydrochlorothiazide

Drug example
(2)

Claim share
(3)

%ΔQ
(4)

%ΔOOP
(5)

0.077
0.067
0.047
0.045
0.038
0.031
0.030
0.023
0.022
0.022

-31.9
-17.4
-13.9
-27.1
-17.9
-19.4
-26.7
-15.9
-29.2
-5.5

136.1
125.5
87.8
84.2
21.4
138.1
243.0
111.5
74.8
132.0

Brand/Generic
(2)

Claim share
(3)

%ΔQ
(4)

%ΔOOP
(5)

Generic
Generic
Brand
Brand
Generic
Generic
Generic
Generic
Generic
Generic

0.034
0.028
0.022
0.021
0.018
0.018
0.017
0.017
0.017
0.016

-10.8
-12.4
-48.3
-21.5
-13.6
-17.5
-24.2
-18.9
-3.8
-20.4

116.4
57.8
145.1
14.5
39.4
115.9
254.3
83.1
102.2
38.9

Lipitor
Propranolol
Lisinopril
Diuril
Levothyroxine
Amlodipine
Omeprazole
Prozac
Losartan
Morphine

Estimated elasticity
(6)
-0.23
-0.14
-0.16
-0.32
-0.84
-0.14
-0.11
-0.14
-0.39
-0.04

(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.031)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)

Estimated elasticity
(6)
-0.09
-0.21
-0.33
-1.48
-0.35
-0.15
-0.10
-0.23
-0.04
-0.52

(0.006)
(0.015)
(0.002)
(0.057)
(0.025)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.023)

Table reports the estimated elasticities for the ten most frequently claimed therapeutic classes (top panel) and drugs (bottom panel).
Column (3) reports the share of each class' claims in the baseline sample. Column (4) reports the estimated percentage change in the
observed (relative to the predicted) claim propensity in December for individuals who enter the donut hole. Column (5) reports the
associated percentage change in the out-of-pocket price. Elasticities -- reported in clumn (6) -- are then estimated based on equation (1),
with standard errors in parenthesis (based on 100 bootstrap samples from which we estimate the change in claim propensity). See
Section 3 for more details.

40

Table 3: Elasticity differences by drug categories

Mean elasticity

Std. Dev.

Acute drugs
Chronic drugs

-0.12
-0.45

0.34
0.84

Non-maintenance drugs
Maintenance drugs

0.01
-0.30

0.49
0.60

Branded drugs
Generic drugs

-0.34
-0.13

0.79
0.15

-0.10

0.09

-0.17

0.17

Predominantly non-maintenance classa
Predominantly maintenance class

a

Table reports (unweighted) average (and std. dev.) estimated elasticities for
different subsets of drugs (and therapeutic classes). See on-line appendix for details
of how these classifications are constructed.
a

We consider a class as "predominantly maintenance" if the majorty of the
associated drugs are classified as to maintenance drugs; in most therapeutic classes
all drugs are either maintenance or not.

41

42

72.6
38.8
27.6
3.7
62.1
40.6
30.0
22.0
4.2

4-Tier plans (81% of enrollees; 61% of plans)
Tier 1
1,806.3
Tier 2
846.5
Tier 3
828.7
Tier 4
275.5

5-Tier plans (9% of enrollees; 21% of plans)
Tier 1
1,506.0
Tier 2
882.1
Tier 3
784.0
Tier 4
658.4
Tier 5
276.4
0.630
0.391
0.076
0.168
0.106

0.646
0.111
0.092
0.054

0.652
0.119
0.046

(3)

Share generics

6.7
34.2
62.8
66.3
199.4

6.4
40.5
68.0
199.6

4.1
36.4
77.6

(4)

OOP ($US)a

20.3
114.0
133.3
193.8
651.3

21.5
141.0
131.5
682.7

21.9
130.5
218.3

(5)

Total cost ($US)a

0.34
0.31
0.50
0.37
0.31

0.30
0.29
0.53
0.29

0.18
0.28
0.44

(6)

Co-insurancea

0.059
0.022
0.009
0.001
0.000

0.581
0.189
0.043
0.001

0.060
0.019
0.003

(7)

Claim share
(all drugs)

0.064
0.021
0.007
0.001
0.000

0.616
0.170
0.025
0.000

0.062
0.018
0.002

(8)

Claim share
("common" drugs)

a

OOP cost, total cost, and co-insurance rate are based only on claims that are above the deductible and under the donut hole.

Table uses our baseline sample described in Section 3. Each cell in the table reports average across plans that have the associated number of tiers. Column (1) reports the average
number of drugs (defined here by the number of NDC11 codes on the formulary), column (2) reports the number of "common" drugs, and column (3) reports the share of all drugs
that are generic. Columns (4) and (5) report, respectively, the average out-of-pocket and total cost per claim (for "pre-gap" claims) for all drugs. Column (6) converts the out-ofpocket costs to a co-insurance rates for all drugs. For each plan and tier we calculate the aggregate co-insurance as the ratio of OOP spending in that plan-tier to total spending on
drugs in that plan-tier. We then average across plans. Columns (4), (5), and (6) reported weighted average (by plan enrollment), while the other columns are not weighted. Columns
(7) and (8) record the share of each tier's claims out of, respectively, all claims and "common drugs" claims in the sample.

72.7
39.4
12.0

(2)

(1)

3-Tier plans (8% of enrollees; 12% of plans)
Tier 1
1,732.5
Tier 2
857.0
Tier 3
485.6

No. of "Common"
drugs

No. of all drugs

Table 4: Plan design and drug pricing

43
-0.211
0.477

0.016
50,086

-0.213
0.483

0.014
29,865

Yes
No

-0.120
(0.008)

(3)

4-tier plans

-0.200
0.260

0.015
34,854

Yes
No

-0.074
(0.005)

High frequency
drugs
(4)

-0.211
0.477

0.054
50,086

Yes
Yes

-0.210
(0.007)

(5)

All drugs & plans

-0.246
0.591

0.021
13,829

Yes
No

-0.163
(0.016)

"Lower subst."
drugs
(6)

Table shows the relationship between the estimated demand elasticity of each drug and its tier placement, as in equation (3). We report the coefficient on
being in Tier 3, relative to tiers 1 or 2; indicator variables for higher tiers are included in the regression (but not reported). The unit of observation is a drug-byformulary-by-tier. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the formulary-tier level. Column (4) restricts the analysis to the 96 of our 160 "common
drugs" that have at least 300,000 claims over our sample period. Column (5) adds a control for the total cost of the drug by year. Column (6) restricts the
analysis to the 38 drugs for which substitution to other drugs is less likely.

-0.211
0.477

Mean of Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. Of Dep. Var.

No
No

Formulary Fixed Effects
Drug price included
0.011
50,086

-0.119
(0.006)

-0.122
(0.007)

High co-insurance (Tier 3)

R-squared
No. of Obs.

(2)

(1)

Yes
No

All drugs & plans

All drugs & plans

Sample

Dependent Variable: Estimated demand elasticity

Table 5: Relationship between elasticity of common drug and its tier-positioning

44
0.435
0.306

Mean of Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. Of Dep. Var.

0.029
586,735
0.408
0.267

R-squared
No. of Obs. (plan years)

Mean od Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. Of Dep. Var.

0.408
0.267

0.304
586,735

Yes
No

-0.305
(0.065)

0.435
0.306

0.324
654,043

Yes
No

0.416
0.267

0.339
463,207

Yes
No

-0.315
(0.074)

0.441
0.304

0.363
521,144

Yes
No

-0.323
(0.073)

High frequency
drugs
(3)

0.408
0.267

0.386
586,735

Yes
Yes

-0.252
(0.052)

0.435
0.306

0.415
654,043

Yes
Yes

-0.166
(0.039)

(4)

All drugs & plans

0.452
0.318

0.435
197,281

Yes
No

-0.167
(0.056)

"Lower subst."
drugs
(5)

0.400
0.266

0.271
277,585

Yes
No

-0.182
(0.035)

(6)

Branded drugs

0.462
0.330

0.518
376,458

Yes
No

-0.641
(0.075)

(7)

Generic drugs

Table shows the relationship between a drug's (Panel A) or class' (Panel B) pre-gap co-insurance rate and its estimated elasticity. The unit of observation is a drug (or class) by plan.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the drug (or class) levels.

No
No

Formulary fixed effects
Drug price included

Estimated demand elasticity

-0.303
(0.064)

0.065
654,043

R-squared
No. of Obs. (plan years)

Panel B. Class-level analysis

No
No

-0.198
(0.047)

(2)

(1)

-0.197
(0.046)

All drugs & plans

All drugs & plans

Formulary fixed effects
Drug price included

Estimated demand elasticity

Panel A. Drug-level analysis

Sample

Dependent Variable: Co-insurance rate

Table 6: Relationship between co-insurance and elasticity

