NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO FIELD EXPERIMENTS ON LABOR AND HOUSING MARKETS OVERSTATE
DISCRIMINATION? A RE-EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCE
David Neumark
Judith Rich
Working Paper 22278
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22278

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016, Revised August 2017

We wish to thank the following authors of studies who generously provided their raw data: Ali
Ahmed, Lina Andersson, and Mats Hammarstedt; Stijn Baert, Bart Cockx, Niels Gheyle, and
Cora Vandamme; Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan; Mariano Bosch, M. Angeles
Carnero, and Lídia Farré; Magnus Carlsson and Stefan Eriksson; Dan-Olof Rooth (also with
Magnus Carlsson); Nick Drydakis; Michael Ewens, Bryan Tomlin, and Liang Choon Wang;
Hwok-Aun Lee and Muhammad Abdul Khalid; and Phil Oreopoulos. We thank Nick Drydakis
and Philip Oreopoulos, and three anonymous referees, for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by David Neumark and Judith Rich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Field Experiments on Labor and Housing Markets Overstate Discrimination? A Re-examination
of the Evidence
David Neumark and Judith Rich
NBER Working Paper No. 22278
May 2016, Revised August 2017
JEL No. J71
ABSTRACT
There have been over 80 field experiments on traditional dimensions of discrimination in labor
and housing markets since 2000, in 23 countries. These studies nearly always find evidence of
discrimination against minorities. However, the estimates of discrimination in these studies can
be biased if there is differential variation in the unobservable determinants of productivity or
quality of majority and minority groups, so it is possible that this experimental literature as a
whole overstates the evidence of discrimination. We re-assess the evidence from the 10 existing
studies of discrimination that have sufficient information to correct for this bias. For the housing
market studies, the estimated effect of discrimination is robust to this correction. For the labor
market studies, in contrast, the evidence is less robust, as just over half of the estimates of
discrimination either fall to near zero, become statistically insignificant, or change sign.

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
Judith Rich
Economics and Finance Department
University of Portsmouth
Richmond Building Portland Street
Portsmouth PO1 3DE
United Kingdom
judy.rich@port.ac.uk

1. Introduction
Field experiments – specifically, audit or correspondence studies – have been used
extensively to test for discrimination in markets. In audit studies of labor market discrimination,
fake job candidates (“testers”) of different races, ethnicities, etc., who are sometimes actors, are
sent to interview for jobs (or in some early studies, apply by telephone). The candidates have
similar resumes and are often trained to act, speak, and dress similarly. Correspondence studies, in
contrast, use fictitious job applicants who exist on paper only (or now, electronically), and differ
systematically only on group membership. The response captured in correspondence studies is a
“call-back” for an interview or a closely related positive response. In contrast, the final outcome in
audit studies is actual job offers. Differences in outcomes between groups are likely attributable to
discrimination, although there are, naturally, some subtle issues of interpretation – including the
fact that such differences can be attributable to either taste discrimination or statistical
discrimination. Audit and correspondence (AC) studies have also been used to study
discrimination in housing markets. In audit studies, the testers of different races, ethnicities, etc.,
are sent to inquire about properties for rent or sale. In correspondence studies the fictitious inquiry
is submitted electronically, applying online to advertised properties for rent or sale.
AC studies are widely regarded as providing more rigorous evidence on discrimination
than can be obtained from non-experimental evidence in which group membership may be
correlated with unobservables. 1 Nonetheless, AC studies have come in for criticism (Heckman
and Siegelman, 1993; Heckman, 1998). The most challenging criticism of these studies is that, in
the standard implementation, the resulting estimate of discrimination can be biased in either

1

The methods and empirical findings from these studies have been reviewed by Pager (2007), Riach and
Rich (2002), Rich (2014), and Neumark (2016). There are, additionally, similar studies of discrimination in
consumer markets (e.g., Doleac and Stein, 2013).

1

direction – or equivalently, discrimination can be unidentified. This problem arises when the
variances of the unobservables differ across the groups studied, something that cannot be ruled out
or easily controlled in AC studies, and indeed a difference in the variances of unobservables is at
the core of early models of statistical discrimination (Aigner and Cain, 1977). This criticism –
which we refer to as the “Heckman-Siegelman critique” – holds even under quite ideal conditions
(detailed later) in which other potential research design flaws that Heckman and Siegelman
discuss are absent.
A statistical method that can lead to unbiased estimates of discrimination using data from
AC studies, relying on identifying assumption, was proposed in Neumark (2012). As explained
below, most past AC studies do not have the requisite data, which are applicant or other
characteristics aside from the group identifier that shift the probability of call-backs or hires.
However, we have identified 10 studies of discrimination against minorities (based on race,
ethnicity, or sexual orientation) in labor and housing markets conducted over the last couple of
decades that do include the requisite data. 2
These 10 studies – just like nearly all of the far greater number of AC studies that do not
have the requisite data – find evidence of discrimination against ethnic or racial minorities,
immigrants, or gays and lesbians. 3 We have obtained the original data from the authors of these
studies, and our goal in this paper is to test whether this evidence is robust to confronting the data
with the Heckman-Siegelman critique. Specifically, implementing the correction for bias from
differences in the variances of unobservables across groups, do these studies still uniformly point

2

The studies are: Ahmed et al. (2010); Baert et al. (2015); Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) – the data
used in Neumark (2012); Bosch et al. (2010); Carlsson and Eriksson (2014); Carlsson and Rooth (2007);
Drydakis (2014); Ewens et al. (2014); Lee and Khalid (2016); and Oreopoulos (2011).
3
For the most recent review of a large number of AC studies, see Neumark (2016).

2

to discrimination? Some very recent AC studies have implemented this bias correction. 4 Our goal
in this paper is to revisit past studies that do not address the Heckman-Siegelman critique, to
assess whether the near-uniform findings of discrimination from the large body of past research is
robust to addressing this critique. We cannot re-examine all such studies. But we do, we believe,
re-examine the complete set of such studies that focus on traditional dimensions of discrimination
and have (accessible) the data required to address this critique.
After providing some background details on these studies, we explain the approach and
report results. To summarize the results briefly, for the housing market studies the estimated
effects of discrimination are robust to this correction. For the labor market studies, in contrast, the
evidence is less robust; in about half of the cases covered in these studies, the estimated effect of
discrimination either falls to near zero or becomes statistically insignificant, and in one the sign
changes. The results for the labor market, in particular, suggest that researchers need to build into
future AC studies the data and experimental design needed to address the Heckman-Siegelman
critique, and that further work on different ways to eliminate bias from AC studies estimates of
discrimination is warranted. More substantively, our re-examination of the evidence suggests that
the overall body of experimental evidence on labor market discrimination provides a less clear
signal of discrimination than one would draw from the results reported in the existing studies.
2. The field experiments covered in this paper
The field experiments re-analyzed in this paper are one of three broad types: studies of
ethnic/immigrant or race discrimination in labor markets; studies of sexual orientation
discrimination in labor markets; and studies of ethnic/immigrant or race discrimination in rental

4

See Baert (2014, 2015, 2016), Carlsson et al. (2013), Neumark et al. (2015), and Nunley et al. (2015).
Baert and Verhofstadt (2015) also do this, although in relation to criminal background (juvenile
delinquency), which is outside the scope of discrimination studies covered in the present paper.

3

housing markets. Many of the details and results of these studies are discussed in Rich (2014) and
Neumark (2016). Here we focus only on what is essential to understand the analysis of bias from
differences in unobservables that we implement in this paper. Readers interested in more details on
these specific studies, and the techniques used more generally, should see our surveys (or of course
the original papers). We do not go into more detail because our goal in this paper is not to compare
or critique other dimensions of these studies, but rather just to consider the robustness of the
conclusions to addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique. 5
What distinguishes these 10 studies from the others in the literature is that they use
applicants distinguished not only by race, ethnicity (including immigrant origin), or sexual
orientation, but also by different levels of qualifications. In these studies, this was done to ask, in a
general way, whether the evidence of discrimination by ethnicity, race, or sexual orientation
differed for applicants with different levels of qualifications. 6 As discussed in the next section,
however, the availability of data with variation in applicant qualifications is exactly what is needed
to implement the empirical method that addresses the Heckman-Siegelman critique.
Baert et al. (2015), Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), Carlsson and Rooth (2007), Drydakis
(2014), and Lee and Khalid (2016) all used matched pairs (sets) of applicants, with two (or more)

5

There are also field experiments investigating differences in hiring outcomes based on other
characteristics, such as criminal background, mental or physical illness, facial attractiveness, veteran status,
or socio-economic background or class. While these kinds of differences are not the focus of our paper
(even though some could be interpreted as discrimination), the experimental designs in these papers do not
generate the data needed to implement this empirical method, with the exception of Baert and Balcaen
(2013), who implement this method in relation to differential treatment based on military service, and find
no evidence of bias from differences in the variances of unobservables.
6
The first study of this type (Jowell and Prescott-Clarke, 1970) considered this issue. The study compared
job offer outcomes for immigrant versus white British applicants, and gave half the applications in each
group higher qualifications with regard to education. (There was also variation among the immigrants only
in whether they were English-speaking and whether secondary education was in Britain, although this kind
of variation that does not apply equally to majority and minority groups is not as useful.) The more recent
studies with such data that we re-examine in the present paper are those for which we could recover the
data from authors.

4

applications sent to each job vacancy. Oreopoulos (2011) considered differences for many different
ethnic groups (relative to native Canadians), in some cases also signaling immigrant status, and sent
multiple resumes for each job vacancy. Across these studies, on the resumes used, which were
either real resumes the authors found or resumes generated randomly from elements of other
resumes, race or ethnicity was signalled by name, and immigrant status in addition to ethnicity was
sometimes further signalled by education or work experience in a foreign country (Oreopoulos,
2011). Sexual orientation was signalled by participation in an organization active on behalf of the
gay community or a gay organization.
There have been fewer studies of discrimination in housing markets in the broader literature.
In the housing market experiments we re-examine, only Bosch et al. (2010) used matched pairs,
while the other three (Ahmed et al., 2010; Ewens et al., 2014; Carlsson and Eriksson, 2014) sent a
single rental enquiry. An accompanying message providing details on the applicant was attached, in
which the researchers manipulated the information provided – ethnicity and race, as well as other
qualifications or the applicant’s job, which indicated ability to pay. In these studies, signaling is
done by name, although Bosch et al. (2010) interpret their results for Moroccan versus Spanish
names as measuring discrimination against immigrants.
Other qualifications also varied across the resumes or applications – and this variation in
qualifications is essential for implementing the correction for bias from differences in variances of
unobservables. The variables used in each study are described in Tables 2A, 2B, and 3, which
report our results from re-analyzing the data from these studies (discussed in detail below). For
example, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) generally sent four applications to each job. They
created two matched pairs of applicants, one with low-quality background and another pair with
high-quality background. The quality of the applicant varied based on labor market experience,
career profiles, employment history, and skills such as employment experience gained either over

5

summer or while at school, volunteering, extra computer skills, certification degrees, foreign
language skills, honors, or some military experience. Carlsson and Rooth (2007) signalled similar
additional information on applicants as Bertrand and Mullainathan, as well as different spells of
unemployment, work experience over the summer, overqualified or not, personality traits, and
cultural and sporting activities listed as hobbies and interests. Oreopoulos (2011) varied the
information provided on the extent of foreign education and foreign experience as well as
language skills and certification and masters degrees. Drydakis (2014) used an accompanying
cover letter to provide more favorable information about applicants in some cases, including
mentioning grades, previous job responsibilities and tasks, and personality characteristics
associated with work commitment; these same applicants also included letters of references that
more strongly signalled positive work traits such as teamwork and loyalty to the firm. Lee and
Khalid (2016) varied factors such as private versus public university, grades, and English
proficiency.
In the housing market tests, researchers manipulated the information on the applicant,
using an accompanying message, to explore the impact of basic, negative, or positive information
– such as habits (smoking, exercise, and nightclub attendance, in Carlsson and Eriksson, 2007),
variation in smoking and credit rating (in Ewens et al., 2014), and information on positive
characteristics like work history, education, lack of payment complaints, etc. (Ahmed et al., 2010)
or stable occupations and contracts (Bosch et al., 2010).
The richness and number of qualifications that researchers chose to vary across the applicants
differ quite a bit across these studies. For the labor market studies, these qualifications generally
pertain to education, experience, and skills, but sometimes extend to attempts to convey something
about the applicant’s personality or hobbies, the order of the application, and other things. One of
the housing studies (Carlsson and Eriksson, 2014) tries to provide information on the applicant’s

6

lifestyle, which could be relevant to a potential landlord. We do not discuss the different
qualifications used in each study in detail, but list them for each study in the tables reporting the
statistical analysis (Tables 2A and 2B for the labor market studies, and Table 3 for the housing
market studies). The reader will note that we also list other features of the ads that could affect the
probability of a call-back – such as characteristics of the job or the apartment. We include these
because – as explained in the next section – the statistical method is informed by differences in the
coefficients between the two groups studied in any of the factors that can affect call-backs.
3. Findings from the field experiments covered in this paper
Table 1 summarizes the conventional results from the 10 studies we re-examine, as well as
giving basic information about them, including the years covered, the groups covered, and the
outcomes. The original studies report results in different ways, varying between chi-square/Fisher
exact tests, binomial tests, or tests of the null hypothesis that there is no difference in the call-back
rate between the groups, typically controlling for other aspects of the resumes. However, here we
report results on a consistent basis for all studies – marginal effects from probit models using the
full set of resume characteristics included in the data – which we have estimated from data provided
by the authors of these studies. 7
As reported in Table 1, the six labor market experiments covered in Panel A all find
statistically significant evidence of discrimination against either ethnic minorities, blacks, or gays
and lesbians. The estimated differentials by racial and ethnic groups are in the same range – an
approximately 0.03 to 0.15 lower probability of a call-back. These are on somewhat different

7

Details on the control variables, the standard errors, etc., are provided in tables discussed below. Not
surprisingly, the results in Table 1 closely parallel the conclusions of the original papers – however they
report their results – although they are not always identical.

7

baseline rates of call-backs, but the call-back rates also do not vary that much across these studies. 8
The two estimates from Drydakis (2014), for discrimination against gays and lesbians in Cyprus, are
much larger (although the baseline call-back rates are much higher too).
The four housing market studies similarly find consistent evidence of discrimination against
minorities. The range of estimates is fairly tight (a 0.09 to 0.17 lower call-back rate). Thus, every
one of these studies points to evidence of discrimination against the minority group.
The conclusions from these studies strongly echo the broader literature, in which nearly
every study finds evidence of discrimination in labor or housing market on the basis of race or
ethnicity (Rich, 2014; Zschirnt and Ruedin, 2015; Neumark, 2016; Quillian et al., n.d.), as do the
smaller number of studies of discrimination based on sexual orientation (Neumark, 2016). The
question this paper addresses is whether this near-uniform evidence of discrimination from field
experiments is an accurate reflection of discriminatory behavior, supporting a conclusion that
discrimination really is this consistent and pervasive, or whether the evidence in at least some of
these studies might reflect biases stemming from differences in the variance of unobservables across
groups – the problem highlighted by the Heckman-Siegelman critique.
Some of the studies also include female and male applicants, or more broadly test for
discrimination along multiple dimensions, including sex and age (Carlsson and Eriksson, 2014). We
do not focus, in this paper, on evidence on discrimination based on sex or age. The broader
literature focuses far more on race and ethnicity (and more recently on sexual orientation), and – as
we have noted – delivers a near-uniform finding of discrimination against minorities. The evidence
of sex discrimination is less robust, and tends to point less to discrimination against women, and

8

One might wonder about apparent evidence of discrimination against British immigrants in Canada;
indeed, we will see in implementing the correction for the Heckman-Siegelman critique below that this
evidence appears to be spurious.

8

more to the importance of sex norms for jobs in whether male or female applicants received more
call-backs (Neumark, 2016). And recent evidence from a large-scale correspondence study of age
discrimination yields ambiguous results for men, but not women (Neumark et al., 2016).
We next provide a brief discussion of the approach used to correct for the bias in estimates
of discrimination from the standard field experiment design, and then present our re-examination of
the data from the 10 studies we have identified that have the requisite data to implement the method
in Neumark (2012) to correct the estimates for bias from differences in the variances of
unobservables.
4. Addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique
There are quite a few critiques of AC studies aside from the one we focus on here. Most of
them are laid out in Heckman and Siegelman (1993), and discussed further in Neumark (2012) in
the context of the framework laid out in this section. Some of the more important critiques – such
as the possibility of “experimenter effects,” and small differences between applicants that can
matter a lot when applicants are matched on so many characteristics – can be addressed by using
correspondence studies instead of audit studies, and indeed most recent research uses the
correspondence study technique. The Heckman-Siegelman critique is of particular importance
because it applies equally well to correspondence studies, even under otherwise ideal conditions
such as no mean differences in unobservables between groups, but only differences in the
variances of unobservables. And this critique is salient because nothing in the research design
rules out differences in the variances of unobservables, and indeed – as noted earlier – these
differences are foundational in models of statistical discrimination. We first lay out a basic
framework for the analysis of data from an audit or correspondence study, and then explain the

9

bias and the correction. 9
Non-experimental regression-based approaches testing for and measuring discrimination
use data on the groups in question in a population, introducing regression controls to try to remove
the influence of group differences in the population that can affect outcomes (Altonji and Blank,
1999). Correspondence (and audit) studies, in contrast, create an artificial pool of labor market
participants among whom there are supposed to be no average differences by group. This is clearly
a potentially powerful strategy, because if we have, e.g., a sample of blacks and whites who are
identical on average, because race is randomly assigned to a subset of similar resumes, then in a
regression of the form
Y = α + βB + ε ,

(1)

where Y is the outcome and B is a dummy variable for blacks, ε is uncorrelated with B, so that the
OLS estimate 𝛽𝛽̂ (or simply the mean difference in Y) provides an estimate of the effect of race
discrimination on Y. 10

Of course, most of the earlier regression studies focus on wages, whereas AC studies focus
on hiring. If an employer is free to pay a lower wage to blacks, for example, then in the context of
the Becker employer discrimination model, why discriminate in hiring? One common
interpretation is that there is an equal wage constraint – perhaps due to a minimum wage, or
because anti-discrimination laws are more effective at rooting out wage discrimination than hiring
discrimination. Alternatively, in the simple model, employers with stronger discriminatory tastes
than the marginal employer will discriminate in hiring. As we make clear below, however, this
framework does not only detect taste discrimination à la Becker.

9

This section draws heavily on Neumark (2012), while avoiding many details that a reader can find in that
paper.
10
For simplicity, the discussion here is couched solely in terms of blacks and whites.

10

To provide a more formal framework, suppose that productivity depends on two individual
characteristics (standing in for a larger set of relevant characteristics), X’ = (XI, XII), so that
productivity is P(X’). XI is what the firm observes, and XII is unobserved by firms. It is simplest,
for now, to think of Y as continuous, such as the wage offered, although in fact in AC studies we
should think of it as latent productivity leading to a decision to hire/call-back or not.
Define discrimination as
Y(P(X’), B=1) ≠ Y(P(X’), B=0) .

(2)

Assume that P(.,.) is additive, so
P(X’) = βIXI + XII,

(3)

where the coefficient of XII is normalized to one as it is unobservable, and
Y(P(X’), B) = P + γB.

(4)

Discrimination against blacks implies that γ < 0, so that blacks are paid less than or
perceived as less productive than whites who are actually equally productive.
In correspondence studies, researchers create resumes that standardize the productivity of
applicants at some level. Denote expected productivity for blacks and whites, based on what the
firm observes, as PB* and PW*. Y is observed for each tester, so each test – the outcome of
applications to a firm by one black and one white tester/applicant – yields an observation
Y(PB*, B = 1) − Y(PW*, B = 0) = PB* + γ − PW* .

(5)

Given that the correspondence study design sets PB* = PW*, we should be able to estimate γ
easily from these data, by simply running a regression of Y on the dummy variable B and a
constant. (Some potential complications are discussed in Neumark, 2012).
A correspondence study can preclude systematic differences between groups in
observables and experimenter effects. But there can still be assumed differences in means between

11

groups despite the groups using matched resumes. In equation (5) above, PB* = E(βIXBI + XBII|XBI,
B = 1), and similarly for PW*. Assuming randomization, and with XBI = XWI = XI, the right-hand
side of equation (5) reduces to γ + E(XBII|XI, B = 1) − E(XWII|XI, B = 0), implying that we only
identify γ if E(XBII|XI, B = 1) = E(XWII|XI, B = 0). Employers may have different expectations about
the mean of XII for blacks and whites, conditional on what they observe, which a labor economist
would label statistical discrimination. Although economists are interested in distinguishing
between statistical and taste discrimination, both are illegal under U.S. law and both also appear to
be illegal under European Union law. 11 Moreover, it is challenging to distinguish between the two
models. Thus, this issue is put aside, and the discrimination estimates from the studies considered
in this paper interpreted as the sums of taste and statistical discrimination. 12
That is not to suggest that researchers using AC methods have not tried to distinguish
between taste and statistical discrimination. The idea exploited in most studies is that when the
applications include a richer set of applicant characteristics, it is less likely that statistical
discrimination plays much of a role in group differences in outcomes (e.g., Ewens et al., 2014).

As discussed in Neumark (2016), the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (29, § 1604.2) defines as illegal
discrimination “The refusal to hire an individual because of the preferences of coworkers, the employer,
clients or customers …” But it also states “The principle of nondiscrimination requires that individuals be
considered on the basis of individual capacities and not on the basis of any characteristics generally
attributed to the group. There is not as explicit a prohibition of statistical discrimination in the European
Union (EU). Article 2 of the EU’s Directive 2000/43/EC prohibits both “direct” and “indirect”
discrimination, but these appear to line up, respectively, with disparate treatment and disparate impact in
the U.S. context (see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A32000L0043, viewed
December 2, 2015). However, other material suggests that statistical discrimination is covered by direct
discrimination (OECD, 2013, p. 195).
12
Indeed, it seems that we could also include implicit discrimination (e.g., Bertrand et al., 2005). Implicit
discrimination posits a different reason for undervaluing the productivity of a group of workers, which can
lead to different policy levers to combat it. But if it arises when employers evaluate applicants in AC
studies, the empirical implication for the framework developed here would likely be the same as the
implication of taste discrimination.
11

12

Effectively, one tries to eliminate the term E(XBII|XI, B = 1) − E(XWII|XI, B = 0) from the estimated
difference in hiring rates to see how much of the overall difference in hiring rates is accounted for
by this difference in expectations, which corresponds to statistical discrimination. 13
Oreopoulos (2011) and Ewens et al. present perhaps the most thorough attempts at
discerning between these hypotheses about discrimination in AC studies. Oreopoulos uses the
approach of adding information (e.g., on country of education, to signal English language skills) to
see whether estimated hiring gaps fall, as well as examining differences in hiring gaps for
occupations across which the importance of statistical discrimination likely varies. In many cases,
he does not find evidence consistent with statistical discrimination, despite evidence from a survey
of participating employers that they used name, or country of education or experience, as a signal
of potential language problems.
Ewens et al. (2014) specifically allow for the mean and variances of unobservables to
differ across groups (as in Aigner and Cain, 1977), and examine whether the differential treatment
by race is more consistent with statistical discrimination (both first- and second-moment) or tastebased discrimination. Although they do not correct for differences in variances of unobservables,
they demonstrate that group differences in outcomes may decrease when more information is
provided and they argue that the evidence is consistent with statistical discrimination. In
particular, they demonstrate that the differences in outcomes across groups vary with the
differences in racial composition across neighborhoods in a way that is consistent with the
hypothesized differences in variances of unobservables across groups.
One could presumably use the method described below for resumes with varying amounts
of information, to recover unbiased estimates under different information treatments and hence try

13

Neumark (2016) provides many examples, and also some criticisms of this approach.

13

to gauge the relative importance of taste and statistical discrimination. However, this issue is not
the focus of our analysis in this paper. Instead, our focus is re-examining the 10 studies identified
earlier and investigating whether the uniform evidence of discrimination from these studies
persists once account is taken of the Heckman-Siegelman critique.
The issue raised by the Heckman-Siegelman critique arises from the potential for
differences across groups in the variances of the unobservables – which is equally problematic
even in the ideal condition of no assumed mean difference. To see how the difference in variances
can drive differences in the results of the analysis of data from an AC study, it is most natural to
think of equation (1) as a latent variable model for productivity, with applicants having to exceed
some productivity threshold with sufficiently high probability (where α in equation (1) can also
include observables that vary across individuals that affect productivity, which we have denoted
XI).
To isolate the problem, consider the best-case scenario where E(XBII|XI, B = 1) = E(XWII|XI,
B = 0) – i.e., there is no statistical discrimination regarding levels. But the standard deviations of
the unobservables, denoted σBII and σWII, need not be equal. 14
Assume the applicant is called back (hired) if there is a sufficiently high probability that
their productivity exceeds a given threshold. In this case, the inequality σBII ≠ σWII combined with
the design of AC studies results in a biased estimate of discrimination; worse, we cannot
necessarily even sign the bias.
To see the intuition, recall that the key feature of the usual design of AC studies is using
similar resumes on the applicants in different groups. This requires choosing a particular level of

14

Neumark assumes homoscedasticity within groups, and thus suppresses conditioning on XBI and XWI.

14

the quality of the resumes. Suppose, for example, that the research design standardizes XI at a low
level, denoted XI*. Employers care about how likely it is that the sum βIXI + XII exceeds some
threshold. Given the low value XI*, this is more likely for a group with a high variance of XII.
Thus, even in the case of no discrimination (γ = 0), the employer will favor the high-variance
group. Conversely, if standardization is at a high level of XI*, the employer will favor the lowvariance group. Because researchers do not have information on the population of real applicants
to the jobs studied, there is no definitive way to know whether XI* is high or low relative to the
actual distribution, and hence no way to sign the bias. As discussed in more detail below, note that
the variances of unobservables affect which group gets more call-backs only because of the
research design standardizing the resumes at a particular level (when the level of standardization is
not at the central tendency of the distribution).
The technique developed in Neumark (2012) to correct for the bias from differences in the
variances of unobservable characteristics relies on the experimental study having extra
information that explores the impact of different productivity or quality characteristics (creating
applicants who have different levels of qualifications, for example). As long as some of these
characteristics have the same effects in the latent variable model for the probability of an offer –
the key identifying assumption – this extra information allows the effect of the difference in
variances between the groups’ unobserved characteristics on the responses to be isolated from the
role of discrimination in evaluating applicants. That is, it allows separate identification of the
relative variances in the unobservables and the discrimination coefficient, γ. 15
It is rare that correspondence studies include variables that shift the call-back probability,

To reiterate, for the purposes of simplification, it is assumed E(XBII|XI, B = 1) = E(XWII|XI, B = 0). Without
this assumption, references to γ in the remainder of this section should be read as references to
γ + E(XBII|XI, B = 1) = E(XWII|XI, B = 0) – i.e., the sum of taste and statistical discrimination.
15

15

because these studies typically create one “type” of applicant for which there is only random
variation in characteristics that are not intended to affect outcomes. However, the 10 studies
discussed in Section 2 have this information – as in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), whose data
Neumark (2012) used to illustrate this method for correcting for the bias in AC studies. Applying
this method to the studies re-examined in this paper therefore allows us to determine whether the
measures of discrimination from conventional analyses of the data in these studies provided
unbiased estimates of discrimination, or instead either overstated or understated discrimination. 16
The intuition behind the solution stems from the fact that a higher variance for one group
(say, whites) implies a smaller effect of observed characteristics on the probability that a white
applicant meets the standard for hiring. Thus, information from a correspondence study on how
variation in observable qualifications is related to call-backs can be informative about the relative
variance of the unobservables, and this, in turn, can identify the effect of discrimination. Based on
this idea, the identification problem identified by the Heckman-Siegelman critique is solved by
invoking an identifying assumption – specifically, that the effect of applicant characteristics that
affect perceived productivity and hence call-backs have equal effects across groups – along with
the testable requirement that some applicant characteristics affect the call-back probability (since
if all the effects are zero we cannot learn about σBII/σWII from these coefficient estimates).
In a probit specification, for example, we know that we can only identify the coefficients
of the latent variable model for productivity relative to the standard deviation of the unobservable.
In this case, we effectively have two probit models, one for blacks and one for whites. If we
normalize σWII to one, then for a characteristic (Z) that affects the call-back rate, we identify its

16

For recent code to implement the estimator, we direct readers to the code used in Neumark et al. (2016),
on the website of the American Economic Review (click on “Data Set” on the webpage at
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.p20161008).

16

coefficient (δW) relative to σWII, or δW/σWII. However, if we assume that δW = δB, then we do not
need to impose the normalization that σBII = 1, but instead can identify σBII/σWII from the ratio of
the coefficients on Z in the probit for whites versus blacks, which in turn allows us to identify γ.
The estimation can be done using a heteroscedastic probit model. Finally, when there are multiple
productivity-related characteristics that shift the call-back probability Zk (k =1,…, K), there is an
overidentification test because the ratio of coefficients on each Z, for whites relative to blacks,
should equal σBII/σWII. 17
The heteroscedastic probit model estimates can be decomposed into the estimated
differential due to differences in γ, and the estimated differential due to differences in the variance
of the unobservables. In generic notation, let the latent variable depend on a vector of variables S
and coefficients ψ, and the variance depend on a vector of variables T, which includes S, with
coefficients θ. The elements of S are indexed by k. For a standard probit model, coefficient
estimates are translated into estimates of the marginal effects of a continuous variable S using
∂P(call-back)/∂Sk = ψkφ(Sψ)

(6)

where Sk is the variable of interest with coefficient ψk, φ(.) is the standard normal density, and the
standard deviation of the unobservable is normalized to one. Typically, this is evaluated at the
means of S. When Sk is a dummy variable such as race, the difference in the cumulative normal
distribution functions is often used instead, although the difference is usually trivial.
The marginal effect is more complicated in the case of the heteroscedastic probit model,
because if the variance of the unobservable differs by race, then when race “changes” both the

Indeed, the identifying restriction δW = δB only has to hold for subsets of the characteristics that shift the
call-back probability, and one can rely only on this subset if the overidentification test for a larger set of
resume characteristics fails (see Neumark, 2012).
17

17

variance and the level of the latent variable that determines hiring can shift. As long as we use the
continuous version of the partial derivative to compute marginal effects from the heteroscedastic
probit model, there is a unique decomposition of the effect of a change in a variable Sk that also
appears in T into these two components. In particular, denoting the variance of the unobservable
[exp(Tθ)]2, with the variables in T arranged such that the kth element of T is Sk, then the overall
partial derivative of P(call-back) with respect to Sk is
∂P/∂Sk = φ(Sψ/exp(Tθ)) ∙{ψk/exp(Tθ)} + φ(Sψ/exp(Tθ))∙{(–Sψ∙θk)/exp(Tθ)}. 18

(7)

The first part of the sum in equation (7) is the partial derivative with respect to changes in
Sk affecting only the level of the latent variable – corresponding to the counterfactual of Sk
changing the valuation of the worker without changing the variance of the unobservable. The
second part is the partial derivative with respect to changes via the variance of the unobservable.
In the analysis below, these two separate effects are reported as well as the overall marginal effect,
and standard errors are calculated using the delta method. 19
This discussion raises the issue of what we are trying to measure in audit and
correspondence studies. Focusing on γ, the structural effect of race, captures the potential
discounting by employers of black workers’ productivity à la Becker (and possibly statistical
discrimination about the mean of XII). But as shown, employers could treat blacks and whites
differently in hiring because of different variances of the unobservable. If the latter is accepted as

18

See Cornelißen (2005).
Because the formula for the derivative based on a continuous variable yields this unique decomposition,
it is used below – and also to interpret the simple probit estimates, as in Table 1. The implied partial
derivatives from the probit using the formula for a discrete variable (or computing the partial derivative for
each sample observation and averaging, as is now more standard) were very similar. One can decompose
the partial derivative from the heteroskedastic probit model based on the partial derivative for discrete
variables calculated from difference in the cumulative normal distribution functions, but then the
decomposition is not unique.

19

18

a meaningful measure of discrimination, we might not want to eliminate it.
There are two reasons why the coefficient γ is the focus of interest. First, to the best of our
knowledge, differential treatment based on assumptions (true or not) about variances have not
been viewed as discriminatory in the legal literature. Second, and probably more important, the
taste discrimination (and possibly “first-moment” statistical discrimination) that correspondence
studies capture in γ generalizes from the correspondence study to the real economy. In contrast,
the difference in treatment based on differences in the variances of unobservables is an artifact of
the design of correspondence (or audit) studies – in particular, the standardization of applicants to
particular, and similar, values of the observables, relative to the actual distribution of observables
among real applicants. If, instead, a study used applicants that replicated the actual distribution of
applicants to the employers in the study, there would be no bias – in the setting described here –
from different variances of the unobservables. This is discussed in detail in Neumark (2012).
That is not to say, however, that there cannot be discrimination based on second moments
with, for example, risk averse firms. In that sense, one can potentially interpret the bias correction
and decomposition not as separating out real versus spurious discrimination, but rather firstmoment versus second-moment discrimination. We could imagine, for example, that risk-averse
firms are less likely to call back (or hire) workers with more uncertain productivity, even when on
average they are as productive as another group. However, the potential difficulty with this
interpretation is that we do not uniformly find that the minority group that experiences
discrimination according to the conventional analysis generally has a higher variance of the
unobservable; indeed, in both the labor market studies and the housing market studies we analyze,
this is the case in just about half of the estimates. This is a further reason why, in the remainder of
the paper, we interpret the evidence as isolating discrimination by adjusting for differences in the
variances of unobservables.

19

5. Results from re-examination of field experiments with quality variation across resumes
Labor market field experiments
We report the results for the re-analysis of the datasets from the labor market field
experiments in Tables 2A and 2B. Turning to the first set of labor market studies covered in Table
2A, we first report the estimated discrimination coefficient (γ, in the equations from above) in the
first row of the table (Panel A). These match the estimates in the last column of Table 1, and have
already been summarized.
Panel B turns to the heteroscedastic probit estimates that correct for biases from
differences in the variance of unobservables. The “Controls” entry toward the bottom of the table
lists the resume characteristics including those likely to shift the call-back rate (like education,
skills, etc.). 20 The first row of Panel B reports the overall effect from the heteroscedastic probit
estimates. These are similar to the probit estimates. The next two rows of the table report the key
results from the decomposition of the heteroscedastic probit estimates. The “level” effect (labelled
“Marginal effect through level (unbiased)” in the table) is the unbiased estimate, and the
“variance” effect reflects the bias from correspondence study design, arising because of the
interaction between the quality of the resumes sent out (relative to the actual distribution) and
differences in the variances of unobservables.
Looking at these estimates, for the first study – the Baert et al. (2015) experiment on
discrimination against Turkish job applicants relative to natives in Belgium – the evidence of

20

Some studies include resume characteristics that are not independent of minority group status. For
example, Oreopoulos (2011) indicates, for some of his ethnic groups, that some education or experience
occurred in a foreign country. This is useful for asking what might explain variation in the amount of
discrimination immigrants face, which is the focus of his study. But it does not fit into the narrower
question considered in this paper of discrimination against the minority group per se. Hence, we only use
resume characteristics that are constructed to be orthogonal to minority group status.

20

discrimination completely disappears in the heteroscedastic probit estimates. In both columns (1)
and (2) – the first for a call-back, and the second for an immediate interview – the negative and
significant coefficient estimate on the indicator for Turkish applicants becomes positive and
statistically insignificant.
In contrast, the estimated effect through the variance is negative and significant, implying
that the study design generates bias towards finding evidence of discrimination. The next row of
the table reports that the ratio of the estimated standard deviations of the unobservables for
minority versus non-minority candidates is around 0.5, indicating a lower variance of
unobservables for the Turkish applicants. In terms of the model, the reduction in estimated
discrimination coupled with a lower variance of unobservables for minorities implies that on
average the resumes in this study were of relatively low quality compared to what employers see;
thus, the low variance group is less likely to be of sufficiently high quality on the unobservables to
merit a call-back, and the difference in variance creates a bias towards finding discrimination
against Turkish applicants.
Below the decomposition estimates, the table reports some additional diagnostic test
results. First, it reports the p-value from the overidentification test that the ratios of the skill
coefficients between (in this case) Turkish and native applicants are equal across all of the
skills/resume characteristics. The p-value is 0.97 in column (1) and 0.93 in column (2), indicating
that we do not reject the overidentifying restrictions. On the other hand, in this case, as reported in
the next row, the data tend to reject the restriction to the homoscedastic specification; the p-value
from a likelihood ratio test is 0.01 in column (1) and 0.10 in column (2). The final test result
reported is whether the ratio of variances of the unobservables equals one; this is rejected strongly
in both columns (a result we expect would to parallel to some extent the likelihood ratio test).
Thus, for the Baert et al. study, application of this method of correcting for bias from

21

differences in the variances of unobservables very much overturns the evidence of ethnic
discrimination. There is one additional point to make with reference to the more general earlier
discussion about interpreting the effect through the variance. One might refer to the negative (and
significant) estimates on “Marginal effect through variance” as suggesting that the evidence of
discrimination has not gone away, but simply been “displaced” to show up in the variance. We
have already explained why, in the context of the method and underlying model used in this paper,
the estimated effect through the variance is an artifact of the study, and would not be expected to
be replicated in the real world. Similarly, it would not be replicated if the study had used highquality resumes, or a distribution of resumes that matched the distribution employers actually see.
An alternative hypothesis, though, is that the effect of variance is real, and reflects employer risk
aversion rather than how the employer evaluates the likelihood that an applicant exceeds a callback/hiring threshold, given the resume. However, if there is risk aversion, then high-variance
groups would be penalized. That is inconsistent with the evidence from the Baert et al. data, since
the minority applicants are estimated to have lower variance. 21
Having gone through the results for the first study in detail, the results for the other labor
market studies can be covered more succinctly. The Carlsson and Rooth (2007) study of
discrimination against Middle Easterners in Sweden asks a very similar question to Baert et al.
(2015). In this case, however, the conclusions are scarcely affected by addressing the HeckmanSiegelman critique. The estimated marginal effect through the level (−0.102) is very similar to the
simple heteroscedastic probit estimate (−0.095), and the estimated marginal effect through the

21

This may be too strong a statement, since if employers actually evaluate applicants based on their
assumed variance of the unobservable, the statistical model might be different. We are not aware of any
field experiments that have tried to incorporate risk aversion, although this might be fruitful. Dickinson and
Oaxaca (2009) provide a lab experiment study of this type of discrimination in labor markets.

22

variance is close to zero (0.007) and estimated precisely. In this case the ratio of the estimated
standard deviations of the unobservable for minorities relative to non-minorities is very close to
one (1.03), which implies – in terms of the Heckman-Siegelman critique – that there is unlikely to
be any bias regardless of the quality of the artificial resumes relative to the population of resumes
that the employer sees, which is consistent with the robustness of the evidence for this study. Note
also that the data do not reject the overidentifying restrictions, nor do they reject the restriction to
the homoscedastic model or that the ratio of standard deviations equals one – not surprising given
the estimates.
The Drydakis (2014) study looks at discrimination against gays and lesbians. In this study,
also, correcting for potential bias from differences in the variances of the unobservables does not
alter the conclusion much. Indeed, the estimated effect of being gay or lesbian is larger negative
(−0.476 or −0.499) after correcting for this bias, relative to the overall effect of −0.384 for gays
and −.304 for lesbians. For both groups, the estimated variance of the unobservable is quite a bit
larger than for straight men or women, with a ratio of standard deviations of 1.59 for gay versus
straight men, and 2.27 for lesbian versus straight women. The combination of a higher variance for
gays or lesbians with a larger estimate of discrimination would imply that the resumes were of low
quality relative to the distribution, which would lead employers to favor the high variance group
and generate a bias towards zero in the estimate of discrimination.
Note that for the Drydakis analyses there is strong evidence against the homoscedastic
probit model and marginally significant evidence against equal standard deviations. Also, for the
analysis of gay versus straight men the overidentifying restrictions are rejected at the 10-percent
level. This last result prompted us to estimate a less restrictive model that did not restrict the
effects of two of the resume characteristics to be the same across gay and straight men – chosen
based on the estimates indicating that these interactions did not fit the expected pattern if the

23

coefficients in the latent variable model were equal and only the variances of the unobservables
varied. 22 In this case the overidentification restrictions were no longer rejected (the p-value was
0.751), yet the estimates were very similar to those reported in column (5) of Table 2A.
Lee and Khalid (2016) study discrimination against Malays (versus Chinese), in the private
sector in Malaysia. 23 In this case, the conclusions are dramatically affected by addressing the
Heckman-Siegelman critique, as the estimated marginal effect through the level changes sign and
becomes significant and positive – consistent with discrimination in favor of Malays. 24 In contrast,
the estimated marginal effect through the variance is large, negative, and significant (−0.445). In
this case the ratio of the estimated standard deviations of the unobservable for Malays relative to
Chinese is very low (0.11). The combination of a lower variance for Malays with a smaller
(indeed, opposite-signed) estimate of discrimination would imply that the resumes were of low
quality relative to the distribution for jobs included in the study, which would lead employers to
favor the high variance group and generate a bias towards discrimination in favor of Chinese
applicants. Note also that the data do not reject the overidentifying restrictions.

22

These were the indicators for a high-quality resume (more experience) and for resume type. These were
chosen because the estimated signs of the interactions relative to the signs of the main effects were rather
strongly inconsistent with what would be predicted based on the higher estimated variance of the
unobservable for gays. Note that the model is identified as long as the effects of some variables that shift
the call-back probability are restricted to be equal across the two groups; this restriction does not have to
hold for all of them, and can be relaxed by adding interactions between the group indicator and the resume
characteristic to the heteroscedastic probit model.
23
Malays are not the minority group, although we retain that label in the table to be consistent with other
studies. Lee and Khalid (2016) discuss issues related to potential discrimination against Malays in the
private sector, including affirmative action for Malays in public education that may lead Malay graduates to
be less preferred. Their sample size with controls is a bit smaller than ours (see their Table 4), because they
also include data on the companies in the study; these data are not always available, and the company data
were not provided to us.
24
While this change in results is striking, there are also findings in the Lee and Khalid paper that do not
cleanly fit the expected story of discrimination against Malays. In particular, they find stronger anti-Malay
discrimination in hiring for private university graduates, where affirmative action in education is not
implemented.

24

Turning to the remaining labor market studies, in Table 2B, Oreopoulos (2011) studies
outcomes for six immigrant groups relative to native Canadians. It turns out that for two of these
groups – Chinese and Indian – the evidence of discrimination remains significant after addressing
the Heckman-Siegelman critique, and is actually stronger, with estimates changing from around
−0.05 to −0.10 or greater. For both groups, the estimated variance of the unobservable is larger for
immigrants than for natives, which appears to interact with the applicants being low quality so that
the higher variance biases the estimate of discrimination from the standard probit towards zero. In
contrast, for the other four groups – Chinese-Canadian, 25 Pakistani, Greek, and British – there is
no longer significant evidence of discrimination. Note that in two cases – Pakistani and Greek –
the point estimate of the marginal effect of minority group membership through the level is still a
large negative number, but is insignificant. In contrast, for the British, the point estimate is no
longer negative.
Turning to the other diagnostics, in every case for the Oreopoulos analysis, the
overidentification restrictions are not rejected. Similarly, with the exceptions of the analysis for
the Chinese applicants, the data do not reject the restriction to the homoscedastic model. Thus, in
this case we are sometimes failing to find evidence of discrimination because we are estimating a
more flexible model even when the data do not reject a more restrictive model that provides
evidence of discrimination – and the results for the Pakistani and Greek applicants are notable in
this regard. This poses the usual trade-off of bias versus precision, although generally speaking
labor economists are willing to estimate less restrictive models that eliminate bias at the risk of
decreased precision. Regardless, it seems reasonable to conclude that the re-analysis of the
Oreopoulos data indicates far less robust evidence of discrimination than the original study.

25

This refers to an English first name and a Chinese last name.

25

Finally, column (7) of Table 2B repeats the re-analysis of the Bertrand and Mullainathan
(2004) data from Neumark (2012). In this case, the evidence of discrimination gets a bit stronger,
and the variance of the unobservable is estimated to be larger for blacks. These findings are
consistent with low quality resumes generating a bias against finding discrimination, although the
qualitative conclusions are unchanged.
Thus, the conclusion from our re-examination of the labor market experiments is that the
findings from the existing studies of discrimination against ethnic, racial, or sexual orientation
minorities are not always robust to addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique. All 14 estimates
based on the existing studies, using the conventional approach, point to evidence of
discrimination. But only six (or just under one-half) of the corrected estimates provide evidence of
discrimination. 26
This conclusion that the analysis of data from field experiments on labor market
discrimination is not always robust is echoed in the findings reported in Neumark et al. (2016).
They study age discrimination in hiring, and find that the evidence of discrimination against older
women is robust to addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique, but the evidence of
discrimination against older men is not robust. On the other hand, some other recent papers using
this technique do not find large differences. Carlsson et al. (2013) re-examine data from four
previous studies of the Swedish labor market, each of which includes some form of the data
required to implement the bias correction. Their re-analysis does not lead to large changes in the
estimates of discrimination, although sometimes the estimated discrimination (against those with
Arabic names, and in favor of women) becomes smaller. Three recent studies by Baert, all on the

26

This includes the evidence from Carlsson and Rooth (2007), Drydakis (2014, for both gays and lesbians),
Oreopoulos (2011, for Chinese and Indian), and Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004, significant at 10-percent
level).

26

Belgian labor market, found no change in the estimates of discrimination in these experimental
studies. Baert (2015) implemented this method in a study of discrimination against Turkish
school-leavers in Belgium, using information on distance from the worker’s residence to the
workplace and other application characteristics to identify the heteroscedastic probit model, and
report that this correction does not alter the conclusions. Baert (2014) applied the bias correction
in an investigation of discrimination based on sexual orientation and family responsibilities, and
found no bias or difference in reported results (Baert, 2014, footnote 15, p. 551). Baert (2016)
found similar results in a study of hiring discrimination against disabled individuals (see pp. 8384). Nunley et al. (2015) studied racial discrimination in hiring of recent college graduates in the
United States. Applying the bias correction to their finding of a significant, lower interview rate to
black graduates indicated that the baseline estimate of discrimination was understated, although
the resulting estimated marginal effects through the level and variance were not statistically
significant (p. 1118). Thus, among these latter studies, there is again sometimes an indication that
the results are not robust to addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique, although there is less
clear of an indication that ignoring this critique leads to overstating discrimination.
Housing market field experiments
The results from the re-examination of the evidence from the housing discrimination
studies are presented in Table 3. Ahmed et al. (2010) study discrimination against Arab applicants
in Sweden, looking – as three of the four housing studies do – at both positive responses and offers
of immediate showings. In this study, correcting for potential bias from differences in the
variances of the unobservables does very little to change the conclusions. The estimates of lower
positive responses or offers of immediate showings to Arab applicants become if anything more
negative – most notably for immediate showing, where the estimate changes from −0.074 to
−0.146 – and both estimates are statistically significant. The estimated effects of Arab ethnicity

27

through the variance are positive, and larger for immediate showings, corresponding to the larger
negative estimate on the marginal effect through the level. The estimated variance of the
unobservable is larger for Arab applicants, so combined, the estimates imply that the applications
were lower quality than the population of applications to these landlords, biasing towards zero the
conventional probit estimate of discrimination in immediate showings. Turning to the other
diagnostics, in neither analysis are the overidentification restrictions, the restriction to a
homoscedastic probit model, or equality of the standard deviations rejected. Thus, in this study
evidence of discrimination persists.
These same conclusions are echoed in the remaining columns of the table – for the Bosch
et al. (2010), Carlsson and Eriksson (2007), and Ewens et al. (2014) studies. In all cases, the biascorrected estimates still lead to statistically significant evidence of discrimination based on race
and ethnicity. And in most cases the point estimate for the marginal effect through the level is very
close to the overall heteroscedastic probit estimate, while the estimates of the effect of race or
ethnicity through the variance are very small. 27
There is one case (Ewens et al., 2014) where the overidentifying restrictions are rejected at
the 10-percent level (and the p-values for the other tests are fairly low). We therefore carried out
an additional analysis, paralleling what we did with the Drydakis (2014) data on gay and straight
male applicants. In this case, we estimated a less restrictive model that did not restrict the effects
of percent black in the area or city to be the same across black and white applicants, based on the

27

One reason for the robustness of the results in Carlsson and Eriksson (2013) could be because they use
applications with substantial variation in applicant characteristics. The authors do this because by avoiding
standardizing applicants to a very narrow range, the bias identified by the Heckman-Siegelman critique can
be reduced, although this cannot ensure that the range of quality of actual applicants is not larger. It is also
the case that – especially for the positive response outcome – the variances are nearly equal (the ratio of
estimated standard deviations is 1.02), so that using a narrow range of applicant quality would not
introduce bias.

28

estimates indicating that these interactions did not fit the pattern of equal coefficients in the latent
variable model with probit coefficient differing because of differences in the variances of
unobservables. In this case the overidentification restrictions were no longer rejected (the p-value
was 0.877), yet the conclusions were similar to those in column (7) of Table 3. The overall
estimate (standard error) of discrimination from the heteroscedastic probit model was −0.064
(0.023), and the unbiased estimated effect through the level was −0.067 (0.023).
Thus, the conclusion from our re-examination of the housing market studies is that the
findings from the existing studies of discrimination against ethnic or racial minorities are robust to
addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique. With one minor exception, these past studies found
evidence of discrimination, and our corrected estimates are qualitatively and usually quantitatively
very similar.
Why might the housing market tests of callback for rental enquiries be more robust to
addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique? One possibility is that that the information provided
in the housing market tests is sufficiently complete that there is little scope for a role for
unobservables, and hence little impact of any differences in the variance of unobservables across
groups. In housing markets, there may not be much more that matters to agents than ability to pay,
and the information in the applications may convey this quite reliably. In contrast, an employer
has an ongoing relationship with a worker, as do the employer’s customers, so that many factors
that are not conveyed in an on-line job application could potentially weigh on an employer’s
decision, and hence, correspondingly, differences in the variances of these unobserved factors
across groups could matter much more.
6. Conclusions
The goal of this paper was to re-examine evidence from field experiments on labor market
and housing market discrimination (experiments that, in general, identify the combined effect of

29

taste discrimination and statistical discrimination). Specifically, our goal is to see if the nearuniform findings of discrimination against minorities hold up after correcting for an important
source of bias originally identified in Heckman and Siegelman (1993) – which we refer to as the
“Heckman-Siegelman critique.” This critique emphasises that even under quite ideal conditions
for these studies, the evidence can be biased in either direction – or, equivalently, discrimination
can be unidentified – if the variances of the unobservables differ across the groups studied. This is
a plausible concern, given that a difference in the variances of unobservables across groups cannot
be cannot be ruled out and indeed is at the core of early theoretical models of statistical
discrimination (Aigner and Cain, 1977). We re-examine evidence from 10 studies that have the
requisite data – applicant or other characteristics aside from the identifier for the group in question
which shift the probability of call-backs or hires – implementing a correction for this bias
proposed in Neumark (2012).
We find that for the housing market studies, the estimated effect of discrimination is robust
to this correction. For the labor market studies, in contrast, the evidence is less robust; in about
half of cases the estimated effect of discrimination either falls to near zero or becomes statistically
insignificant, and in one case the sign changes.
We of course cannot definitively extrapolate from the 10 studies we were able to reexamine to the broader set of field experiments on discrimination by race, ethnicity, and sexual
orientation. However, given that about half of the estimates of labor market discrimination that we
could re-examine no longer provide statistical evidence of discrimination (or discrimination in the
same direction) after correcting for bias from differences in the variance of unobservables, it
seems reasonable to suggest that the overall (and overwhelming) evidence of labor market
discrimination from field experiments is likely less robust than it seems. We have no doubt that in
many countries there is discrimination in labor and housing markets against many groups, and that

30

– like the subset of studies we re-examine in this paper – the evidence of discrimination would
frequently be robust to addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique. But our evidence also
indicates that in some cases a research design that enables a researcher to address this critique
would not find evidence of labor market discrimination.
If nothing else, this conclusion implies that we need three types of research to draw more
definitive conclusions from field experiments on labor and housing market discrimination: (1)
more evidence using this kind of research design and methods; (2) more analysis of how best to
implement these methods, what kinds of quality shifters provide the most informative estimates,
etc.; and (3) further consideration of whether there are other ways to address the HeckmanSiegelman critique and whether they generate similar answers. Moreover, given the nonrobustness of the experimental evidence on labor market discrimination, in particular, to
addressing the Heckman-Siegelman critique, one could reasonably argue that future experimental
studies of labor market discrimination (and perhaps of discrimination in any market) must take
account of this critique to be regarded as credible.

31

References
Ahmed, A., Andersson, L. and Hammarstedt, M. (2010). ‘Can discrimination in the housing
market be reduced by increasing the information about the applicants?’, Land
Economics, 86(1), pp. 79-90.
Aigner, D. and Cain, G. (1977). ‘Statistical theories of discrimination in labor markets’,
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30(2), pp. 175-87.
Altonji, J. and Blank, R. (1999). ‘Race and gender in the labor market’. In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3, edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, 3143-259.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Baert, S. (2014). ‘Career Lesbians. Getting Hired for Not Having Kids?’ Industrial Relations
Journal, 45, pp. 543–561.
Baert, S. (2015). ‘Field experimental evidence on gender discrimination in hiring: Biased as
Heckman and Siegelman predicted?’, Economics, 9, August 20,
http://dx.doi.org/10.5018/economics-ejournal.ja.2015-25.
Baert, S. (2016). ‘Wage Subsidies and Hiring Chances for the Disabled: Some Causal
Evidence’, European Journal of Health Economics, 17, pp. 71–86.
Baert, S. and Balcaen, P. (2013). ‘The Impact of Military Work Experience on Later Hiring
Chances in the Civilian Labour Market. Evidence from a Field Experiment’.
Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 7, http://www.economicsejournal.org/economics/journalarticles/2013-37.
Baert, S., Cockx, B., Gheyle, N. and Vandamme, C. (2015). ‘Is there less discrimination in
occupations where recruitment is difficult?’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
68(3), pp. 467-500.
Baert, S. and Verhofstadt, E. (2015). ‘Labour market discrimination against former juvenile
delinquents: Evidence from a field experiment’, Applied Economics, 47, pp. 1061-72.
Bertrand, M., Chugh, D., and Mullainathan, S. (2005). ‘Implicit discrimination’, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 95(2), pp. 94-8.
Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S. (2004). ‘Are Emily and Greg more employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination’, American
Economic Review, 94(4), pp. 991-1013.
Bosch, M., Carnero, M. and Farré, L. (2010). ‘Information and discrimination in the rental
housing market: Evidence from a field experiment’, Regional Science and Urban
Economics, 40(1), pp. 11-19.
Carlsson, M. and Eriksson, S. (2014). ‘Discrimination in the rental market for apartments’,
Journal of Housing Economics, 23, pp. 41-54.
Carlsson, M., Fumarco, L. and Rooth, D.-O. (2013). ‘Artifactual evidence of discrimination in
correspondence studies? A replication of the Neumark method’, IZA Discussion Paper No.
7619. Bonn, Germany: IZA.
Carlsson, M. and Rooth, D.-O. (2007). ‘Evidence of ethnic discrimination in the Swedish labor
market using experimental data’, Labor Economics, 14(4), pp. 716-29.
Cornelißen, T. (2005). ‘Standard errors of marginal effects in the heteroskedastic probit
model’, Institute of Quantitative Economic Research, Discussion Paper No. 230.
Hanover, Germany: University of Hanover.
Dickinson, D. and Oaxaca, R. (2009). ‘Statistical discrimination in labor markets: An

experimental analysis’, Southern Economic Journal, 71(1), pp. 16-31.
Doleac, J. Stein. L.C.D. (2013). ‘The Visible Hand: Race and Online Market Outcomes’,
Economic Journal, 123(572), pp. F469-92.
Drydakis, N. (2014). ‘Sexual orientation discrimination in the Cypriot labor market: Distastes
or uncertainty?’ International Journal of Manpower, 35(5), pp. 720-44.
Ewens, M., Tomlin, B. and Wang, L.-C. (2014). ‘Statistical discrimination or prejudice? A
large sample field experiment’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1), pp. 119-34.
Heckman, J. (1998). ‘Detecting discrimination’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(2), pp.
101-16.
Heckman, J. and Siegelman, P. (1993). ‘The Urban Institute audit studies: Their methods and
findings’. In Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in
America, edited by Michael Fix and Raymond J. Struyk, 187-258. Washington, D.C.:
The Urban Institute Press.
Jowell, R. and Prescott-Clarke, P. (1970). ‘Racial discrimination and white-collar workers in
Britain’, Race, 11(4), pp. 397-417.
Lee, H.A. and Khalid, M.A. (2016). ‘Discrimination of high degrees: race and graduate hiring
in Malaysia’, Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy, 21(1), pp. 53-76.
Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Neumark, D. (2016). ‘Experimental research on labor market discrimination.’ NBER Working
Paper No. 21262. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Neumark, D. (2012). ‘Detecting discrimination in audit and correspondence studies’, Journal
of Human Resources, 47(4), pp. 1128-157.
Neumark, D., Burn, I. and Button, P. (2016). ‘Experimental age discrimination evidence and
the Heckman critique.’ American Economic Review, 106, pp. 303–308.
Nunley, J., Pugh, A., Romero, N., Seals, R. (2015). ‘Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market
for Recent College Graduates: Evidence from a Field Experiment’, B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis and Policy, 15, pp.1093–1125.
OECD. (2013). International Migration Outlook 2013. Paris: OECD.
Oreopoulos, P. (2011). ‘Why do skilled immigrants struggle in the labor market? A field
experiment with thirteen thousand resumes’, American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 3(4), pp. 148-71.
Pager, D. (2007). “The use of field experiments for studies of employment discrimination:
Contributions, critiques, and directions for the future’, The Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science, 609(1), pp. 104-33.
Quillian, L., Pager, D., Hexel, O. and Midtboen, A. (n.d.). ‘The persistence of racial
discrimination: A meta-analysis of field experiments in hiring since 1972’, unpublished
paper.
Riach, P. and Rich. J. (2002). ‘Field experiments of discrimination in the market place’, The
Economic Journal, 112(483), pp. F480-518.
Rich, J. (2014). ‘What do field experiments of discrimination in markets tell us? A meta analysis
of studies conducted since 2000’, IZA Discussion Paper No. 8584. Bonn, Germany: IZA.
Zschirnt, E. and Ruedin, D. (2015). ‘Ethnic discrimination in hiring decisions: A meta-analysis of
correspondence tests 1990-2015’, unpublished paper.

Table 1: Experimental Studies of Discrimination in Labor and Housing Markets Re-examined
Majority
Estimated
call-back
differential for
Study
Country
Years
Minority
Outcome
rate
minority
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A. Labor market field experiments
Baert et al. (2015)
Belgium
2011-12
Turkish
Call-back
.329
-.082
(.034)
Immediate
.190
-.056
interview
(.026)
Carlsson and
Sweden
2005-6
Middle
Call-back
.269
-.095
Rooth (2007)
Eastern
(.009)
Drydakis (2014)
Cyprus
2010-11
Gay
Call-back
.554
-.410
(.010)
Lesbian
Call-back
.523
-.411
(.011
Lee and Khalid
Malaysia
2011
Malay (vs.
Call-back
.221
-.152
(2016)
Chinese)
(.018)
Oreopoulos
Canada
2008
Chinese
Call-back
.142
-.053
(2009)
(.007)
Indian
Call-back
.142
-.056
(.007)
ChineseCall-back
.142
-.063
Canadian
(.008)
Pakistani
Call-back
.142
-.073
(.009)
Greek
Call-back
.142
-.035
(.017)
British
Call-back
.142
-.031
(.011)
Bertrand and
United
2001-2
BlackCall-back
.097
-.030
Mullainathan
States
sounding
(.006)
(2004)
names
B. Housing market field experiments
Ahmed et al.
Sweden
2008
Arab/Muslim
Positive
.514
-.171
(2010)
response
(.033)
Immediate
.254
-.091
showing
(.024)
Bosch et al.
Spain
2009
Moroccan
Positive
.590
-.133
(2010)
immigrants
response
(.014)
Immediate
.541
-.135
showing
(.014)
Carlsson and
Sweden
2010-11
Arab
Positive
.387
-.130
Eriksson (2014)
response
(.012)
Immediate
.271
-.110
showing
(.011)
Ewens et al.
United
2009
Black
Positive
.503
-.090
(2014)
States
response
(.019)
Note: All studies are correspondence studies. Column (7) reports marginal effect from probit models, our
estimates, from following tables. In the Oreopoulos study, “Chinese-Canadian” means there was an English
first name.

Table 2A: Estimates for Labor Market Discrimination Studies: Full Specifications
Study

Outcome
Minority group
A. Estimates from basic probit
Minority, marginal effect
B. Heteroscedastic probit model
Minority, marginal effect
Marginal effect through level
(unbiased)
Marginal effect through variance
Standard deviation of
unobservables, minority/nonminority
Wald test, overidentification, ratios of
coefficients equal (p-value)
LR test: standard vs. heteroscedastic
probit (p-value)
Wald test, ratio of standard deviations
= 1 (p-value)
Controls (job or applicants)

Clustered (within-pair design)
N

Baert et al. (2015),
Belgium
Call-back
Immed. interview
Turkish, males
(1)
(2)

Carlsson and Rooth (2007),
Sweden
Call-back
Middle Eastern, males
(3)

Drydakis (2014),
Cyprus
Call-back
Gay
Lesbian
(4)
(5)

Lee and Khalid (2016)
Malaysia
Call-back
Malay
(6)

-.082
(.034)

-.056
(.026)

-.095
(.009)

-.410
(.010)

-.411
(.011)

-.152
(.018)

-.096
(.034)
.044
(.068)
-.141
(.065)
.49

-.072
(.028)
.073
(.087)
-.145
(.093)
.55

-.095
(.009)
-.102
(.023)
.007
(.026)
1.03

-.384
(.040)
-.476
(.029)
.093
(.065)
1.59

-.304
(.091)
-.499
(.016)
.195
(.104)
2.27

-.201
(.038)
.244
(.108)
-.445
(.142)
.11

.97

.93

.87

.09

.64

.94

.01

.10

.80

.06

.01

.01

.00

.03

.79

.18

.16

.00

High education, over-educated,
distance, vacancy duration,
vacancies/unemployed, unemployment,
% foreign, % Turkish, city, multiple
jobs, average occupation wage, job
quality, intensive/moderate customer
contact

Unemployment spells, cultural
activities, sport, personality,
summer experiences, U.S. high
school, high education, multiple
employers, occupation

Yes

Yes
5,636

736

736

Enhanced cover
letters, enhanced
reference letters, first
applicant, resume
type, reference type,
tester, occupation

Occupation, cover letter with
good English, extracurricular
skills, BA from private
university, grades, language
and writing skills stated
(Malay, Chinese), MS Office,
software/accounting skills,
high quality CV, degree or
degree project on CV, preuniversity institution, job ad
stated race

Yes
4,846

4,194

3,009

Note: In Panel A, the marginal effect is based on the standard formula for a discrete variable, with other variables set at sample means. In Panel B, the continuous
approximation for marginal effects is used, with the decomposition in equation (8) immediately below. The standard errors for the two components of the marginal
effects are computed using the delta method. The only individual controls for which interactions are not introduced are for other demographic groups.

Table 2B: Estimates for Labor Market Discrimination Studies: Full Specifications
Study
Oreopoulos (2011), Canada
Outcome
Call-back
Minority group
ChineseChinese Indian Canadian Pakistani Greek
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A. Estimates from basic probit
Minority, marginal effect
-.053
-.056
-.063
-.073
-.035
(.007)
(.007)
(.008)
(.009)
(.017)
B. Heteroscedastic probit model
Minority, marginal effect
-.046
-.050
-.068
-.083
-.066
(.009)
(.008)
(.009)
(.014)
(.073)
Marginal effect through level
-.131
-.101
-.029
-.076
-.169
(unbiased)
(.046)
(.041)
(.054)
(.078)
(.208)
Marginal effect through variance
.086
.052
-.040
-.007
.102
(.052)
(.046)
(.054)
(.070)
(.139)
Standard deviation of unobservables,
1.46
1.26
.84
.97
1.54
minority/non-minority
Wald test, overidentification, ratios of
.72
.85
.78
.48
.66
coefficients equal (p-value)
LR test: standard vs. heteroscedastic
.07
.22
.46
.92
.33
probit (p-value)
Wald test, ratio of standard deviations
= 1 (p-value)
Controls (job or applicants)

.19

.32

.42

.92

.55

Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), U.S.
Call-back
Black-sounding names
British
(6)

(7)

-.031
(.011)

-.030
(.006)

-.038
(.013)
.031
(.045)
-.068
(.052)
.75

-.026
(.007)
-.070
(.040)
.045
(.043)
1.26

.20

.42

.21

.26

.13

.37

Extracurricular activities, top-ranked Bachelor’s, Master’s,
occupation, speaking/social/writing skills required, female

Bachelor’s, experience and square,
volunteer, military service, email address,
gaps in work history, work during school,
academic honors, computer and other
skills, female; in zip code (% high school
dropout, college graduate, black, and
white, log median household income)
Clustered (within-pair design)
Yes
Yes
N
5,866
6,373
4,468
3,978
3,388
3,934
4,784
Note: In Panel A, the marginal effect is based on the standard formula for a discrete variable, with other variables set at sample means. In Panel B, the
continuous approximation for marginal effects is used, with the decomposition in equation (8) immediately below. The standard errors for the two
components of the marginal effects are computed using the delta method. The only individual controls for which interactions are not introduced are for
other demographic groups. Some skills are specific to immigrant groups and used to distinguish among immigrants (such as specific language fluencies
or where experience obtained), and are not included.

Table 3: Estimates for Housing Discrimination Studies
Study
Ahmed et al. (2010),
Sweden
Outcome
Positive
Immediate
response
showing
Minority group
Arab/Muslim
(1)
(2)
A. Estimates from basic probit
Minority, marginal effect
-.171
-.091
(.033)
(.024)
B. Heteroscedastic probit model
Minority, marginal effect
-.165
-.074
(.034)
(.027)
Marginal effect through level
-.182
-.146
(unbiased)
(.035)
(.049)
Marginal effect through variance
.017
.072
(.019)
(.058)
Standard deviation of
1.20
1.35
unobservables, minority/nonminority
Wald test, overidentification, ratios
.59
.91
of coefficients equal (p-value)
LR test: standard vs.
.32
.20
heteroscedastic probit (p-value)
Wald test, ratio of standard
.37
.29
deviations = 1 (p-value)
Controls (area or applicants)
Enhanced application, rent,
space, rooms, metro,
company

Bosch et al. (2010), Spain
Positive
Immediate
response
showing
Moroccan immigrants
(3)
(4)

Carlsson and Eriksson
(2007), Sweden
Positive
Immediate
response
showing
Arabic/Muslim
(5)
(6)

Ewens et al. (2014), U.S.
Positive response
Black
(7)

-.133
(.014)

-.135
(.014)

-.130
(.012)

-.110
(.011)

-.090
(.019)

-.136
(.017)
-.136
(.018)
.001
(.004)
.91

-.136
(.017)
-.135
(.015)
-.001
(.014)
.98

-.131
(.013)
-.134
(.026)
.004
(.025)
1.02

-.113
(.011)
-.074
(.034)
-.039
(.035)
.85

-.089
(.019)
-.092
(.019)
.003
(.003)
1.08

.33

.52

.87

.93

.07

.74

.95

.88

.26

.18

.74

.95

.89

.22

.20

Enhanced application, rent,
rooms, urban, company,
female

Jobs, exercise, nightclub,
smoker, references, female,
age

Mother’s estimated
education, positive email,
negative email, rent,
relative rent, rent in area,
one BR, cost, % male, %
black in area/city, female,
Muslim name
Clustered (within-pair design)
No
Yes
No
No
N
959
959
4,716
4,716
5,827
5,827
13,800
Note: In Panel A, the marginal effect is based on the standard formula for a discrete variable, with other variables set at sample means. In Panel B, the continuous
approximation for marginal effects is used, with the decomposition in equation (8) immediately below. The standard errors for the two components of the
marginal effects are computed using the delta method. The only individual controls for which interactions are not introduced are for other demographic groups.

