NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COSTS OF SOVEREIGN DEFAULT:
EVIDENCE FROM ARGENTINA
Benjamin Hébert
Jesse Schreger
Working Paper 22270
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22270

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

We thank Laura Alfaro, Joaquin Blaum, Luigi Bocola, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Jeff
Frieden, Gita Gopinath, Ed Glaeser, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Réka Juhász, Eduardo Levy
Yeyati, Matteo Maggiori, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, Monika Piazzesi, Ken Rogoff, Martin
Schneider, Alex Roth, Mary Bryce Millet Steinberg, Chris Tonetti, Christoph Trebesch, and
Victoria Vanasco for helpful conversations. We thank John Leahy and three anonymous referees
for comments that helped improve the paper. We thank Vivian Yue, Andreas Stathopoulos, and
Graciela Kaminsky for excellent discussions. We thank Brent Neiman for feedback and for
generously sharing data. We thank various seminar and conference audiences. We thank Stephen
King, Vivek Anand, and Tom Adney of Markit for useful discussions about the data. Christine
Rivera provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22270.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Benjamin Hébert and Jesse Schreger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Costs of Sovereign Default: Evidence from Argentina
Benjamin Hébert and Jesse Schreger
NBER Working Paper No. 22270
May 2016
JEL No. F3,F4,G15
ABSTRACT
We estimate the causal effect of sovereign default on the equity returns of Argentine firms. We
identify this effect by exploiting changes in the probability of Argentine sovereign default
induced by legal rulings in the case of Republic of Argentina v. NML Capital. We find that a
10% increase in the probability of default causes a 6% decline in the value of Argentine equities
and a 1% depreciation of a measure of the exchange rate. We examine the channels through
which a sovereign default may affect the economy.

Benjamin Hébert
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
bhebert@stanford.edu
Jesse Schreger
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jschreger@hbs.edu

A Code Repository is available at https://github.com/bhebert/CostOfSovereignDefault

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in international macroeconomics is why governments repay their debt to foreign
creditors, given the limited recourse available to those creditors. The seminal paper of Eaton and Gersovitz
(1981) argues that reputational concerns are sufficient to ensure that sovereigns repay their debt. In a famous
critique, Bulow and Rogoff (1989b) demonstrate that reputation alone cannot sustain sovereign borrowing
in equilibrium, without some other type of default cost or punishment. The size and features of this cost also
play a key role in quantitative models of sovereign debt, beginning with Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and
Arellano (2008). Numerous empirical papers have been written trying to find the source and measure the
size of these costs. The fundamental identification challenge is that governments usually default in response
to deteriorating economic conditions, which makes it hard to determine if the default itself caused further
harm to the economy.
The case of Republic of Argentina v. NML Capital provides a natural experiment to identify the causal
effect of sovereign default. Following Argentina’s sovereign default in 2001, NML Capital, a hedge fund,
purchased some of the defaulted bonds and refused to join other creditors in restructurings of the debt that
occurred in 2005 and 2010. Instead, because the defaulted debt was issued under New York law, NML sued
the Argentine government in U.S. courts to receive full payment. To compel the Argentine government to
repay the defaulted debt, the U.S. courts blocked Argentina’s ability to pay its restructured creditors, unless
NML and the other holdout creditors also received payments. The Argentine government resisted paying
the holdouts, even though the required payments would be small relative to the Argentine economy. As a
result, legal rulings in favor of NML raised the probability that Argentina would default on its restructured
bonds, while rulings in favor of Argentina lowered this probability.
We argue that these legal rulings are exogenous shocks to the risk-neutral probability of default1 that
allow us to identify the causal effect of sovereign default on the market value of Argentine firms. Our
key identifying assumption is that the information revealed to market participants by these legal rulings
affects firms’ stock returns only through the effect on the sovereign’s risk-neutral probability of default. This
assumption requires that the judges in U.S. courts making these rulings do not have private information about
1 In

our context, the “risk-neutral probability of default” is the probability that a risk-neutral agent would have to assign to
Argentina defaulting within the next five years to be indifferent between buying and selling a credit default swap on Argentina.
The actual, or physical, default probability could differ from the risk-neutral probability if market participants are risk-averse with
respect to Argentine default. Computing the risk-neutral probability of default from credit default swap prices involves several
assumptions (see appendix section A.4).

1

the Argentine economy. This assumption also requires that the firms we study are not directly affected by the
rulings. Consistent with this assumption, Argentine firms are legally separate from the federal government
of Argentina and are not subject to attachment of their assets by creditors of the sovereign. We discuss other
potential challenges to our identifying assumption in more detail in section 6.
We use credit default swaps (CDS) to measure the change in the risk-neutral probability of default.
Compiling rulings from the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, the Second
Court of Appeals, and United States Supreme Court, we isolate fifteen rulings that potentially changed the
risk-neutral probability of default. We identify the effect of changes in this default probability on equity
returns through heteroskedasticity, following Rigobon (2003) and Rigobon and Sack (2004).2 We describe
this procedure and our identification assumptions in detail in section 4. We find that, for every 10% increase
in the 5-year cumulative risk-neutral default probability around these rulings, the U.S. dollar value of a
value-weighted index of Argentine American Depository Receipts (ADRs3 ) falls roughly 6%. Between
January 3, 2011, when our data starts, and July 30, 2014, when Argentina defaulted, the risk-neutral 5year default probability increased from roughly 40% to 100%. Linearly extrapolating our estimate of the
causal effect on log returns implies that this episode reduced the value of the Argentine firms in the index
by 30%. We also find that a 10% increase in the 5-year cumulative risk-neutral default probability causes
a 1% depreciation in our preferred measure of the Argentine unofficial exchange rate.4 The most direct
interpretation of the risk-neutral default probability changes and stock returns we study is that they reflect
changes in the actual probability of default and the expected value of the stream of dividends paid by the
firms. However, alternative interpretations are possible, and we discuss them in section 6.
To better understand how this sovereign default was expected to affect the economy, we examine which
types of firms are harmed more or less by an increase in the probability of default. We sort firms along
the dimensions suggested by the theoretical sovereign debt literature5 , as well as on some additional firm
characteristics. We find suggestive evidence that foreign-owned firms, exporters, banks6 , and large firms are
2 In

appendix section D, we run a traditional event study, and find similar results.
are shares in foreign firms that trade on U.S. stock exchanges in U.S. dollars.
4 We focus on unofficial measures of the exchange rate because Argentina had capital controls during this period. These measures
are discussed in section 3.4.
5 Bulow and Rogoff (1989a), Mendoza and Yue (2012), and Cole and Kehoe (1998) motivate us to study exporting firms,
importing firms, and foreign-owned firms, respectively. Numerous authors (e.g. Gennaioli et al. (2014), Acharya et al. (2014a),
Bolton and Jeanne (2011), Bocola (2013) and Perez (2014)) have offered explanations for why banks would be particularly harmed
by sovereign default.
6 Our point estimates are negative and economically significant for banks, consistent with the theoretical literature, but our
standard errors are too large to reject the hypothesis of no differential effects.
3 ADRs

2

hurt more by increases in the probability of sovereign default than would be expected, given their “beta” to
the Argentine market and exchange rate.
This paper contributes to a large empirical literature examining the costs of sovereign default, surveyed
by Borensztein and Panizza (2009) and Tomz and Wright (2013). Using quarterly time series, Levy Yeyati
and Panizza (2011) find that output generally falls in anticipation of a sovereign default and that the default
itself tends to mark the beginning of the recovery. Rose (2005) documents that bilateral trade between creditor countries and debtor countries falls after a default. Acharya et al. (2014b) examine the effect of the European sovereign debt crisis on syndicated loan supply and firm behavior. Arteta and Hale (2008) observe that
during a sovereign default, external credit to the private sector is reduced. Schumacher et al. (2014) study
sovereign debt litigation across a range of countries over the past forty years. Using cross-country panel
data, Gornemann (2014) finds a persistent drop in output following a sovereign default. Methodologically,
our paper uses a natural experiment to estimate the causal effect of sovereign default. Fuchs-Schundeln and
Hassan (2015) survey the literature on natural experiments in macroeconomics. Our cross-sectional analysis
is methodologically related to Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Gorodnichenko and Weber (2013).
This paper is also related to the literature on quantitative models of sovereign debt, initiated by Aguiar
and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008). This literature attempts to simultaneously explain sovereign
default decisions, debt levels, credit spreads, and business cycle facts for emerging market countries. In
many of these papers, the magnitude of the exogenous output cost of default is one of the key parameters
that determines the equilibrium quantity of debt issued and the incidence of default. This literature also
emphasizes the cyclical properties of the output cost (Arellano (2008), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012))
necessary to explain the observed facts, and develops theories to explain the source of these costs (Mendoza
and Yue (2012), Bocola (2013), Perez (2014), Gornemann (2014)). Our evidence speaks to both the size
and source of these costs, but further work is needed to relate our findings to this class of models.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the case of Republic of Argentina v. NML
Capital. Section 3 describes the data and presents summary statistics. Section 4 presents our estimation
framework and results. Section 5 discusses the firm characteristics that are associated with larger responses
to changes in the probability of default. Section 6 discusses institutional details and alternative interpretations of the results. Section 7 concludes.

3

2

Argentina’s Sovereign Debt Saga

In 2001, Argentina entered a deep recession, with unemployment reaching 14.7% in the fourth quarter of
that year. In December 2001, after borrowing heavily from the IMF, Argentina defaulted on over $100
billion in external sovereign debt and devalued the exchange rate by 75%.7
The Argentine government then spent three years in failed negotiations with the IMF, the Paris Club, and
its private creditors. In January 2005, Argentina presented a unilateral offer to its private creditors, which
was accepted by the holders of $62.3 billion of the defaulted debt. Despite the existence of the holdout
creditors, S&P declared the end of the Argentine default in June 2005 and upgraded Argentina’s long-term
sovereign foreign currency credit rating to B-. In 2006, Argentina fully repaid the IMF, and Argentina
reached an agreement with the Paris Club creditors in May 2014.
In December 2010, Argentina offered another bond exchange to the remaining holdout creditors. Holdout private creditors who were owed $12.4 billion of principal agreed to the exchange. Following this
exchange, on December 31, 2010, the remaining holdout creditors were owed an estimated $11.2 billion,
split between $6.8 billion in principal and $4.4 billion in accumulated interest.8 At this point, Argentina had
restructured over 90% of the original face value of its debt.
Following the 2010 debt exchange, the remaining holdout creditors– termed “vultures” by the Argentine
government– continued their legal battle. This litigation eventually culminated in Argentina’s 2014 default
on its restructured bondholders. The creditors, led by NML Capital,9 argued that the Argentine government
breached the pari passu clause, which requires equal treatment of all bondholders, by paying the restructured
bondholders and refusing to honor the claims of the holdouts.
The case took several years to work its way through the U.S. courts, going from the United States District
Court for the Southern District of New York (“Southern District”), to the United States Court of Appeals for
the Second Circuit (“Second Circuit”), all the way to the United States Supreme Court. These three courts
issued numerous rulings between December 2011, when Judge Thomas P. Griesa of the Southern District
first ruled in favor of the holdouts on the pari passu issue, and July 2014, when Argentina defaulted.
7 Data and facts cited in this section are from Global Financial Data, Daseking et al. (2005), Hornbeck (2013), and Thomas and
Marsh (2014).
8 The interest on the defaulted debt has continued to accumulate since 2010, with the total amount owed reaching $15 billion
in 2014 (Gelpern (2014a)). However, some of these claims may never be repaid, due to issues related to the statute of limitations
(Millian and Bartenstein (2016)).
9 Elliott Management Corporation, the parent company of NML, has a long history in litigating against defaulting countries. See
Gulati and Klee (2001) for a discussion of Elliott’s litigation against Peru and Panizza et al. (2009) for a literature review on the
law and economics of sovereign default.

4

Following Griesa’s initial ruling in December 2011, years of legal wrangling ensued over what this ruling
meant and how it would be enforced. Griesa clarified that Argentina was required to repay the holdouts as
long as it continued to the pay the restructured bondholders (using a “ratable” payment formula). Argentina
was not willing to comply with this ruling, and continued to pay the restructured bondholders without
paying the holdouts. Griesa then ordered the financial intermediaries facilitating Argentina’s payments to
stop forwarding payments to the restructured bondholders, until Argentina also paid the holdouts. Griesa
also ordered Argentina to negotiate with the holdouts, but the holdouts and the courts rejected Argentina’s
offer of a deal comparable to the 2005 and 2010 bond exchanges. Argentina then twice appealed to the
Supreme Court, with the Supreme Court declining to hear either appeal. Following the decline of the second
appeal on June 16, 2014, Griesa’s orders were implemented, and Argentina had only two weeks before a
coupon to the restructured creditors was due. Against court orders, Argentina sent this coupon payment
to the bond trustee, Bank of New York Mellon (BNYM), but, as ordered by the court, BNYM did not
forward to the payment to the restructured bondholders. Argentina’s restructured bonds did not receive a
coupon payment on June 30, which began a 30-day grace period. Negotiations failed, and the International
Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) declared that a credit event had occurred for credit default swaps
referencing Argentina’s restructured bonds on August 1, 2014. On September 3, 2014, the auction associated
with the settlement of the CDS contracts was held, and it resulted in a recovery rate of 39.5 cents on the
dollar.10
The cumulative effect of these legal rulings was to change the menu of options available to Argentina.
The status quo option, in which Argentina continued to pay its restructured bondholders without paying
the holdouts, became infeasible. Instead, Argentina could attempt to settle with the holdouts and avoid
defaulting on its restructured bondholders, or it could default on the restructured bondholders.
Argentina effectively chose to default. In the simplest interpretation of these events, making the required
payments was not possible, and Argentina was forced to default by the U.S. court system. This was the
interpretation offered by a number of commentators in the financial press (e.g. O’Brien (2014)). However,
if a settlement was possible, the rulings might have also raised the probability of a settlement. If Argentine
firms would be affected by a settlement, through some channel other than the avoidance of a sovereign
default, then the exclusion restriction of our experiment would not hold. In section 6, we argue that such
10 The

low recovery rate reflects both the decline in the price of Argentina’s bonds from 2011 to 2014, and the fact that some (the
“cheapest to deliver”) of Argentina’s bonds had relatively low coupons, and therefore low prices, when they were issued.

5

channels are not plausible, because the amount of money required for a settlement was small.
As of this writing (May 2016), Argentina has not yet resumed payments on its restructured bonds.
However, an end to the default appears imminent (Platt and Mander (2016)). In a closely contested election
in the fall of 2015, Argentina elected a new president, whose platform included a promise to settle with the
holdout creditors. Argentina reached an agreement with the main litigating holdouts, passed a law allowing
payments to the holdouts, and convinced the U.S. courts to lift their injunctions. The settlement is reported
as being worth roughly 75% of the full value of the judgements obtained by the litigating holdouts (Politi
and Yuk (2016)), and will cost around $12.5 billion if accepted by all of the holdouts (Mander and Moore
(2016)). Argentina recently issued $16.5 billion of new debt, for the stated purpose of repaying the holdouts,
making the restructured bonds current, and increasing Argentina’s dollar reserves.

3
3.1

Data and Summary Statistics
Stock Market and CDS Data

Our dataset consists of daily observations of financial variables from January 3, 2011 to July 29, 2014 (the
day before Argentina most recently defaulted). We study the returns of ADRs(U.S. dollar-denominated
claims on underlying local equities) issued by Argentine firms and traded in the United States, as well the
returns of Argentine peso-denominated equities traded in Argentina. The ADRs trade on the NYSE and
NASDAQ, are relatively liquid, and are traded by a wide range of market participants.11 However, using
only the ADRs limits our analysis to twelve firms that have exchange-traded ADRs. To study the crosssectional patterns of Argentine firms, we also examine the returns of firms traded only in Argentina. The
full list of firms included in our analysis, along with select firm characteristics, is available in appendix table
2.
The most commonly cited benchmark for Argentine ADRs is the MSCI Argentina Index, an index of six
Argentine ADRs. We also construct our own indices of ADRs, covering different sectors of the Argentine
economy. We classify Argentine firms by whether they are a bank, a non-financial firm, or a real estate
holding company. The industry classifications are based on the Fama-French 12 industry classification and
11 Edison and Warnock (2004) document that ADRs that trade on the NYSE and NASDAQ are incorporated into U.S. investors’
portfolios at float-adjusted market weights; that is, they are not subject to the “home bias” that causes U.S. investors to underweight
foreign stocks more generally. In contrast, several market participants have told us that capital controls and related barriers were
significant impediments to their participation in local Argentine equity markets during the time period we study.

6

are listed in appendix table 2. We construct value-weighted indices for the entire market and each of these
industries, except real estate.12 The value-weighted indices we construct exclude YPF, the large oil company
that was nationalized in 2012.
We use credit default swap (CDS) spreads to measure the risk-neutral probability of default. A CDS
is a financial contract in which the seller of the swap agrees to insure the buyer against the possibility that
a reference entity (in this case, the Republic of Argentina) defaults on a particular set of bonds issued by
that entity. Once a third party, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA), declares a
credit event, an auction occurs to determine the price of the defaulted debt. The CDS seller then pays the
buyer the difference between the face and auction value of the debt. In appendix section A.4, we provide
details on how Markit, our data provider, imputes risk-neutral default probabilities from the term structure
of CDS spreads using the ISDA Standard Model. We focus on the 5-year cumulative default probability, the
risk-neutral probability that Argentina defaults within 5 years of the CDS contract initiation.13
Because we want to capture the abnormal variation in Argentine CDS and equity returns caused by
changes in the probability of default, we would like to account for other global factors that may affect
both measures. Controlling for these factors is not necessary, under our identification assumptions, but can
reduce the magnitude of our standard errors. To proxy for risk aversion, we use the VIX index, the 30-day
implied volatility on the S&P 500.14 We use the S&P 500 to measure equity returns and we use the MSCI
Emerging Markets Asia ETF to proxy for factors affecting emerging markets generally. We use the Asia
index to ensure that movements in the index are not directly caused by fluctuations in Argentine markets. To
control for aggregate credit market conditions, we use the Markit CDX High Yield and Investment Grade
CDS indices. We also control for crude oil prices (West Texas Intermediate). These controls are included
in all specifications reported in this paper, although our results are qualitatively similar when using a subset
of these factors, or no controls at all. In our discussion, we will assume that the legal rulings we study do
not affect these controls; if this assumption were false, our estimates would measure the effect of the legal
rulings on firms above and beyond what would be expected, given the effects on our control variables (see
12 We

do not include a value-weighted real estate index in the results because there are only two closely-related firms in this
sector. We have also constructed equal-weighted indices, and found similar results.
13 We prefer the 5-year cumulative default probability measure because we believe that shocks which move default probability
from (for example) one year ahead to two years ahead, without altering the cumulative default probability over those two years,
should have only a minimal impact on stock valuations. Our results are qualitatively robust to using the 1- or 3-year cumulative
default probability, and other CDS-based measures, subject to the caveat that the 1- and 3-year cumulative default probabilities are
more volatile than the 5-year measure. Tenors longer than five years are not traded frequently. See appendix table 7 for details.
14 See Longstaff et. al. (2011) for discussion of the relationship between the VIX and sovereign CDS spreads.

7

section 5 for details).

3.2

Definition of Events and Non-Events

We build a list of legal rulings issued by Judge Griesa, the Second Circuit, and the Supreme Court. We
have created this list using articles in the financial press (the Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg News, and the
Financial Times), LexisNexis searches, and publicly available information from the website of Shearman, a
law firm that practices sovereign debt law.
In appendix section J, we list all of these events and links to the relevant source material. Unfortunately,
for many of the events, we are unable to determine precisely when the ruling was issued. We employ several methods to determine the timing of rulings. First, we examine news coverage of the rulings, using
Bloomberg News, the Financial Times, and LexisNexis searches. Sometimes, contemporaneous news coverage specifically mentions when the ruling was released. Second, we use the date listed in the ruling. Third,
many of rulings are released in the PDF electronic format, and have a “creation time” and/or “modification
time” listed in the meta-information of the PDF file. In appendix section J, we list the information used to
determine the approximate time of each ruling.
For our main analysis, we use two-day event windows. Consider the Supreme Court ruling on Monday,
June 16th, 2014. The two-day event window, applied to this event, would use the CDS spread change from
the close on Thursday, June 12th to the close on Monday, June 16th. It would use stock returns (for both
ADRs and local stocks) from 4pm EDT on Thursday, June 12th to 4pm EDT on Monday, June 16th.15
For our two-day event windows, we choose our sample of non-events to be a set of two-day risk-neutral
default probability changes and stock returns, non-overlapping, at least two days away from any event, and
at least two days away from any of the “excluded events.” “Excluded events” are legal rulings that we do
not use, but also exclude from our sample of non-events.16 For the heteroskedasticity-based identification
strategy we employ, removing these legal rulings increases the validity of our identifying assumption that
15 For

events occurring outside of daylight savings time in the eastern time zone, the local stocks close at 5pm ART (3pm EST),
while the ADRs use 4pm EST. We do not correct for this. For some events, we are certain about the day of the event. For these
events, we place the event on the first day of the two-day window; however, our results are robust to placing the event on the second
day of the two-day window instead (see appendix section E.1). We also report our results using one-day windows in appendix
section E.1.
16 We exclude three rulings for which we could not find any contemporaneous media coverage. For one ruling, we could not find
the ruling itself. One of the rulings was issued on the Friday in October 2012 shortly before “Superstorm Sandy” hit New York,
and another the night before Thanksgiving. One of the legal rulings was issued at the beginning of an oral argument, in which
Argentina’s lawyers may have revealed information about Argentina’s intentions. Finally, we exclude the ruling made on July 28th,
2014, because this ruling was made very close to the formal default date, and news articles on that day focused on the last-minute
negotiations, not the ruling. Our results are qualitatively similar when we include this ruling.

8

the variance of shocks induced by legal rulings is higher on event days than non-event days. However, our
results are robust to including these days in the set of non-events.

3.3

Summary of Events and Non-Events

In figure 3a, we plot the two-day change in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability and the two-day
return of value-weighted index over our sample. Small data points in light gray are non-events and the
maroon/dark dots cover event windows in which a U.S. court ruling was released. The details on each event
can be found in appendix section J. In figure 3b, we construct the equivalent figure for the MSCI Mexico
equity index and the change in Argentina’s probability of default. Comparing the figure for the Argentine
value-weighted equity index with the figure for the Mexican index, we see that on the non-event days, both
stock indices co-move with our Argentine default probability measure. However, on the event days, only the
Argentine equity index co-moves with the Argentine default probability measure. This observation suggests
that omitted common factors might not be very important on our event days, consistent with the result that
our event studies and heteroskedasticity-based identification strategy reach similar conclusions. In appendix
section B, we present similar figures for the different sectors of the Argentine economy and measures of the
exchange rate.
[Insert figure 3 here]
In the table below, we present summary statistics for the returns of our value-weighted ADR index and the
changes in 5-year risk-neutral default probabilities, during the two-day event and non-event windows.
[Insert table 1 here]

3.4

Exchange Rates

We also study the effect of sovereign default on exchange rates. However, “the exchange rate” was difficult
to measure during this period. Argentina imposed capital controls in 2002, strengthened them in 2011, and
then relaxed them at the end of 2015, after our sample ends. During the 2011-2014 period, the official
exchange rate diverged from the exchange rates implied by other markets. We will consider three different
measures of these parallel exchange rates, known as the Blue Dollar. All of them are based on the rate at
which individuals could actually transact, subject to various transaction costs.
9

The first unofficial exchange rate that we consider is the one that Argentines could use to buy dollars
from black market currency dealers. Dolarblue.net published this rate daily and was the source used by
many Argentines as a reference for the exchange rate. This onshore rate is known as the Dolar Blue or the
Informal dollar, among many other names. This is our preferred measure of Argentina’s market exchange
rate.
The other two measures of the unofficial exchange rate we study come directly from market prices
and provide a way for onshore currency dealers to secure dollars. Both rely on the fact that even though
the Argentine peso was a non-convertible currency, securities can be purchased onshore in pesos and sold
offshore in dollars. The first class of instruments for which this can be done are domestic law Argentine
government bonds, and the exchange rate associated with this transaction is known as the “blue-chip swap”
rate. We can construct a similar measure of the exchange rate, known as the “ADR blue rate,” by using
equities rather than debt. We describe the construction of both measures in appendix section A.3.17
[Insert Figure 1 here]
In Figure 1, we plot all four of these exchange rates during our sample period. Throughout this period,
the official rate is significantly below the unofficial rates. The ADR blue rate and the blue-chip swap rate are
virtually indistinguishable (at low frequencies) during this period, and co-move with the Dolar Blue rate.
The three parallel exchange rates we consider are not equivalent to a (hypothetical) freely-floating exchange rate. All three depend on local markets that were difficult for foreigners to access, and were potentially subject to government intervention. We found news articles stating that, during the 2011-14 period,
the Argentine government occasionally intervened in local (peso-denominated) bond and stock markets to
manage these parallel exchange rates. Moreover, the premium demanded by black market currency dealers
for dollars would fluctuate based on the vigor with which the government prosecuted those dealers (Parks
and Natarajan (2013)).
17 Auguste

et al. (2006) explore how the convertibility of ADRs provides a way around capital controls. Both of our measures
rely on Argentine local markets, which are illiquid, and therefore can be quite noisy at high frequencies. Pasquariello (2008)
documents that, for countries with convertible currencies, ADR parity does not always hold, and that the violations of ADR parity
are more common around financial crises. As a result, we should not necessarily expect our ADR-based measure and the dolar blue
to respond identically to the legal rulings.

10

3.5

Case Study: Supreme Court Announcement

For one of our events, we are able to precisely determine when the event occurred. On June 16, 2014,
the U.S. Supreme Court denied two appeals and a petition from the Republic of Argentina. The denial of
Argentina’s petition meant that Judge Griesa could prevent the Bank of New York Mellon, the payment
agent on Argentina’s restructured bonds, from paying the coupons on those bonds unless Argentina also
paid the holdouts. Because Argentina had previously expressed its unwillingness to pay the holdouts, this
news meant that Argentina was more likely to default.18
The Supreme Court announces multiple orders in a single public session, and simultaneously provides
copies of those orders to the press. SCOTUSBlog, a well-known legal website that provides news coverage
and analysis of the Supreme Court, had a “live blog” of the announcements on June 16th, 2014. At 9:33am
EST, SCOTUSBlog reported that “Both of the Argentine bond cases have been denied. Sotomayor took
no part” (Howe (2014)). At 10:09am, the live blog stated that Argentina’s petition had been denied. At
10:11am, the live blog provided a link to the ruling. In figure 2, we plot the returns of the Argentine ADRs
and the 5-year cumulative default probability, as measured by CDS. The ADRs begin trading in New York
at 9:30am. The default probability is constructed from CDS spreads based on the Markit “sameday” data at
9:30am EST and 10:30am EST.
[ Insert figure 2 here]
From 9:30am to 10:30am, the MSCI Argentina Index fell 6% and five-year cumulative risk-neutral
default probability rose by 9.8%. When the Argentine stock market opened, the local stocks associated
with the MSCI Argentina Index opened 6.2% lower than it closed the previous night, implying virtually no
change in the ADR-based blue rate.

4

Framework and Results

In this section, we estimate the causal effect of sovereign default on equity returns using all of the events in
our sample and two-day event windows. The key identification concerns are that stock returns might have
an effect on default probabilities, and that unobserved common shocks might affect both the market-implied
18 On the same day, the Supreme Court also allowed the holdouts to pursue discovery against all of Argentina’s foreign assets,
not just those in the United States.

11

probability of default and stock returns. In our context, one example of the former issue is that poor earnings
by large Argentine firms might harm the fiscal position of the Argentine government. An example of the
latter issue is a shock to the market price of risk, which could cause both CDS spreads and stock returns to
change.
We consider these issues through the lens of a simultaneous equation model (following Rigobon and
Sack (2004)). While our actual implementation uses multiple assets and controls for various market factors,
for exposition we discuss the log return of a single asset (the equity index, for example), rt , and the change
in the risk-neutral probability of default, ∆Dt , and ignore constants.19 The model we consider is

∆Dt
rt

= γrt + κD Ft + εt

(1)

= α∆Dt + κFt + ηt

(2)

where Ft is a single unobserved factor that moves both the probability of default and equity returns, εt is
a shock to the default probability, ηt is a shock to the equity market return, and all of these shocks are
uncorrelated with each other and over time. The goal is to estimate the parameter α, the impact of a change
in the probability of default on equity market returns.
Our key identifying assumption is that the information revealed to market participants by the legal rulings affects firms’ stock returns only through the effect on the sovereign’s risk-neutral probability of default.
This assumption is equivalent to asserting that the legal rulings are idiosyncratic default probability shocks
(εt ) in the framework above. The assumption embeds both the requirement that the legal rulings be exogenous (the εt shocks are not correlated with the other shocks) and that the exclusion restriction is satisfied
(the εt shocks affect returns only by affecting default probabilities).
If one were to simply run the regression in equation 2 using OLS, the coefficient estimate could be
biased. There are two potential sources of bias: simultaneity bias (stock returns affect default probabilities)
and omitted variable bias (unobserved common factors).20 In order for the OLS regression to be unbiased,
equity market returns must not affect default probabilities and there must be no omitted common shocks.
These assumptions are implausible in our context, but we present OLS results for comparison purposes.
We could rely on more plausible assumptions by adopting an event study framework (see, for instance,
19 In

appendix section I, we demonstrate how an equivalent system can be derived in a multi-asset framework.
and Sack (2004) discusses these biases in the context of this framework.

20 Rigobon

12

Kuttner (2001) or Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)). In this case, the identifying assumption would be that
changes to Argentina’s risk-neutral probability of default during the event windows (time periods in which
a U.S. court makes a legal ruling) are driven exclusively by those legal rulings, or other idiosyncratic default
probability shocks (εt ). Under this assumption, we could directly estimate equation (2) using OLS on these
ruling days. We present these results, and the details of the event studies, in appendix section D.
Our preferred specification uses a heteroskedasticity-based identification strategy, following Rigobon
(2003) and Rigobon and Sack (2004). This does not require the complete absence of common and idiosyncratic shocks during event windows. This strategy instead relies on the identifying assumption that
the variances of the common shocks Ft and equity return shocks ηt are the same on non-event days and
event days, whereas the variance of the shock to the probability of default εt is higher on event days than
non-event days (because of the effects of the legal rulings, which we have assumed are εt shocks). Under
this assumption, we can identify the parameter α by comparing the covariance matrices of abnormal returns
and abnormal default probability changes on event days and non-event days.
We divide all two-day periods in our sample into two types, events (E) and non-events (N). For each of
the two types of two-day windows, j ∈ {E, N} , we estimate the covariance matrix of [rt , ∆Dt ] , denoted Ω j :


Ωj = 


var j (rt )

cov j (rt , ∆Dt ) 

cov j (rt , ∆Dt ) var j (∆Dt )

We can then define the difference in the covariance matrices during events and non-events as ∆Ω = ΩE −ΩN ,
which simplifies to21


∆Ω = λ 

where λ =

2 −σ2
σε,E
ε,N

α2
α


α 

1

!

.
(1 − αγ)2
The estimator we employ, which we call the CDS-IV estimator, is defined as

α̂CIV
21 Algebraic

=

∆Ω1,2 covE (∆Dt , rt ) − covN (∆Dt , rt )
=
∆Ω2,2
varE (∆Dt ) − varN (∆Dt )

details can be found in Rigobon (2003).

13

(3)

As shown in Rigobon and Sack (2004), this estimator can be implemented in an instrumental variables
framework. While at first glance there may appear to be alternative estimators to estimate α based on ∆Ω,
we believe they are not appropriate given our null hypothesis that α = 0.22
The CDS-IV instrument is relevant under the assumption that λ > 0. We can reject the hypothesis that
λ = 0 using a test for equality of variances, which is described in appendix section F.1. The relevance of
the CDS-IV instrument is also suggested by the weak-identification F-test of Stock and Yogo (2005), also
reported in appendix section F.1. In table 2, we present the results of our CDS-IV estimation. The standard
errors and confidence intervals use the bootstrap procedure described in appendix section C.
[Insert table 2 ]

4.1

Equity Returns

In the first five columns of Table 2, we report the effects of increases in the probability of default on different
classes of Argentine equities. We focus on our preferred CDS-IV specification in the lower panel and report
the OLS results in the upper panel for comparison purposes. We find that a 10% increase in the 5-year
cumulative risk-neutral default probability causes a negative 6.043% log-return for our value-weighted ADR
index. We also find that increases in the cumulative risk-neutral probability of default cause statistically and
economically significant declines in the MSCI Argentina Index, value-weighted bank ADR index, valueweighted non-financial ADR index, and the YPF ADR. The MSCI Argentina Index falls by substantially
more than our value-weighted index because the MSCI Argentina Index consists mostly of YPF and bank
ADRs, which fall by more than the ADRs of non-financial and real estate firms. We linearly extrapolate the
log-return to find that an increase in the risk-neutral default probability from 40% to 100%, which is roughly
what Argentina experienced, would cause around a 30% fall in the value-weighted index, by our estimates.
This increase also caused a 39% fall in the value of banks, a 30% decline in non-financials, and a 43%
fall for YPF, by our estimates. Linearly extrapolating the log-return, we find that a completely unexpected
default (a change from 0% to 100% in the risk-neutral default probability) would cause a 45% fall in the
value index. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that Argentina’s default caused significant harm
to the value of Argentine firms.
22

These issues are discussed in more detail in appendix section F.2.

14

4.2

Exchange Rates

We next discuss our results for the various exchange rate measures we study. The last four columns of
Table 2 report our estimate of the effects of increases in the probability of default on the four exchange rate
measures. As with equities, we focus on the CDS-IV results and report the OLS results for comparison.
Unsurprisingly, given the Argentine government’s exchange rate policy, we find no contemporaneous effect
of increases in the probability of default on the official exchange rate. We find that a 10% increase in the
risk-neutral probability of default causes a 1% depreciation in all three measures of the parallel exchange
rates. The results for the Dolar Blue (black market exchange rate) are statistically significant; the results for
the ADR blue rate and blue-chip swap rate are not.
In appendix figure 3, we display the raw data behind these results. The ADR blue rate and blue-chip
swap results are both substantially influenced by a single outlier event (the Supreme Court announcement
described in section 3.5), during which they exhibit substantial appreciation, despite a depreciation of the
Dolar Blue rate, a fall in the stock market, and an increase in the risk-neutral probability of default. On
the day of the Supreme Court ruling, while the value of the ADRs and internationally-traded domestic law
bonds fell sharply, the local stocks and domestically traded debt fell even more, implying an appreciation of
ADR blue rate and blue-chip swap rate. This could be because local markets became more illiquid on this
particular day. Outside of this event, the ADR blue rate and blue-chip swap rate exhibit a consistent pattern
of depreciation during events in which the risk-neutral probability of default increases, and appreciation
during events in which that default probability decreases.
Our preferred interpretation of these results is that they are consistent with the empirical coincidence of
devaluation and default documented by Reinhart (2002), and with models in which a government finds it
optimal to simultaneously default and devalue, such as Na et al. (2014). However, we must emphasize that
the exchange rates we measure are not the freely convertible exchange rates studied and modeled by those
authors.

4.3

Magnitudes

In table 3, we present estimates for the magnitude of the losses caused by default. The columns labeled
“Estimate (60%)” and “Estimate (100%)” report the estimated losses caused by increasing the probability
of default by 60% and 100%, respectively. The 60% is relevant for Argentina because this is approximately

15

the amount the five-year risk neutral default probability increased during the period of our study. The 100%
column is relevant because it is closer to the concept of the cost of default in the literature.
In the first three rows of the table, we present estimates for the firms that have ADRs. The first row
estimates are calculated by multiplying the sum of the 2011 market values of all non-YPF firms in the value
index by the point estimate for the value index in table 2, converted from log to arithmetic returns. The
second row estimates follow the same procedure, for YPF, and the third row is the sum of the first two rows.
The losses for firms with ADRs are comparable to the ultimate cost of the 2016 settlement. In the fourth
and fifth rows, we also include the losses experienced by locally traded firms. We assume that these firms
experience losses at the same rate as the firms with ADRs. When considering the losses on these two broader
classes of firms, the direct reduction in the market value of these firms as a result of default significantly
exceeds the face value of all holdout claims.
For the firms with ADRs, including YPF, the average yearly earnings from the first quarter of 2009
through the second quarter of 2011 was roughly $2.4 billion.23 We estimate that, in response to a completely
unanticipated default, the market value of these firms would decline by roughly 8 years of annual earnings.
For reference, in the quantitative sovereign debt model of Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), a country loses 2%
of its output upon default, and is “redeemed” with a 10% chance each quarter. If a firm’s ADR dividends
followed the same process after a default, the “cashflow news” (Campbell (1990)) associated with default
would represent roughly 4-5% of the firm’s annual earnings. Accounting for leverage explains part but
not all of the difference (see appendix section G.3). One (speculative) explanation for our results is that
default causes very persistent or permanent output losses, or equivalently a decline in growth rates, and this
is reflected in firm earnings. This would be consistent with the findings of Gornemann (2014), who uses a
panel dataset to estimate the impact of default on growth rates. It would also be consistent with the findings
of Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), who argue that emerging market countries experience shocks to their trend
growth rate more generally.24 However, we must emphasize that this is not the only possible explanation for
our results, and that further research on this topic is necessary.
[Insert table 3 here ]
23 We

calculate annual earnings from 2009-2011 because of the availability of earnings data in CRSP for all of the firms with
ADRs. Unfortunately, that time period coincides with a recession in many developed countries. Using our preferred measure of
Argentine real GDP, growth was low but positive over this period.
24 The view that emerging market countries experience permanent productivity shocks is controversial (see, for example, GarcíaCicco et al. (2010)).

16

5

Cross-Sectional Evidence
In this section, we examine which firm characteristics are associated with larger or smaller responses

to the default shocks. The cross-sectional pattern of responses across firms can help shed light on the
mechanism by which sovereign default affects the economy.
First, motivated by Bulow and Rogoff (1989a), we examine whether or not firms that are reliant on
exports are particularly hurt. Bulow and Rogoff (1989a) argue that in the event of a sovereign default,
foreign creditors can interfere with a country’s exports. Second, motivated by Mendoza and Yue (2012), we
examine whether or not firms that are reliant on imported intermediate goods are particularly hurt by default.
Mendoza and Yue (2012) argue that a sovereign default reduces aggregate output because firms cannot
secure financing to import goods needed for production, and so are forced to use domestic intermediate
goods, which are imperfect substitutes. Third, motivated by Gennaioli et al. (2014), Acharya et al. (2014a),
Bolton and Jeanne (2011), Bocola (2013) and Perez (2014), we examine whether financial firms are more
adversely affected. While these papers are not explicitly about whether banks are hurt more than other
firms, they posit that the aggregate decline in output following a sovereign default occurs because of the
default’s effect on bank balance sheets. Finally, motivated by Cole and Kehoe (1998), we examine whether
foreign-owned firms underperform following an increase in the probability of sovereign default. Cole and
Kehoe (1998) argue that “general reputation,” rather than a specific reputation for repayment, is lost by
defaulting on sovereign debt. This theory would lead us to expect increases in the risk of sovereign default
to cause foreign-owned firms to underperform, due to a higher risk that Argentina will act disreputably in
other arenas, such as investment protection.
Our empirical approach is similar to several papers in the literature studying the cross-section of firms’
responses to identified monetary policy shocks, using an event study for identification, such as Bernanke and
Kuttner (2005) and Gorodnichenko and Weber (2013). We test whether certain types of firms experience
returns around our legal rulings that are larger or smaller than would be expected, given those firms’ betas
to the Argentine equity markets and exchange rate. In effect, we are testing whether the ensemble of shocks
that generate returns outside of the event windows have a similar cross-sectional pattern of returns to the
default probability shock.
Our procedures are motivated by a modified version of the model in equation (2) and equation (1).
We derive both models from a single underlying system of equations, presented in appendix section I. The

17

modified version of the those equations has the return of the Argentine market index and the exchange
rate on the right-hand side. We show that the heteroskedasticity-based estimation procedure identifies the
coefficient (αi − βiT αm ), where αi is the response of this portfolio to the default shock, αm is the response
of the market index and exchange rate to the default shock, and βi are the coefficients of a regression of
the returns of portfolio i on the market index and ADR blue rate. This coefficient can be interpreted as
the excess sensitivity of the portfolio to the default shock, above and beyond what would be expected from
the Argentine equity market’s and exchange rate’s exposures to the default shock, and the sensitivity of
the portfolio to the Argentine equity market and exchange rate. In this sense, our approach generalizes the
CAPM-inspired analysis of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005).
To increase our sample size of firms, we now use local Argentine stock returns, rather than ADRs. The
use of the local stocks and CDS data requires that both the New York and Buenos Aires markets be open,
which reduces the size of our sample. However, all but one of the legal rulings remain in our sample.
We study which characteristics of firms are associated with over- or under-performance in response to
default shocks. We form zero-cost, long-short portfolios25 based on the export intensity of their primary
industry (for non-financial firms), the import intensity of individual non-financial firms in 2007 and 2008
using data from Gopinath and Neiman (2014), whether they are a listed subsidiary of a foreign firm, firm
size, and whether they have an associated ADR. For the exporter, importer, and firm size portfolios, we
group firms based on whether they are above or below the median value in our sample. An import-intensive
firm is not the opposite of an export-intensive one; some firms are classified as neither import nor export
intensive, whereas others are both import and export intensive.
In these portfolios, we equally weight firms within the “long” and “short” groups. For example, we
classify 12 of our 26 non-financial firms26 as high export intensity, and 14 of 26 as low export intensity. We
equally weight these firms, so that the “long” portfolio has a 1/12 weight on each high export intensity firm,
and the short portfolio has a 1/14 weight on each low export intensity firm. We then form the long-short
portfolio, and determine whether the portfolio over- or underperforms after a default shock, using the CDSIV estimator and bootstrapped confidence intervals discussed previously. The local equity index that we use
as a control is an equal-weighted index of all of the local stocks in our data sample.
25 Because

we form long-short portfolios, the nominal exchange rate does not directly impact the portfolio’s return, except to the
extent that it differentially affects the firms.
26 We actually have 27 non-financial firms, but one is a technology firm. The technology firm’s industry classification did not
exist when the input/output table we use to construct the data was generated.

18

The over- or underperformance of the portfolios is not an ideal test of the theories. For example, if we do
not observe that importing firms underperform, it may be because the firms we observe are not the ones who
would have difficulties, or because our import-intensive and non-import-intensive firms also differ on some
other characteristic that predicts over- or underperformance (essentially an omitted variables problem). The
reverse is also true; a significant result does not necessarily validate the theory, but might instead be found
because of a correlation across firms between importing and some other firm characteristic.
[Insert table 4 here]
In table 4, we find that firms whose primary industry is export-intensive under-perform given their exposure to the equal-weighted index and exchange rates, and those assets’ response to the default probability
shock, while the long-short importer portfolio overperforms by a statistically insignificant amount.27 We find
that foreign subsidiaries, of which there are nine, underperform relative to non-financial firms that are not
foreign subsidiaries. This result is consistent with the general reputation theory of Cole and Kehoe (1998),
which implies that default makes policy changes more likely and that foreign investors become reluctant to
invest. We also find that larger firms (defined as above-median market capitalization in 2011) significantly
underperform relative to smaller firms; however, this may reflect the relative illiquidity of smaller firms’
stocks, rather than a difference in real outcomes. We do not find that firms with an ADR substantially overor underperform firms without ADRs.
We estimate economically large, but not statistically significant, underperformance for banks. The excessive sensitivity of bank stocks to default risk is consistent with the theories of Gennaioli et al. (2013,
2014), Bocola (2013), and Bolton and Jeanne (2011). However, we find that a “de-levered” portfolio of
bank stocks (see appendix section G.3) outperforms a de-levered portfolio of non-financial firms, which
suggests that the assets held by these Argentine banks are not substantially impaired by the sovereign default. This result is not necessarily surprising– Argentina did not default on its local law, locally owned
debt.
We interpret this cross-sectional analysis as lending modest support to several of the theories in the
existing literature that try to understand the costs of sovereign default.
27 We

display these results graphically in appendix figure 4.

19

6

Identification and Interpretation

In this section, we discuss challenges to our identification assumption and alternative interpretations of
our stock market results, as well as the external validity of our results. We first discuss the exogeneity of
our shocks, and then discuss channels through which the rulings might have affected firms, other than by
changing the default probability.
We argue that the rulings of the courts are not influenced by news about the Argentine economy. Formally, the interpretation of the laws in question does not depend on the state of the Argentine economy.
Substantively, because the amount required to repay the litigating holdouts in full was small relative to the
Argentine economy (more on this below), news about the Argentine economy’s prospects would not materially change the Argentine government’s ability to pay. Moreover, even if the judges were responding
to economic fundamentals, under the null hypothesis that default does not affect fundamentals, the judges
would have no information advantage over market participants.28
It is important that our study avoid announcements by the Argentine government, because such announcements might be responding to news about fundamentals, or affect corporations in ways other than
through default. In the case of the Supreme Court decision discussed earlier, the Argentine government did
not respond immediately to the ruling (Russo and Porzecanski (2014)). More generally, we include as events
only orders by a judge or judges. We exclude orders that were issued during oral arguments, because those
events also include opportunities for lawyers representing Argentina to reveal information.
We also argue that the rulings did not directly impact the firms we study, except by changing the probability of default. One potential issue is that the legal rulings might have changed the probability or size of
a settlement with the holdouts, and this could affect the firms. To meet the precise demands of the courts,
Argentina needed to pay its litigating creditors only $1.5 billion. However, the $1.5 billion owed to the
litigating creditors was only around 10% of the estimated $15 billion holdout debt outstanding (Gelpern
(2014a)). Presumably, if Argentina paid NML and its co-litigants in full, the other holdout creditors would
have demanded repayment on similar terms; indeed, “me too” claims caused the size of the 2016 settlement
with litigating creditors to grow to $9.3 billion. Even if we assume that Argentina will eventually need to
28 More

subtle interactions between the state of the Argentine economy and the legal rulings might complicate the interpretation
of our analysis. For example, if bad news about the Argentine economy causes the market response to the legal rulings to be larger
than it otherwise would have been, our estimates will reflect some sort of average effect, where the averaging occurs over states of
the economy.

20

pay the full $15 billion, that represented only 3% of GDP, and 45% of foreign currency reserves.29 As seen
in Table 3, the actual repayment was less than half the loss of market value experienced by publicly traded
firms. Because only a small fraction of Argentine firms are publicly traded, and there is no reason to expect
the tax burden to repay the debt to fall exclusively on these firms, the direct repayment costs could only
account for a tiny fraction of the loss of market value experienced by these firms.
This issue is complicated, however, by the presence of a “Rights Upon Future Offers” (RUFO) clause
in the restructured bond contracts. If Argentina voluntarily made an offer to the holdouts that was better
than what the restructured creditors received, the restructured creditors would be entitled to the better deal,
provided the offer occurred before December 31, 2014. Argentina claimed that this RUFO clause meant that
it could not pay NML the $1.5 billion owed without incurring hundreds of billions in additional liabilities.
There is one crucial word in the RUFO that makes the whole matter more complicated: voluntarily. If
Argentina offered the holdouts a better deal because U.S. courts would otherwise have blocked its payments
to the restructured bondholders, would that offer be voluntary or involuntary? Some observers noted that
Argentina’s counsel told the Second Circuit Court of Appeals that Argentina “would not voluntarily obey”
court rulings to pay the holdouts in full (Cotterill (2013)). In addition, other commenters noted that the
RUFO clause appeared to have some loopholes, allowing Argentina to potentially settle with the holdouts
without triggering the clause.30 Moreover, the restructured bondholders could waive their right to exercise
the RUFO clause, because it takes 25% of exchange bondholders to trigger the clause, and the whole issue
could have been rendered moot if the exchange bondholders could be persuaded that waiving the clause was
preferable to having their coupon payments blocked. Of course, this possibility assumes Argentina would
have paid any amount to the holdouts, a questionable proposition given the domestic politics surrounding
the holdouts (Gelpern (2014b)). Notably, when the RUFO clause expired at the end of 2014, no progress
in settlement talks between the holdouts and Argentina was reported. Nevertheless, suppose the RUFO
clause was binding, and settlement with the holdouts was not possible. In this case, the legal rulings caused
Argentina to default, and our identification assumption holds.31
29 The

CIA World Factbook reports Argentina’s 2013 GDP as $484.6 billion, and its exchange and gold reserves at $33.7 billion
as of December 31, 2013. However, the GDP calculation uses the official exchange rate, which may overstate the size of Argentina’s
economy.
30 See the comments from Barclay’s reported in Cotterill (2013).
31 If the RUFO clause was binding, and nevertheless a settlement was possible, one would have expected rulings in favor of NML
to raise the value of the restructured bonds. In fact, we observe that restructured bond prices decline along with the stock returns.
In appendix table 14, we report the effect of increases in the probability of default on the price of the defaulted bonds held by the
holdouts, the restructured bonds that Argentina eventually defaulted on in July 2014, and domestic-law dollar debt.

21

In table 3, we show that the losses to firms were of similar magnitude to the amount owed to all of
the holdouts, not just the litigants. To believe that the prospect of a settlement was driving the losses we
observe, one would need to believe that the holdouts would be paid in full and that the entirety of the burden
of repayment would fall on firms with ADRs, even though those firms are a small part of the economy.
Given our identification strategy, we would be concerned about any effect the rulings had on the value
of Argentine firms that did not operate through the rulings’ impact on the probability of default. There is
no direct effect on Argentine firms because they are legally independent from the Argentine government,
and their assets cannot be attached by the holdouts.32 In fact, eleven of the twelve ADR firms issued
debt internationally between 2002 and 2014, when the federal government of Argentina was excluded from
international debt markets.33 The ruling affects them only to the extent that it changes the behavior of
the Argentine government or other actors. One potential channel not operating through the probability of
default is the possibility that the legal rulings changed the law regarding sovereign debt generally. We
muster evidence against this in the appendix.34 Another possible channel that would violate our exclusion
restriction, which we cannot test, is that the rulings act as a sort of coordination device. For instance,
the legal rulings could have provoked the government of Argentina into a sequence of actions unrelated to
sovereign default, or changed the probability that the Peronist government of Argentina stayed in power, for
reasons unrelated to the default. It is important to remember, however, that our costs of default are inclusive
of the effects on government policy changes and political fortunes, if these changes occur because of the
default. Our exclusion restriction is only violated if these changes are unrelated to sovereign default.

6.1

Interpreting Returns

In this subsection, we discuss how to interpret the stock returns and risk-neutral default probability changes
we study. First, we argue that U.S. investors’ stochastic discount factor is the relevant one for pricing the
ADRs and CDS. As shown by Edison and Warnock (2004), the ADRs we study are held by US investors
in proportion to their market weight, and are not affected by “home bias.” In appendix section H.1, we
32 There was litigation regarding whether the Argentine central bank qualified as independent from a legal perspective, but no
such litigation for any of the companies listed in the stock index.
33 Data from Bloomberg. The twelfth firm, Pampa Energia, issued debt internationally through a subsidiary.
34 In appendix section G.1, we show that the stock markets of Brazil and Mexico and the risk-neutral default probabilities of more
than 30 countries did not respond to these legal rulings (our estimates are close to zero, and relatively precise). This is in contrast to
the OLS estimates, which show that those financial variables are correlated with the Argentine risk-neutral probability of default,
presumably due to common shocks affecting Latin America or emerging markets more generally. This evidence suggests that,
whatever changes to sovereign debt law occurred as the result of these rulings, they did not materially impact other Latin American
countries that issue debt in New York.

22

document that the ADRs we study are held by large, diversified financial institutions (who are also the
type of institutions that trade CDS). In appendix table 16, we show that the average turnover of ADRs is
significantly higher than the average turnover of the underlying local equities, providing further evidence
for the relative importance of foreign investors in pricing Argentine firms.
Second, we argue that the stock returns and risk-neutral default probability changes we study measure
Argentina-specific news. The legal shocks are an almost canonical example of idiosyncratic risk, and it is
very unlikely that U.S. investors’ stochastic discount factor is meaningfully affected by these legal rulings.
Consistent with this argument, we find no evidence for an impact of these rulings on other emerging market
CDS spreads and stock indices (see appendix section G.1). We also control for the legal rulings’ impact on
a variety of proxies for the price of risk. Consistent with the previous point, incorporating these controls
makes little difference for our estimates.
However, it is possible that these legal rulings create a shortage of Argentina-specific (as opposed to
emerging-market specific) expert capital, along the lines of Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). We muster evidence against this by showing that Argentine-listed multinationals, such as Tenaris and Petrobras Brazil are
unaffected by the default shocks (see table 11 in the appendix). This expert-specific capital would therefore
have to defined more narrowly than firms trading on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange, and this shortage of
expert capital would have to occur within the large financial institutions that own the ADRs we study.
Assuming the the shocks we study are Argentina-specific news, there are two potential (and not exclusive) explanations for these returns. The most direct interpretation is that the returns represent changes in
the expected cash flows from the ADRs. Alternatively, the returns could be caused by an increase in the
exposure of the dividends of the ADRs to priced risk factors (an increase in “beta”, rather than a change in
the mean value of the dividends). This would explain a decline in the value of the firms, as valued by the
market. If the returns we measure are caused by this discount rate news, then we should expect that our legal rulings predict future returns. We have run our heteroskedasticity-based estimator using two-day-ahead
returns, rather than contemporaneous returns, as the outcome variable. We found no significant effects, but
our standard errors are too large to rule out economically plausible return predictability. Additionally, for
some purposes, it may not matter whether the value of Argentine firms fell because they were expected to
be less profitable as a result of the default or because they became riskier as a result of the default.
The issues discussed in this section with regards to stock returns also apply with regards to the riskneutral probability of default, as measured by credit default swaps. The most straightforward interpretation
23

of the changes in default probabilities we study is that they are changes in the physical default probability.
However, it is theoretically possible that the legal rulings induced changes in the covariance between Argentine default or recovery rates and priced risk factors, and this caused part of the change in risk-neutral
probabilities that we observe.
One concern we can muster evidence against is that Argentine CDS markets are thinly traded. According
to data from the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporate (DTCC), from the first quarter of 2011 until the
second quarter of 2014, the Argentine sovereign was the 15th most commonly traded sovereign CDS and
the 48th most commonly single-name CDS overall. In appendix section H.3, we compare the liquidity of
Argentine sovereign CDS to the liquidity of CDS on other emerging market governments, major financial
institutions, and non-financial corporations.

6.1.1

Transfer and Convertibility Risk

Even if we assume that the negative returns we observe represent cashflow news, there is still the question
of whether news about these ADRs is representative of Argentina’s broader economy. As mentioned previously, the earnings of firms with ADRs are a small fraction of the Argentine economy. Market participants
may have anticipated that, conditional on default, it would become difficult for firms to make payments on
their ADR dividends. In other words, default might have caused the government to adjust its capital controls.
Ex-post, we know that this did not occur, and we are not aware of any evidence suggesting it was ever
likely. However, suppose investors were concerned about this possibility. In this case, we might expect
to see a significant difference between firms’ local (peso) stock performance and their ADR performance.
However, to compare the performance of local stocks and ADRs, we need a measure of the exchange rate
that would not be affected by these capital controls. Unfortunately, all of our market exchange rate measures
(the ADR blue, the blue-chip swap, and the dolar blue) would likely be affected by changes in the capital
control regime. We do not find any evidence that there is a different effect across these three exchange rates.
This suggests that, if changes in capital controls conditional on default were anticipated, the anticipated
changes would have applied equally to bonds, stocks, and other means by which Argentines can acquire
dollars.

24

6.2

External Validity

Our estimates of the cost of default include the consequences of whatever policies the government is expected to employ, conditional on default. These costs also include the effects of firms, households, and other
agents changing their behavior as a result of the default. For the government, these policies could include
renegotiating with creditors, finding other means to borrow, balancing budgets via taxes or reduced spending, and taking actions that affect the convertibility of the currency, among other actions. When we refer to
the causal of effects of sovereign default, we include the anticipated effects of whatever policies the government is expected to employ as a result of having defaulted. The external validity of our results depends
on the extent to which other defaulting countries would behave similarly to Argentina in the aftermath of a
default.
One potential cost of default is exclusion from markets. Although the debt exchanges of 2005 and 2010
eventually achieved a participation rate of 91.3%– above the level generally needed by a sovereign to resolve
a default and reenter capital markets– the government of Argentina remained unable to issue international
law bonds. Ongoing creditor litigation had resulted in an attachment order, which would allow the holdouts
to confiscate the proceeds from any new bond issuance (Hornbeck (2013)). However, prior to these legal
rulings, the government of Argentina was able to issue local-law, dollar-denominated bonds, and some of
those bonds were purchased by foreigners. Some of these local-law bonds were affected by the legal rulings,
and it may have become more difficult for Argentina to borrow as a result of the rulings.
There are several complications arising from Argentina’s ambiguous international standing. If the costs
of default for Argentina were lower than that of a typical sovereign debtor, because Argentina was already
unable to borrow in international markets, then our estimates understate the costs for the typical sovereign.
On the other hand, because Argentina chose to default despite an ability to pay, the costs might be higher
than is typical. These complications emphasize the uniqueness of Argentina’s circumstances.

7

Conclusion

For several decades, one of the most important questions in international macroeconomics has been “why do
governments repay their debts?” Using an identification strategy that exploits the timing of legal rulings in
the case of Republic of Argentina v. NML Capital, we present evidence that a sovereign default significantly
reduces the value of domestic firms. We provide suggestive evidence that exporters and foreign-owned firms
25

are particularly hurt by sovereign default.

References
Acharya, Viral, Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl, “A Pyrrhic Victory? Bank Bailouts and Sovereign Credit Risk,” The
Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (6), 2689–2739.
Acharya, Viral V., Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger, and Christian W. Hirsch, “Real Effects of the Sovereign Debt Crisis in
Europe: Evidence from Syndicated Loans,” 2014.
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, “Defaultable debt, Interest Rates and the Current Account,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69 (1), 64–83.
and , “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is the Trend,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (1), 69–102.
Arellano, Cristina, “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3),
690–712.
Arteta, Carlos and Galina Hale, “Sovereign Debt Crises and Credit to the Private Sector,” Journal of International Economics,
2008, 74 (1), 53–69.
Auguste, Sebastian, Kathryn M. E. Dominguez, Herman Kamil, and Linda L. Tesar, “Cross-Border Trading as a Mechanism
for Implicit Capital Flight: ADRs and the Argentine Crisis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53 (7), 1259–1295.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Kenneth N. Kuttner, “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?,” The
Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (3), 1221–1257.
Bocola, Luigi, “The Pass-Through of Sovereign Risk,” Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania, 2013.
Bolton, Patrick and Olivier Jeanne, “Sovereign Default Risk and Bank Fragility in Financially Integrated Economies,” IMF
Economic Review, 2011, 59 (2), 162–194.
Borensztein, Eduardo and Ugo Panizza, “The Costs of Sovereign Default,” IMF Staff Papers, 2009, 56 (683-741).
Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff, “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,” The Journal of Political Economy,
1989, 97.
and , “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?,” The American Economic Review, 1989, pp. 43–50.
Campbell, John Y, “A variance decomposition for stock returns,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 1990.
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102
(6), 2674–2699.
Cole, Harold L. and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Models of Sovereign Debt: Partial versus General Reputations,” International Economic
Review, 1998, 39 (1), 55–70.
Cotterill, J., “Raising the RUFO in Argentine bonds,” 2013. http://ftalphaville.ft.com/2013/03/06/1411442/
raising-the-rufo-in-argentine-bonds/ [Accessed: 10/22/2015].
Daseking, Christina, Atish R. Ghosh, Timothy D. Lane, and Alun H. Thomas, Lessons from the Crisis in Argentina, International monetary fund, 2005.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, “Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical analysis,” The Review of
Economic Studies, 1981, pp. 289–309.
Edison, Hali J. and Francis E. Warnock, “US investors’ emerging market equity portfolios: a security-level analysis,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 2004, 86 (3), 691–704.
Fuchs-Schundeln, Nicola and Tarek A. Hassan, “Natural Experiments in Macroeconomics,” Available at SSRN 2583876, 2015.
Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2015, 130 (3), 1369–1420.
García-Cicco, Javier, Roberto Pancrazi, and Martín Uribe, “Real Business Cycles in Emerging Countries?,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 2510–31.
Gelpern, Anna, “After Argentina,” Credit Slips Blog June 2014. http://www.creditslips.org/creditslips/2014/06/
after-argentina.html [Accessed: 4/18/2016].
, “Argentina: The RUFO Crazy,” Credit Slips Blog July 2014. http://www.creditslips.org/creditslips/2014/07/
argentina-the-rufo-crazy.html [Accessed: 4/18/2016].
Gennaioli, Nicola, Alberto Martin, and Stefano Rossi, “Banks, Government Bonds, and Default: What do the Data Say?,” 2013.
, , and , “Sovereign Default, Domestic Banks, and Financial Institutions,” The Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (2), 819–866.
Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neiman, “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104
(3), 793–831.

26

Gornemann, Nils, “Sovereign Default, Private Investment, and Economic Growth,” 2014.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Michael Weber, “Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence from the Stock Market,” 2013.
Gulati, Mitu and Kenneth N. Klee, “Sovereign Piracy,” The Business Lawyer, 2001, pp. 635–651.
Hornbeck, J.F., “Argentina’s Defaulted Sovereign Debt: Dealing with the ’Holdouts’,” Congressional Research Service, 2013.
Howe, Amy, “Live blog of orders and opinions | June 16, 2014,” 2014. http://live.scotusblog.com/Event/Live_blog_
of_orders_and_opinions__June_16_2014?Page=0 [Accessed: 10/22/2015].
Kuttner, Kenneth N., “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds Futures Market,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 2001, 47 (3), 523–544.
Mander, Benedict and Elaine Moore, “Argentina puts an end to long holdouts saga,” 2016. http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/
s/0/516ab98a-08a1-11e6-876d-b823056b209b.html [Accessed: 4/29/2016].
Mendoza, Enrique G. and Vivian Z. Yue, “A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign Default and Business Cycles,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2012, 127, 889–946.
Millian,
Carolina
and
Ben
Bartenstein,
“Argentina
Settlement
Surprise
Leaves
Some
Investors
in
the
Cold,”
2016.
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-24/
argentina-settlement-surprise-leaves-some-investors-in-the-cold [Accessed: 4/22/2016].
Na, Seunghoon, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, Martin Uribe, and Vivian Z Yue, “A model of the twin ds: Optimal default and
devaluation,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.
O’Brien, Matt, “Everything you need to know about Argentina’s weird default,” 2014. http://www.washingtonpost.com/
news/wonkblog/wp/2014/08/03/everything-you-need-to-know-about-argentinas-weird-default/ [Accessed:
10/22/2015].
Panizza, Ugo, Federico Sturzenegger, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, “The Economics and Law of Sovereign Debt and Default,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 2009, pp. 651–698.
Parks, Ken and Prabha Natarajan, “Argentina Peso Rises; Intervention Is Cited,” 2013. http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887323582904578489470877343446 [Accessed: 4/22/2016].
Pasquariello, Paolo, “The anatomy of financial crises: Evidence from the emerging ADR market,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (2), 193–207.
Perez, Diego J., “Sovereign Debt, Domestic Banks and the Provision Of Public Liquidity,” Manuscript, Stanford University, 2014.
Platt, Eric and Benedict Mander, “US appeals court clears way for Argentina bond sale,” 2016. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/
0/5039a628-01a0-11e6-99cb-83242733f755.html [Accessed: 4/18/2016].
Politi, Daniel and Pan Kwan Yuk, “Argentina strikes deal with holdouts,” 2016. http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/
26fca102-deff-11e5-b67f-a61732c1d025.html [Accessed: 4/18/2016].
Reinhart, Carmen M., “Default, currency crises, and sovereign credit ratings,” The World Bank Economic Review, 2002, 16 (2),
151–170.
Rigobon, Roberto, “Identification through Heteroskedasticity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (4), 777–792.
and Brian Sack, “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2004, 51 (8), 1553–1575.
Rose, Andrew K, “One reason countries pay their debts: renegotiation and international trade,” Journal of development economics,
2005, 77 (1), 189–206.
Russo,
Camila
and
Katia
Porzecanski,
“Argentine
Bonds
Plunge
After
U.S.
Court
Rejects
Apeeal,”
2014.
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-06-16/
argentine-bonds-plunge-after-u-s-supreme-court-rejects-appeal [Accessed: 10/22/2015].
Schumacher, Julian, Christoph Trebesch, and Henrik Enderlein, “Sovereign Defaults in Court,” Available at SSRN 2189997,
2014.
Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” Identification and Inference for
Econometric Models: Essays in honor of Thomas Rothenberg, 2005, 1.
Thomas, Leigh and Sarah Marsh, “Argentina clinches landmark debt repayment deal with Paris Club,” 2014.
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/05/29/us-argentina-debt-parisclub-idUSKBN0E90JI20140529
[Accessed: 10/22/2015].
Tomz, Michael and Mark L. J. Wright, “Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and Default,” Annu. Rev. Econ., 2013, 5 (1),
247–272.
Yeyati, Eduardo Levy and Ugo Panizza, “The elusive costs of sovereign defaults,” Journal of Development Economics, 2011, 94
(1), 95–105.

27

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Window Type
Mean ∆Dt (%)
SD ∆Dt (%)
Mean Equity Log Return (%)
Equity Log Return SD (%)
Cov(∆Dt , rt )
Number of two-day windows

Event
-0.09
5.06
0.30
4.02
-15.27
15

Non-Event
-0.01
1.79
0.04
2.77
-2.21
386

Notes: This table reports the mean default probability change, the standard deviation of default probability changes, the mean value-weighted index
return, the standard deviation of that return, and the covariance of default probability changes and that return during events and non-events. The
underlying data is based on the two-day event windows and non-events described in the text.

28

29

[-110.3,-41.0]
15
401

95% CI

Events

Obs.
401

15

[-112.2,-61.0]

(4)
OLS

401

15

[-103.4,-9.2]

(19.76)

-58.63**

(5)

(16.91)

-55.13**

YPF

[-88.5,-15.8]

401

15

[-141.1,-39.1]

(22.09)

-93.69***

CDS-IV

[-59.6,-24.3]

(8.192)

-41.32***

Non-Fin.

(6)

401

15

[-3.2,1.9]

(1.430)

-0.716

[-39.3,9.3]

(3.540)

4.183

Official

(7)

355

14

[3.0,17.0]

(3.325)

10.37**

[2.0,17.3]

(3.994)

9.689**

Dolar Blue

(8)

353

14

[-29.4,86.6]

(15.95)

10.71

[8.9,37.7]

(6.366)

20.91***

ADR Blue

(9)

356

14

[-33.3,106.1]

(18.02)

11.01

[13.2,40.1]

(6.316)

24.72***

BCS

Notes: This table reports the results for the OLS and CDS-IV estimators of the effect of changes in the risk-neutral default probability (∆D) on several equity indices and exchanges rates. The equity indices
are the MSCI Index, the Value-Weighted index, the Value-Weighted Bank Index, the Value-Weighted Non-Financial Index, and YPF. All indices are composed of ADRs. The index weighting is described
in the text. For exchange rates, Official is the government’s official exchange rate. Dolar Blue is the onshore unofficial exchange rate from dolarblue.net. ADR Blue is the ADR Blue Rate constructed by
comparing the ADR share price in dollars with the underlying local stock price in pesos, as described in Section 3. BCS is the Blue-Chip Swap is constructed by comparing the ARS price of domestic
Argentine sovereign debt with the dollar price of the same bond, as described in Section 3. The coefficient on ∆D is the effect on the percentage log returns of an increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default
probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine CDS curve. Standard errors and confidence intervals are computed using the stratified bootstrap procedure described in the text. The underlying
data is based on the two-day event windows and non-events described in the appendix. All regressions contain controls for VIX, S&P, EEMA, high-yield and investment grade bond indices, and oil prices.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

401

15

[-89.4,-36.2]

(13.25)

(16.20)

SE

(12.91)

-83.16***

-60.43***

-79.44***

∆D

(8.829)
[-72.7,-36.1]

(7.165)
[-58.4,-27.3]

(9.641)

[-70.5,-30.6]

-53.89***

SE

-42.35***

-50.44***

(3)
Bank

95% CI

∆D

(2)
Value

(1)

MSCI

Table 2: Equity and Exchange Rate Results

Table 3: Magnitudes
Measure
ADRs (ex. YPF)
YPF
ADRs
All equities in dataset
All equities

Estimate (60%)

Estimate (100%)

-4.7 $B
-6.6 $B
-11.3 $B
-15.6 $B
-16.7 $B

-7.9 $B
-11.0 $B
-18.9 $B
-26.0 $B
-27.8 $B
12.5 $B (Estimated)

Actual Repayment

Notes: The first line, “ADRs (ex.YPF)” reports the imputed loss of market value all firms included in our sample of ADRs experienced, excluding
YPF. It is calculated by multiplying the sum of the market values of all the firms in 2011 by point estimate on the Value Index in Table 2. The second
row, “YPF”, reports the same calculation for YPF. The third row, “ADRs,” is the sum of the first two. The fourth row, “All equities in dataset”,
is the loss by locally traded firms that are included in the analysis of Section 5. It is computed by extrapolating the losses of the value index to
these stocks. The fifth row, “All equities,” includes all Argentine firms with listed equities, even those that do not meet the data quality standards
to be included in Section 5, and is also computed by extrapolation. “Actual Repayment” is the cost to the government of Argentina of the recently
agreed-upon settlement with the major holdouts, extrapolated to cover all holdouts.

Table 4: Cross-Section: Long-Short Portfolios, CDS-IV

∆D
95% CI
Index β
FX β
Events
Obs.

(1)
Foreign
-27.96***
(9.538)
[-51.0,-10.1]
-0.341
-0.0888
14
353

(2)
Financial
-34.36
(16.51)
[-78.2,13.7]
0.0198
-0.0252
14
353

(3)
Exporter
-39.47***
(9.867)
[-62.8,-20.6]
-0.682
-0.351
14
353

(4)
Importer
2.722
(8.147)
[-17.1,18.4]
-0.124
-0.184
14
353

(5)
Size
-33.72**
(10.20)
[-56.9,-9.8]
-0.396
0.0497
14
353

(6)
ADR
-12.81
(12.46)
[-46.9,23.4]
0.0679
0.139
14
353

Notes: This table reports the results for the “CDS-IV” estimator. The column headings denote the outcome variable, a zero-cost long short portfolio.
“Foreign” goes long firms with a foreign parent and short domestically owned firms. “Financial” goes long banks and short non-financial firms.
“Exporter” goes long export-intensive non-financial firms and short non-export-intensive non-financial firms. “Importer” is defined equivalently for
importers. “Size” goes long firms with above-median market capitalization in 2011, and short firms with below-median market cap. “ADR” goes
long firms with an American Depository Receipt and short firms without one. The coefficient on ∆D is the effect on the percentage log returns of
an increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine CDS curve. Index beta is the coefficient on
the equal-weighted index of Argentine local equities, as described in section 5, and FX beta is the beta to the ADR blue rate. Standard errors and
confidence intervals are computed using the stratified bootstrap procedure described in the appendix, section C. The underlying data is based on
the two-day event windows and non-events described in the text. All regressions contain controls for VIX, S&P, EEMA, high-yield and investment
grade bond indices, and oil prices. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

30

4

6

ARS/USD
8
10

12

14

Figure 1: Exchange Rates

2011

2012

2013
Official
ADR

2014

Dolar Blue
Blue Chip Swap

Notes: This figure plots the four versions of the ARS/USD exchange rate. Official is the government’s official exchange rate. Dolar Blue is the
onshore unofficial exchange rate from dolarblue.net. ADR is the ADR Blue Rate constructed by comparing the ADR share price in dollars with the
underlying local stock price in pesos, as described in Section 3. Blue-Chip Swap is constructed by comparing the ARS price of domestic Argentine
sovereign debt with the dollar price of the same bond, as described in Section 3.

76

Figure 2: Event Data from June 16, 2014, 9:30-11:30am EST

−10

66

Probability of Default (Percent)
68
70
72
74

−8
−6
−4
−2
Equity Log Return Since Close (Percent)

0

London

Europe

9:30 am

10:30 am
Probability of Default

11:30 am
MSCI Argentina Index

Notes: This figure plots the 5-year risk-neutral probability of default (“Probability of Default (Percent)”, left axis), the change in the price of the
MSCI Argentina Index against the previous night’s close (“Equity Return Since Close (Percent)”, right axis). The default probability points are
labeled with the name of the reporting market, with European markets reporting at 9:30am EST and London Markets reporting at 10:30am EST.
The Supreme Court order was released at 9:33 am EST.

31

Figure 3: Equity Returns and Argentine Default Probability

10

(a) Argentine Equity Index

6

5

2

1
14

10

Log Return
−5
0

3

4

5
12
7
8

9
11

15

−15

−10

13

−10

−5

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

Event

7
12
4

2
3

14
6

5
11
9

8

1

15

13

10

−10

−5

Log Return
0

5

10

(b) Mexican Equity Index

−10

−5

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

Event

Notes: This figure plots the change in change in the risk-neutral probability of default and returns on the Argentine value-weighted Index (top
panel) and MSCI Mexico Index (bottom panel) on event and non-event two-day windows. Each event and non-event window is a two-day event or
non-event as described in the text. The numbers next to each maroon/dark/large dot reference an event window in appendix table 18. The procedure
for classifying events and non-events is described in the text.

32

Appendix
A

Data Construction Details

In this section, we provide additional details about our data construction.

A.1

Data Sources

In the table below, we list the data sources used in the paper. The data source for the credit default swap
prices is Markit, a financial information services company. We use Markit’s composite end-of-day spread,
which we refer to as the “close.” The composite end-of-day spread is gathered over a period of several
hours from various market makers, and is the spread used by those market makers to value their own trading
books. The composite end-of-day spread uses a survey of dealers to estimate the recovery rate. Markit
uses a data cleaning process to ensure that the composite end-of-day quotes are reasonable approximations
of market prices. Markit provides extensive documentation on their data, including documentation on the
“CDS Data Cleaning Process,” a “Markit CDS Liquidity User Guide,” and other detailed information on
the data construction. This very thorough documentation and extensive conversations with Markit give us
confidence that this is the most reliable source of CDS pricing available.
We have experimented with alternative providers of CDS data, such as Bloomberg, but found discrepancies between these data sources and Markit. Although the aggregate time series of Markit, Bloomberg,
and Datastream appear similar, at a higher frequency it is clear that there are significant issues with the
Bloomberg and Datastream data. The primary issue with the Bloomberg data is that the CDS spreads at
tenors other than 5 years appear to be unreliable. In particular, Bloomberg’s 2, 3, and 4 year CDS spreads
have very large daily fluctuations that are completely absent from the 5 year spread and from the Markit
data. However, the Bloomberg data for the 5 year spread appears to be reasonable. This explains why the
Bloomberg and Markit results that use a 5 year credit triangle approximation, with a 39.5% recovery rate,
are very similar (see appendix table 7). However, while the credit triangle approximation method is a useful
first step, it essentially assumes a constant hazard rate over the life of the 5 year CDS. Given that the court
case would likely lead to default over the shorter term, as we see in the Markit hazard rates, this assumption is not appropriate.. Given the problems with the shorter tenor Bloomberg CDS, we do not attempt to
bootstrap a risk-neutral default probability curve using the ISDA Standard Model.
The Datastream data look very similar to Markit on most days, but there are many dates, including
several of our events, for which the Datastream data is missing. For instance, the data in Datastream on
the day of the major Supreme Court ruling (June 16, 2014) is missing. We conferred extensively with
Datastream support, and they confirmed that their source data is from EIKON, and that on that day, as well
as several other of the rulings, EIKON did not receive any CDS quotes. They were unable to explain why
there were no prices on these days. Both Bloomberg and Markit have data for these days, and DTCC trading
volume data indicates that Argentine CDS were traded during the weeks for Datastream has missing data.
When we use the previously mentioned credit triangle approximation with the Datastream data, and discard
the days with missing data, we find results that are similar to the full-sample Markit and Bloomberg credit
triangle approximation results (see appendix table 7).

1

Table 1: Data Sources

A.2

Data

Data Source

Prices and returns for ADRs
Prices and returns for local equities
VIX
S&P
MSCI Emerging Markets Asia ETF
High Yield and IG Bond Index
Oil Prices
Industry Exports
Firm Imports
Firm Revenue
Firm Earnings (ADR firms only)
Market Capitalization
Foreign Ownership
Industry Classification
Bond Prices for BCS construction
Dolar Blue Rate
Official nominal exchange rate
CDS spreads/Recovery Rate/Default Probability
Alternative CDS Spreads
Argentine Sovereign Bond Prices

CRSP
Bloomberg
CBOE
Global Financial Data
Datastream
Datastream
Global Financial Data
OECD-STAN IO Tables
Gopinath and Neiman (2014)
Compustat Global
CRSP
Bloomberg
Bloomberg
Fama-French, formatted by Dexin Zhou
Bloomberg
dolarblue.net
Datastream
Markit
Bloomberg, Datastream
Bloomberg

Firm Classifications

To ensure sufficient data quality, we limit our study of local Argentine equities to firms with a 2011 market
capitalization at least 200 million pesos35 , have returns during at least ten of our event windows, and for
which the equity price changes on at least half of all trading days in our sample. We exclude several firms that
have neither headquarters or a large fraction of their revenues in Argentina, but are listed on the Argentine
exchange for legacy reasons.36
We classify firms according to their Fama-French industry classifications.37 We sort firms into their
corresponding Fama-French industries according the SIC code of their primary industry, available from
Datastream. After this initial sort, we only have one firm, Boldt, classified as Business Equipment, and so
we combine it with the telecommunications firms. The “Finance” Fama-French 12 industry classification
is also too broad for our purposes, as it combines banks, holding companies, and real estate firms. We
therefore split the nine firms initially classified as “Finance” according to their Fama-French 49 industry
classification. This gives us six banks, two real estate firms, and one “Trading” firm, Sociedad Comercial
del Plata. Because Sociedad Comercial del Plata is a diversified holding company, and is the only company
in the Fama-French 49 industry classification of “Trading,” we rename its industry “Diversified”, and do not
35 About

$50mm USD at market exchange rates in 2011.
appendix section G.2, for a discussion of these firms.
37 Classifications available on Kenneth French’s website. We use the versions formatted by Dexin Zhou.
36 See

2

merge it with any other industry classification. After these modifications, our sample includes six banks, two
chemical firms, one diversified firm, three energy firms, four manufacturing firms, six non-durables firms,
two real estate firms, three telecoms and eight utilities. These industries are listed in table 2.
We also sort firms by their exporter status. Unfortunately, this task is complicated by the fact that publicly available data sources do not comprehensively report firm-level exports. We instead rely on industrylevel measures. We use the OECD STAN Input-Output Tables for Argentina to calculate what share of each
industry group’s output is exported. The Input-Output Table covers 37 industries, each of which covers at
least one two-digit ISIC industry, and some of which, such as “Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing”,
cover up to five two-digit ISICs. After we calculate the share of exports for each of these 37 industries,
we classify our 33 firms into one of these industries according to the SIC code of its primary output. The
most recent Input-Output Table for Argentina uses data from 1995, so our export analysis assumes that the
relative tradability of different products has not changed too much over the past 20 years.38 When we construct a zero-cost long-short portfolio, going long exporters and short non-exporters, we will classify firms
as exporters if exports accounted for at least 10% of their primary industries’ revenues in our Input-Output
table, and non-exporters otherwise. The exporter threshold is set at 10% because there are no firms with an
export share between 3.6% and 10.1%.
To calculate each firm’s import intensity, we use firm level data from Gopinath and Neiman (2014).
The most recent available import data is for 2007 and 2008 (through October), and we compute the ratio of
imports to firm revenue using data from Compustat Global. Our measure of import intensity is the average
ratio of imports to revenue in 2007 and 2008. The importer threshold is set to the median ratio 0.6%.
The next cut of the data divides firms between those that are subsidiaries of foreign corporations and
those that are not. We classify firms as foreign-owned if the headquarters of their ultimate parent is any
country other than Argentina in Bloomberg (Field ULT_PARENT_CNTRY_DOMICILE). We use the most
recent (as of our data construction) version of this variable and cannot account for the possibility that an
Argentine firm was only recently purchased by a foreign parent.
The final variable we use to classify our local equities is an indicator for whether or not the firms have
an ADR that is traded in the US. This includes some firms with ADRs that trade over-the-counter, and are
therefore not included in our analysis of the ADRs.
38 For

those firms that report data on revenue from exports, there is a strong correlation between reported exports as a share of
sales and the imputed share of exports from the 1995 input-output table.

3

Table 2: Firms Included in Analysis
Company

Ticker

Industry

Exports

Imports

Market Cap

Aluar

ALUA

Manufacturing

19.4

9.1

9443.0

IRSA Propiedades Commerciales

APSA

Real Estate

2960.1

Y

Hipotecario Naci

BHIP

Banks

3540.0

Y*

Banco Macro Bansud

BMA

Banks

9379.2

Y

Boldt

BOLT

Telecoms

Banco Patagonia

BPAT

Banks

3488.4

Y
Y

1.8

ADR

1537.5

Banco Santander Rio

BRIO

Banks

12786.1

Carlos Casado

CADO

Real Estate

378.1

Capex

CAPX

Utilities

0.1

0.9

Foreign

Y*
Y
Y*

1087.8

Celulosa

CELU

Chemicals

11.2

1.3

760.3

Central Puerto Rights

CEPU2

Utilities

0.1

0.4

1814.4

Sociedad Comercial Del Plata

COME

Diverse

1.5

Cresud

CRES

Non-Durables

14.5

0.0

3495.9

Y

Edenor

EDN

Utilities

0.1

0.1

1894.5

Y

19.4

0.0

10893.1

Y

7723.6

Y

212.3

Siderar

ERAR

Manufacturing

BBVA Banco Frances

FRAN

Banks

Gp Finance Galicia

GGAL

Banks

Solvay Indupa

INDU

Chemicals

IRSA

IRSA

Real Estate

Juan Minetti

JMIN

Manufacturing

3.6

2.1

1633.5

Ledesma

LEDE

Non-Durables

14.5

1.0

4004.0

Metrogas

METR

Utilities

0.1

0.0

677.3

Y*
Y*

7125.7
11.2

0.6

1218.0

Y
Y

Y

3350.5

Y
Y

Mirgor

MIRG

Manufacturing

10.1

11.8

512.0

Molinos Rio De La Plata

MOLI

Non-Durables

19.5

0.4

8014.4

Pampa Energia

PAMP

Utilities

0.1

0.1

3417.2

Quickfood

PATY

Non-Durables

19.5

0.5

641.9

Y

Petrobras Argentina

PESA

Energy

25.5

3.8

8228.4

Y

Y

SA San Miguel

SAMI

Non-Durables

19.5

0.6

491.1

Moli Juan Semino

SEMI

Non-Durables

19.5

0.1

325.5
Y

Y

Telecom Argentina

TECO2

Telecoms

2.7

0.3

21754.8

Transportadores De Gas Del Norte

TGNO4

Utilities

0.1

3.3

540.4

Transportadora De Gas Del Sur

TGSU2

Energy

25.5

0.9

2558.3

Transener

TRAN

Utilities

0.1

2.1

640.3

YPF

YPFD

Energy

14.2

2.2

74532.8

Y

Y

Y

Notes: This table lists the 33 firms used in the analysis of local equities, and one firm (IRSA Propiedades Commerciales) whose ADR is included in
our ADR sample, but whose local stock returns do not pass our data quality requirement. Ticker indicates the company’s local ticker in Bloomberg.
Exports denotes the ratio (in percentage terms) of exports to total output for the firm’s primary industry. Exports are calculated by classifying the
firm into one of the 37 industries in the OECD STAN Input-Output Table according the SIC code of the firm’s primary industry. Imports denotes
the ratio (in percentage terms) of imports to firm revenue in 2007 and 2008. The import data is from Gopinath and Neiman (2014). Market Cap.
is the firm’s average end-of-quarter market capitalization in 2011 from Bloomberg, measured in Argentine pesos. ADR is an indicator for whether
the firm currently has an American depository receipt. “Y*” indicates that the firm has an OTC-traded or discontinued ADR and is not included in
our sample of ADRs. To be included in our ADR sample, the ADR must be exchange-traded and have existed for our entire sample. Foreign is an
indicator for whether the firm is owned by a non-Argentine parent company.

4

A.3

Exchange Rate Construction

The blue-chip swap rate is constructed by dividing the peso price of the government bond by the dollar price
of the same bond. The mechanics of this transaction are outlined in Panel A of Figure 1. In Panel B of
Figure 1, we demonstrate how to construct an exchange using local equities and ADRs.
We calculate the blue-chip swap rate using the two most liquid available debt instruments, the Bonar
X and the Boden 15.39 To calculate this blue-chip swap rate, we search for the bonds on Bloomberg, use
<ALLQ> to find the list of all available pricing sources for the bonds, and then download the full available
history of closing prices for every data provider in ARS and USD.40 Each day, there are around 5 closing price quotes per bond in ARS and USD. We calculate the median price for each bond every day, by
currency, and then construct the implicit exchange rate by dividing the median peso price by the median
dollar price. This gives us a blue-chip swap rate for each of our two bonds, and we construct the Blue-Chip
Swap rate by taking the average of the two. Despite these bonds being classified as domestic debt, many of
these instruments have ISINs and are accepted on Euroclear or Clearstream. This makes it relatively easy
for foreign investors to use this process to get money on- or offshore, circumventing Argentina’s capital
controls.41 However, it is important to remember that although we calculate the exchange rate using simultaneous prices, an investor implementing this transaction is required to hold the bond for at least 3 days at
an Argentine custodian bank, and therefore bears some price risk when acquiring dollars.42 Despite being
domestic law debt instruments, both of these bonds became entangled in the legal proceedings we focus on
in this paper.43
For the ADR blue rate, we follow the methodology outlined on dolarblue.net.44 We collect daily open
and close price data on the ADR and local equity for eight firms from Bloomberg.45 We then calculate the
daily implicit exchange rate for each firm, drop the high and low price among the eight firms, and construct
our measure as the mean of the remaining six equities. The average difference between the maximum
and minimum firm-level exchange rate is 3.6% of the level of the ADR Blue Rate. This difference could
reflect differences in the closing times of the NYSE/NASDAQ and Buenos Aires stock exchanges, bidoffer spreads, and other forms of illiquidity. Generally speaking, it is very costly for foreign investors
to participate in local Argentine markets, which makes the ADR blue rate arbitrage difficult for them to
execute. Together, the ADR Blue Rate and the Blue-Chip Swap rate may be known as the dolar contado con
liquidación, dolar fuga, or the dolar gris (Infodolar (2016)).
While the CDS-IV results in Table 2 report similar point estimates of the effect of default on the Dolar
Blue, ADR Blue and Blue-Chip Swap Rate, the standard errors and confidence interval for the Dolar Blue
are significantly tighter. The reason for this is that the behavior of the ADR Blue rate and Blue-Chip swap
rate on the day with the largest increase in the probability of default, the Supreme Court ruling day on June
16, 2014, is a significant outlier. On that day, these measures of the exchange rate significantly appreciated.
This is in stark contrast to the Dolar Blue rate, which has a significant depreciation. Mechanically, the
reason for the appreciation of the ADR Blue and Blue-Chip Swap rates is that the value of domestically
traded securities priced in ARS fell significantly more than those traded by foreign investors in dollars.
39 The

ISIN for the Bonar X is ARARGE03F441 and the ISIN for the Boden 15 is ARARGE03F144.
drop pricing sources with less than 300 days of data and sources where more than 5% of the daily observations record no
price change.
41 Indeed, dolarblue.net offers a simple guide for how to buy and sell dollars (Dolarblue.net (2014)).
42 Chodos and Arsenin (2012).
43 Excellent coverage of turmoil around the domestic debt was provided by Joseph Coterill of FT Alphaville. See, for instance,
Cotterill (2015b) or Cotterill (2015a).
44 Dolarblue.net (2016)
45 Grupo Financiero Galicia (ADR Ticker: GGAL, Local Ticker: GGAL), Tenaris (TS, TS), BBVA Banco Frances (BFR, FRAN),
Banco Macro (BMA, BMA), Pampa Energia (PAM, PAMP), Petrobras Argentina (PZE, PESA), Petroleo Brasileiro (PBR, APBR),
and Telecom Argentina (TEO, TECO2).
40 We

5

Based on conversations with market participants, we believe that the ruling caused a major disruption in
local trading. If we expand the window size around this ruling, it ceases to be an outlier, consistent with
the trading disruption hypothesis. However, a major speech was made by the President of Argentina in
the evening following the ruling, so we cannot be certain that this pattern is due to a disruption in trading.
We also find that, if that event is excluded, the effect on the exchange rate approximately doubles and is
relatively precisely estimated. The importance of this outlier (Event 13) can be clearly seen in Figure 3.
Figure 1: Blue Rate Construction
(a) Blue-Chip Swap

(b) ADR Blue Rate

Panel (a) demonstrates how an investor would convert Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars at an exchange rate of 10
pesos to the dollar, by buying a domestic sovereign bond in ARS and selling the bond offshore in USD. This transaction
defines an unofficial exchange rate known as the Blue-Chip Swap rate. Panel (b) demonstrates how an investor would
convert Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars at the same exchange rate, by buying shares of Banco Macro onshore and
selling an ADR in New York. The transaction defines an unofficial exchange rate known as the ADR Blue Rate.

A.4

Construction of Risk-Neutral Default Probabilities

We convert CDS spreads into risk-neutral default probabilities to provide a clearer sense of the magnitude
of the estimated coefficients. We emphasize that we work with risk-neutral probabilities and do not attempt
to convert them to physical probabilities. Pan and Singleton (2008) and Longstaff et al. (2011) impose
additional structure to estimate the physical default probabilities.
In our baseline results, we will use the five-year cumulative risk-neutral default probability estimated by
Markit using the ISDA standard model. This calculation begins with data from Markit on CDS par spreads
and the dealer reported recovery rates, as well as a zero-coupon discounting curve.46 The par spread is
the coupon payment that a buyer of CDS protections pays to the seller of the contract such that the CDS
46 Details

on the discounting curve can be found at http://www.cdsmodel.com/cdsmodel/documentation.html. In the robustness
checks where we estimate the risk-neutral default probability rather than using the data provided by Markit, we will use the U.S.
zero-coupon Treasury curve calculated in Gürkaynak et al. (2007) as our discount curve. As Longstaff et al. (2011) point out,
changing from the Treasury curve to a zero-coupon curve extracted from Libor and swap rates would have very little effect on the
results. Our estimation is performed using the Matlab function cdsbootstrap.

6

contract has zero cost at initiation. Because the seller of a CDS insures the buyer of a CDS against credit
losses throughout the duration of the contract, pricing the contract involves calculating the term structure of
credit risk on the bond. The recovery rate we use is the average of the recovery rates reported by dealers
contributing prices to Markit. In robustness checks, we also consider a case with a constant recovery rate
equal to the realized recovery of 39.5%.47
The market standard for pricing CDS is a reduced form model that models time-varying credit risk as
a time-varying hazard rate of default.48 Because we use the risk-neutral default probabilities calculated by
Markit, our exposition will exactly follow Markit (2012). The par spread is the spread that equates the
present value of payments from buyer of protection to the seller of protection (Fee Leg) equals the value
of the from the seller to the buyer upon default (Contingent Leg). We can write the equation equating the
present value of fee leg to the present value of the contingent leg as
n
N

Sn ∑ ∆t PS(t) D ft + AD = (1 − R) · ∑ PS(t−1) − PS(t) D ft
i=1

(4)

i=1

where
Sn

=

Spread for protection to period n

∆t

=

Length of Period

PSi

=

Probability of survival to time i

D fi

=

Discount factor to time i

R

=

Recovery Rate

AD

=

Accrual on Default

White (2013) provides a detailed explanation of the calculation of accrual on default and we will omit the
details here for brevity. If we assume that the default hazard rate is constant between CDS nodes (tenors for
which CDS contracts are traded), the survival probabilities map exactly to the hazard rates. For example, if
the shortest tenor CDS traded is 6 months,
 and thehazard
 rate of default is λ6m from time 0 to 6 months, then
1
the survival probability is equal to exp −λ6M ·
. Given a 6 month par spread, a discounting curve
2
to 6 months, and an assumption on the recovery rate, λ6m can be calculated directly from equation 4. Once
this hazard rate, and therefore the survival probability, has been calculated for the 6 month tenor, the hazard
rate between the next node of the CDS curve, 6 months and 1 year, can be calculated in the same way. In
this way, the hazard rate curve is bootstrapped until we have calculated the hazard rates between every CDS
node. We can then use our estimate hazard rates to calculate the risk-neutral default probabilities for various
horizons:
Pr (D ≤ 6M)

=

Pr (D ≤ 1Y )

=


 
1
1 − exp −λ6M ·
2

 
 
1
1
1 − exp −λ6M ·
− λ1Y ·
2
2

..
.
Pr (D ≤ 5Y )

=


 
 

1
1
1 − exp −λ6M ·
− λ1Y ·
− λ2Y − λ3Y − λ4Y − λ5Y
2
2

The final equation, the probability that the government defaults in the next 5 years, is the measure we use
for the default probability in our baseline analysis. For the calculation of the default probabilities of the other
47 See

http://www.creditfixings.com/CreditEventAuctions/holdings.jsp?auctionId=9073 for details on the auction to calculate the
recovery rate.
48 White (2013) provides a very thorough discussion of the ISDA standard model.

7

sovereigns in section G.1, we approximate the default probability by using the credit triangle relationship.
As shown in White (2013), if we assume the premium leg were paid instantly and the hazard rate were equal
to a constant λ , then we would have
S

=

λ

=

Pr (D < 5Y )

=

(1 − R) λ
S
1−R
1 − exp (−5λ ) .

In the figure below, we chart the CDS spreads and recovery assumptions that we use to infer hazard rates
of default and cumulative default probabilities. In all regressions in the body of the paper, we use Markit’s
risk-neutral default probability calculations rather than our own calculations.
Figure 2: From CDS Spreads to Default Probabilities
(a) Daily Composite CDS Spreads

0

25

Recovery Rate
30

Par Spread
50
100

35

40

150

(b) Dealer-Reported Recovery Rate

2012

2013
6 Months
2 Year
4 Year

2014
20

2011

1 Year
3 Year
5 Year

2011

2013

2014

(d) Risk-Neutral Cumulative Default Probability

0

0

.5

Hazard Rate
1

1.5

Cumulative Default Probability
.2
.4
.6
.8

2

(c) Estimated Hazard Rate

2012

2011

2012
0−6 Months
1−2 Years
3−4 Years

2013

2014

2011

6 Months−1 Year
2−3 Years
4−5 Years

2012

2013
6 Months
2 Year
4 Year

2014
1 Year
3 Year
5 Year

Notes: Panel (a) plots the daily Composite CDS spreads from Markit. Panel (b) plots the the average of all recovery rates of Markit
contributors whose CDS curves are used to calculate the Markit CDS End of Day composite curve. Panel (c) plots the default
hazard rates estimated using the ISDA Standard model. 0-6 Months indicates the estimated constant hazard rate from initiation
to 6 months, 6 Months - 1 Year indicates the implied estimated constant hazard rate from 6 months after initiation to 1 year after
initiation, and so on. Panel (d) converts the estimated hazard rates in Panel (c) into cumulative risk-neutral default probabilities.
6 Months indicates the probability the government defaults in the next 6 months, 1 Year indicates the probability of default in the
next year, and so on. The data and ISDA Standard model are discussed in Sections 3.1 and A.4.

8

B

Additional Figures
Figure 3: Change in Default Probability and other Financial Variables on Event and Non-Event Days

10

Value−Weighted Index: Non−Financial
10

Value−Weighted Index: Banks
2

5

3

14

Log Return
−5
0

10
5
9

15
12
7
8

4

3

11
9

5
15

−10

−10

13

−15

−15
−10

−5

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

−10

−5

Event

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

Event

5
Log Return
0
3

6
14

11
10 4 9

12
87

5

1

15

3

6

10 4
11
9

13

5
1

12

14

13

−5

−10

2

7
8
2

−5

10
Log Return
5

10

Dolar Blue Rate

15

Official Exchange Rate

0

7
8

13

11

−10

−5

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

−10

−5

Event

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

Event

5

10

Blue−Chip Swap Rate

10

ADR Blue Rate

9

6
4

7
8

12

14

5

Log Return
0

3

5

12

10

1
11

2

13

−5

Log Return
0

1

12

10

1
4

14

Log Return
−5
0

5

6

6

2

5
10
4 9

3
6

7
8

1

2

−5

13

−10

−10

14

11

−10

−5

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

−10

Event

−5

0
Change in Default Probability
Non−Event

5

10

Event

Notes: This figure plots the change in the risk-neutral probability of default and returns on the Value-Weighted Bank and NonFinancial Index and four measures of the exchange rate, on event and non-event days. Official is the government’s official exchange
rate. Dolar Blue is the onshore unofficial exchange rate from dolarblue.net. ADR Blue is the ADR Blue Rate constructed by
comparing the ADR share price in dollars with the underlying local stock price in pesos, as described in Section 3. Blue-Chip
Swap is constructed by comparing the ARS price of domestic Argentine sovereign debt with the dollar price of the same bond, as
described in Section 3. Each event and non-event day is a two-day event or non-event as described in the text. The numbers next
to each large dark maroon dot references each event-day in the table below figure 3a. The procedure for classifying events and
non-events is described in the text.

9

0

Importer
Exporter
Size

Foreign

ADR

−50

Financial

−100

Estimated Abnormal Return

50

Figure 4: Estimated Response to Default Shocks: Long-Short

−40

−20

0

20

40

Abnormal Return from Market Beta
Notes: Each label denotes a zero-cost long short portfolio. “Exporter” is a portfolio going long export-intensive non-financial
firms (NFFs) and short non-export-intensive NFFs. “Importer” is defined equivalently for importers. “Financial” goes long banks
and short NFFs. “Foreign” goes long firms with a foreign parent and short domestically-owned firms. “Size” goes long firms
with above-median market capitalization in 2011, and short firms with below-median market cap. “ADR” goes long firms with
an American Depository Receipt and short firms without one. The data sources are described in Section 3.1. On the the x-axis,
we plot the expected abnormal return for each portfolio, calculated as the beta of each long-short portfolio on the index times αM ,
the effect of an increase in the probability of default in the index. On the y-axis, we plot the sum of the expected abnormal return
and (αi − βi αM ), the additional sensitivity of each portfolio to an increase in the probability of default. Values above (below) the
line indicates that the portfolio over-performed (under-performed) following increases in the probability of default, relative to the
abnormal return implied by the portfolio’s market beta. The ranges indicate bootstrapped 90% confidence intervals.

10

−20

Real Estate

−40

Diverse
Chemical
Telecoms
Manufacturing

−60

Utilities

−80

Energy
Banks

−100

Estimated Abnormal Return

0

20

Figure 5: Estimated Response to Default Shocks: Industries

−80

−60

−40

Abnormal Return from Market Beta
Notes: Industry classifications are based on the Fama-French 12 industry categories with the modifications described in Section
3.1. On the the x-axis, we plot the expected abnormal return for each portfolio, calculated as the beta of each long-short portfolio
on the index times αM , the effect of an increase in the probability of default in the abnormal return of the index. On the y-axis,
we plot the sum of the expected abnormal return and (αi − βi αM ), the additional sensitivity of each portfolio to an increase in the
probability of default. Values above the line indicates that the portfolio over-performed following increases in the probability of
default, relative to what would be implied by the portfolio’s market beta. Values below the line indicate underperformance. The
ranges indicate bootstrapped 90% confidence intervals.

C

Standard Errors and Confidence Intervals

To construct confidence intervals for our coefficient estimates, we employ the bootstrap procedure advocated by Horowitz (2001). The advantage of this procedure is that it offers “asymptotic refinements” for
the coverage probabilities of tests, meaning that it is more likely to achieve the desired rejection probability
under the null hypothesis. Our estimators (except for the OLS) are effectively based on a small number
of the data points (the events), and therefore these refinements may provide significant improvements over
first-order asymptotic approximations. As a practical matter, our confidence intervals are in almost all cases
substantially wider than those based on first-order asymptotic approximations. Nevertheless, these “asymptotic refinements” are still based on asymptotic arguments, and there is no guarantee that they are accurate
for our data. We also find (in unreported results) that our confidence intervals for our coefficient of interest, α, are similar to confidence intervals constructed under normal approximations, using a bootstrapped
standard error.
We use 1,000 repetitions of a stratified bootstrap, resampling with replacement from our set of events
and non-events, separately, so that each bootstrap replication contains 15 events and 386 non-events.49
49 The

number of events and non-events listed apply to the ADRs. The exchange rates have a slightly different number of events

11

In each bootstrap replication, we compute the (asymptotically pivotal) t-statistic tk = α̂kσ̂−k α̂ , where α̂ is
the point estimate in our actual data sample, α̂k is the point estimate in bootstrap replication k, and σ̂k
is the heteroskedasticity-robust standard deviation estimate of α̂ − α from bootstrap sample k. We then
determine the 2.5th percentile and 97.5th percentile of tk in the bootstrap replications, denoted tˆ2.5 and
tˆ97.5 , respectively. The reported 95% confidence interval for α̂ is [tˆ2.5 σ̂ + α̂, tˆ97.5 σ̂ + α̂], where σ̂ is the
heteroskedasticity-robust standard deviation estimate of α̂ − α from our original data sample. We construct
90% and 99% confidence intervals in a similar fashion, and use them to assign asterisks in our tables.50 In
the tables, we report the 95% confidence interval and the heteroskedasticity-robust standard error from our
dataset (σ̂ ).
Note that this procedure, like heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, assumes that the abnormal returns we study are serially uncorrelated.

D
D.1

Event Studies
IV-Style Event Study

We present an “IV-style” event study in this section. This study uses the two-day events and non-events
described previously. The second stage equation we wish to estimate is equation (2) in the text. The
instrument we use is 1(t ∈ E)∆Dt (and 1(t ∈ E)), where E is the set of event days and 1(·) is the indicator
function. The first-stage regression is
∆Dt = χ1(t ∈ E)∆Dt + ρ1(t ∈ E) + µD + ωDT Xt + τt ,
where τt is a composite of the three unobserved shocks (εt , Ft , νt ) on the non-event days, and Xt are the
observable controls. Under the event study assumptions, the unobserved shocks εt and Ft (in the second
stage) are not correlated with the change in the default probability on event days. The standard errors and
confidence intervals for this approach are described in section C.
and non-events, due to holidays, missing data, and related issues.
50 These asterisks represent an “equal-tailed” test that α 6= 0.

12

Table 3: Equity and Exchange Rate Results, IV-Style Event Study
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

MSCI

Value

Bank

Non-Fin.

YPF

∆D

-75.27***

-57.80***

-79.05***

-56.01**

-88.14***

SE

(14.36)

(11.77)

(11.97)

(17.81)

(19.67)

95% CI

[-107.3,-37.0]

[-86.0,-33.9]

[-109.8,-56.0]

[-105.6,-7.7]

[-136.1,-36.3]

Events

15

15

15

15

15

Obs.

401

401

401

401

401

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Official

Dolar Blue

ADR Blue

BCS

∆D

-0.00539

10.17**

12.39

13.95

SE

(1.236)

(2.665)

(13.21)

(12.56)

95% CI

[-3.2,2.1]

[3.3,16.4]

[-23.7,76.1]

[-14.7,66.7]

Events

15

14

14

14

Obs.
401
355
353
356
Notes: This table reports the results for the IV-Style Event Study estimator of the effect of changes in the risk-neutral default
probability (∆D) on several equity indices and exchanges rates. The equity indices are the MSCI Index, the Value-Weighted index,
the Value-Weighted Bank Index, the Value-Weighted Non-Financial Index, and YPF. All indices are composed of ADRs. The index
weighting is described in the text. For exchange rates, Official is the government’s official exchange rate. Dolar Blue is the onshore
unofficial exchange rate from dolarblue.net. ADR Blue is the ADR Blue Rate constructed by comparing the ADR share price in
dollars with the underlying local stock price in pesos, as described in Section 3. BCS is the Blue-Chip Swap is constructed by
comparing the ARS price of domestic Argentine sovereign debt with the dollar price of the same bond, as described in Section
3. The coefficient on ∆D is the effect on the percentage log returns of an increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability
from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine CDS curve. Standard errors and confidence intervals are computed using the stratified
bootstrap procedure described in the text. The underlying data is based on the two-day event windows and non-events described
in the appendix. All regressions contain controls for VIX, S&P, EEMA, high-yield and investment grade bond indices, oil prices.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

D.2

Standard Event Studies

We also present the results of two additional event studies that use the methodology described in Campbell
et al. (1997). The first event study uses two-day windows around events.
Let N denote the set of non-event days, and let L1 = |N|. We first estimate the factor model on the
non-event days,
ri,t = µi + ωiT Xt + νi,t ,
and generate a time series of abnormal returns, r̂i,t = ri,t − ûi − ω̂iT Xt , where Xt is the vector of controls
discussed in section 3.1. We also estimate the variance of the abnormal returns associated with the factor
1
2 . We next estimate a similar factor model for the
model (assuming homoskedastic errors), σ̂i2 = L1
∑t∈N ν̂i,t
change in the probability of default, ∆Dt , and create a time series of abnormal default probability changes,
dˆt . We then classify our event days into three categories, based on the abnormal default probability change
during the event window. Let σd denote the standard deviation of the abnormal default probability changes.
If the probability increases by at least σd , we label that day as an “higher default” event. If the probability
decreases by at least σd , we label that event as a “lower default” event. If the default probability change is
less, in absolute value, than σd , we label that as a “no news” event.
For each type of event, we report the cumulative abnormal return and cumulative abnormal default
13

probability change over all events of that type (higher default, lower default, no news). We also report two
statistics that are described in Campbell et al. (1997). In this event study (but not the next one we discuss),
which does not aggregate returns across different ADRs, the two statistics are identical, up to a small sample
size correction. Define E{h,l,n} as the set of event days of each type. The first statistic, J1, is computed, for
event type j and ADR i, as
∑t∈E j r̂i,t
J1i j = q
.
|E j |σ̂i2
Under the null hypothesis that the events have no effect on the stock returns, J1i j is asymptotically distributed
as a standard normal. However, because we have so few events in each category, asymptotic normality will
be a poor approximation, if the abnormal returns are themselves far from normal. This is one reason we
prefer the variance-based estimators.
The second statistic, J2, is nearly identical to J1 for this event study (they will be different in the next
event study we describe). For each event, we can define a standardized cumulative abnormal return,
s
|E j | − 4 r̂i,t
q ,
zi,t =
|E j | − 2 σ̂ 2
i

where the first term represents a small-sample correction. The statistic J2 is defined as
∑t∈E j zi,t
.
J2i j = p
|E j |
This statistic is also asymptotically standard normal under the null hypothesis, subject to the same caveat
about return normality. In the table 4, we present these two statistics for the value-weighted index.
Table 4: Standard Event Study: Index
Shock Type
Higher Default
No News
Lower Default

# Events
7
3
5

CAR (%)
-12.92
-7.65
23.06

∆D (%)
28.40
-0.51
-29.38

J1
-2.20**
-1.99**
4.65***

J2
-2.19**
-1.98**
4.63***

Notes: CAR indicates cumulative abnormal return over the event windows, ∆D is the change in the risk-neutral probability of
default, and the test statistics J1 and J2 are described in the text and in Campbell et al. (1997), pp. 162. A shock type of higher
default indicates that this event raised the default probability by more than one two-day standard deviation, a shock type of lower
default indicates that this event lowered the default probability by more than one two-day standard deviation, and a shock type of
no news indicates a day with a legal ruling in which the default probability did not move at least one two-day standard deviation in
either direction. The underlying data is based on the two-day event windows and non-events described in the text. The p-values are
the p-values for a two-sided hypothesis test assuming normality. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

The results of this event study are broadly similar to the variance-based estimates. In the 7 event days
where the default probability significantly increased, the cumulative increase in the default probability was
28.40% and the stock market experienced a cumulative abnormal return of -12.92%. Assuming a linear relationship between default probabilities and equity returns, this implies that a 1% increase in the probability of
default causes a 0.45% fall in the stock market. During the 5 days where the default probability significantly
declined, the cumulative fall in the default probability was 29.38% with a cumulative abnormal return of
23.06%. This implies a 1% fall in the probability of default causes an 0.78% rise in the stock market. While
the large window sizes used in this study raise concerns about the validity of the identification assumptions,
we will see that this estimate is very close to the results we find from our heteroskedasticity-based estimates.
The next event study we present uses four different window sizes. To construct these narrower windows,
14

we also use a “sameday” CDS spread from Markit, which is as of 9:30 am EST. We refer to this as the “open,”
and is it in addition to the “close” defined in the main text. The sameday spread is built under the assumption
that the expected recovery rate has not changed from the previous day’s close. We convert the open and close
CDS spreads into default probabilities ourselves for this analysis, rather than use probabilities provided by
Markit, because Markit does not compute “open” default probabilities, only closing ones.
We classify events into several types: close-to-close, open-to-open, close-to-open, and open-to-close.
For the Supreme Court ruling on June 16th, 2014, the event occurred in the morning of the 16th, after the
U.S. stock market opened. We classify this ruling as “open-to-close” meaning that we will use the CDS
spread change from 9:30am EDT on Monday the 16th to roughly 4pm EDT on Monday the 16th, and the
ADR returns from 9:30am EDT on Monday the 16th to 4pm EDT on Monday the 16th. If we had instead
classified the event as “close-to-close,” we would compare the 4pm EDT close on Friday the 13th to the
4pm EDT close on Monday the 16th. The “close-to-open” and “open-to-open” windows are defined in a
similar way. We use the narrower window sizes (close-to-open and open-to-close) when possible, and the
wider window sizes (close-to-close and open-to-open) when we do not have precise information about the
event time.
The heterogenous-window-size event study approach does have one advantage over the heteroskedasticity approach (as we have implemented it). For the heteroskedasticity approach, we use two-day event days,
because those are the smallest uniformly-sized windows that all of our events can fit into. If the identification assumptions required for the heterogenous-window-size event study hold, this approach may have more
power than the heteroskedasticity-based approach.
Our data set includes one additional event (16 instead of 15), because one of the two-day windows in fact
contained two separate legal rulings on consecutive days. Conceptually, the event study is almost identical,
except that we must study each type of event (higher default, lower default, no news) for each window size.
That is, we separately estimate abnormal returns and abnormal default probability changes for each window
size s ∈ S, the set of window sizes. We classify events based on the standard deviation of abnormal default
probability changes for the associated window size. Let E js denote an event of type j (higher default, lower
default, no news) with window size s (close-to-close, open-to-open, close-to-open, and open-to-close). The
abnormal return r̂i,t,s is the abnormal return for ADR i at time t with window size s, and σ̂is2 is the variance
of the abnormal returns for that window size. The J1 statistic is computed as
∑s∈S ∑t∈E js r̂i,t,s
J1i j = q
.
∑s∈S |E js |σ̂is2
Asymptotically, subject to the same caveats mentioned previously, this statistic is distributed as a standard normal. The second statistic, J2, is constructed in a similar fashion. However, the standardized cumulative abnormal returns are now defined with respect to the event window size,
s
|E js | − 4 r̂i,t,s
q ,
zi,t,s =
|E js | − 2 σ̂ 2
is

and the J2 statistic is

∑s∈S ∑t∈E js zi,t,s
J2i j = p
.
∑s∈S |E js |

This statistic is also, subject to the same caveats, asymptotically standard normal. It is not the same
as the J1 statistic, because of the heterogeneity in window size. If the cumulative abnormal returns occur
mostly in narrower windows (which have smaller variance of abnormal returns), the J2 statistic will be
larger in absolute value than the J1 statistic. If the reverse is true, the J1 statistic will be larger. The size of

15

the window may depend in part on the court releasing the opinion, the urgency with which the opinion was
required, and other endogenous factors. It is not obvious whether the J1 or J2 statistic should be preferred.
Fortunately, the results presented in table 5 using the two statistics are similar.
Table 5: Heterogenous-Window Event Study: Index
Shock Type
Higher Default
No News
Lower Default

# Events
5
6
5

CAR (%)
-10.81
-0.35
11.90

∆D (%)
14.73
3.91
-28.40

J1
-3.45***
-0.12
4.12***

J2
-3.06***
-0.09
3.47***

Notes: CAR indicates cumulative abnormal return over the event window, ∆D is the change in the risk-neutral probability of default,
and the test statistics J1 and J2 are described in the text and in Campbell et al. (1997), pp. 162. This study pools events across
different window sizes (open-open, open-close, close-open, close-close). A shock type of higher default indicates that this event
raised the default probability by more than one standard deviation, where the standard deviation is defined for non-events with the
same window size. A shock type of lower default indicates that this event lowered the default probability by more than one standard
deviation, and a shock type of no news indicates a day with a legal ruling in which the default probability did not move at least one
standard deviation in either direction. The underlying data is based on the event windows and non-events described in the text, and
uses the narrowest windows possible with our data and uncertainty about event times. The p-values are the p-values for a two-sided
hypothesis test assuming normality. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

In the 5 event days where the default probability significantly increased, the cumulative probability of
default rose 14.7% and the stock market had a cumulative abnormal return of -10.8%. This estimate implies
that a 1% increase in the probability of default causes a 0.73% fall in equity returns. During the 5 days where
the default probability significantly declined, the cumulative fall in the default probability was 28.4% with
a cumulative abnormal equity return of 11.9%. This implies a 1% fall in the probability of default causes an
0.42% rise in the stock market. When we again treat up and down movements symmetrically, we find that a
1% increase in the probability of default causes a 0.53% fall in the equity market.
Compared with these event studies, the IV-style event study described previously has the advantage of
offering an interpretable coefficient, α̂, that estimates the change in stock prices given a change in the default
probability. It also takes into account the magnitude of the default probability changes on each event day,
whereas the event studies discussed above treat each event in a category equally. However, it is not a priori
clear that the impact of the default probability on stock returns should be linear, and therefore not obvious
that this approach is superior to the two-day event study. The similarity of the two results suggests linearity
is not a bad assumption. Additionally, because the IV-style event study uses two-day event windows, it
requires stronger identification assumptions than the heterogenous-window event study.

E
E.1

Alternative Specifications
Alternative Event Windows for the CDS-IV Estimator

In this subsection, we present results for the CDS-IV estimator that use alternative event windows. The
“alternative 2-day window” results we present refer to events for which there are two possible 2-day windows
that could encompass the event. For example, if we are certain the event occurred during trading hours on
Wednesday, and believe there are no other events, statements by politicians, or the like on any adjacent
day, then we can use either the Monday close to Wednesday close two day window or the Tuesday close to
Thursday close two day window. In our main analysis, as discussed in the text, we place the event on the
first day; in this example, that would mean that we use the Tuesday to Thursday closes. In these results,
16

we place the event on the second day; in this example, the Monday to Wednesday close. The five two-day
windows that move one day earlier in these results are Dec. 5, 2012, Dec. 7, 2012, Aug. 26, 2013, Jan. 13,
2014, and Jun. 27, 2014.
The “1-Day Window” results use a different approach. For these results, each 1-day return is a data
point; our analysis now has 816 data points, instead of 401. We also gain an additional event (in the two-day
analysis, two events fell within the same window). When we are certain that an event occurred during a
one-day window, we use only that window as the event. When we are not certain which of the two possible
one-day windows contains the event, we call both of those one-day windows a single event.
In effect, we are including some non-event days as events in our 1-day window analysis. For the
heteroskedasticity-based estimator, this does not bias the results; it is still true that the variance on our
“event” days is higher than on our non-event days, even though a few of our events did not actually contain
a legal ruling. If we knew which days actually contained the release of our legal rulings, we could improve
the power of our analysis by removing the non-events from our event sample; of course, we do not know
which days to remove.
For the purposes of bootstrapping the standard errors in this analysis, we bootstrap events, not “event
days.” That is, we draw (with replacement) 16 events from our event sample, which could contain anywhere
from 16 to 32 one-day windows. We have experimented with the alternative approach of drawing 20 eventdays; the results seem qualitatively similar, but the latter approach could construct bootstrap replication
samples in which there are no actual events.

17

18

-72.71**

404
-51.40**
(20.66)
[-160.8,-4.2]

404

-70.20**

(22.39)

[-169.6,-9.3]
20
816

Obs.

∆D

SE

95% CI

Event Days

Obs.
816

20

[-167.1,-11.4]

(22.43)

15

(5)
YPF

404

15

[-146.2,-19.0]

(21.44)

-97.61**

816

20

[-142.1,-1.3]

(21.82)

-49.22**

814

20

[-203.9,106.3]

(32.35)

-85.58

CDS-IV, 1-Day Windows

404

15

[-109.9,2.4]

(22.48)

-59.07*

(6)

816

20

[-2.3,2.6]

(0.971)

-0.743

404

15

[-2.5,2.2]

(1.317)

-0.662

Official

(7)

738

17

[-33.3,38.9]

(6.744)

13.12

358

14

[4.6,19.2]

(3.478)

12.58***

Dolar Blue

(8)

736

17

[-88.3,103.4]

(14.60)

-0.955

356

14

[-61.5,125.0]

(18.30)

2.446

ADR Blue

(9)

739

17

[-169.3,331.7]

(21.30)

-0.871

359

14

[-64.4,137.6]

(21.13)

8.811

BCS

Notes: This table reports the results for the CDS-IV estimator of the effect of changes in the risk-neutral default probability (∆D) on several equity indices and exchanges rates, using alternative event
window definitions. The equity indices are the MSCI Index, the Value-Weighted index, the Value-Weighted Bank Index, the Value-Weighted Non-Financial Index, and YPF. All indices are composed of
ADRs. The index weighting is described in the text. For exchange rates, Official is the government’s official exchange rate. Dolar Blue is the onshore unofficial exchange rate from dolarblue.net. ADR
Blue is the ADR Blue Rate constructed by comparing the ADR share price in dollars with the underlying local stock price in pesos, as described in Section 3. BCS is the Blue-Chip Swap is constructed
by comparing the ARS price of domestic Argentine sovereign debt with the dollar price of the same bond, as described in Section 3. The coefficient on ∆D is the effect on the percentage log returns of an
increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine CDS curve. Standard errors and confidence intervals are computed using the stratified bootstrap procedure
described in the text. The underlying data is based on the alternative two-day event windows or one-day event windows described in the appendix.. All regressions contain controls for VIX, S&P, EEMA,
high-yield and investment grade bond indices, and oil prices. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

816

20

404

15

15

(15.23)

(4)
Non-Fin.
CDS-IV, Alternative 2-Day Windows

[-116.3,-51.5]

Events

(15.61)
[-92.7,-29.4]

(17.37)

[-111.0,-33.4]

-78.63***

SE

-57.48***

-79.47***

(3)
Bank

95% CI

∆D

(2)
Value

(1)

MSCI

Table 6: Alternative Window Equity and Exchange Rate Results

E.2

Alternate Measures of Default Probability

In this section, we discuss how our results are affected by using different measures for the probability
of default. In particular, we change two features of our baseline default probability: the horizon and the
assumed recovery rate. In our baseline specification we look at the cumulative default probability over
five years, and here we will also consider the one and three year horizons. While we have data on CDS
spreads out to 30 years, we are reluctant to use them because these longer tenors tend to be traded much less
frequently. These are the first set of “Markit” results in Table 7.
The second change we will consider concerns the recovery rate. In our baseline specification, we use
the average dealer-reported recovery rate. While this series does vary, and in particular increases towards
the eventual actual recovery rate as Argentina approached its eventual default, we cannot be sure how representative the earlier reported quotes are of market expectations. Therefore, as an alternative to the dealer
reported recovery rates, we set the recovery rate equal to 39.5%, the rate at which the CDS auction eventually
settled. We estimate the risk-neutral default probability under this assumption using the Matlab command
CDS bootstrap and use the U.S. Treasury zero coupon curve as the discounting curve. These results are
labeled “Constant Recovery” in table 7.
We will also consider the raw par spreads and points upfront as alternative measures of the default
probability. This approach has the drawback that the coefficients are more difficult to interpret, but does
come with the benefit that it uses market prices directly rather than relying on a model. The results are
labeled “Par Spread” in Table 7. The final set of results we include looks at the effect of changes in the quoted
Points Upfront. The way that CDS generally trade today is not actually with the par spread. Instead, the
buyer agrees to pay the seller a fixed coupon (5% for Argentine CDS) and “Points Upfront”, the percentage
of the notional that the buyer pays the seller upon initiation of the CDS. There is a one-to-one mapping
between the par spread and points upfront. The results are labeled “Points Upfront” in Table 7.
We also use measures of the risk-neutral probability of default computed using CDS data from Bloomberg
and Datastream. For reasons discussed in appendix section A.1, we have much less confidence in these data
sources than Markit and therefore restrict ourselves to only using the 5-year spread. Therefore, rather than
bootstrapping the risk-neutral probability of default using the ISDA Standard Model, we use the credit triangle approximation as described in appendix section A.4. We also use the realized recovery rate of 39.5%,
and so these results should be compared to the results using Markit data and a 5-year credit triangle approximation with a constant recovery assumption. These calculations are labels “Markit CT, Constant Recovery”,
“Bloomberg CT, Constant Recovery”, and “Datastream CT, Constant Recovery”, with credit triangle abbreviated CT.
Finally, we consider a specification that does not use any CDS data at all. Instead of CDS spreads or
risk-neutral default probability measures imputed from CDS spreads, we instead use the log bond price and
yield spread of a restructured bond. In particular, we use the log price and yield spread for a discount USDdenominated bond issued as part of the 2010 restructuring that matures in 2033 (ISIN XS0501194756). We
choose this bond because it has the best pricing data of the restructured bonds in Bloomberg. This has the
drawback that it is a longer tenor instrument than the CDS spreads and default probability we look at. We
define the yield spread as the yield to maturity on the bond over the over the 20-year U.S. Treasury par yield
from Gürkaynak et al. (2007). We find very similar qualitative results using these alternative measures,
although the magnitudes are difficult to compare given the difference in tenor.

19

Table 7: Alternate Default Probability Measures
Indices
Measure

Exchange Rates

Value

Banks

Non-Fin.

Blue

ADR

BCS

Markit

1Y

-30.49***

-42.45***

-30.42**

5.716***

0.910

1.025

Markit

3Y

-48.95***

-67.40***

-47.51**

8.580**

8.245

8.336

Markit

5Y

-60.43***

-83.16***

-58.63**

10.37**

10.71

11.01

Constant Recovery

1Y

-28.96***

-40.63***

-28.84***

5.701***

0.283

0.209

Constant Recovery

3Y

-51.67***

-71.16***

-50.04**

9.044**

9.387

8.942

Constant Recovery

5Y

-68.20***

-93.80***

-66.24**

11.67**

13.02

12.56

Par Spread

1Y

-0.135**

-0.199***

-0.134*

0.0283**

0.00817

0.0151

Par Spread

3Y

-0.301**

-0.441***

-0.295

0.0606**

0.0448

0.0631

Par Spread

5Y

-0.397**

-0.579***

-0.391

0.0790**

0.0643

0.0911

Points Upfront

1Y

-0.350***

-0.494***

-0.350**

0.0668***

0.00744

0.0121

Points Upfront

3Y

-0.458***

-0.645***

-0.448**

0.0832**

0.0637

0.0697

Points Upfront

5Y

-0.477***

-0.671***

-0.466**

0.0852**

0.0688

0.0759

Markit CT, CR

5Y

-48.83***

-66.54***

-47.58***

8.497**

5.799

4.019

Bloomberg CT, CR

5Y

-44.00***

-66.30**

-40.14**

12.04**

19.19*

17.86

Datastream CT, CR

5Y

-41.36***

-58.07*

-33.40

4.416

30.09*

15.42

Log Bond Price

5Y

51.11***

70.70**

47.41***

-11.61**

-14.37

-12.34

Bond Spread

5Y

-3.299***

-4.761***

-2.952***

0.755*

0.969

0.863

Notes: Measure “Markit” indicates that these are the risk-neutral default probabilities computed by Markit. “Constant Recovery” uses our estimation
of the risk-neutral default probability under the assumption that the recovery rate is equal to its realized rate of 39.%. “Par Spread” directly uses
the Composite par spread from Markit and “Points Upfront” uses the points upfront data from Markit. The next three entries use the credit triangle
(CT) approximation using Markit, Bloomberg, and Datastream CDS data assuming a constant recovery rate. “Log Bond Price” uses the log of the
price a USD-denominated restructured discount bond issue (ISIN XS0501194756) that matures in 2033. “Bond Spread” uses the yield to maturity
of this restructure bond over the 20-year U.S. Treasury par yield from Gürkaynak et al. (2007). Dolar Blue is the onshore unofficial exchange rate
from dolarblue.net. ADR Blue is the ADR Blue Rate constructed by comparing the ADR share price in dollars with the underlying local stock
price in pesos, as described in Section 3. Blue-Chip Swap is constructed by comparing the ARS price of domestic Argentine sovereign debt with
the dollar price of the same bond, as described in Section 3. The Value-Weighted index, the Value-Weighted Bank Index and the Value-Weighted
Non-Financial Index are referred to as “Value,” “Banks”, and “Non-Fin.”, respectively, and are included in their standard form and delevered.
Standard errors and confidence intervals are computed using the stratified bootstrap procedure described in the text. The underlying data is based on
the two-day event windows and non-events described in the text. All regressions contain controls for VIX, S&P, EEMA, high-yield and investment
grade bond indices, soybean and oil prices. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

F

Issues Regarding Weak/Irrelevant Instruments

In this section, we discuss two issues related to weak instruments problems. First, as noted in the text, the
CDS-IV estimator is relevant if there is a difference in the variance of the default probability changes on
event and non-event days. If the difference in this variance is small, issues relating to weak instruments can
arise (see Nakamura and Steinsson (2013) for a discussion of this issue). We formally test that difference
between the variances on event and non-event days is large.
Second, as noted in the text, there are other possible estimators of α that can be constructed from the difference of the covariance matrix on event and non-event days. These estimators, however, use an “irrelevant
instrument” under the null hypothesis that α = 0, and therefore are not appropriate for our problem.

20

F.1

Tests of Differences in Variances

We conduct two tests to verify that the variance of the default probability changes during our event windows
is significantly higher than the variance during non-event windows. Following Foley-Fisher and Guimaraes
(2013), we conduct a formal test of hypothesis that (ΩE )22 = (ΩN )22 using the method developed by Brown
and Forsythe (1974) and Levene (1960). We use the sample associated with our value index (recall that for
the exchange rates, the sample is slightly smaller). We strongly reject the hypothesis of equal variances. We
also report the first-stage F-statistic of the CDS-IV estimator for the value index, as advocated by Stock and
Yogo (2005). For the CDS-IV estimator, this first-stage F-statistic is closely related to the difference in the
variance of the default probability during the event and non-event windows.
Table 8: Tests of Differences in Variance
Test
Levene
Brown-Forsythe trimmed mean
Brown-Forsythe median
First-Stage F-stat

F-statistic
53.7***
53.0***
52.6***
338.3

p-value
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Notes: “Test” describe the F-statistic being computed. The Levene test for unequal variances is described in Levene
(1960). The Brown-Forsythe tests are described in Brown and Forsythe (1974). These tests all formally test the
hypothesis that the variance of the changes in the 5-year cumulative default probability is equal on event days and
non-event days. The sample associated with these tests is the sample we used to compute the results for our value
index, and involves 15 events and 386 non-events. The first-stage F-stat is the first-stage F-statistic from the two-stage
least squares IV implementation of the CDS-IV estimator, on the same sample. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

An alternative to pre-testing for differences in variance is weak-identification-robust inference. A procedure for this type of inference in a similar context is described and implemented by Nakamura and Steinsson
(2013). The strength of our rejection of the hypothesis of equal variances suggests that this approach is unnecessary for our application.

F.2

Irrelevant Instruments

We use the CDS-IV estimator because the alternative estimators use an “irrelevant instrument” under the
null hypothesis that α = 0. As can be seen in equation (3), the coefficient of interest can be identified as the
ratio of the first element of the matrix to an off-diagonal:
α̂RIV =

∆Ω1,1
varE (rt ) − varN (rt )
=
∆Ω1,2 covE (∆Dt , rt ) − covN (∆Dt , rt )

The estimator α̂RIV is the ratio of the sample estimates of ∆Ω1,1 and ∆Ω1,2 . The denominator, ∆Ω1,2 , is the
covariance between the default probability, which is the variable being instrumented for, and the instrument.
Under the null hypothesis, this covariance is zero, meaning that the instrument is irrelevant. As a result, the
behavior of the α̂RIV estimator under the null hypothesis is not characterized by the standard IV asymptotics,
and our confidence intervals will not have the correct coverage probabilities.51
51 Under

a different null hypothesis, that α is near, but not equal, to zero, weak identification asymptotics may be a better
characterization of the sample distribution of α̂RIV .

21

The CDS-IV estimator does not suffer from this issue. The estimator α̂CIV is based on the ratio of
the sample estimates of ∆Ω1,2 and ∆Ω2,2 . Under the null hypothesis that α = 0 and λ > 0, the CDSIV instrument is still relevant, and the standard asymptotics for α̂CIV apply. The GMM estimator, which
uses all three moments, can be thought of as a sort of average of the CDS-IV and Returns-IV estimators.
When α 6= 0, using all three moments is helpful because it takes advantage of all available information and
makes over-identifying tests possible. However, under the null hypothesis that α = 0, using the Returns-IV
estimator in any way is problematic. More formally, the Jacobian of the moment conditions with respect to
the parameters does not have full column rank when α = 0, and the identification assumption used to derive
the standard GMM asymptotics does not hold. The two-step GMM procedure, implemented using standard
asymptotics to estimate the optimal weighting matrix, would generally not correctly estimate the variances,
because of the irrelevant instrument. As a result, the weight matrix might effectively place excessive weight
on the Returns-IV estimator, relative to the CDS-IV estimator, and end up providing problematic results.

G
G.1

Additional Results
Mexico, Brazil, and Other Countries

In this section, we present the results of OLS and CDS-IV regressions for non-Argentine countries’ equity
indices and default probabilities. With OLS, we find that the Argentine risk-neutral default probability comoves with other emerging market equity indices and sovereign default probabilities (as measured by those
countries’ CDS). With the CDS-IV estimator, we find no significant causal effect. We interpret these results
as suggesting that there are common factors in the pricing of emerging market debt and equity, consistent
with the findings of Pan and Singleton (2008), but the legal rulings we study did not affect these common
factors. Moreover, our results suggest that the legal rulings did not have significant effects on other sovereign
debtors. We interpret these results as consistent with the uniqueness of Argentina’s circumstances, and the
limited applicability of these legal rulings to future cases.

22

Table 9: Default Probability, Other Countries
(a) OLS

Country
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Bahrain
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Cyprus
Egypt
France

∆D
1.199***
0.00829
0.0154
0.00776
0.0427***
0.0235***
0.00941
0.0349***
0.0290**
0.0729
0.0158
0.0224**

Country
Iceland
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
South Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Panama
Peru

∆D
-0.00515
0.0194
-0.00555
-0.00231
0.00616
0.0358***
0.00425
0.00123
0.0367***
-0.00643
0.0335***
0.0333***

Country
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Russia
South Africa
Spain
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
Venezuela
Vietnam

∆D
0.0178
0.00369
0.0249**
0.0558***
0.0364***
-0.00267
0.00681
0.0500***
0.105**
0.172***
-0.00470

Country
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Russia
South Africa
Spain
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
Venezuela
Vietnam

∆D
-0.0122
0.00355
-0.00370
0.0331
0.0197
-0.0162
-0.0136
0.0112
0.128
0.0240
-0.0646

(b) CDS-IV

Country
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Bahrain
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Cyprus
Egypt
France

∆D
1.384***
-0.00547
0.0108
-0.00337
0.00191
-0.00376
-0.00752
0.00157
-0.0239
0.119
-0.0227
-0.00211

Country
Iceland
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
South Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Panama
Peru

∆D
0.0171
-0.0158
-0.0238
-0.0271
-0.00399
0.0151
-0.0170
-0.0220*
-0.000665
-0.0156
-0.00605
-0.00359

Notes: This table reports the results for the OLS (a) and CDS-IV (b) estimators of the effect of changes in the five-year
risk-neutral Argentine default probability on the five-year risk-neutral default probability for the country listed. The default
probability measure used for the outcome variable is derived from the credit triangle approximation described in appendix A.4,
which explains why the coefficient on Argentina is not exactly one. The coefficient is the effect on the other country’s five-year
risk neutral default probability of an increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the
Argentine CDS curve. Standard errors and confidence intervals are computed using the stratified bootstrap procedure described in
the text. The underlying data is based on the two-day event windows and non-events described in the text. All regressions contain
controls for VIX, S&P, EEMA, high-yield and investment grade bond indices, soybean and oil prices. Significance levels: ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

23

Table 10: Regressions for Brazil and Mexico

OLS ∆D
Robust SE
95% CI
Event IV∆D
Robust SE
95% CI
CDS-IV∆D
Robust SE
95% CI

(2)
Brazil MSCI Index
-11.40***
(3.464)
[-17.5,-4.6]
1.967
(5.360)
[-11.5,13.8]
3.989
(4.941)
[-8.4,11.5]

(4)
Mexico MSCI Index
-6.646**
(2.857)
[-12.7,-1.1]
1.932
(3.655)
[-8.1,7.6]
3.286
(4.258)
[-10.6,9.3]

Notes: This table reports the results for the OLS, IV-style event study, and CDS-IV estimators of the effect of changes in the
risk-neutral default probability (∆D) on the stock market indices of Brazil and Mexico. The coefficient on ∆D is the effect on the
percentage log returns (of stocks) and change in the 5-year CDS spread (in bps) of an increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default
probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine CDS curve. Standard errors and confidence intervals are computed using
the stratified bootstrap procedure described in the text. The underlying data is based on the two-day event windows and non-events
described in the text. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

G.2

Multinational Firms

In this section, we discuss several firms that could be considered Argentine, but were excluded from our
analysis. Techint is a privately held multinational conglomerate that controls, among other companies,
Tenaris and Ternium. Tenaris is a steel pipe company, headquartered in Luxembourg, that conducts most
of its business outside of Argentina. Tenaris is listed on the Buenos Aires stock exchange and has an ADR
on the NYSE. Ternium is a steel company, also headquartered in Luxembourg, that is listed only on the
NYSE, but owns a subsidiary, Siderar, that is listed on the Buenos Aires stock exchange, and that subsidiary
conducts a substantial part of its business in Argentina. We include Siderar (ticker ERAR) in our data
for local stocks, and do not include Tenaris in either our local stock or ADR datasets. Petróleo Brasileiro
(Petrobras) is the state oil company of Brazil. The Argentine subsidiary of Petrobras, Petrobras Argentina
(ticker PESA) is included in our dataset, but its parent is not. We also exclude Arcos Dorados (“Golden
Arches”), an Argentina-headquartered McDonald’s franchisee that has operations across Latin America and
is listed only on the NYSE, and not in Argentina. We present results for the ADRs of Tenaris and Petrobras,
and the stock of Arcos Dorados, below.

24

Table 11: Regressions for Tenaris, Petrobras, and Arcos Dorados

OLS ∆D
Robust SE
95% CI
Event IV∆D
Robust SE
95% CI
CDS-IV∆D
Robust SE
95% CI

(1)
Tenaris ADR
-5.620
(5.163)
[-15.3,6.1]
-0.404
(6.775)
[-18.5,12.9]
0.621
(7.314)
[-18.9,12.7]

(2)
Petrobras ADR
-14.44**
(7.191)
[-30.6,-0.5]
4.271
(9.612)
[-26.4,27.5]
7.457
(10.86)
[-27.3,33.0]

(3)
Arcos Dorados
-11.27
(7.775)
[-24.9,7.0]
12.13
(10.20)
[-25.4,44.1]
16.68
(13.75)
[-26.9,45.8]

Notes: This table reports the results for the OLS, IV-style event study, and CDS-IV estimators of the effect of changes in the
risk-neutral default probability (∆D) on the ADRs of Tenaris and Petrobras, and the stock of Arcos Dorados. These companies are
multinationals that conduct a small portion of their business in Argentina, but are listed on the Argentine stock exchange (Tenaris
and Petrobras) or headquartered in Argentina but listed on the NYSE (Arcos Dorados). The coefficient on ∆D is the effect on the
percentage log returns of an increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine CDS
curve. Standard errors and confidence intervals are computed using the stratified bootstrap procedure described in the text. The
underlying data is based on the two-day event windows and non-events described in the text. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

G.3

Delevered Portfolios

In table 12 below, we present results with a “crude” deleveraging. We form an index composed of firm’s
ADRs and U.S. treasury bills. We weight each firm by the previous year’s book value of assets, and then
assume that the firm has debt equal to the difference between that book value of assets and the previous
quarter’s market value of common equity. For each firm, we include in the index a mixture of treasury
bills and ADRs, in proportion to the firms’ mix of debt and equity. We then apply the CDS-IV estimation
procedure to these indices.
Table 12: Delevered Indices, CDS-IV

∆D
SE
95% CI
Events
Obs.

(1)
Value Index
-16.00**
(4.253)
[-31.5,-4.2]
15
401

(2)
Bank Index
-10.79***
(2.259)
[-16.2,-4.4]
15
401

(3)
Non-Financial Index
-27.98*
(10.18)
[-57.0,3.5]
15
401

All regressions have controls for VIX, S&P, EEMA, oil prices, and CDX indices. Confidence intervals for value index and FX calculated using a
stratified bootstrap following Horowitz (2001). Confidence intervals for the tracking portfolios calculated using a hybrid bootstrap method, in
which the coefficients for the portfolio weights are sampled from their asymptotic distribution, then the high frequency data is bootstrapped using
the stratified bootstrap procedure described in the text.

25

G.4

Local Stock Results

In this section, we show the response of equal- and value-weighted local stock portfolios to the default
shocks. We also show the response of industry portfolios to default shocks, controlling for the response
of the Argentine market. We group these firms into equal-weighted industry portfolios, using the industry
definitions described in section 3.1. We also construct an equal-weighted index of all of the firms in our
sample, which is restricted to firms passing a data quality test also described in section 3.1. We use this
equal-weighted index as our measure of the Argentine market return. All of the returns we study in this
section are dollar returns, converted at the ADR blue rate. In Figure 5 and Table 13 below, we display
estimates of the excess sensitivity of the industry portfolios to the default shock, using the CDS-IV estimator
and the bootstrapped confidence intervals described in the previous sections.
Table 13: Cross-Section: Industry Returns, CDS-IV

∆D
95% CI
Index β
Events
Obs.

∆D
95% CI
Index β
Events
Obs.

(1)
Equal-Weighted
-51.23*
(13.61)
[-92.2,0.4]
14
353

(2)
Value-Weighted
-53.74**
(14.31)
[-125.9,-9.2]
–
14
353

(3)
Banks
-27.49*
(12.45)
[-61.0,4.7]
1.033
14
353

(4)
Chemicals
5.756
(16.78)
[-38.3,37.2]
0.896
14
351

(5)
Diverse
15.63
(18.69)
0.989
[-45.2,66.5]
14
353

(6)
Energy
-17.45
(12.96)
0.852
[-47.4,15.7]
14
353

(7)
Manufacturing
-13.79
(10.02)
0.736
[-42.1,11.1]
14
353

(8)
Non-Durables
-5.701
(7.501)
0.750
[-23.1,6.0]
14
353

(9)
Non-Financial
6.438
(4.336)
1.015
[-10.3,20.3]
14
353

(10)
Real Estate
16.54
(18.03)
0.684
[-28.1,71.6]
14
338

(11)
Telecoms
-10.74
(10.27)
0.694
[-37.9,6.7]
14
353

(12)
Utilities
34.87
(15.79)
1.605
[-13.7,88.8]
14
353

Notes: This table reports the results for the “CDS-IV” estimator. The column headings denote the outcome variable. “EqualWeighted” is an equal-weighted index of local equities in Table 2 and “Value-Weighted” is a value-weighted index of those same
stocks, excluding YPF. The returns are expressed as dollar returns, converted from peso returns using the ADR blue rate. The
industry classifications are based on Fama-French with modifications described in Section 3.1. The coefficient on ∆D is the effect
on the percentage returns of an increase in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine
CDS curve. Index beta is the coefficient on the equal-weighted index of Argentine local equities, as described in Section 5. Standard
errors and confidence intervals are computed using the stratified bootstrap procedure described in the text. The underlying data is
based on the two-day event windows and non-events described in the text. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

G.5

Individual Bond Prices

As discussed in section 6, one potential complication in interpreting our results is the RUFO clause in the
restructured bond contracts. In particular, one might be concerned that as the probability of default increases,
the expected payout on the restructured bonds also increases, raising the amount Argentina is expected to
repay creditors. In this case, the effect of the legal rulings on bond prices is ambiguous. The effect on
CDS-implied probability of default is not ambiguous; if the recovery assumption is updated correctly, then
26

the default probability is correct.
In the table below, we observe that increases in the CDS-implied default probability lead to significant
declines in the value of the restructured bonds. If the default probability is measured correctly, this is not
consistent with the story that increases in the default probability coincided with increases in the probability
of a settlement that offered improved terms to restructured bondholders. That is, either the RUFO clause
would be circumvented, or the RUFO clause was binding and a settlement was not likely.
We also investigate the performance of the holdout bonds around the legal rulings. The bonds owned
by the holdouts are very illiquid, but we were able to find some prices from Bloomberg. We are uncertain
as to the quality of these prices and therefore interpret the results cautiously. Consistent with this, we find
large standard errors in our estimation. This could reflect the poor quality of the data, but also has another
interpretation. Several rulings coincided with significant increases in the holdout bond prices, while others
did not. One possible interpretation of this fact is that some rulings raised the probability of a settlement,
while others lowered that probability, but this was largely uncorrelated with whether the rulings raised or
lowered the probability of default.
The restructured bond we examine in the table below is a dollar-denominated discount bond issued as
part of the 2010 restructuring. The holdout bond we examine is a dollar-denominated bond maturing in 2030
that court documents show NML Capital owned in 2003. For completeness, we also show a domestic-law
fixed coupon dollar bond maturing in 2017.
Table 14: Bond Level Analysis: CDS-IV

∆D
SE
95% CI
Events
Obs.

(1)
Restructured
-124.8***
(11.93)
[-146.2,-93.5]
15
397

(2)
Holdout
1.206
(40.35)
[-63.3,103.1]
15
258

(3)
Domestic
-48.56*
(10.68)
[-75.0,2.0]
15
401

Notes: This table reports the effect of changes in the five-year risk-neutral Argentine default probability (∆D) on the price
(percentage log price return) of Argentine government bonds. The coefficient on ∆D is the effect on the bond price of an increase
in the 5-year risk-neutral default probability from 0% to 100%, implied by the Argentine CDS curve. “Holdout” is a
USD-denominated bond maturing in 2030. “Restructured” is a dollar-denominated discount bond issued as part of the 2010
restructuring with an ISIN of XS0501194756 that matures in 2033. “Domestic” is domestic-law fixed coupon dollar debt maturing
in 2017 with an ISIN ARARGE03F441.

H

Holdings and Liquidity Data

In this section, we provide additional background on the likely holders of the ADRs we study. We also provide information about the relative liquidity of the ADRs and local stocks, and information on the liquidity
of Argentine sovereign CDS relative to other CDS.

27

H.1

ADR Holdings Data

In this section, we use 13-F filings to document that the ADRs we study are owned in significant quantities by
large, diversified financial institutions headquartered in the U.S. and other developed countries. 13-F filings
are quarterly filings mandated by the SEC for financial institutions that control more than $100mm USD
of financial assets. These institutions must disclose their ownership of certain assets, including ADRs that
trade on the NYSE and NASDAQ. We collect quarterly data from Thompson Reuters, which is available
via WRDS, on all 13-F reported holdings of the ADRs we study, by financial institution. There are no
Argentine financial institutions that both manage over $100mm USD and own any shares of the ADRs,
during any quarter between 2011q1 to 2014q2. We list the top ten holders of the ADRs we study, by average
market value, for the 2011-2014 period. We note that these institutions are sophisticated, mostly-US-based
financial institutions that are unlikely to be significantly affected by Argentina’s default.
Table 15: Top Institutional Holders of ADRs
Rank

Institution

Country

Avg. Holdings ($MM USD)

1

LAZARD CAPITAL MARKETS LLC

USA

413

2

MASON CAPITAL MANAGEMENT

USA

293

3

ETON PARK CAPITAL MGMT, L.P.

USA

256

4

CAPITAL INTL INC. (SINGAPORE)

Singapore

158

5

BLACKSTONE GROUP

USA

143

6

SOROS FUND MANAGEMENT, L.L.C.

USA

128

7

MSDW & COMPANY

USA

126

8

HIGHFIELDS CAPITAL MGMT, L.P.

USA

112

9

WELLINGTON MANAGEMENT CO, LLP

USA

109

10
THIRD POINT LLC
USA
87
Notes: This table reports the ten institutions that file 13-F reports with the largest dollar value of average holdings of the twelve
exchange-traded ADRs we study, over the period of 2011 quarter 1 to 2014 quarter 2. Institutions are required to file 13-F reports
if they manage more than $100mm USD of eligible securities (a set that includes exchange-traded stocks and other assets).
“Country” is the the country of incorporation, the nationality of the legal vehicle that manages the assets, not its ultimate parent.
“Avg. Holdings” is the mean dollar amount of holdings of the twelve ADRs, in millions of U.S. dollars.

H.2

ADR and Equity Liquidity Data

In this section, we compare the average monthly turnover of ADRs with the average monthly turnover of the
underlying equities traded on the local stock exchange. Local turnover comes from Bolsar.com, the website
of the Bolsa de Comercio de Buenos Aires (BCBA) and ADR Turnover is from CRSP, accessed via WRDS.
During the sample period, all of the ADRs we studied had higher turnover in the ADR market than their
respective underlying on the local exchange, often by an order of magnitude.

28

Table 16: Average Monthly Turnover of ADRs and Local Equities
Ticker
BFR
BMA
CRESY
EDN
GGAL
IRCP
IRS
PAM
PZE
TEO
TGS
YPF

Turnover - ADR, $M
81.1
232.0
67.8
23.3
207.6
2.0
32.1
56.4
71.8
259.7
16.1
1512.8

Turnover - Local, $M
18.0
33.9
1.5
15.3
95.2
0.2
2.5
29.7
13.8
42.1
1.7
80.5

ADR/Local Turnover
4.5
6.8
44.5
1.5
2.2
11.8
12.8
1.9
5.2
6.2
9.2
18.8

Notes: Ticker is the Ticker of ADR. Turnovers for the ADRs and Local equities are reported in millions of U.S. Dollars. The
daily dollar value of the turnover of local equities is calculated by dividing the ARS turnover by the ADR Blue Rate. The ratio of
ADR/Local Turnover first sums all turnover from January 2011 - July 31, 2014 and then computes the ratios.

H.3

CDS Liquidity

In this section, we use data from the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation (DTCC) to compare the
liquidity of Argentine CDS to that of other sovereigns, financial corporations, and non-financial corporations.52 For each category, we report one entity that trades more than Argentina, one roughly the same
amount, and one less. We also report the daily notional traded in millions of USD. Argentine CDS are
actively traded, with CDS as liquid as other emerging markets, major financial corporates, and several of
the most actively traded non-financial corporates. During our sample period, Argentina was on average the
15th most commonly traded sovereign CDS.
Table 17: Trading Volume of CDS

Argentine Republic
Republic Of Korea
Republic Of Indonesia
Republic Of The Philippines
Bank Of America Corporation
The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.
Citigroup Inc.
Eastman Kodak Company
Radioshack Corporation
Fiat S.P.A.

Average Trades/Day
18.2
26.7
18.3
13.6
23.5
18.2
15.5
27.0
18.1
13.4

Average Daily Notional ($m)
146.4
282.1
153.6
130.4
214.3
173.2
139.3
81.3
76.8
82.1

Notes: This data from the DTCC runs from 2011Q1 to 2014Q2. The sovereign, financial, and non-financial corporate reference
entities displayed in this table were chosen to represent entities that experienced somewhat higher, equivalent, and somewhat lower
CDS volume, in terms of trades per day.
52 We

thank Andreas Stathopoulos for this suggestion.

29

I

Econometric Model

The model we use is
∆Dt

= µd + ωDT Xt + γ T rt + βD Ft + εt

rt

= µ + ΩXt + α∆Dt + β Ft + ηt ,

where rt is a vector of returns, ∆Dt is the change in the default probability, Xt is a set of global factors
(S&P 500, etc...), Ft is an unobserved factor, and εt is the idiosyncratic default probability shock, and ηt is
a vector of return shocks that do not directly affect the probability of default. Through some algebra, we
show that this is equivalent to the systems described in equations 1 and 2, used in most of our analysis, and
the equations used in the cross-sectional analysis.
We begin by separating the equation governing the vector of returns rt into the return of asset i, ri,t ,
which is the asset of interest, and the returns of some other assets, denoted r−i,t . We separate the various
coefficient vectors and matrices, µ, Ω, α, β , γ, and shocks ηt , into versions for asset i, µi , ωiT , etc..., and
versions for the other assets, µ−i , Ω−i , etc... This system can be written as
∆Dt
ri,t
r−i,t

T
= µd + ωDT Xt + γiT ri,t + γ−i
r−i,t + βD Ft + εt

= µi + ωiT Xt + αi ∆Dt + βi Ft + ηi,t
= µ−i + Ω−i Xt + α−i ∆Dt + β−i Ft + η−i,t .

Most of our analysis considers only a single asset, ri,t , and the default probably change ∆Dt . Substituting
the returns r−i,t into the ∆Dt equation,
∆Dt

=

T µ
TΩ
µd + γ−i
ωDT + β−i
γiT ri,t
−i
−i
+
X
+
t
T α
T α
T α +
1 − γ−i
1 − γ−i
1 − γ−i
−i
−i
−i
T β
βD + γ−i
1
−i
T
Ft +
T
T α (γ−i η−i,t + εt )
1 − γ−i α−i
1 − γ−i
−i

ri,t

= µi + ωiT Xt + αi ∆Dt + βi Ft + ηi,t .

This system, for the two assets, is equivalent to the one in equations 1 and 2, except that is has two
T η
shocks, γ−i
−i,t and εt , that directly affect ∆Dt without affecting ri,t , and includes constants and observable
controls Xt . Neither of these differences substantially alter the identification assumptions or analysis. The
event study and Rigobon (2003) approach both identify the coefficient αi , under their identifying assumptions, which is the coefficient of interest.
Next, we discuss a version of this system with the market return. Let the market return be a weighted
version of the return vector, rm,t = wT rt . Separating the vectorized version of the system into four equations,
∆Dt
ri,t

T
= µd + ωDT Xt + γiT ri,t + γ−i
r−i,t + βD Ft + εt

= µi + ωiT Xt + αi ∆Dt + βi Ft + ηi,t

r−i,t

= µ−i + Ω−i Xt + α−i ∆Dt + β−i Ft + η−i,t

rm,t

= µm + ωmT Xt + αm ∆Dt + Ft + wT ηt ,

where µm = wT µ, ωmT = wT Ω, and so on. We have assumed that wT β = 1, which is a normalization.

30

Substituting out r−i,t ,
∆Dt

TΩ
T µ
ωDT + β−i
µd + γ−i
γiT ri,t
−i
−i
+
X
+
t
T α
T α
T α +
1 − γ−i
1 − γ−i
1 − γ−i
−i
−i
−i

=

T β
βD + γ−i
1
−i
T
Ft +
T α
T α (γ−i η−i,t + εt )
1 − γ−i
1
−
γ
−i
−i −i

ri,t
rm,t

= µi + ωiT Xt + αi ∆Dt + βi Ft + ηi,t
= µm + ωmT Xt + αm ∆Dt + Ft + wT ηt ,

as above. Next, we solve for Ft using the market return equation:
Ft = rm,t − µm − ωmT Xt − αm ∆Dt − wT ηt .
Plugging this into our system of equations,
(1 + αm

T β
βD + γ−i
−i
)∆Dt
T
1 − γ−i α−i

=

(

T µ
T β
T β
µd + γ−i
βD + γ−i
ω T + β T Ω−i βD + γ−i
−i
−i
−i T
−
µm ) + ( D T−i
−
ω )Xt +
T
T
T
1 − γ−i α−i
1 − γ−i α−i
1 − γ−i α−i
1 − γ−i α−i m

T β
T
T β
βD + γ−i
γ−i
βD + γ−i
γiT ri,t
−i
−i T
+
rm,t + (
−
w )η−i,t +
T
T
T
T
1 − γ−i α−i
1 − γ−i α−i
1 − γ−i α−i
1 − γ−i α−i −i
T β
βD + γ−i
1
−i
wi ηi,t +
εt
T α
T
1 − γ−i
1
−
γ
−i
−i α−i

ri,t

=

(µi − βi µm ) + (ωiT − βi ωmT )Xt + (αi − βi αm )∆Dt
+βi rm,t + (1 − wi βi )ηi,t + wT−i η−i,t .

From these equations, it follows that the event study approach and Rigobon (2003) approach both identify
the coefficient (αi − βi αm ), under their identifying assumptions, which is the coefficient of interest.

31

J

Event and Excluded Dates
Table 18: Default Probability Changes and Returns during Event Windows
Event Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Two-Day Window End Date
November 27, 2012
November 29, 2012
December 5, 2012
December 7, 2012
January 11, 2013
March 4, 2013
March 27, 2013
August 26, 2013
October 4, 2013
October 8, 2013
November 19, 2013
January 13, 2014
June 16, 2014
June 24, 2014
June 27, 2014

∆D (%)
4.40
-10.61
-6.40
-0.58
3.44
-5.41
2.59
2.35
0.05
-1.56
-0.04
2.38
7.72
-5.56
5.83

Equity Return (%)
3.90
6.75
2.84
0.10
0.08
7.44
-2.07
-3.21
-2.64
2.60
-3.99
-0.95
-6.50
2.92
-2.73

Notes: ∆D refers to the percent change in the risk-neutral probability of default and Equity Return refers to
the log return on the value-weighted index of ADRs.

32

33

Two-Day

immediately appealed.

27Nov12

3:43pm

Denial

27Nov12,
5:00am.

Post

New York

day window).

is missing (for the open-to-open, but not the two

26th is an Argentine holiday, so the ADR Blue Rate

the open on the 27th to the open on the 26th. The

bondholders immediately appealed. We compare

government of Argentina and the exchange

The denial occurred on the 26th, and both the

in the ADR data, so we exclude this event.

bounced back on the 23rd. We cannot observe this

On the 22nd, the Argentine market fell a lot, but

21st. The opinion was filed by Judge Griesa on the

23rd appear in our data to be the same as on the

all CDS marks on that date and the morning of the

Nov 22 was Thanksgiving in the United States, and

night of the 21st, but was embargoed until the 23rd.

26Nov12,

News

5:33am.

Americas

Business

22Nov12,

bondholders.

for a stay. The bondholders

27Nov12

Order

they also pay the exchange

immediately pay the holdouts, if

on his order that Argentina

Judge Griesa removes the stay

Missing

impact of “Superstorm Sandy.”

bondholders and holdouts.

on this day are questionable, given the impending

middle of the day. Unfortunately, the closing marks

The appeals court releases opinions during the

See above.

See above.

Nacion” published on 5Mar12.

about the ruling is based on an article in “La

ruling became public. The first story we found

coverage, and we are unable to determine when the

There was very little contemporaneous news

Comments

treatment of restructured

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

Missing

Missing

News Link

Passu clause requires equal

26Nov12 to

Excluded

23Nov12

12:43pm

Griesa’s ruling that the Pari
2:14pm

7:11am
26Oct12,

Decision

25Oct12,

pending appeal.

05Mar12,

Missing

Appeals court upholds Judge

Judge Griesa denies the

Excluded

26Oct12

Stay

Order

Missing

Missing

Missing

(EST)

Link

(EST)
Decision

News Time

Decision

PDF Time

Stay granted by Judge Griesa,

exchange bondholders request

Excluded

05Mar12

“ratable payment.”

Order by Judge Griesa requiring

Open,

Excluded

23Feb12

clause.

with regards to Pari Passu

Original ruling by Judge Griesa

Description

Open-to-

Excluded

Event Type

7Dec11

Window End
7Dec11, 12:55pm

34

stay of Judge Griesa’s order.

post security against the

04Dec12

of New York (custodian of the
exchange bonds) and the Euro
bondholders to appear as

Close,

05Dec12 to

06Dec12

11:49am.

for a payment formula.

Order

“creation time” of this PDF is actually at 4pm, 3 hours after the “modification time”.

01Mar13,

Appeals court asked Argentina

Decision

54 This

3:27pm.

en-banc hearing of appeal.

Order

Order

order has a 9pm “creation time” and a 5pm “modification time.”

28Feb13,

Appeals court denies request for

4:10pm

10Jan13,

10:13pm.

Denial

4:46pm

01Mar13,

Missing

12:01am

11Jan13,

11:47am

06Dec12,

1:46pm.

04Dec12,

8:24am.

29Nov12,

(EST)

Link
Stay

News Time

Decision

53 This

04Mar13

01Mar13 to

Open,

Open-to-

11Jan13

04Mar13

10Jan13 to

Excluded

bondholders to appeal to NY
state court for interpretation on

Open,

Pari Passu clause.

Appeals court denies
certification for exchange

Close-to-

interested parties.

Appeals court allows the Bank

Close-to-

05Dec12,

holdouts to force Argentina to

Close,
payments owed.

04Dec12,
1:15pm.54

Appeals court denies request of

Open-to-

29Nov12

28Nov12 to

28Feb13

11Jan13

07Dec12

05Dec12

5:04pm53

Open,

28Nov12,

PDF Time

Appeals court grants emergency

Close-to-

Description

29Nov12

Event Type
(EST)

Two-Day

Window End

Times

Financial

Shearman

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

News Link

Saturday).

other coverage is from the following day (a

The FT story is the earliest we could find. Most

restriction.

the Argentine economy, violating the exclusion

their arguments in response to expectations about

issues. Lawyers from Argentina may have changed

during which lawyers for both sides argued various

The denial occurred at the beginning of a hearing,

on the 10th.

The ruling was written immediately after the closes

Comments

35

04Oct13

2:43pm.

from swapping the exchange
bonds into Argentine-law bonds.

Open,

rejected Argentina’s motion.

Missing

03Oct12 to

Open-to-

04Oct13

motioned to dismiss, and Griesa

defaulted debt. Argentina

central bank liable for the

Griesa to consider the Argentine

Holdouts had petitioned Judge

03Oct13,

Excluded

26Sep13

appeal.

hearing to consider Argentina’s

Missing

4:21pm

Judge Griesa bars Argentina

Non-Event

23Aug13
Supreme Court schedules

Griesa’s decision.

Close,

22Aug13 to

Appeals court upholds Judge

Close-to-

22Aug13,

Decision

Order

Missing

Docket Info.

6:27pm.

03Oct13,

5:40pm.

25Sep13,

2:35pm.

11Sep13,

4:02pm

23Aug13,

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

are capturing the event.

conceivably endogenous. The rejection was filed

Holdouts reject Argentina’s payment plan. Also

an event nor excluded.

Actions by Argentina are endogenous. This neither

Argentina filed just before midnight on 28Mar13.

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

we exclude this event.

We were not able to find Judge Griesa’s ruling, so

count is as a ruling.

that this is routine and not “news,” so we do not

related to Argentina’s petition. We were advised

The Supreme Court distributed case materials

10:17am.

business day. The modification date of the PDF is

The appeals court announces decisions during the

also neither an event nor excluded.

12:01am

20Apr13,

12:05pm

30Mar13,

3:30pm. We use the one day window to ensure we

not appear in our data until after the NY close at

374bps increase in the 5yr CDS spread, which does

The Bloomberg story specifically mentions a

Comments

after business hours on Friday, 19Apr13. This is

5:20pm

payment plan.

Reply

N/A

Bloomberg

News Link

excluded)

19Apr13,

Holdouts reject Argentina’s

N/A

2:35pm

26Mar13,

(EST)

Link
Order

News Time

Decision

event or

(neither

Non-Event

excluded)

Griesa ordered.

11Sep13

26Aug13

22Apr13

Offer roughly 1/6 of Judge

(neither

event or

Non-Event

Argentina files payment plan.

rehearing.

01Apr13

11:58am

Argentina’s request for en-banc

Open,

27Mar13 to

26Mar13

26Mar13,

PDF Time

Appeals court denies

Open-to-

Description

27Mar13

Event Type
(EST)

Two-Day

Window End

36

30Jun14

27Jun14

24Jun14

23Jun14

16Jun14

13Jan14

19Nov13

Close,

swap of exchange bonds to
Argentine law bonds.

Open,

20Jun14 to

negotiations.

26Jun14
payment

Argentina misses a coupon

application for a stay, pending

Close,

Non-Event

Judge Griesa rejects Argentina’s

Open-to-

24Jun14
11:40am

26Jun14,

12:36pm

23Jun14 to

23Jun14,

Judge Griesa appoints special
master to oversee negotiations.

Open,

2:17pm

20Jun14,

See Text.

Open-to-

23Jun14

Judge Griesa prohibits debt

Close-to-

16Jun14

Supreme Court denies
Argentina’s second petition.

Close,

2:42pm

Argentina case.

Open-to-

10Jan14

Close,

Open-to-

10Jan14,

en-banc hearing.

18Nov13 to
Supreme Court agrees to hear

11:04am

19Nov13

18Nov13,

Appeals Court denies
Argentina’s request for an

Open,

Argentina’s first petition.

Open-to-

07Oct13

Supreme Court denies

PDF Time
N/A

Open-to-

Description

08Oct13

Event Type
(EST)

Two-Day

Window End

Order

Order

Order

Denial

Order

Denial

2:05pm

26Jun14,

7:35pm

23Jun14,

See Text.

2:48pm

10Jan14,

12:01am

19Nov13,

11:45am

07Oct13,

(EST)

Link
Order

News Time

Decision

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

Blog

SCOTUS

Blog

SCOTUS

Bloomberg

Blog

SCOTUS

News Link

previous event.

two-day windows, this event is pooled with the

The modification date for the order is 1:05pm. With

the close of the 20th.

do not want to include, so we start this event only at

President made a market-moving speech, which we

are missing. During day of the 20th, the Argentine

20Jun14 is an Argentine holiday, so the local stocks

The text discusses this event in detail.

10am. The document was likely posted afterwards.

The supreme court usually announces orders at

The modification time of the orders is 4:53pm.

10:00am EST).

Supreme Court issues decisions (9:30am or

The stock market opens (9:30am EST) before the

Comments

37

missed payment expires.

The 30-day grace period for the

3:51pm

Repsol bonds for one month.

30Jul14

28Jul14,

PDF Time

Judge Griesa allows Citi to pay

Non-Event

Description

29Jul14

Event Type
(EST)

Two-Day

Window End
12:01am

28Jul14,

(EST)

Link
Order

News Time

Decision

Bloomberg

Bloomberg

News Link

We end our dataset on 29Jul14.

negotiations, not the ruling.

government statements and news about

because the main news during this period was

use the one day window to be safe. Excluded

event almost certainly occurred post-close, but we

The modification time on the order is 5:07pm. This

Comments

Appendix References
Brown, Morton B. and Alan B. Forsythe, “Robust tests for the equality of variances,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 1974, 69 (346), 364–367.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and Craig MacKinlay, The Econometrics of Financial Markets,
Princeton University press, 1997.
Chodos, Daniel and Igor Arsenin, “Argentina: NDFs are a good hedge for the Blue Chip swap (only) in
“blow-up” scenarios,” Credit Suisse Fixed Income Research, April 2012.
Cotterill, Joseph, “Bonar turns into subpoena,” FT Alphaville April 2015. http://ftalphaville.ft.
com/2015/02/26/2120454/bonar-turns-into-subpoena/ [Accessed: 5/1/2016].
, “The great Bonar caper,” FT Alphaville April 2015. http://ftalphaville.ft.com/2015/04/23/
2127218/the-great-bonar-caper/ [Accessed: 5/1/2016].
Dolarblue.net, “Como adquirir (o vender) dólares legalmente a través de la Bolsa,” September
2014. http://web.archive.org/web/20150323065949/http://blog.dolarblue.net/2014/09/
como-adquirir-o-vender-dolares.html [Accessed: 5/1/2016].
, “Cálculo,” 2016. http://web.archive.org/web/20150926023011/http://blog.dolarblue.
net/p/calculo.html [Accessed: 5/1/2016].
Foley-Fisher, Nathan and Bernardo Guimaraes, “US real interest rates and default risk in emerging
economies,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2013, 45 (5), 967–975.
Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neiman, “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (3), 793–831.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, “The US Treasury Yield Curve: 1961 to the
Present,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (8), 2291–2304.
Horowitz, Joel L., “The Bootstrap,” Handbook of Econometrics, 2001, 5, 3159–3228.
Infodolar, “COTIZACIÓN DÓLAR CONTADO CON LIQUIDACIÓN,” 2016.
Levene, Howard, “Robust tests for equality of variances,” Contributions to probability and statistics: Essays in honor of Harold Hotelling, 1960, 2, 278–292.
Longstaff, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, “How Sovereign Is
Sovereign Credit Risk?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (2), 75–103.
Markit, “Markit CDS Sensitivities Methodology,” January 2012.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, “High frequency identification of monetary non-neutrality,” Technical
Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.
Pan, Jun and Kenneth J. Singleton, “Default and Recovery Implicit in the Term Structure of Sovereign
CDS Spreads,” The Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (5), 2345–2384.
Rigobon, Roberto, “Identification through Heteroskedasticity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003,
85 (4), 777–792.
Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in honor of Thomas Rothenberg, 2005, 1.
White, Richard, “The Pricing and Risk Management of Credit Default Swaps, with a Focus on the ISDA
Model,” OpenGamma Quantitative Research, 2013, (16).

38

