                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   INTERPRETING RECENT QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTS
                OF UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT EXTENSIONS

                                       Marcus Hagedorn
                                       Iourii Manovskii
                                         Kurt Mitman

                                      Working Paper 22280
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22280


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2016




Support from the National Science Foundation Grant No. SES-1357903 is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marcus Hagedorn, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Interpreting Recent Quasi-Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Unemployment Benefit
Extensions
Marcus Hagedorn, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman
NBER Working Paper No. 22280
May 2016
JEL No. E24,J64,J65

                                         ABSTRACT

We critically review recent methodological and empirical contributions aiming to provide a
comprehensive assessment of the effects of unemployment benefit extensions on the labor market
and attempt to reconcile their apparently disparate findings. We describe two key challenges
facing these studies - the endogeneity of benefit durations to labor market conditions and
isolating true effects of actual policies from agents' responses to expectations of future policy
changes.

Marinescu (2015) employs a methodology that does not attempt to address these challenges. A
more innovative approach in Coglianese (2015) and Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016)
attempts to overcome these challenges by exploiting a sampling error in unemployment rates as
an exogenous variation. Unfortunately, we find that this approach falls prey to the very problems
it aims to overcome and it appears unlikely that the fundamental bias at the core of this approach
can be overcome. We find more promising the approach based on unexpected policy changes as
in the recent contributions by Johnston and Mas (2015) and Hagedorn, Manovskii and Mitman
(2015). This approach by design addresses the problem of benefit endogeneity. It does not,
however, fully address the effects of expectations and generally yields a lower bound on the
actual effects of policies.


Marcus Hagedorn                              Kurt Mitman
Department of Economics,                     Institute for International Economic Studies
University of Oslo,                          Stockholm University
Box 1095 Blindern,                           106 91 Stockholm
0317 Oslo, Norway                            SWEDEN
marcus.hagedorn@econ.uio.no                  kurt.mitman@iies.su.se

Iourii Manovskii
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
manovski@econ.upenn.edu
1         Introduction
Unemployment insurance (UI) benefit extensions are one of the most prominent and actively
used countercyclical stabilization policies. In the U.S., UI benefits have been extended in every
recession since 1957, including an extension of unprecedented magnitude following the onset
of the Great Recession - from a typical duration of 26 weeks up to 99 weeks. While previ-
ous extensions were largely discretionary, the President’s 2016 fiscal year budget called for a
new, permanent, federally-financed emergency unemployment insurance program which would
automatically provide up to 52 weeks of additional benefits in recessions.
        Of course, the wisdom of relying on this policy for macroeconomic stabilization depends
on the assessment of its impact on the aggregate labor market variables, such as aggregate
employment, unemployment, labor force, job vacancies, etc. The vast empirical micro literature
had a considerably narrower focus of inferring the effect of benefit extensions on the duration
of unemployment spells of UI claimants and generally found a large impact.1 Moreover, the
methodology in these studies was designed with the goal of inferring the effect of benefit ex-
tensions on the search effort of the unemployed. The equilibrium labor market theory implies,
however, that unemployment benefit extensions also impact job creation decisions by employers.
        To address these limitations, Hagedorn et al. (2013) proposed a semi-structural measurement
methodology which allows to measure the aggregate effects of this policy that includes its effects
on job creation. Their estimator is designed to overcome two key empirical challenges: First, job
creation, as any other investment decision, depends not only on the current policy, but also on
the expectations of future policies. Second, unemployment benefit extensions are endogenous
with respect to economic conditions. Implementing this methodology in the data, they find that
benefit extensions raise equilibrium wages and lead to a sharp contraction in vacancy creation,
employment, and a rise in unemployment.
        In an attempt to relax the theoretical restrictions underlying the more structural approach
in Hagedorn et al. (2013), two strands have recently emerged in the literature that exploit
quasi-experimental variation to infer the total effects of UI benefit extensions.
    1
     For example, Katz and Meyer (1990), whose findings became the widely accepted benchmark in the litera-
ture, conclude: “Our results indicate that a 1-week increase in potential benefit duration increases the average
duration of the unemployment spells of UI recipients by about 0.16–0.20 week... An increase in potential benefit
duration ... from 6 months to 2 years is predicted to generate a 13–16-week increase in unemployment duration.”
This roughly doubles the duration of unemployment spells in the authors’ data. If the duration of all unem-
ployment spells doubles, the overall unemployment rate doubles as well, e.g. rising from about 5 to 10 percent
following the increase of benefit duration of this magnitude during the Great Recession. If only the spells of
unemployed who actually collect benefits double, the implied increase in aggregate unemployment would be
roughly half as large. While there is conflicting evidence in the literature on which of the two experiments is
more appropriate, the direct effect of this policy is very sizable in either of them.


                                                       1
   The first strand, which we refer to as “methodology based on mistakes” was pioneered by
Coglianese (2015) and refined by Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016). These authors
attempt to exploit the fact that unemployment benefit extensions in the US are determined
at the state level as a function of the contemporaneously measured unemployment rate, which
is subject to measurement error due to sampling variation. Coglianese (2015) identifies the
“mistakes” in setting benefit duration through a comparison with administrative UI claimant
counts. Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016), instead, exploit future revisions to state
unemployment data for this purpose. Having identified “erroneous” changes in benefit duration,
they proceed to infer the impact of these changes on unemployment or employment. In contrast
to Hagedorn et al. (2013), they find small or even negative effects of benefit extensions on
unemployment. Unfortunately, as we explain below, this happens because this methodology does
not address either of the two challenges associated with measuring the effect of UI extension on
forward looking job creation decisions. It does not address the role of expectations and, perhaps
paradoxically, falls prey to the very benefit endogeneity problem that it attempts to overcome.
   The second approach exploits unexpected cuts in benefit duration to infer their labor market
implications. Two prominent contributions in this strand of the literature are Johnston and Mas
(2015) and Hagedorn et al. (2015). The former paper exploits the unexpected cut in potential
benefit duration by 16 weeks in Missouri in April 2011. The latter paper studies the effects
of a nationwide elimination of all benefit extensions in December 2013. This methodology
addresses the challenge of policy endogeneity but it is not designed to fully control for the
effects of expectations. While the timing of the actual cut in benefits was unexpected, the benefit
extensions were never designed to be permanent, so it was natural for economic agents to expect
them to be cut at some point in the future. Thus the effect of the policy change was to bring
forward the time of the cut relative to expectations. Economic theory then suggests that these
policy experiments reveal a lower bound on the true effects of benefit extensions. Nevertheless,
both experiments suggest even larger effects than those estimated by Hagedorn et al. (2013),
thus further challenging the wisdom of relying on benefit extensions as a stabilization policy.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we draw on Hagedorn et al.
(2013) to highlight the key methodological challenges for inferring the economic consequences
of UI benefit extensions with a particular emphasis on the less understood role of expectations.
In light of these challenges, in Section 3 we review the methodology based on mistakes and in
Section 4 we discuss the methodology based on unexpected cuts in benefits. Section 5 concludes.




                                                2
2      Methodological Challenges: The Role of Expectations
A key lesson in Hagedorn et al. (2013) that sets it apart from the empirical literature is that
to obtain unbiased and interpretable estimates of the effects of unemployment benefits on
unemployment and vacancies, it is important to take into account that firms’ job creation
decisions depend on future policies. One the one hand, this finding does not come as a surprise
as all investment decisions are affected by expectations of future productivity, demand, and
economic policies. On the other hand, it is quite surprising that this channel was deemed
unimportant a priori by the empirical literature.2
    A simple example might be helpful in illustrating why taking expectations into account is
necessary. Consider two otherwise identical states, one which passes a law extending benefits
by 20 weeks for one year, and the other which extends benefits by 10 weeks permanently. The
estimates in Hagedorn et al. (2013) imply that in the state with the temporary extension,
unemployment would increase 0.5 percentage points, whereas in the state with the permanent
extension unemployment would increase by 0.8 percentage points. The effect is higher in the
state with the permanent change because firms expect that profits at all future dates will be
lower because of the extension, whereas in the state with the temporary change, firms expect
profits to be lower for one year only.3 A naive difference-in-differences analysis would erroneously
suggest a significant negative impact of unemployment benefits on unemployment. Moreover, if
employers anticipated these policy changes, say a year in advance, virtually all the adjustment
of job creation (and of unemployment in a standard search model) would have occurred prior to
the actual change in policy. Indeed, the basic optimality of firms’ decisions implies no discrete
jumps in vacancy posting at the time that expected policy changes are implemented. Thus, an
observer may conclude that unemployment and vacancies are not related to benefits because
they change dramatically when benefits do not and do not change when benefits change. It is
only by controlling for the movements induced by the changes in expectations that the correct
magnitude of the effect of UI policy can be identified. This ostensibly simple logic is remarkably
misunderstood in the literature.4
    2
      This is despite clear available evidence that economic agents react well in advance of expected UI policy
changes. See, e.g., Carling et al. (2001).
    3
      Profits decline in response to an increase in benefit generosity because wages rise for a given level of workers’
productivity. The logic is standard: An improvement of workers’ outside option leads to a wage increase to
prevent shirking in the efficiency wage model and directly affects the wage bargain in the search model.
    4
      For example, the identification strategy of Marinescu (2015) implicitly assumes that the effect of UI policies
on vacancy creation happens contemporaneously and only contemporaneously and rules out any expectation
effects. Furthermore, Marinescu (2015) focuses on just one benefit change per state to obtain a “before” and
“after” period to apply a particular existing empirical methodology. Neither selecting the sample based on
the endogenous outcome variable leading to no other benefit changes in the “before” or “after” windows nor


                                                          3
                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                   Estimated Coefficient on unemployment at period t
  Estimated coefficient on unemployment at period t
                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                  .6
                          .4




                                                                                                                                           .4
                 .2




                                                                                                                                  .2
         0




                                                                                                                          0
-.2




                                                                                                                 -.2
                                                         0   1    2       3        4       5         6   7   8                                                         0   1   2       3        4       5         6   7   8
                                                                      Future benefit change in t+k                                                                                 Future benefit change in t+k

                                                                         (a) States                                                                                            (b) Border counties
Figure 1: The Impact of Future Unemployment Benefit Durations on Current Unemployment.

                                                       The important role of expectations can also be seen directly in the data as illustrated in
Figures 1 and 2. The key feature of the U.S. unemployment insurance system is that unem-
ployment insurance policies are determined at the state level and apply to all locations within
a state. Figure 1(a) plots the coefficients estimated in Hagedorn et al. (2013) from a regression
of log state unemployment in quarter t on the log of contemporaneous benefit duration and
changes in log benefit duration over the next eight quarters (the regression includes fixed state
and time effects). We observe that current unemployment is significantly positively related to
future changes in benefit duration. State-level evidence does not isolate the effect of expecta-
tions, however, because it also reflects the endogeneity of benefits: benefit duration tends to
rise in response to past increases in unemployment at the state level. The same endogeneity
problem implies that one cannot infer the effects of benefit extensions by simply relating benefit
duration to unemployment in a panel of states.
                                                       To overcome the endogeneity problem, Hagedorn et al. (2013) employ the dominant method-
ology in the labor economics literature: they exploit a policy discontinuity at state borders and
compare the evolution of unemployment in counties that border each other but belong to differ-
ent states. This methodology was used, among others, by Holmes (1998) to identify the impact
of right-to-work laws on location of manufacturing industry as well as by Card and Krueger
(2000) and Dube et al. (2010) to identify the effect of minimum wage laws on earnings and
employment of low-wage workers. It captured the imagination of labor economists because, as
Dube et al. (2016) explain, “Measuring labor market outcomes from an immediately adjacent
county provides a better control group, since firms and workers on either side are generally af-
implicitly assuming that all other benefit changes are irrelevant seems appealing. Obviously the fact that benefits
change multiple times and agents change their behavior in anticipation of these changes requires a different
methodology.


                                                                                                                 4
fected by the same idiosyncratic local trends and experience macroeconomic shocks at roughly
the same time... The border discontinuity design also offers a way to address concerns about
policy endogeneity. Minimum wage policies may react to shocks affecting the whole state, not
just those affecting counties right at the border. Therefore, policy differences within cross-border
pairs are unlikely to reflect endogeneity concerns that may severely bias studies using state-level
variation.” Hagedorn et al. (2013) provide formal evidence that supports this assertion. Specifi-
cally, they verify that differences in state level productivities and demand (estimated using the
Bartik methodology) do not help predict the difference in variables of interest between border
counties. To ensure that the endogeneity is not induced by the county-level data construction,
they also verify that the results are consistent across numerous variables and datasets: LAUS
unemployment data, administrative UI claims data, administrative payroll counts from QCEW
and QWI, as well as the universe of on-line job vacancies.5
       This insight implies that the effects of expectations can be isolated using a similar regression
but with all variables differenced between bordering counties (unemployment is now measured
at the county level and the regression includes fixed effects for each border county pair). We
observe that eliminating the endogeneity problem plaguing the state-level analysis indeed leads
to a substantial reduction of estimated coefficients plotted in Panel 1(b) relative to Panel 1(a).
Nevertheless, current unemployment at the county level continues to respond significantly to
future state-level benefit changes.
       Clearly, the presence of significant expectation effects implies an empirical analysis which
fails to account for firms’ expectations would measure an uninterpretable mixture of the true
policy effect and of the unknown effect of labor market participants’ expectations of future
policies. To address this problem, Hagedorn et al. (2013) derive a quasi-difference estimator of
the effect of unemployment insurance policies on variables such as vacancies and unemployment
that controls for the effect of expectations.
       Using the quasi-difference estimator, we can confirm that significant effects of future poli-
cies identified using border county comparisons in Figure 1(b) are indeed due to expectations.
Specifically, Figure 2 plots estimates from the same regression with the dependent variable being
the difference in quasi-differenced unemployment between border counties. Quasi-differencing
   5
    Marinescu (2015) does not address the endogeneity problem in her work but criticizes the border-county
approach by arguing that her results based on applying this methodology to the vacancy data from one website
are different from the results in Hagedorn et al. (2013) who apply it to the data on the universe of on-line
vacancies. Of course, this only indicates that the data she uses is non-representative. She also points out that
benefit changes can induce workers to change the allocation of search effort between border counties. This was
specifically incorporated in the analysis of Hagedorn et al. (2013) and found to induce a negligible downward
bias on the effect of benefits on unemployment.



                                                       5
                               Estimated Coefficient on unemployment at period t
                            -.15       -.1      -.05       0      .05        .1


                                                                                   0   1   2       3        4       5         6   7   8
                                                                                               Future benefit change in t+k


        Figure 2: Difference of Quasi-Differenced Unemployment between Border Counties.

eliminates the effects of expectations and we observe that indeed, when expectations are con-
trolled for, the difference in current unemployment between border counties is independent of
future benefit durations.6


3       Methodology Based on Mistakes
The idea of this methodology is to infer the effects of benefit extensions by identifying the
instances when the extensions occurred “by mistake.” The credit for developing this methodol-
ogy is due to Coglianese (2015). However, his proposed implementation for identifying mistakes,
discussed below, is neither econometrically nor economically sound. This led Chodorow-Reich
and Karabarbounis (2016) to propose a different implementation, which we discuss first.


3.1      Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016)
The idea in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) is very simple. Let us,t be the unem-
ployment rate in state s at time t, as measured in real time, i.e., at time t. The duration of
benefits Ts,t in state s depends mechanically (and discontinuously) on this measurement, that
is when us,t crosses a pre-determined threshold, extended benefits are triggered either on or
off. The data on unemployment rates are revised over time as more data become available or
measurement procedures and concepts are refined. Let ũs,t be the measure of the unemployment
rate in state s at time t as revised at some future date. Denote by T̃s,t the hypothetical duration
    6
    Hagedorn et al. (2013) also use future benefits directly to compute the response of unemployment to changes
in UI generosity. They find that both the measurement using direct evidence on future policy changes and the
quasi-differenced estimator which uses current policy only deliver the same answer, implying first, that future
expected policy changes affect current choices and second, that their estimator controls for those expectations
very well.


                                                                                                         6
of benefits which would have been implemented at date t had the revised data been available
in real time (given the same mechanical rule – extended benefit triggers – mapping measured
unemployment rate to benefit duration).
       As the revised unemployment data differ from the real time unemployment data, the actual
benefit duration Ts,t differs from the hypothetical duration T̃s,t by an error ηs,t due to the
measurement error in the real time unemployment rate:

                                                Ts,t = T̃s,t + ηs,t .                                           (1)

The interpretation in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) of ηs,t as exogenous measure-
ment error requires that T̃s,t and ηs,t move independently of each other. An increase in T̃s,t
triggered by an increase in ũs,t then has to lead to an increase of equal size of Ts,t induced by
us,t (otherwise T̃s,t and ηs,t will co-move invalidating the assumption of η being measurement
error). In terms of the unemployment rate, this co-movement of benefit means that whenever
ũs,t triggers a benefit change so does us,t . We now argue that the assumption of η being measure-
ment error is demonstrably false and leads to a biased estimate. Denote therefore the difference
between these two benefit series as

                                               T̂s,t = Ts,t − T̃s,t .                                           (2)

Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) interpret T̂s,t = ηs,t as exogenous measurement
error driven by the (incorrect) real-time data but not by the revised (true) unemployment
rate. Such an exogenous variation in benefits can then be used to measure how a change in
benefits affects unemployment. The type of regressions implemented in Chodorow-Reich and
Karabarbounis (2016) regresses the revised unemployment rate on the measurement error in
benefits while controlling for state and time fixed effects δs and δt ,7

                                         ũs,t = β T̂s,t + δs + δt + s,t .                                     (3)

The key identification assumption to obtain an unbiased estimate is that the error term s,t is
uncorrelated with the regressor T̂s,t . The automatic increase in benefits in a state as a mechanical
discontinuous function of state unemployment — a relationship the authors apparently overlook
— immediately implies that this assumption is wrong. To see this consider a shock to the left
hand side variable, revised unemployment ũs,t , which by assumption in Chodorow-Reich and
   7
     Surprisingly, with exception of Hagedorn et al. (2013) and Hagedorn et al. (2015), this literature does not
make use of the flexible interactive effects model of Bai (2009) which improves upon including just fixed effects as
it controls for the heterogeneous impact of aggregate shocks across locations such as states or counties, provides
a natural way to control for observed and unobserved spatial heterogeneity and allows for a very flexible model
of local-level trends in variables.


                                                         7
Karabarbounis (2016) is not correlated with T̂s,t , that is it cannot induce a change in T̂s,t at
the same time. However, a shock that changes ũs,t also changes (or can change) hypothetical
benefits T̃s,t . The question is then whether this induced change in T̃s,t leaves T̂s,t unchanged.
This is equivalent to the question whether changes in T̃s,t induce changes in ηs,t , which requires
(as explained above) that the real time unemployment rate and the revised unemployment rate
always cross the threshold at the same time. However, the measurement error in unemployment
rates implies that this is not the case in the data.8


       A Simple Example. A simple example illustrates the bias in this approach. Suppose
there is only one unemployment threshold at 6%, so that benefit duration increases by 13
weeks from the regular 26 weeks to 39 weeks when unemployment crosses this threshold from
below. Duration falls from 39 to 26 weeks if this threshold is crossed from above. At any point
in time the economy can be described by one of four cases depending on whether revised and/or
real-time unemployment are above or below the threshold:

                     Case 1. ut < 6%,        ũt < 6% :        Tt = 26,       T̃t = 26,   T̂t = 0.
                     Case 2. ut > 6%,        ũt < 6% :        Tt = 39,       T̃t = 26,   T̂t = 13.
                     Case 3. ut < 6%,        ũt > 6% :        Tt = 26,       T̃t = 39,   T̂t = −13.
                     Case 4. ut > 6%,        ũt > 6% :        Tt = 39,       T̃t = 39,   T̂t = 0.

       Now consider the shock  from equation (3) which increases the revised unemployment rate
ũ and triggers an increase in benefits T̃ by 13 weeks. This shock moves the economy from Case
1 or 2 to either Case 3 or 4. Starting from Case 1, T̂ changes from 0 to either −13 or to 0.
Starting from Case 2, T̂ changes from 13 to either −13 or to 0. So in all cases T̂ weakly decreases
(strictly in 3 out of 4 scenarios) when T̃ increases, establishing a negative co-movement. The
case of a shock  which decreases the revised unemployment rate ũ and triggers a decrease in
benefits T̃ is symmetric. This shock moves the economy from Case 3 or 4 to either Case 1 or 2.
Starting from Case 3, T̂ changes from −13 to either 0 or to 13. Starting from Case 4, T̂ changes
from 0 to either 0 or to 13. So in all cases T̂ increases (strictly in 3 out of 4 scenarios) when T̃
decreases, once again establishing a negative co-movement.

   8
       The same arguments apply to regressions for lagged responses of unemployment

                                       ũs,t+k = β k T̂s,t + δs + δt + s,t+k ,                               (4)

since the shock to unemployment  (and to most other macro variables) is highly persistent. An innovation t
which increases today’s unemployment rate ũs,t and triggers an increase T̂s,t also increases s,t+k and therefore
ũs,t+k , implying a bias in the estimate β k .


                                                          8
                                                              9
                                                                        Trigger                   Revised
                                                                      Threshold              Unemployment
                                                              8




                                          Unemployment Rate
                                                              7


                                                              6


                                                              5
                                                                                                           Real-time
                                                              4                                        Unemployment


                                                              3
                                                                  0          5      10            15         20          25
                                                                                         Time
                                                                      (a) Real-time and Revised Unemployment
                                                50                                 Hypothetical
                                                                                      Benefits

                                                40

                                                30
                      Weeks of Benefits




                                                20
                                                                                                             Real-time
                                                                                                              Benefits
                                                10

                                                         0

                                          -10                                             Error


                                          -20
                                                              0              5      10            15         20          25
                                                                                         Time
                           (b) Real-time and Hypothetical Benefits and “Mistakes”

Figure 3: Mechanical Negative Correlation between the “Errors”, Hypothetical Benefit Dura-
tion, and Revised Unemployment Invalidating Empirical Methodology in Chodorow-Reich and
Karabarbounis (2016).

   Figure 3 illustrates the mechanical bias that endogeneity of benefits at the state level induces
on the measurement approach in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016). Panel 3(a) plots
a path of real time and revised unemployment that includes all possible transitions across the
four Cases described above. Panel 3(b) plots the associated paths of real-time and hypothetical
benefit durations and of the difference between real time and hypothetical benefit durations.
The mechanical negative co-movement between the error and hypothetical benefits (and revised
unemployment) is immediately evident. This, of course, invalidates the key identifying assump-
tion in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) that innovations in revised unemployment


                                                                                         9
that trigger hypothetical benefit changes cannot lead to changes in the error T̂ appearing on
the right hand side of the regression.


  Evidence of Bias in the Data. The negative relationship between T̂ and T̃ is also easy to
see directly in the data. We use the same real time and revised measures of state unemployment
rate during the Great Recession as Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016). We regress the
“measurement error” in benefit duration, T̂s,t , on the hypothetical benefit duration, T̃s,t , based
on the revised unemployment data:

                                   T̂s,t = β T T̃s,t + δs + δt + Ts,t .                          (5)

   Violating the key identifying assumption in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016),
β̂ T = −0.061 is negative and strongly significant (s.e. 0.015) (focusing only on the Great
Recession period of 2005–2013 we find an even stronger negative relationship β̂ T = −0.070, s.e.
0.017). Thus, as expected, the two variables are strongly negatively correlated. Unsurprisingly,
regressing the hypothetical benefit duration, T̃s,t , on the revised unemployment rate, ũs,t ,

                                   T̃s,t = β u ũs,t + δs + δt + us,t .                          (6)

yields a positive significant coefficient, β̂ u = 0.879 (s.e. 0.105), reflecting partially that the
benefit duration series was constructed using the revised unemployment rate series (focusing
again on the Great Recession period we find an even stronger relationship β̂ u = 1.229, s.e.
0.157). Taken together, these findings clearly imply a downward bias in the estimated β in
equation (3). In case benefit extensions had a limited effect on unemployment, the estimated β
would be significantly negative whereas a value of β equal to zero suggest a true positive effect
of an increase in benefits on unemployment.


   Errors vs. Innovations. Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) are not using T̂s,t
but instead use innovations to this series,

                                         νs,t = T̂s,t − Et−1 T̂s,t .                              (7)

Obviously, the same arguments apply and thus the same endogeneity problems arise with any
innovation series as they do to the original series. When we regress the innovations νs,t on
hypothetical benefits T̃s,t ,

                                   νs,t = β I T̃s,t + δs + δt + Is,t ,                           (8)

we find a negative significant β̂ I = −0.014 (s.e. 0.0046) (during the Great Recession period we


                                                    10
           0.10




                                                                                        0.10
Innovations and Errors




                                                                             Innovations and Errors
                0.05




                                                                                             0.05
  0.00




                                                                               0.00
           -0.05




                                                                                        -0.05
                2005m1                       2010m1                2015m1                    2005m1          2010m1                2015m1
                                                date                                                            date

                                      Error Innovations   Errors                                      Error Innovations   Errors


                                       (a) California                                                   (b) Nevada

                                     Figure 4: Errors T̂ and innovations in California and Nevada.

find β I = −0.014, s.e. 0.00468).
                         Furthermore, constructing innovations instead of directly using the series of errors intro-
duces an additional bias to the analysis, since the unemployment rate is used to generate
predictions of future benefits (see Footnote 9 in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016)).
More generally, an insurmountable inconsistency plagues the approach of using innovations. On
the one hand, agents use the unemployment rate to predict future benefit levels, so omitting un-
employment when constructing innovations will not yield unanticipated innovations to agents.
When omitting unemployment, the econometrician would use regressors as innovations that are
not innovations to agents, but an unknown convolution of current and past variables, which
invalidates the approach. Thus, this requires using the unemployment rate when constructing
innovations, but this again leads to an almost unavoidable bias. The econometrician has to
make arbitrary choices about agents’ information sets and their forecasting procedure, which
are almost certainly not correctly reflecting how agents forecast, so that innovations depend on
past variables such as the unemployment rate. As a result, a bias of unknown sign and size arises
when the effect of an innovation on unemployment is estimated since innovations depend by
construction on unemployment. In both cases — using unemployment as Chodorow-Reich and
Karabarbounis (2016) apparently do or not using it — leads to the conclusion that additional
biases are added when using innovations.
                         The conclusion that the construction of innovations has to be biased is confirmed through
the experience of California and Nevada, as shown in Figure 4. The real-time and revised benefit
duration fully agreed in these states so that at no point in time there was an error in setting ben-
efits, i.e. T̂t = 0 ∀t. Remarkably, however, the innovations series computed by Chodorow-Reich
and Karabarbounis (2016) for these states are almost never zero and move around quite inex-

                                                                            11
plicably. It is unclear which behavior of unemployment or other macro variables in California
and Nevada are causing movements in innovations but it is clear that these are erroneous move-
ments not reflecting error in benefits. Clearly, one would expect that regressing unemployment
on noise yields a coefficient of around zero.


3.1.1      A Placebo Test of the Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) Estimator

To illustrate the severity of the endogeneity bias plaguing the empirical strategy in Chodorow-
Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) we apply the estimator to the data from a time period when
there were no benefit extensions with an artificially created placebo measure of weeks of benefits
available based on a hypothetical trigger of benefit extensions and using real-time and revised
unemployment data.
       Specifically, we consider data from 1996-2000 when no extended benefits were available in
the US.9 In practice, a state triggers on a benefit extension in a given month if the three month
average of the state seasonally adjusted unemployment rate exceeds a pre-determined threshold.
Consequently, we use the real-time measure of unemployment provided by Chodorow-Reich and
Karabarbounis (2016) and specify our placebo extension of 1.75 months (to correspond to the
average non-zero benefit duration error in their sample) in any month when the preceding three
month average of the state seasonally adjusted unemployment rate exceeded a pre-specified
threshold, τ . Importantly, the 2015 state unemployment data revision by the BLS exploited by
Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) affected not only the data from the Great Recession
period, but also the data all the way back to the 1970s. Thus, we use the ũs,t data from the
2015 revision to construct T̃s,t — the hypothetical duration of benefits which would have been
implemented using the revised data given the same mechanically pre-specified thresholds τ .
The two measures of unemployment and the implied benefit series allow us to construct the
“measurement error” T̂s,t as in Eq. (2).
       We consider placebo trigger thresholds, τ , in 0.05% increments from 4% to 6% unemploy-
ment. This range was chosen to include thresholds that generate both higher and lower frequency
and duration of triggered benefit extensions than observed during the Great Recession period,
thus encompassing the plausible range of appropriate placebo experiments. We then regress
the revised unemployment on the “measurement error” in benefits as in regression (3) for each
τ . The estimates are all large and negative, and all but one of the individual coefficients are
statistically significant. The coefficients corresponding to each threshold are plotted in figure
   9
    Except for a brief extension of benefit duration in New Jersey studied by Card and Levine (2000). Removing
that episode from the placebo sample has no impact on the findings.



                                                     12
                                     .1
                                                         -1*Estimated Effect from Hagedorn et al. (2013)




                     Coefficient on Placebo Benefits
                      -.2           -.1
                                     -.3        0




                                                       4.0             4.5               5.0           5.5   6.0


   Figure 5: Placebo Test of the Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) Methodology.


5. Of course, given that there were no actual unemployment benefit extensions, an estimator
free of endogeneity bias must have recovered a zero effect of nonexistent benefit extensions of
unemployment. Thus, the large negative impact of benefit extensions on unemployment found
with the Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) estimator on the placebo sample, implies
that the result is driven entirely by the endogeneity bias described above.10 To highlight the
size of the bias, the red line in Figure 5 plots the minus one times the effect of an extension of
this size estimated in Hagedorn et al. (2013). The average estimated negative bias in Chodorow-
Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) is nearly four times as large as the estimated positive effect
in Hagedorn et al. (2013) and is large for all values of τ . The size of the bias then suggests that
the fact that Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) find no effect of benefit extensions
on unemployment is consistent with significantly larger positive effects than those found in
Hagedorn et al. (2013). The implied magnitude of the effect appears implausible, however.


3.1.2    The Role of Expectations

Up to this point in our discussion, we have given the benefit of the doubt to Chodorow-Reich
and Karabarbounis (2016), who interpret the difference between us,t and ũs,t as measurement
error. This is a questionable assumption because the data revision they rely on reflected not
only better state unemployment data but a host of methodological changes, including, e.g. a
  10
     Note that Hagedorn et al. (2013) use the same placebo experiment to verify the excellent performance of
the estimator they proposed. Coglianese (2015) reaches a different conclusion because he does not correctly
implement the estimator in Hagedorn et al. (2013) and because his placebo sample includes year 2001 despite
the fact that unemployed in 2001 actually received extended benefits.


                                                                                    13
different seasonal adjustment procedure. If, however, the difference in the real-time and re-
vised unemployment rate is not measurement error, then clearly the difference between the
corresponding benefits cannot be measurement error either.
      The measurement approach in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) also does not
take into account that expectations of the full sequence of future expected benefits matter
for forward-looking decision makers. The strategy to identify innovations in the stochastic
process for “policy errors” is not per se helpful in inferring agents’ expectations for at least
two reasons. First, just considering unexpected current period innovations ignores changes in
all future benefits. Obviously, a one-period change in benefits can only have very small effects
since investment decisions by forward-looking agents respond mainly to persistent changes in
future policies. Focusing just on innovations, therefore, ignores the quantitatively relevant part
of policy and can even lead to wrong conclusions as we explained above. Second, inferring
agents’ surprises from innovations in the stochastic process is problematic. This has been long
realized in the literature which emphasized the distinction between the information set of the
econometrician and the information set that the economic agents act on. For example, it is
well understood that stochastic innovations in earnings identified by an econometrician need
not correspond to surprise realizations to an agent but may well be anticipated by the agent
long in advance. The key lesson from that literature is that one needs to impose considerably
more structure to infer the information sets of forward looking individuals. We cannot imagine
how this can be accomplished while imposing less structure than is required in Hagedorn et al.
(2013).


3.2       Coglianese (2015)
Coglianese (2015) was the first to propose to identify the effects of benefit extensions based on
what the author labels a “natural experiment ... whereby random sampling error in a national
survey altered the duration of unemployment insurance in several states, resulting in random
variation in the number of weeks of unemployment insurance available at the state level.”
      However, what Coglianese (2015) labels a sampling error is simply the difference between
the insured unemployment rate (IUR) and the total unemployment rate (TUR). The IUR
counts the number of continuing claimants in regular state UI programs (weeks 2 through 26 of
unemployment). TUR, on the other hand, counts all unemployed. Since IUR refers to a small
subset of all unemployed, it clearly differs from TUR.11 Importantly, the difference is endogenous
 11
  The BLS provides a more detailed explanation on its website (http://www.bls.gov/cps/cps htgm.htm):
“While the UI claims data provide useful information, they are not used to measure total unemployment


                                                 14
to current and future economic conditions and UI policy. For example, the difference includes
those who exhausted regular state benefits (and might be receiving extended benefits) and the
share of such long-term unemployed is endogenous to both economic conditions and policy.
It also depends on the decision of unemployed whether to apply for benefits, which clearly
depends on the future economic conditions they expect to face. It also depends on the decision
of whether to quit a job or leave schooling and enter unemployment ineligible for benefits.
Thus, the difference is an aggregate of a myriad of endogenous choices and is certainly not a
natural experiment.12 The empirical strategy in Coglianese (2015) that requires exogeneity of
this difference is thus obviously fundamentally flawed.13 Presumably, this led Chodorow-Reich
and Karabarbounis (2016) to propose a different implementation discussed above.


3.2.1    A Placebo Test of the Coglianese (2015) Estimator

To illustrate the bias in Coglianese (2015), we apply his methodology to the same placebo
sample as in Section 3.1.1. Specifically, following Coglianese (2015), we control for economic
conditions by including 8 lags of IUR and instrument for UI duration with a dummy variables
for whether a state was triggered on. The dependent variable is measured in quarter t + 1 “to
avoid issues of simultaneous causality.” The regression includes state and time fixed effects and
because they exclude several important groups. To begin with, not all workers are covered by UI programs.
For example, self-employed workers, unpaid family workers, workers in certain not-for-profit organizations, and
several other small (primarily seasonal) worker categories are not covered.
In addition, the insured unemployed exclude the following:
   1. Unemployed workers who have exhausted their benefits.
   2. Unemployed workers who have not yet earned benefit rights (such as new entrants or reentrants to the
      labor force).
   3. Disqualified workers whose unemployment is considered to have resulted from their own actions rather
      than from economic conditions; for example, a worker fired for misconduct on the job.
   4. Otherwise eligible unemployed persons who do not file for benefits.
Because of these and other limitations, statistics on insured unemployment cannot be used as a measure of total
unemployment in the United States. Indeed, over the past decade, only about one-third of the total unemployed,
on average, received regular UI benefits.”
  12
     Labeling the difference between TUR and IUR a “sampling error” is also misleading. First, the TUR is
constructed by LAUS program as a partnership between states and the BLS and it specifically corrects for the
sampling error in the CPS and the correlation structure of its errors that Coglianese (2015) mentions. Second,
TUR estimates and not IUR estimates are used to allocate billions of dollars by various federal programs (see
http://www.bls.gov/lau/lauadminuses.pdf for a subset). Wouldn’t it be remarkable if policymakers have decided
to base policies on a “sampling error” when counts of state UI claimants are readily available to them?
  13
     Hagedorn et al. (2013) have already used the same administrative UI claims data that are used by Coglianese
(2015) to corroborate their findings based on total unemployment. They show how comparable statistics can be
constructed from the two measures of unemployment and find that both measures of unemployment lead to the
same conclusions.




                                                      15
                                     .3            .25
                   Coefficient on Placebo Benefits
                    .05      .1      .15
                                     0
                                     -.05   .2




                                                         4.0   4.5        5.0             5.5           6.0


                  Figure 6: Placebo Test of the Coglianese (2015) Estimator.


standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                                                            8
                                                                            X
         log(T U Rs,t+1 ) = β log(U IDurations,t ) +                              γk log(IU Rs,t−k ) + θs + δt + s,t .   (9)
                                                                            k=1

   The estimated coefficients for the full range of τ are plotted in Figure 6, revealing the
systematic and highly significant bias across all placebo specifications. Despite being estimated
on the placebo sample where no extensions actually took place, the average of the estimates
(across values of τ ) is β̂ = 0.156, implying large effect of placebo benefits on unemployment.
These results clearly indicate that the methodology proposed in Coglianese (2015) does not
overcome the endogeneity problem. Unfortunately, this placebo experiment cannot fully describe
the size and even the sign of the bias in the actual data where benefit extensions actually take
place. This is because IUR is endogenous to current and expected benefit extensions, inducing
an additional endogeneity bias not captured by this placebo analysis.


3.2.2   Final Comment on Coglianese (2015)

While interpreting the clearly biased estimates of Coglianese (2015) is probably a fool’s errand,
it seems worth pointing out that his preferred estimate of positive effects of benefit duration
on employment growth is fully consistent with a Mortensen-Pissarides search and matching
model. Indeed, we replicated this regression on the data generated from the model in Hagedorn
et al. (2013) and found a coefficient of 0.103, somewhat larger than the empirical estimate in
Coglianese (2015). Of course, higher benefits in the model lead to a lower level of employment.
At first glance this might appear like a contradiction but the logic is simple. Imagine that

                                                                     16
benefits increase unexpectedly in period t and are expected to last for n periods. This leads
to an upward revision in expected benefits in periods t + 1, t + 2, etc. Whenever the increase
in period t benefits leads to an upward revision of expected future benefits, employment in
period t falls relative to employment in period t + 1, employment in period t + 1 falls relative to
employment in period t+2 and so on until benefits return to their pre-period t level. Thus, higher
benefits are associated with higher employment growth but this is due to benefits depressing
current employment.


4        Methodology Based on Unexpected Cuts in Benefits
Another approach to assessing the effects of UI benefit extensions is based on studying the data
surrounding unexpected changes in benefit duration, often occurring for political reasons.


4.1       The Natural Experiment in Missouri, Johnston and Mas (2015)
In a prominent recent quasi-experimental study in this methodological tradition, Johnston and
Mas (2015) assessed the impact of the sudden and unanticipated cut in potential benefit dura-
tion by 16 weeks in Missouri in April 2011. The cut applied only to new claimants while those
who claimed benefits prior to the reform were grandfathered into the old potential benefit du-
ration schedule. Using individual-level administrative data on unemployment and employment,
the authors find a very large positive effect of the cut in benefit duration on exit rate from
unemployment (mainly into employment). This estimate is based on a comparison of a large
number of individuals that differ with respect to potential benefit duration because of becoming
unemployed shortly before or shortly after the reform. Thus, it plausibly identifies the effect
on workers’ search intensity because all these individuals arguably face the same labor mar-
ket. Hagedorn et al. (2013) label the effect of UI benefit duration on individual search effort
controlling for market-level conditions “the micro effect.” This effect is well identified in John-
ston and Mas (2015) although it is significantly larger that earlier estimates based on a similar
methodology, e.g., Card and Levine (2000).14
       Knowledge of the magnitude of the micro effect is, however, insufficient to assess the total
effect of changes in benefit duration on the labor market. Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis
(2016), among others, argue that evaluating a one time policy change in a single state provides
effectively only one data point and one cannot draw econometrically sound conclusions from
  14
    It is also larger than the estimates in the older literature reviewed in Krueger and Meyer (2002) and
Nicholson and Needels (2004).


                                                   17
                          4500                                                                         59.4




                                                                         Employment Population Ratio
                                                                                                       59.2
Job Openings (Millions)



                          4000                                                                          59

                                                                                                       58.8

                          3500                                                                         58.6

                                                                                                       58.4

                          3000                                                                         58.2
                             2012 2012.5 2013 2013.5 2014 2014.5 2015                                    2012 2012.5 2013 2013.5 2014 2014.5 2015
                                              Date                                                                           Date
                                        (a) Vacancies                                                   (b) Civilian Employment to Population Ratio

Figure 7: Dynamics of Aggregate Vacancies and Employment before and after 2014 Unemploy-
ment Benefit Duration Cut.

it that would apply to a nationwide cut in benefits. Despite this concern about their external
validity, the patterns suggested by the Missouri experiment appear interesting. Johnston and
Mas (2015) find that job creation must have increased following the reform just enough to absorb
all the unemployed workers who increased their search effort following the reform. Hagedorn
et al. (2013) consider direct evidence on the behavior of job vacancies in Missouri and document
a sharp and discontinuous rise in the vacancy-unemployment ratio in Missouri at the time of
the reform. Note that, at least on impact, the observed jump in vacancy creation cannot be in
response to higher search effort of new claimants eligible for fewer weeks of benefits following
the reform, simply because they represent a tiny fraction of all unemployed (only about a third
of all unemployed were claiming benefits in Missouri at the time of the reform and it took a
number of months for the claimants under the new rules to account for a meaningful share of
all claimants). This is consistent with the presence of a significant “macro effect” introduced
by Hagedorn et al. (2013) following the logic of the standard equilibrium search model where a
weakening of the outside option of workers raises the hiring incentives for firms.


4.2                              The 2014 Employment Miracle, Hagedorn et al. (2015)
In this section we discuss a quasi-experimental evaluation of a nationwide cut in benefits that
overcomes the concern raised by Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) about the general-
ity of findings based on a policy change in one state. Specifically, Hagedorn et al. (2015) exploit
the unexpected failure by US Congress in December 2013 to reauthorize the unprecedented
benefit extensions introduced during the Great Recession. All federal extensions were abruptly


                                                                        18
cut to zero, implying the average decline of benefit duration across US states of about 25 weeks.
Following the reform, the US labor market boomed. For example, Figure 7 illustrates a sharp
increase in aggregate employment to population ratio and the number of job vacancies seeking
to recruit a worker. While the evidence appears striking, it is nevertheless not convincing as it
is still based on effectively one data point, albeit the one for the whole nation.15
       To obtain more robust conclusions, Hagedorn et al. (2015) exploit the fact that, prior to
being cut to zero in December 2013, federal benefit extensions ranged from 0 to 47 weeks across
U.S. states and the fact that this policy change was exogenous to cross-sectional differences
across U.S. states. The available benefit duration in a given state just prior to the reform,
however, was endogenous to the economic conditions of the state. Thus, as in Johnston and
Mas (2015), or indeed in any attempt to infer aggregate policy effects from variation induced
by policy changes, the key challenge to a proper inference of the effects of benefits is to ensure
that the effects are not confounded by pre-existing differences in employment or labor force
trends. Hagedorn et al. (2015) use two distinct empirical methodologies and three different
models of local-level trends for this purpose. They also consider employment data based on
administrative job counts and on (primarily survey-based) counts of individuals with a job.
Across all methodologies and data sources they consider, they find a large and statistically
significant effect of the 2014 cut in benefits on employment. They provide a model that allows
to aggregate local estimates to a nationwide impact and conclude that the cut in benefit duration
accounted for about 50 to 80 percent of the aggregate employment growth in 2014. As Figure
8, summarizing their findings, indicates, over half of the aggregate employment growth was due
to the increase in the labor force induced by the policy reform.16


4.3       Policy Reforms and Expectations
The advantage of using exogenous policy reforms to identify the effects of benefit extensions is
that it partially breaks the mechanical link between unemployment and available benefit dura-
tion. This happens only partially because pre-reform benefit duration was indeed endogenous
to economic conditions and it is important to measure the counterfactual employment trends
that would have realized in the absence of the reform.
       Moreover, exploiting this type of reforms cannot by itself fully control for the effects of
expectations. While the reform itself is exogenous, what is relevant for the economic agents is
  15
     Similarly striking evidence emerges from the labor market boom following the benefit duration cut (known
as Hartz IV reform) in Germany. Krause and Uhlig (2012) review and structurally interpret the evidence.
  16
     This is consistent with the theoretical prediction of the standard search model that an increase in job
availability draws non-participants into the labor market. See Pissarides (2000) Ch. 7 for a textbook treatment.


                                                      19
                                              3
                                                                                    Employment (LAUS)


        Implied Aggregate Eﬀect (millions)   2.5                                    Labor Force (LAUS)

                                                                                    Payroll Employment (QCEW)
                                               2


                                             1.5


                                                  1


                                              0.5

                                                   0
                                                       Linear Time
                                                          Trends       Interac5ve
                                                                         Eﬀects          "Natural
                                                                                         Factors"        Event Study

                                                                     Methodology and Speciﬁca5on
Figure 8: Implied aggregate effects of the benefit cut in December 2013 across methodologies
and datasets used in Hagedorn et al. (2015).


the change in the full path of expected future benefit durations induced by the reform. Indeed,
this experiment is likely to yield a lower bound on the true effect if job creators assigned, say,
prior to the reform in December 2013, some probability to a future cut in benefit duration but
were surprised by the specific timing of when the reform was implemented. Moreover, in case
of evaluating a policy reform in an individual state, say, Missouri, there is a downward bias if,
upon observing the policy change in that state, job creators in neighboring states assigned a
higher probability to similar benefit duration cuts taking place in their states.


5    Conclusion
We reviewed recent methodological and empirical contributions aiming to provide a compre-
hensive assessment of the effects of unemployment benefit extensions on the labor market and
attempted to reconcile their apparently disparate findings. The two key challenges facing the
literature is to overcome the endogeneity problem due to the fact that unemployment benefit


                                                                                20
durations set at the state level are a function of state’s labor market conditions. The second
key challenge is driven by the fact that individuals’ decisions respond to expected changes in
benefits before those changes actually take place. This makes it difficult to separate the ef-
fects of policies from the effects of expectations of future policy changes (perhaps induced by
contemporaneous changes in policy).
   Hagedorn et al. (2013) proposed an estimator designed to overcome these challenges. It
draws on the classic approach in labor economics to the evaluation of (endogenous) state level
policies based on the comparison of border counties belonging to different states. They also
show that a very large class of modern equilibrium labor market models implies that the effects
of expectations can be controlled for using an estimator based on the quasi-difference of the
variables of interest. Following this approach, they find a significant positive effect of unemploy-
ment benefit extensions that took place during the Great Recession on overall unemployment.
The quantitative magnitude of their findings is somewhat smaller than what can be expected
form the earlier literature but this is likely due to methodological improvements.
   The more recent literature has attempted to dispense with some of the complexities asso-
ciated with the semi-structural approach in Hagedorn et al. (2013). One approach, pioneered
by Coglianese (2015) and refined in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) attempts to
overcome the endogeneity problem by identifying “mistakes” in setting policy, i.e., the instances
when benefits were set in a way that was not justified by labor market conditions. Coglianese
(2015) identifies the “mistakes” as the difference between the insured unemployment rate and
the total unemployment rate, but as we explained, the difference between these to variables can-
not be interpreted as a mistake as the two variables and the difference between them measure
endogenous choices affected by benefit policy. The approach in Chodorow-Reich and Karabar-
bounis (2016) measures the errors as the difference between the benefits set based on real time
unemployment data and those that would have been set had the revised (in the future) unem-
ployment data been available in real time. Unfortunately, their whole strategy for overcoming
the mechanical correlation between real-time benefits and unemployment is based on ignoring
the same mechanical correlation between revised benefits and unemployment. Their procedure
flips the sign of the bias but does little to eliminate it. We show in a placebo experiment that
the bias on the estimated effects of UI benefit extensions is large and negative. The assessment
of the quantitative magnitude of the bias in the data when benefits actually change is even more
complicated because this approach does not deal with the effects of expectations. Thus, while
this approach is quite creative, its current implementations are fundamentally flawed at the
very basic level. Unfortunately, we are doubtful that this strategy can be modified to overcome


                                                21
the key identification challenges facing the literature.
       A more promising approach to simplify the analysis is based on the assessment of unexpected
policy changes. This quasi-experimental approach has a long tradition in economics and we
argue that it can be helpful in overcoming some of the challenges facing this literature. For
example, Johnston and Mas (2015) find large effects of an unexpected cut in benefit duration
in Missouri. The external validity of the inference based on essentially one data point provided
by this reform is perhaps questionable. However, this is the approach that will hopefully be
applied by others to other policy reforms eventually enabling inference based on a range of such
studies. A fruitful approach is to extend the scope of such studies and consider, as Hagedorn
et al. (2015) a nationwide cut in benefit duration. Although such reforms are more rare, they
allow to exploit the heterogeneity of impacts across locations to overcome the effects of sampling
uncertainty.
       The advantage of the studies based on this methodology is that they largely overcome the
problem of policy endogeneity. They, however, are less able to isolate the effects of actual policy
changes from the impact on expectations of future policies. As discussed above, these policy
changes bring forward the timing of the policy changes that can be expected in the future. As
all investment decisions are sensitive to expectations, the measured impact of these reforms is
likely smaller than that of the policy change that not only changes the current benefits but also
permanently changes the expected path of future benefits. Interestingly, even the likely lower
bound on the true effects uncovered in these studies is quantitatively large.
       Overall, we are encouraged by the recent efforts in the literature to rise to the challenge of
measuring total effects of unemployment benefit extensions on the labor market.17 This is one of
the most prominent and actively used countercyclical stabilization policies. Measuring its total
impact is beyond the scope of earlier empirical micro work motivated by the narrow public
finance questions of the impact of policy on the duration of insured spells. While obviously
valuable, this literature left unanswered the key question of how benefit extensions affect the
overall labor market. Our assessment of the existing findings points to the tentative conclusion
that benefit extensions lead to significant increases in unemployment and to a reduction in
employment and job vacancies. Given that these findings challenge the wisdom of relying on
this policy instrument for cyclical stabilization, more research is clearly and urgently needed.
  17
    An influential older literature with the same focus has concluded that UI generosity (with benefit duration
being the key component) played a crucial role in explaining the cross-country differences in the levels and
dynamics of unemployment between the US and many European economies. Scarpetta (1996) and Nickell et al.
(2005) present original empirical analysis and review a large body of work based on cross-country regressions
leading to this conclusion. An influential research program pioneered by Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) aims to
provide a structural interpretation to these findings.


                                                      22
Some approaches will ultimately not withstand the scrutiny but the issues are so important and
the literature is so sparse, that the exploration of alternative identification strategies is clearly
called for.


References
Bai, J. (2009): “Panel Data Models with Interactive Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 77, 1229–
  1279.
Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (2000): “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
  of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply,” American Economic
  Review, 90, 1397–1420.
Card, D. and P. B. Levine (2000): “Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI Spells:
  Evidence from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program,” Journal of Public Economics,
  78, 107–138.
Carling, K., B. Holmlund, and A. Vejsiu (2001): “Do Benefit Cuts Boost Job Finding?
  Swedish Evidence from the 1990s,” The Economic Journal, 111, 766–90.
Chodorow-Reich, G. and L. Karabarbounis (2016): “The Limited Macroeconomic Ef-
  fects of Unemployment Benefit Extensions,” Working Paper 22163, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.
Coglianese, J. (2015): “Do Unemployment Insurance Extensions Reduce Employment,”
  mimeo, Harvard University.
Dube, A., W. T. Lester, and M. Reich (2010): “Minimum Wage Effects Across State
  Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92,
  945 – 964.
——— (2016): “Minimum Wage Shocks, Employment Flows and Labor Market Frictions,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 34.
Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2013): “Unemployment
  Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects,” National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19499.
Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2015): “The Impact of Unemployment
  Benefit Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment Miracle?” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 20884.


                                                 23
Holmes, T. J. (1998): “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evi-
  dence from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 667–705.
Johnston, A. C. and A. Mas (2015): “Potential Unemployment Insurance Duration and La-
  bor Supply: The Individual and Market-Level Response to a Benefit Cut,” mimeo, Princeton
  University.
Katz, L. F. and B. D. Meyer (1990): “The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unem-
  ployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics, 41,
  45–72.
Krause, M. U. and H. Uhlig (2012): “Transitions in the German Labor Market: Structure
  and Crisis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 64–79.
Krueger, A. and B. Meyer (2002): “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance,” Handbook
  of Public Economics, 4, 2327–2392.
Ljungqvist, L. and T. J. Sargent (1998): “The European Unemployment Dilemma,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 106, 514–550.
Marinescu, I. E. (2015): “The General Equilibrium Impacts of Unemployment Insurance:
  Evidence from a Large Online Job Board,” mimeo, University of Chicago.
Nicholson, W. and K. Needels (2004): “Extended Unemployment Benefits: A Review of
  the Literature,” Working paper, Amherst College.
Nickell, S., L. Nunziata, and W. Ochel (2005): “Unemployment in the OECD since the
  1960s. What Do We Know?” The Economic Journal, 115, 1–27.
Pissarides, C. (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Scarpetta, S. (1996): “Assessing the Role of Labour Market Policies and Institutional Set-
  tings on Unemployment: A Cross County Study,” OECD Economic Studies, 26, 43–98.




                                            24
