                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE ECONOMICS OF "RADIATOR SPRINGS:"
         INDUSTRY DYNAMICS, SUNK COSTS, AND SPATIAL DEMAND SHIFTS

                                          Jeffrey R. Campbell
                                           Thomas Hubbard

                                         Working Paper 22289
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22289


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2016




We thank Feng Lu and Chris Ody for excellent research assistance, and many seminar participants
and colleagues for their comments, especially Eric Bartelsman and Steve Berry, who discussed the
paper at conferences. We are grateful for the financial support of the Northwestern University Transportation
Center in putting together the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors. They do not
necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System,
its Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jeffrey R. Campbell and Thomas Hubbard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of "Radiator Springs:" Industry Dynamics, Sunk Costs, and Spatial Demand
Shifts
Jeffrey R. Campbell and Thomas Hubbard
NBER Working Paper No. 22289
May 2016
JEL No. L13,L22,L81

                                          ABSTRACT

Interstate Highway openings were permanent, anticipated demand shocks that increased gasoline
demand and sometimes shifted it spatially. We investigate supply responses to these demand
shocks, using county-level observations of service station counts and employment and data on
highway openings' timing and locations. When the new highway was close to the old route,
average producer size increased, beginning one year before it opened. If instead the interstate
substantially displaced traffic, the number of producers increased, beginning only after it opened.
These dynamics are consistent with Hotelling-style oligopolistic competition with free entry and
sunk costs and inconsistent with textbook perfect competition.


Jeffrey R. Campbell
Senior Economist and Research Advisor
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
jcampbell@frbchi.org

Thomas Hubbard
615 Leverone Hall
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
t-hubbard@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1    Introduction
The construction of the U.S. Interstate Highway System during the second half
of the 20th century both increased intercity tra¢ c in rural areas and changed
tra¢ c patterns within them. Pixar’s 2005 …lm “Cars”famously depicted the re-
sulting impacts on local economies. In the …lm, an interstate increased intercity
tra¢ c but diverted it away from a …ctional town on Route 66 called “Radiator
Springs.” In the non-animated world, interstate highway construction changed
demand for travelers’ services in hundreds of rural counties. Sometimes these
new highways shifted demand spatially (as in “Cars”), but in many cases the in-
terstate was built adjacent to the previous intercity route and incumbents could
easily serve new travelers. Regardless, incumbents and potential entrants could
anticipate the location and timing of highway openings, because the new high-
ways’ locations were chosen long before most of them were built and because
highway construction takes time.
    The periodic opening of new segments of the Interstate Highway System
– and the concomitant changes in tra¢ c patterns – o¤ers a rare opportunity
for a systematic study of industry dynamics. How does the number and size
distribution of …rms change with a foreseeable change in demand, and how
do any changes depend upon where the demand increase appears in product
space? From the perspective of service stations and other businesses that serve
highway travelers, the openings of highway segments represent changes to the
level of demand and to consumers’tastes over locations. Local demand shocks
occurred at di¤erent points of time for such businesses in the rural United States
as the segments of the Interstate Highway System opened between the late
1950s and early 1980s, and the timing of these openings is well-documented. In
this paper, we combine data on highway openings, distances between interstate
highways and previous intercity routes, and the number and size distribution
of service stations in hundreds of rural counties. Our analysis of these data
provides evidence on how gasoline retailers adjusted to these demand shocks.
    A large literature in microeconomics, and especially industrial organization,
proposes that market adjustments to permanent, anticipated demand increases
depend on how …rms compete. Textbook models of perfect competition predict
that such demand shocks only increase the number of …rms in the long run but
leave their size distribution unchanged. Furthermore, the supply-side expansion
through entry should take place no sooner than the increase in demand, even
if the timing of the demand increase can be forecasted accurately. In contrast,
some models of imperfect competition – in particular, Hotelling-style models
where mark-ups fall with entry – imply these permanent demand increases in-
duce growth in …rm size in the long run, and the extent to which they induce
entry versus increases in …rm size depends on whether the demand shocks create
new product segments. When the costs of entry and expansion are sunk, these
changes in industry structure can precede the growth in demand in equilibrium.
Our evidence on the timing and margins of adjustment therefore sheds light on
how the …rms in our sample, which operated in markets where entry barriers
were low but entry and expansion involved sunk costs, competed.


                                        1
    We show that the margin and timing of adjustment of local gasoline mar-
kets to interstate highway construction depended on the distance from the old
intercity route to the new interstate. When the two were close, average station
size increased but the number of stations did not, and the increase in station
size began one to two years before the new highway was completed. In con-
trast, when the new highway was far (say, 5-10 miles) from the old route, the
number of stations increased, but this increase did not begin until after the new
highway was completed. Broadly, these patterns are inconsistent with a com-
petitive benchmark in which all of the long-run adjustment to demand shocks is
in the number of …rms rather the size of …rms, and none of the adjustment takes
place before demand shocks take place. We conclude that industry dynamics
here are best understood through the lens of imperfect competition models that
have been the workhorse frameworks in industrial organization since the 1980s,
in which product di¤erentiation is an essential ingredient and strategic e¤ects
can give …rms incentives to invest ahead of demand. It may be tempting to
abstract from these elements in this context – the gasoline itself is relatively
undi¤erentiated and our research indicates that there was close to free entry
in the markets that we study. However, these elements are necessary even in
this context to understand competition and market dynamics; indeed, gasoline
retailing appears to provide a textbook example of how industry dynamics can
play out in imperfectly competitive markets.
    Our work is related to several lines of empirical work. Chandra and Thomp-
son (2000), Baum-Snow (2007), and Michaels (2008) independently use the same
observations of highway opening dates to investigate, respectively, the e¤ects of
infrastructure on growth, the contribution of highway construction to subur-
banization, and the e¤ects of decreased transportation costs on wage premiums
for skill. Our work focuses on the rural portion of this sample because traf-
…c patterns in rural areas are relatively uncomplicated, making measurement
of spatial demand changes possible. Our use of rural areas to investigate in-
dustry structure is similar in spirit to Bresnahan and Reiss (1990, 1991) and
Mazzeo (2002). Our county-level measures of market structure are coarser than
these other studies. However, we are able to examine industry dynamics in a
way these papers cannot because we observe industry demand shocks, industry
employment, and producer counts over long periods.1
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the an-
alytical background to the paper. We develop a competitive benchmark that
is inspired by textbook models of perfect competition, and summarize insights
from various models of imperfect competition with respect to the margin and
timing of an industry’s adjustment to a permanent, anticipated demand shock.
Section 3 presents the historical context, which we use to help motivate and
interpret our empirical work. Section 4 describes the data and shows trends in
highway completion, the number and size distribution of service stations, and
the relationship between them. Section 5 presents and discusses our main re-
   1 See also Berry (1992), Berry and Waldfogel (2010), and Campbell and Hopenhayn (2005)

for other empirical work that connects competition to industry structure.



                                           2
sults from panel-data VARs like those in Campbell and Lapham (2004), and
it provides evidence on alternative interpretations of these results. Section 6
concludes.


2     Industry Adjustment to Demand Shocks
In this section, we examine the question of how the supply side of a market
adjusts to permanent, anticipated demand shocks through the lens of theory.
This analysis aids the interpretation of our empirical results, which reveal how
local retail gasoline markets adjust to anticipated demand increases – at the
extensive margin through increases in the number of producers or at the in-
tensive margin through increases in producers’ sizes – and when the industry
adjustment occurs relative to the arrival of demand.
    Although much of the theoretical discussion is in general terms, we are moti-
vated by an empirical context with several speci…c features. Entry barriers are
low, because building a new service station or adding capacity (i.e., pumps) to
an existing one requires few scarce inputs and can be accomplished in only a few
months once local planning and zoning approval is obtained.2 Since highways
were planned years in advance of their opening, and construction took on the
order of one to two years once it started; we conclude that the time to build or
expand a service station is generally short relative to the time it takes to plan
and build a new segment of highway.3 Thus, …rms could time their entry or
expansion to coincide with the highway’s opening if they chose to do so. How-
ever, much of any new investment was sunk (literally!), because underground
storage tanks and pumps are immobile and have little value outside of gasoline
retailing.

2.1     A Competitive Benchmark
Models of perfect competition found in most undergraduate economics text-
books describe the short- and long-run industry adjustment to a positive de-
mand shock.4 These models envision an industry consisting of a large number
of price-taking …rms that produce a homogeneous product. These …rms’com-
mon technology features a U-shaped average cost curve with its minimum at
q ? . The distinction between the short and long run is that in the long run, the
number of …rms adjusts so that each …rm earns zero pro…t. The long-run price
p? equals minimum average cost and each …rm produces q ? . The number of
operating …rms equals total demand at p? divided by q ? .
   2 And as we explain further below, obtaining this approval was generally easy for the loca-

tions relevant to our sample: commercially zoned areas near rural Interstate Highways.
   3 The short time to build for service stations is also revealed by Campbell and Lapham

(2005), who document that the number of gasoline service stations in towns along the U.S.-
Canada border adjusted within one year following unanticipated demand shocks associated
with changes in the real exchange rate.
   4 See, for example, Baumol and Blinder (1985), p. 475-489; and Besanko and Braeutigam

(2011), p. 348-358.



                                              3
    The textbook model’s analysis of the short-run adjustment illustrates com-
petitive industry dynamics following unanticipated demand shocks when …rms
cannot respond immediately through entry. With greater demand and an
upward-sloping short-run supply curve, the price rises above p? . Each incum-
bent …rm produces more than q ? , and they all earn positive pro…ts in the short
run. The length of the "short run" when …rms make positive pro…ts depends on
how quickly …rms can enter. Over time, entry dissipates short-run pro…ts, shifts
out the short-run supply curve, and restores the price to p? and each individual
…rm’s production to q ? .
    The comparable analysis of a competitive industry’s adjustment to an antic-
ipated demand shock depends on how far in advance the shock can be forecast
relative to the time required for entry. If …rms in the textbook model can fore-
cast the demand shock farther in advance than the time to build, then entrants
can time their entry to match the demand expansion, and the model industry
adjusts entirely through entry when the demand increase arrives. Prices never
rise above p? , individual …rms’ production never increases beyond q ? , and no
…rm makes positive pro…ts at any point in time.
    The textbook competitive model’s simplicity and clarity make it a founda-
tional building block in many studies of industry dynamics, including Dunne,
Roberts, and Samuelson (1989), Jovanovic and MacDonald (1994), and Cabral
and Mata (2003). Since this benchmark abstracts from a great deal of micro-
economic detail and yet is applied widely, one might wonder how its implica-
tions fare after adding empirically plausible extensions that maintain its two
key assumptions, free entry and an absence of strategic interactions between
producers. Campbell (2010) obtains the same long-run invariance of …rm size
and price to demand in a model that allows for both …rm-speci…c cost shocks
and sunk costs. Caballero and Hammour (1994) call the stabilization of the
price at p? the “insulation e¤ect”of entry, and they show that it operates as in
the textbook competitive model in a richer framework with stochastic demand,
sunk costs and ongoing technological change.5 Both of these results re‡ect the
same mechanism. Entry removes excess pro…ts and leads the market to clear
always at the competitive price p? . Active …rms’incentives with respect to pro-
duction do not change in the face of a demand shock, and the industry adjusts
entirely through entry. The robustness of the textbook competitive model’s
fundamental predictions about the margin of entry make it a useful benchmark
against which to compare empirical results.
    We next explore industry adjustment in imperfectly competitive industries.
These will help intepret our empirical evidence, which will reveal results incon-
sistent with our competitive benchmark.
  5 Their  equilibrium analysis of industry-dynamics under aggregate uncertainty di¤ers
sharply from that of Dixit and Pindyck (1994), who consider the problem of a …rm with
an exclusive and non-expiring entry option facing demand uncertainty.




                                          4
2.2     Imperfect Competition and the Margin of Long-Run
        Adjustment
The textbook model of perfect competition provides a stark prediction regarding
the margin of industries’ long-run adjustment: all of the long-run adjustment
to an anticipated demand increase should be in the number of …rms, not …rm
size. Models of imperfect competition, in contrast, show how the margin of
adjustment to a demand increase depends on the extent to which entry reduces
markups. If adding producers has no e¤ect on markups then (as in our com-
petitive benchmark) all of the adjustment should be in the number of …rms.
In contrast, if adding producers leads markups to fall, some of the long-run
adjustment to a demand increase should be in an increase in …rm size.
    To illustrate this point, consider an industry with S identical consumers,
each with a unit demand for the industry’s good. Suppose that there are many
potential suppliers who can produce at …xed cost F and marginal cost c. Com-
petition proceeds in two stages: simultaneous entry followed by price competi-
tion. If N …rms enter, one chooses p, and all of the others choose p0, then the
(possibly) deviating …rm attracts S x(p; p0; N ) customers, where x(p; p0; N ) is
the deviating …rm’s (output-based) market share. We impose three regularity
conditions on this demand system. First, raising p while holding p0 and N con-
stant reduces x. Second, raising N while holding p and p0 constant also reduces
x. Finally, multiplying N by a positive scalar t while holding both p and p0 to
the same constant value divides x by t. This …nal condition states that doubling
the number of producers while holding their common price constant cuts each
producer’s quantity sold in half.
    A symmetric free-entry equilibrium in this industry is a pair (p? ; N ? ) satis-
fying two equations, an optimal pricing equation and a zero pro…t condition:
                     p? c               1
                               =                   ;
                       p?         (p? ; p? ; N ? )
                          F    = S x (p? ; p? ; N ? ) (p?        c) :

Here,
                                      @x (p; p0; N )      p0
                        (p; p0; N )
                                          @p0        x (p; p0 ; N )
is the residual demand curve’s elasticity. We are interested in how this long-run
equilibrium changes when we multiply S by t > 1. Doing so has no direct e¤ect
on the optimal pricing equation: Increases in S rotate …rms’ residual demand
curves outward, leading them optimally to sell more at the same price. However,
an increase in S raises post-entry pro…t, leaving the free-entry condition violated.
At issue is how p? and N ? adjust to restore equilibrium, and this depends on
how changing the number of producers impacts the elasticity of demand.
    In many familiar models of Chamberlin-style monopolistic competition, (p? ; p? ; t   N ?) =
  (p? ; p? ; N ? ) for all t > 1. Examples include Spence (1976), Dixit and Stiglitz
(1978), and Wolinsky (1984). In these models, new entrants can always di¤eren-
tiate themselves enough so that they have no impact on the equilibrium markup


                                           5
of the second-stage pricing game; it is as if entry coincides with an expansion of
product space. In this case, multiplying N ? by t su¢ ces to restore equilibrium.
The equilibrium price and each producer’s quantity are unchanged, and the
analysis of the margin of adjustment is similar to that in perfect competition.
On the other hand, models of Hotelling-style monopolistic competition, where
product space is …xed, typically imply that (p; p0; t N ) > (p; p0; N ) for all
t > 1: In these, new entrants produce relatively close substitutes for incum-
bents’goods. As with Chamberlin-style monopolistic competition, multiplying
S by t > 1 raises N ? . However, this leads the equilibrium markup to fall. Each
producer must sell more at the lower markup to recoup the …xed cost of entry,
so the ratio of N ? to S must fall. That is, the falling markup leads industry
adjustment to be an expansion on both the intensive and extensive margins.
    Our empirical analysis measures the margin of adjustment to a permanent
increase in demand, and how the margin of adjustment depends on any ac-
companying change in demanders’locational tastes. We examine the latter by
measuring where the new Interstate is located relative to the previous route that
through tra¢ c used. In our competitive benchmark, all long-run adjustment
occurs on the extensive margin. In contrast, imperfect competition models illus-
trate how the margin of adjustment can di¤er with whether the demand increase
is accompanied by a spatial shift in tastes. When the new Interstate is built on
top of the old route, then new entrants located near highway exits provide close
substitutes to incumbent producers’o¤erings; the new highway creates no new
spatial segments. As the distance from the old route increases, the opening of
the new highway changes the location of through tra¢ c more, and existing sta-
tions become poorer substitutes for a station located near a new highway exit.
One would expect entry to have less of an impact on price-cost margins, and
the industry adjustment to be less in terms of station size and more in terms
of the number of stations, compared to situations where the opening of a new
highway segment creates no new spatial segment.

2.3    Imperfect Competition and the Timing of Adjustment
In our competitive benchmark, entry leads prices to equal minimum average
cost and pro…ts to be no greater than zero at any point in time. Therefore,
any adjustments to a demand increase occur no earlier than when the demand
increase begins. Any …rm that expanded or entered ahead of the demand
increase would receive negative pro…ts before the demand increase –prices would
be below competitive levels –but no greater than zero pro…ts in any period after
the demand increase.
    In contrast, imperfect competition allows for the possibility that the adjust-
ment may begin ahead of an anticipated demand increase, by allowing individual
…rms to have an incentive to make decisions that trade o¤ lower pro…ts today
for higher pro…ts tomorrow. One example is that learning curves can interact
with imperfect competition to induce early expansion. If a …rm expects that
it will sell more in equilibrium after a demand increase, and producing more
today can lower its marginal cost in future periods, it can have an incentive to


                                        6
expand ahead of the demand increase because the returns to such investments
are larger when …rms’scale of operations are greater. This example illustrates
how this incentive could arise in theory even if no …rm believes that its early
expansion a¤ects other …rms’decisions.6
    A large literature in theoretical industrial organization shows how …rms can
have an incentive to invest ahead of the arrival of demand through its e¤ect on
other …rms’ actions. In many of these, the sunk costs of investment and the
concomitant commitment to future production deter the entry or expansion of
other …rms. Since gasoline retailers literally sink substantial capital into the
ground, we …nd this class of models of particular interest.7 Fudenberg and
Tirole (1986) describe one model with particular relevance for our context. In
it, a market is currently supplied by an incumbent monopolist, but the number
of potential customers is expected to double at some future date. This demand
increase gives rise to an entry opportunity, which may either be …lled by the
incumbent or an entrant. Fudenberg and Tirole show that if entry lowers
total industry pro…t –monopoly pro…ts are more than twice the duopoly pro…t
– then in equilibrium the incumbent preemptively …lls the entry opportunity
before demand expands. The incumbent …lls this opportuntity just ahead of
the time where the entrant is indi¤erent between entering, earning low duopoly
pro…ts until demand arrives, and earning high duopoly pro…ts thereafter.


3     The Historical Context
This section describes the historical context in which Interstate Highways were
built and the service stations in our sample competed. This discussion places
our empirical work in perspective, highlighting the most salient interpretations
of our main results.

3.1     Interstate Highway Planning and Construction
The present-day Interstate Highway System is a network of over 40,000 highway
miles that serves nearly all of the largest cities in the United States. Its general
routing is the direct descendent of a 1947 plan that described a 37,000 mile
nationwide network of Interstate Highway routes.8 These routes corresponded
to the existing major roads that connected most population centers, and the
plan designated these roads, or alternatively newly-constructed highways along
   6 We do not believe this and other "non-strategic" incentives to enter or expand ahead of

demand to be compelling in our empirical context. Service stations face no substantial learn-
ing curves, for example. We will therefore emphasize interpretions of our …ndings regarding
the timing of demand that draw from the class of theories described below.
   7 This literature includes, for example, Spence (1977, 1979), Fudenberg and Tirole (1984),

and Bulow, Geanakoplos and Klemperer (1985).
   8 Most of the system’s remaining mileage was determined in the middle 1950s. Annual Re-

port, Bureau of Public Roads, Fiscal Year 1956, U. S. Department of Commerce, Washington,
1956, p. 9.




                                             7
the same route, as part of the Interstate System.9 Little Interstate Highway
construction immediately followed the 1947 plan’s publication, in large part
because the Federal government did not earmark funds for this purpose.10
    The vast majority of the Interstate Highway System’s construction followed
the passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956. The Federal government
…nanced Interstate Highway construction through fuel taxes paid to a Highway
Trust Fund that was speci…cally earmarked for this purpose. Federal funds paid
for 90 percent of construction costs, with the states paying for the remainder.
The construction was carried out on a “pay as you go” basis, and the Fed-
eral Highway Administration (FHA) apportioned each year’s available funds to
states according to their shares of the total cost of building the entire Interstate
system. The legislation’s original goal was for each state to steadily build high-
way mileage until the system’s expected completion in 1970. The 1956 Act also
set engineering standards for Interstate Highways regarding among other things
design speed, alignment, lane width, limited access, and line of sight.
    The formula for splitting Federal aid across the states required the FHA
to have cost estimates for the entire system in place shortly after the passage
of the Act. Topography and geology greatly in‡uence the cost of building
a road, so the rapid development of cost estimates required a relatively quick
selection of Interstate Highways’exact locations. State engineers worked closely
with the Federal government, which could veto highway location choices by
withholding its 90 percent contribution to construction costs. By 1958, all states
had submitted detailed highway location plans.11 The Federal government had
approved designs and locations for all routes in the system by the middle of
1960.12
    The states’Interstate Highway plans sometimes describe the logic behind the
chosen locations of particular segments. For example, Virginia’s report discusses
the location of Interstate 66 in the area from its present Exit 6 (Front Royal)
to Exit 23 (Delaplane) as follows:

           The present road, an asphalt concrete pavement twenty feet wide,
      has horizontal alignment, pro…le grades and sight distance that are
      all inadequate for a sixty mile per hour design speed. Property along
    9 Work of the Public Roads Administration 1947, U. S. Government Printing O¢ ce, Wash-

ington, 1947, p.5-6.
  1 0 Annual Report, Bureau of Public Roads, Fiscal Year 1955, U. S. Department of Com-

merce, Washington, 1956, p. 5; Annual Report, Bureau of Public Roads, Fiscal Year 1956,
U. S. Department of Commerce, Washington, 1956, p. 1.
  1 1 “Immediately after passage of the act the States undertook the engineering and economic

studies necessary to select de…nite locations for the routes of the Interstate System, and at
the end of the …scal year locations for about 80 percent of the 40000 mile system had been
selected and approved. . . ” Annual Report, Bureau of Public Roads, Fiscal Year 1957, U. S.
Department of Commerce, Washington, 1957, p. 7.
  1 2 Annual Report, Bureau of Public Roads, Fiscal Year 1960, U. S. Department of Com-

merce, Washington, 1960, p. 8. Plans with multiple alternative locations were submitted for
some segments, but this was the exception rather than the rule. By 1965, the …nal location
of only about 6 percent of system was yet to be determined. Highway Progress 1965, U. S.
Department of Commerce, Washington, 1965, p. 15.



                                             8
      both sides of the road is developed to the point where almost …fty
      percent of the residents would be displaced by any widening of the
      right of way. . . Two Interstate roadways and an additional frontage
      road would have to be constructed, a more costly procedure than
      the construction of just two Interstate roadways on a new location.
      . . . Although the number of possible locations for a new route are
      restricted by mountains in the area, there are no serious topographic
      or real estate problems along the route selected. It was, therefore,
      laid out to take the greatest advantage of the terrain and to stay
      reasonably close to the present road.13

    As this example indicates, the …rst step in site selection was the evaluation of
the existing road. The obstacles enumerated in the quotation above frequently
made its expansion into an Interstate Highway infeasible. Existing roads were
expanded for less than one-fourth of the mileage in the system. Most Interstate
Highways were instead built as near to the existing road as the local topography
allowed.14
    This discussion illuminates two key aspects of Interstate Highway planning
that bear on our empirical results. First, Interstate Highways’locations were
determined for most of the rural highway segments in our sample many years
before these segments were built. Second, details about the local economy –
such as an agglomeration of businesses and residences along the old route –often
played an important role in determining whether the new highway was built on
top of the old one, but played a far less important role in determining where the
highway was built, given that it was not on top of the old one. Undeveloped land
away from the existing highway was generally available, and highway engineers
sought relatively ‡at terrain with short river crossings where they could build
high-speed roads with gradual curves. Where an entirely new highway was built
predominantly re‡ected the location of suitable terrain. Variation across the
counties in our sample in how far a new highway is from the old route, given that
the new highway is not located on top of an existing road, disproportionately
re‡ects variation in local topography, not other factors such as its expected
impact on the local economy. This second aspect of Interstate Highway planning
informs one of our empirical exercises below, in which we examine whether the
patterns we uncover persist when excluding from our sample counties where the
Interstate Highway is extremely close to the old route.
    Construction began on Interstate Highways in all states beginning in the
late 1950s. Starting from a 2,000-mile base of existing highways (such as the
Massachusetts Turnpike) that were grandfathered into the System, construction
was extremely rapid, averaging over 2,000 miles per year during the 1960s and
  1 3 Interstate Highway System: Commonwealth of Virginia, Volume V, Department of High-

ways, Howard, Needles, Tammen, and Bergendo¤, 1956. For this excerpt, see Section 2, “East
of Front Royal to South of Delaplane.”
  1 4 Interstate Highway construction and site selection were very contentious issues in urban

areas. For example, most of the Interstate Highways planned for Washington D.C. and San
Francisco were never constructed. In the rural areas, these plans were much less controversial
and were largely implemented as speci…ed.


                                              9
early 1970s. Although progress fell short of the initial goal of completion of the
entire system by the end of the 1960s, 90% of it was open by the end of 1975
and 96% by the end of 1980.
    Interstate Highways were typically completed in segments of 5-15 miles, and
the construction of a highway segment generally took three to four years from
start to …nish.15 The timing and allocation of Federal funding, guided by the
"pay as you go" and "proportionate across states" provisions, kept the pace
of construction fairly even across states, and as a consequence there was not
a strong tendency for highway construction to be earlier in states with high
tra¢ c density or growth. However, each state had wide discretion over which
of its Interstate Highways to build …rst. Within states, construction tended
to proceed …rst in areas where through tra¢ c was causing problems: in tra¢ c
corridors, and on highway segments within corridors, where through tra¢ c was
causing existing roads to be congested. Construction then progressed to other
areas, connecting completed segments until all the highways in the state were
complete.16

3.2     Service Stations
Service stations are retail outlets primarily engaged in selling gasoline, pump-
ing it from underground tanks into customers’vehicles. The gasoline itself is
largely undi¤erentiated and sold in standard grades, though a customer might
display a preference for a speci…c station because of its brand, location, or other
characteristics. Service stations have long o¤ered other services or lines of mer-
chandise as well (hence their name). Although now it is common for service
stations to have convenience stores, until the late 1970s most stations instead
supplied simple auto maintenance and repairs such as oil changes, tire replace-
ments, and alignments. Furthermore, unlike today, most stations were "full
service" stations at which attendants pumped gasoline for customers. These
aspects were interrelated: attendants checked the vehicle’s condition while they
pumped gas and made service recommendations –this marketing aspect of "full
service" was viewed as crucial to stations’pro…tability because margins on lu-
bricants, maintenance, and repairs were signi…cantly greater than margins on
gasoline,17 and it was common for attendants to be paid commissions for sales
of these non-gasoline products and services.18      It was generally optimal for
  1 5 Annual Report, Bureau of Public Roads, Fiscal Year 1957, U. S. Department of Com-

merce, Washington, 1957, p. 2.
  1 6 Annual Report, Bureau of Public Roads, Fiscal Year 1960, U. S. Department of Com-

merce, Washington, 1960, p. 11-17, 51-52.
  1 7 Guides for running service stations during this period emphasize this. For example, from

Starting and Managing a Service Station (1961): "How do you make money in this business?
First of all, by getting away from limiting your business to just gasoline...Don’t let [customers]
forget that tires and batteries need replacement, and cars need lubrication." This has since
changed: "Self-service completely changed gasoline retail. Gasoline sales were no longer a
low-pro…t adjunct to highly pro…table car servicing and tire/battery sales." (Russell, 2007)
  1 8 Nielsen, Clayton D., Service Station Management, University of Nebraska Press, Lin-

coln, 1957, p. 39; Russell, Tim, Fill ’er Up: The Great American Gas Station, Voyageur,
Minneapolis, 2007, p. 47.


                                               10
stations in this era to increase the number of employees when they increased
the number of pumps.
    During the time of our sample, new service stations were generally …nanced
and constructed by oil companies, who then leased them to operators as inde-
pendent …rms under "lessee-dealer" arrangements. The construction of a new
service station involved the acquisition of land, the installation of tanks and
pumps, the fabrication of a building and the installation of equipment required
for auto repair, such as hydraulic lifts. A 1970 estimate of the (non-land) cap-
ital costs of a two-bay, two-island service station was on the order of $40,000.19
The capital costs of adding a new "island" of pumps at an existing station was a
small share of this, if additional land was not required, because it was generally
feasible to connect new pumps to existing tanks. The construction of a new
service station was usually straightforward, in part because there were standard
architectural designs, and generally could be completed in no more than several
months.20 A large share of the costs associated with building a new station
were sunk, because much of the capital was not mobile and it was expensive to
convert the facilities and land to be used for most other purposes.
    Entry barries were generally low during our sample period, especially in
the rural areas that we examine. Planning and zoning regulations generally
restricted the location of service stations to commercially-zoned areas and stip-
ulated such things as minimum lot sizes and how close pumps could be to the
right of way, but they usually did not have an important impact on the num-
ber and size of service stations in an area beyond this. Surveys published by
the American Society of Planning O¢ cials in 1973 indicate that planners’main
concerns with respect to service stations had to do with the tra¢ c they gener-
ated, their appearance, and the problem of abandoned stations. O¢ cials dealt
with these by encouraging service stations to be developed on corner lots (which
station owners desired in any case), requiring architectural review, and requir-
ing owners of closed stations to empty and remove tanks.21 Although service
station operators usually had to obtain a special permit to operate, even in com-
mercial zones, planning and zoning regulations regarding service stations were
quite light-handed. Indeed, near highway interchanges, perhaps the most com-
mon problem they addressed was encouraging service stations, and not other
developments such as strip malls, to be very close to exits so that highway
travelers could use them without a¤ecting other tra¢ c.22
    We next report general trends with respect to service stations during and
 1 9 Claus,  R. James and David C. Rothwell, Gasoline Retailing: A Manual of Site Selection
and Development, Tantalus, Vancouver, 1970, p. 75. This is about $225,000 in 2009 dollars.
  2 0 This remains true today. See http://www.bmconstruction.com/pdf/B&M_Construction_

Reprint.pdf, in which a developer reports that it normally takes 90 days to design and build
a service station.
  2 1 Concerns about environmental concerns did not make the list of "major problems." Amer-

ican Society of Planning O¢ cials, The Design, Regulation and Location of Service Stations,
Chicago, 1973. This may have changed in the 1980s with the onset of environmental regula-
tion of underground storage tanks.
  2 2 See, for example, Highway and Land-Use Relationships in Interchange Areas, Barton-

Aschman Associates, January 1968, p. 33.



                                            11
slightly outside our 1964-1992 sample period, paying particular attention to the
period between 1964-1977, the part of our sample period during which most of
the highways were built. The numbers are as reported by the U.S. Census in
either County Business Patterns or the Economic Census (as part of the Census
of Retail Trade or, before 1972, the Census of Business).

3.3     General Trends
Figure 1 presents several series that track the number of service stations in the
U.S., and subsets thereof. The top set of points represents all service stations.
It shows that the number of service stations increased slowly during the 1960s
and early 1970s, growing by 7% from 1963 to its 1972 peak of about 226,000.
This number decreased sharply starting in the mid-1970s, falling by more than
one-third to about 135,000 in 1982, and was relatively stable thereafter. New
station openings were exceeding closings during the period when most of the
Interstate Highway System was built, but service stations were, on net, exiting
the market during the late 1970s.
    The second series tracks the number of service stations with positive payroll;
the trend of this series is very similar to the …rst one. This is of note because
our main data source tracks only stations with employees.
    The other series track the number of "reporting units," as published in
County Business Patterns (CBP). The county-level data that we analyze below
is from this source. There is a break in this series because the de…nition of
a "reporting unit" changed in the middle of our sample period.23 Starting in
1974, the CBP reports the number of establishments – in this context, service
stations –and the numbers published in the CBP track those published in the
Economic Censuses (EC) closely. But before 1974, the CBP reports the number
of …rms competing in the county, not the number of service stations. Firms
owning more than one service station in a county are counted once. Time series
of CBP data before 1974 capture not only the entry and exit of single-station
…rms, but also any combinations or spin-o¤s of service stations within the same
county. The ratio of the reporting unit counts and the establishment counts
before 1974 indicates the degree to which …rms operated multiple stations in the
same county. This ratio increased from 1.12 in 1967 to 1.25 in 1972; starting in
the late 1960s, it became increasingly common for …rms to own multiple stations
in the same county.
    The size and composition of service stations changed during our sample
period. Figure 2 reports time series on average employment size. The EC series
show that the average employment size of service stations grew throughout our
sample period, increasing by about 125% between 1963 and 1992. Turning to
the CBP-derived series, the employment size of the average reporting unit –that
is, average within-county …rm size –increased by 41% between 1964 and 1972.
  2 3 This change corresponded to a change in how the Internal Revenue Service asked …rms

to report employment and payroll data. There was also a change in the employment size
categories the Census used. Before 1974, the three smallest categories were 1-3, 4-7, and 8-19
employees; after 1974, these were 1-4, 5-9, and 10-19 employees.



                                             12
Employment per station with payroll increased by about 35% during this time;
hence, about seven-eighths of the increase in within-county …rm size re‡ects
increases in the number of employees per station rather than in the number of
stations per …rm. The bulk of pre-1974 employment size increases therefore
appears to re‡ect increases in station size.
    Other Census …gures published on a consistent basis since 1972 show in-
creases in size in other dimensions; we depict these in the …rst few columns of
Table 1. Gallons per station increased steadily between 1972 and 1992, more
than doubling during this time. This re‡ects both an increase in the number of
gallons per pump, which grew by 63%, and the number of pumps per station,
which grew by 37%. These …gures indicate that at the same time average em-
ployment per station was increasing, stations’pumping capacity was increasing,
and this pumping capacity was being utilized more intensively.
    Reports from pre-1972 Census surveys suggest strongly that these trends
extend to the beginning of our sample. Evidence from the 1963 Census of
Retail implies that gallons per station grew by at least 44% and pumps/station
by at least 20% between 1963 and 1972, although the estimates are not directly
comparable to those in Table 1 due to reporting bias.24
    The rest of Table 1 depicts two well-known changes in service stations that
occurred during this time. One is the movement toward self-service. This
began in the early 1970s, and the share of sales that are self-service exceeded
90% by 1992. The other is the change in service stations’ ancillary services
away from automotive services and toward convenience stores. These changes
did not entirely coincide. The movement away from automotive services was
essentially complete by 1982, but the increase in the revenue share of convenience
store items – food, alcohol, and tobacco – occurred predominantly after 1982;
the revenue share from these categories increased from 5% to 15% between 1982
and 1992, and has increased since then to about 25%.25
    This study focuses on periods surrounding when Interstate Highways were
being completed, and the phenomena we uncover mainly re‡ect changes in the
number and size distribution of service stations that occured between the early
1960s and the mid-1970s. Throughout this period, service stations were be-
coming larger in terms of employees. Although some of the increase in service
stations’average size may re‡ect increases in the number of hours stations were
open, it is unlikely that all of it does, because the number of pumps per sta-
tion was increasing as well, the vast majority of sales was full-service, and the
sales of automotive services continued to be important pro…t sources. Most of
the Interstate Highway System was complete when several well-known trends
 2 4 The  1963 Census of Retail reports that, among the two-thirds of service stations that
responded to the relevant survey questions, stations pumped 250,000 gallons of gasoline and
had 4.4 pumps on average. The respondants to this survey disproportionately included larger
…rms, but the Census did not publish estimates that adjusted for this reporting bias.
  2 5 A third change during this period was the movement from leaded to unleaded gasoline.

This, like self-service, began in the early 1970s and was essentially complete by 1992. Many
stations o¤ered both leaded and unleaded gas by o¤ering them at di¤erent pumps or islands;
existing stations often replaced a pump that supplied leaded premium with one that supplied
unleaded regular.



                                            13
in service stations began, including the di¤usion of self-service gasoline and the
rise of convenience store-service stations, as well as other innovations such as
"pay at the pump" that would tend to decrease the use of labor. Thus, these
developments can contribute only little to industry dynamics in our sample
period.


4       Data
Our empirical analysis relies on data about highway openings, tra¢ c counts,
highway locations, and service stations.

4.1     Data Sources
4.1.1    Highway Openings
Our data on highway openings come from the U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion’s "PR-511" …le. These data describe the milepost, length, number of lanes,
pavement type, and opening date of segments of the Interstate Highway Sys-
tem that were open by June 30, 1993 and built using Interstate Highway funds.
The data cover nearly the entire System.26 Highway segments in these data
range in length, but the vast majority are less than …ve miles long and many
are less than one mile long. Opening date is described as the month-year in
which the segment was open for tra¢ c. The milepost and length variables in
the PR-511 indicate where the highway segment is located along the route. We
hand-merged these variables with geographic mapping data from the National
Highway Planning Network to identify the county in which each of the PR-511
segments is located.27 This produced a highly-detailed dataset on the timing
and location of Interstate Highway openings.
    We then aggregated these data up to the route-county level. For each route-
county (e.g., I-75 through Collier County, FL), we calculated the total mileage
within the county, the total mileage completed by the end of each calendar
year, and the share of mileage completed by the end of each calendar year.
Highways were normally completed in segments, so it is not unusual for a route
to be partially complete within a county for some period of time, then fully
completed within the county a few years later. This cumulative share variable,
csmiit , is a key independent variable in our analysis.
    We also develop a corridor-level version of this variable, ccsmiit , which ac-
counts for the possibility that tra¢ c volumes in a county are not only a¤ected
by highway openings in the county, but are also a¤ected by highway openings
  2 6 A small fraction of the IHS includes highways that were not built with Interstate Highway

funds, but were incorporated into the System later. (I-39 in Illinois is an example.) These
highways are not in our data.
  2 7 These data are maintained at: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/nhpn/. The PR-511

…le contains a variable that indicates the county in which the segment is located, but other
researchers (Chandra and Thompson, 2000) have noted that this variable contains errors. We
use the PR-511 data in checking our construction of this variable.



                                              14
in other counties along the same tra¢ c corridor. For example, tra¢ c in Boone
County, Missouri is not only a¤ected when Interstate 70 was completed in Boone
County, but also when it was completed in other counties between Kansas City
and St. Louis. We describe the details of how we de…ne corridors and how we
assign highway segments to corridors in the Appendix. The basic idea is sim-
ple, however. Most corridors are de…ned as highways that connect two central
cities with at least 100,000 population; Interstate 70 between Kansas City and
St. Louis is an example. For each corridor, we calculate the share of Interstate
Highway mileage completed in each year, and assign this variable to each county
that lies along the corridor; for example, we calculate the share of Interstate 70
between Kansas City and St. Louis that was opened in each year, and assign
this variable to each county through which I-70 passes between these two cities.

4.1.2    Highway Locations
We augment these data with a measure of how far the Interstate Highway shifted
tra¢ c. Using mid-1950s road maps, we …rst designated the route each segment
of Interstate Highway likely replaced (the "old route").28 The general procedure
was to look …rst at the major cities that the current Interstate connects, then
assess the most direct major route between these cities as of the mid-1950s.
For example, the "old route" for I-95 between Boston and New York is US1.
Once the "old route" was established, we measured the "crow ‡ies" distance
between each current Interstate exit and the old route. This was done using
Google Maps and ancillary tools. Finally, we averaged this distance across the
exits within each route-county. This produces a variable disti (or "distance
from old route") that characterizes the spatial shift in tra¢ c brought about by
the Interstate Highway. This measure ranges from zero for many route-counties
(where the Interstate merely was an upgrading of the old route) to over 20 miles
across the route-counties that we use in our analysis (see below). The median
value is 1.25 miles; the 25th and 75th percentile values are 0.5 and 3.0 miles,
respectively.

4.1.3    Service Stations
Our data on local market structure for service stations come from County Busi-
ness Patterns, published annually by the U.S. Bureau of the Census since 1964.
CBP contains county-level data on narrowly-de…ned industries, including "gaso-
line service stations," SIC 554. We obtained these data in electronic form from
1974-1992; we hand-entered these from published reports from 1964-1973. For
each year and county, these data report employment and payroll in the industry
within the county. They also report the total number of reporting units (…rms
until 1973, service stations thereafter) and the number in several employment
size categories.
  2 8 The "old routes" were essentially the roads that were designated as part of Interstate

system in the 1947 plan.




                                            15
    Our data contain missing values for some county-years, especially in the
very smallest counties. Missing values arise for industry employment and pay-
roll when the Census deems that publishing these would disclose con…dential
information regarding individual …rms. Such disclosure issues do not arise for
the local industry structure variables; these are considered publicly-available
information in any case. However, to economize on printing costs, the Census
did not publish these data for industry-counties with small numbers of employ-
ees (typically fewer than 100); they are available only in electronic versions of
the data. We therefore have missing values for these variables in very small
counties, particularly in years before 1974.
    The CBP data form our dependent variables, the most important of which
are the number and average employment size of service stations (before 1974,
…rms) within the county in an particular year. The bulk of our analysis relates
these variables to the timing of highway openings.

4.2     Sample Criteria
Our empirical approach, which uses highway openings to identify spatial shifts
in the demand for gasoline, envisions contexts where these shifts are uncompli-
cated: for example, a situation where a new highway opens that parallels an
existing road that had previously served both local tra¢ c and "through" tra¢ c.
This is unreasonable in urban contexts, since the spatial distribution of demand
for gasoline is unlikely to be as dependent on the location of the most important
"through" roads. We therefore conduct our analysis on a part of our sample
that includes only less dense areas where tra¢ c patterns are relatively uncom-
plicated.29 First, we use only counties with a single two-digit Interstate and no
three-digit Interstates; this is a simple way of eliminating most large cities as
well as other counties with complicated tra¢ c patterns. Some populous coun-
ties remain after this cut (for example, New York, NY); we therefore eliminate
all counties where 1992 employment exceeds 200,000. We also eliminate all
counties through which the highway passes but there is no exit; most of these
are cases where the highway clips the corner of a county. Finally, we employ
in our main analysis a "balanced panel" which includes only counties where the
number of service stations is nonmissing in each year between 1964-1992.30
    Our main sample ultimately includes 677 counties; we depict these counties
in Figure 3. This map indicates that our sample counties come from all over the
United States, tracing the non-urban parts of the Interstate Highway System.
Di¤erences in the shading of these counties indicate di¤erences in when the
highways were completed; broadly, they were completed somewhat later in the
west than in other regions of the country, but the pattern is not strong, re‡ecting
the Federal government’s encouragement of proportionate construction in each
state. In addition, di¤erences in the shading of the highway indicate counties
  2 9 And unlike urban counties, the location of highways in these counties was generally un-

controversial.
  3 0 We retain route-county-years where service station employment is missing, as long as the

number of service stations is nonmissing.



                                             16
where the new highway was far from the previous intercity route, de…ned here
as farther than 3 miles. It was more common for western Interstates to be
completed close to the previous route than Interstates in other areas of the
country, in large part because the population is less dense in the west than in
east or south.

4.3     Patterns in the Data
Table 2 presents the timing of "two-digit" Interstate Highway completion as
reported in the PR-511 data, and for our balanced panel counties. From the
left part of the table, 20% of two-digit highway mileage was open by the end
of 1960; most of this mileage consisted of toll roads in the east that predated
the Interstate Highway System (such as the Pennsylvania Turnpike) and were
incorporated into the System once it was established. About 55% of two-digit
mileage in the System was completed during the 1960s; the peak construction
year was 1965. 90% of the System was completed by 1975, and the …nal 5% after
1980. The counties in our balanced panel account for 18,833 miles of Interstate
Highways, about half of the two-digit mileage in the System as a whole. The
timing of highway construction in this subsample mirrors that of the system as
a whole, peaking in the mid-1960s, then steadily declining during the years that
followed. As noted above, the timing of Interstate Highway construction means
that our analysis will center on events that mostly took place in the 1960s and
early 1970s, and our creation of a dataset that examines changes in industry
structure during this time exploits this.
    Table 3 presents time trends in the number and size distribution of …rms
(starting in 1974, service stations) in our 677 balanced panel counties. The
trends in these counties are very similar to those in the U.S. as a whole. The
number of …rms/county was roughly constant between 1964 and 1973, with the
number of large …rms increasing relative to the number of small …rms. The
number of service stations per county then fell by about one-third between 1974
and 1992, re‡ecting a large decrease in the number of small stations that is
partially o¤set by a small increase in the number of larger stations.
    Figure 4 presents some initial evidence on whether the timing of industry
structure changes are related to the timing of highway openings. We place
counties into three categories according to the year the highway was completed
in the county: before 1966, 1966-1971, and after 1971. We then calculate
employees per …rm (starting in 1974, per station) within these categories.31
Figure 4 indicates that average …rm size was small in "early" and "late" counties
early on; in each, there were about three employees per …rm. Employment
size increases steadily during this period; in 1992, the average gas station in
"early" and "late" counties had roughly seven employees. But the timing of
this increase di¤ered between the early and late counties. Firm size increased
in the "early" counties relative to the "late" counties early in our sample; by the
  3 1 The quantites in Figure 4 use only counties where we observe service station employment

in each year, N=470.




                                             17
early 1970s, the di¤erence was about 10%. The opposite was true late in our
sample, after the mid-1970s, average station size increased in the late counties
relative to the early counties. The right part of Figure 4, which depicts the
ratios between the "late" and "early" counties each year, shows this pattern.
This evidence indicates that increases in the size of service stations corresponded
to the completion of Interstate Highways.


5       Empirical Model and Results
Our empirical speci…cations follow Campbell and Lapham (2004). We estimate
vector autoregressive speci…cations of the form:

                           yit =    i   +   t   + yit   1   + xit + "it

In the …rst set of results that we will present, yit is a 2 1 vector containing the
logarithms of the number of service stations (before 1974, the number of …rms)
divided by total county employment in county i at time t (nit ) and their aver-
age employment (ait ). The vector xit contains our highway opening variables,
including up to three leads and lags; we describe this part of the speci…cation in
more detail below. The parameter i represents time-invariant factors that lead
the number and size of service stations to di¤er across counties, and t embod-
ies trends and aggregate ‡uctuations that a¤ect all counties equally. Removing
these county-speci…c and time-speci…c e¤ects isolates the changes in the num-
ber and size of service stations around the time of Interstate Highway openings
relative to the county’s own history and national developments. The speci…ca-
tion’s autoregressive structure allows the impact of an Interstate’s opening to
occur gradually. The coe¢ cients of give the initial impact, while (I         ) 1
measures the long-run change.
    Setting aside for now leads and lags, the vector xit includes up to three
highway opening variables: ccsmiit , csmiit , and csmiit disti . Including ccsmiit
accounts for the possibility that the level of demand for gasoline in a county
depends on corridor-level construction; the interaction csmiit disti allows for
the possibility that the e¤ect of the completion of a highway in given county
has a di¤erent impact on local industry structure, depending on the size of the
spatial shift in demand.

5.1     Basic Results
5.1.1    Number and Average Size of Stations
Table 4 presents results from OLS estimates of several speci…cations.32 In
the top panel, xt contains no leads or lags, and includes only csmiit . The
  3 2 All speci…cations allow the autoregressive coe¢ cients to vary for the year 1974, to account

for the change in the Census de…nition of reporting units. We have also estimated speci…-
cations that allow these coe¢ cients to vary before and after this change, and to vary in each
year. The estimates on our highway openings coe¢ cients vary little when we do so.



                                                  18
highway opening coe¢ cient is economically and statistically zero for the number
of stations, and is positive and signi…cant for the average employment size of
stations.33 The autoregressive coe¢ cients all are positive and signi…cant, so the
impact of shocks on the number and average size of service stations in a county
is distributed over time. The magnitudes of the highway opening coe¢ cients,
combined with the autoregressive coe¢ cients, provide no evidence that opening
of a highway is associated with a change in the number of …rms, but imply a
6% long run increase in the average employment size of service stations in the
county, one-third of which (1.9%) occurs in the year that the highway opens.
    The second panel adds a lead and lag to the highway opening vector. The
main result is the positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient on the "-1 year" coe¢ cient
in the average employment size regression: the increase in average size of service
stations begins before the highway opens. The sum of the coe¢ cients on the
leads and lags is approximately unchanged. The …nal two panels extend the
analysis to two and three leads and lags. While the autoregressive coe¢ cients
and the sum of the leads and lags –and thus our estimate of the long-run impact
of highway openings – are approximately the same as in the other panels, the
individual highway opening coe¢ cients are estimated with more noise. The
positive estimates of the "zero, one, and two years before" coe¢ cients suggest
that average station size increased before opening; the coe¢ cient on the "one
year after" coe¢ cient indicates that it fell somewhat the year after the opening.
    This …rst set of results indicates that, unlike in our competitive benchmark,
the margin of adjustment is in …rm size, not the number of …rms, and suggests
that the adjustment begins before the demand increase occurs. While we …nd
these general results interesting, these speci…cations do not di¤erentiate between
highway openings with small and large spatial demand shifts. Below we …nd
that once we do, the industry dynamics become richer.

5.1.2    Size Categories
Table 5 presents more detail regarding these patterns by looking at how the
number of stations in our size categories changed around the time of highway
openings. This table reports results where the dependent variable yit is a vector
of the number of stations in each of the four employment size categories reported
in Table 3. For brevity, we show results only for zero to two leads and lags; the
three leads and lags speci…cation produces results similar to the two leads and
lags one.
    The results in this Table indicate that highway openings are associated with
an increase the average number of "large" stations with 8-19 employees (or, after
1973, stations with 10-19 employees) Our estimates indicate that the number
  3 3 Before 1974, the unit of observation in the data is the "county-…rm." To avoid convoluted

language, we will use the term "station" to refer to our unit of observation before and after
1974. This will be supported by empirical evidence that we present below: the results do
not appear to di¤er before and after 1974, suggesting that highway openings were associated
with changes in the number and size of stations rather than stations’propensity to be part of
multiestablishment …rms.



                                              19
of large stations increased by 0.8 stations during the two years leading up to
the highway opening, and in the long run increased by 1.2-1.4 stations. This is
fairly large relative to the sample mean of 3.2. However, we …nd no evidence
that highway openings are associated with a change in the number of stations
in the other size categories, in particular small stations.
    The Table 4 relationship between increases in the average size of service
stations and highway completion does not appear to be driven by a mechanism
in which new highways lead to increases in the number of large stations and
decreases in the number of small ones. Small stations are exiting the market
throughout our sample period, but there is no evidence that the timing of their
exit is related to when highways are built. This pattern is consistent with the
hypothesis that sunk costs make exit decisions relatively insensitive to changes
in demand, and inconsistent with our competitive benchmark in which …rms
enter and exit the market with changes in demand.

5.1.3   County Employment
One alternative interpretation of these patterns is that they re‡ect reverse cau-
sation: states could foresee which counties were about to experience a boost in
local employment or population (which would also increase the demand service
stations faced from locals), and systematically built highway segments so that
they were completed at or around the same time as this growth. Although our
reading of historical accounts indicates that the timing of Interstate Highway
construction in rural counties was much more closely related to through traf-
…c levels – and thus demand for transportation through the county – than to
local shocks –and thus demand for transportation in the county, we neverthe-
less investigate this interpretation by investigating whether employment in the
counties in our sample systematically changes around the time that highways
are completed in the county.
    Table 6 reports results from this exercise, which uses analogous AR speci…-
cations with ln(county employment) as the dependent variable. The estimate in
the …rst row indicates a negative relationship between employment and highway
openings that is not statistically di¤erent from zero, and adding leads and lags
does not change the general picture. We therefore do not …nd empirical sup-
port for this "reverse causation" hypothesis: if state governments built highways
around the time that they expected local economies to be growing particularly
fast, one would expect to observe a relationship between employment and high-
way completion, but we do not …nd such a relationship. Although the timing
of highway completion re‡ects decisions made by policy-makers and politicians,
it does not appear to be correlated with other shocks to the local economies of
the counties in our sample.

5.1.4   Do These Patterns Di¤er After 1973?
We next investigate whether our estimates of the relationship between highway
openings and industry structure change after 1973. By doing this, we examine


                                       20
several hypotheses. One has to do with whether the patterns we uncover re‡ect
…rm-level or station-level e¤ects. Recall that our data are reported at the …rm
level rather than the station level until 1974. The results in Tables 4 and
5 could either re‡ect that highway completion is associated with increases in
average station size or increases in the number of stations per …rm. Examining
whether these results di¤er after 1973 sheds some light on these alternatives.
If the results we showed above re‡ect only increases in station size, and not
increases in the number of stations per …rm, then one should …nd no di¤erence
in these results when looking through 1973 versus after 1973. In contrast,
…nding that the e¤ects we uncover are signi…cantly weaker after 1973 would
provide evidence that the results we presented above re‡ect increases in the
number of stations per …rm to some extent.
    A second reason for such a test is that, as we discussed above, service stations
changed starting around this time –self-service stations became more prevalent,
and later on, service stations started to have convenience stores. Finding that
the results we uncover are stronger after 1973 would provide evidence consistent
with the hypothesis that the changes we uncovered are interrelated with changes
in stations’format associated with self-service or convenience stores. Finding
no di¤erences would provide no evidence consistent with this hypothesis.
    Results are in Table 7. In short, there is no evidence of a signi…cant change
in after 1973. For each speci…cation and each equation, we fail to reject the
null that the change in the vector is zero, using Wald tests of size 0.05. We
therefore cannot reject the null that the patterns re‡ect only increases in average
station size. To some extent, this re‡ects the simple fact that close to 90% of
two-digit Interstate Highway mileage (both overall and in our subsample) had
opened by the end of 1973. However, enough mileage was constructed after
this time so that the test has some power, and …nding no signi…cant changes
provides some evidence that Interstate Highways were having a similar impact
on local service station market structure before and after this time.

5.1.5   Discussion
The estimates to this point indicate that on average, local markets adjusted to
highway openings through increases in station size, and that this adjustment
began two years ahead of the highway’s opening. A manifestation of this is in
the increase in the number of large stations. They provide a preliminary indi-
cation of the industry dynamics associated with Interstate Highway openings.
On average, the margin of adjustment is on the intensive margin rather than
the extensive margin, and ahead of when highways opened. These dynamics
are inconsistent with those in our competitive benchmark and consistent with
imperfect competition models where markups fall with entry.
    The estimates also suggest that sunk costs shape industry dynamics. Recall
that during our sample period, the number of large stations was increasing and
the number of small stations was decreasing. Our results indicate that, at least
during the time window that we investigate, highway openings are associated
with an increase in large stations but there is no evidence that highway openings


                                        21
are associated with a decrease in the number of small stations. This fact
is what one might expect in an industry where there are signi…cant industry-
speci…c sunk costs – the fact that it is costly to convert a service station to
other purposes would lead exit to be relatively insensitive to demand shocks
and competitive conditions.34
    These patterns, while interesting, mask important di¤erences in the margin
and timing of adjustment between situations where the new highway was close
to and far from the old route. We present and interpret evidence on these
di¤erences in the next section.

5.2     Highway Openings, Spatial Demand Shifts, and In-
        dustry Dynamics
We next extend the analysis by examining how the relationship between highway
openings and industry structure di¤ers, depending on how far the Interstate is
from the old route.
    We …rst run a series of simple speci…cations to examine whether the margin
of adjustment di¤ers with how far the new Interstate is from the old route,
and if so whether any e¤ects we …nd are nonlinear in distance from old route.
Results are in Table 8; these are analogous to those in the top panel in Table
4 that include no leads or lags. We report here only the coe¢ cients on the
cumulative share of miles completed in the county and interactions between this
variable and "distance from old route," since the estimates of the autoregressive
coe¢ cients are similar to those reported in the other tables. The estimates
in the top panel indicate that highway openings are associated with a greater
increase in the number of stations when the Interstate is farther from the old
route. The estimate on the interaction in the second column is positive and
signi…cant. In the third column, we allow the distance e¤ect to be nonlinear
by including an interaction with the square of distance; the estimate on this
coe¢ cient is negative, but is not statistically signi…cant. Within the range
of our data, the linear and quadratic speci…cations have similar implications:
no evidence of a relationship between highway openings and changes in the
number of …rms when "distance from old route" = 0, but a relationship that
gradually increases in magnitude to about 0.025 as "distance from old route"
increases to 10 miles (which is the 95th percentile "distance from old route"
in our data). The bottom panel shows analogous results when examining the
average employment size of service stations. In contrast to the top panel, there
is no evidence of an e¤ect that di¤ers with "distance from old route." The long
run increase of 5-6% we report above holds irrespective of distance.
    Combined, these speci…cations indicate a systematic di¤erence in how these
local markets adjust to demand shocks. When demand expands in a given loca-
tion, the industry adjusts through changes in station size. We …nd no evidence
that the number of stations increases in this case. If instead a spatial shift
  3 4 It is also what one might expect from watching the movie "Cars:" after all, the Radiator

Springs service station had not yet exited the market, even though there apparently had been
no through tra¢ c in the town for many years.


                                             22
accompanies demand growth, then the number of stations increases. These
patterns are consistent with the implications of imperfect competition models
described in Section 2: demand increases that do not create new spatial seg-
ments primarily lead to increases in average …rm size, but demand increases
that do so are absorbed by increases in the number of …rms.
    Table 9 shows how the timing of adjustment varies with the magnitude of
spatial demand shifts. These results are from speci…cations that include leads
and lags, and allow the highway opening variables to interact with "distance
from old route." In addition to the coe¢ cient estimates, we show estimates of
the sum of the leads and lags, evaluated at distance = 0 and distance = 10,
in the right part of the table. The main …nding from these speci…cations is
that the timing as well as the margin of adjustment is di¤erent when comparing
situations where the Interstate was close to and far from the old route. This
is suggested by the coe¢ cient estimates in the middle panel: in particular, by
the positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient estimates on the "+1 year" interaction in
the number of stations regression and on the "-1 year" coe¢ cient in the average
station size regression. But it can be seen more easily in the impulse-response
functions associated with these speci…cations, which we display in Figure 5 and
which use results from the middle speci…cation. In each of these, the three
lines represent impulse-response functions evaluated at three distances: 0 miles,
1.25 miles, and 10 miles; these are at the 5th, 50th, and 95th percentiles of
the distance distribution in our sample. The functions for 0 and 1.25 miles
are similar: there is little change in the number of stations, but an increase in
the average size of 6% during the two years leading up to the highway opening.
Thereafter, the average size levels o¤. The function is much di¤erent for 10
miles. There is an increase in the number of stations of about 8%, starting
after the highway is complete, but no signi…cant increase in the size of stations.
    The evidence in Figure 5, which concerns both the timing and margin of
adjustment, reveals an interesting pattern in light of Section 2’s theoretical dis-
cussions. Figure 5 indicates that, when highways do not create new spatial
segments, local markets adjust through increases in …rm size, and the adjust-
ment begins before highways open. This is inconsistent with the implications
of our competitive benchmark, and consistent with models of imperfect com-
petition. In contrast, Figure 5 indicates that, when highways are built far
from the previous route and thus create new spatial segments, the number of
…rms increases. This is also consistent with imperfect competition models: the
opening up of new areas of product space means new entrants are likely to be
more distant substitutes to incumbents, which in turn facilitates entry. These
patterns illustrate the importance of allowing for such factors as product di¤er-
entiation and sunk costs –integral in imperfect competition but not in perfectly
competitive models – when modeling or analyzing industry dynamics in this
industry, and perhaps other industries (such as many other retail industries)
even though it may be analytically convenient from abstract from these factors.




                                        23
5.3    Do the Results Change When Looking Only at Coun-
       ties Where a New Highway Was Added?
In Section 4 we discussed the determinants of the location of Interstate High-
ways, relative to the roads they replaced. A central point of this discussion
was that details of the local economy sometimes played a signi…cant role in de-
termining whether the new highway was built atop the old route, but played a
minimal role relative to the local terrain in determining how far the new high-
way was from the old route, given that it did not use the old right of way. We
therefore examined whether the patterns we uncover change when we look only
at counties where "distance from old route" was greater than 0.5 miles –coun-
ties where little if any of the old right of way was used for the new highway. We
found that the coe¢ cient estimates were almost the same when using this 518
county sample as when we used the full sample of of 677 counties, though some
of the coe¢ cients that were statistically signi…cant when using a test of size 0.05
are now statistically signi…cant only when using a test of size 0.10. We report
these estimates in Table A2 in the Appendix. We conclude that di¤erences in
the local economy that are correlated with highway placement are unlikely to
explain our results, as these results appear when only looking at counties where
the highway was located away from the old route.

5.4    Does The Timing of Adjustment Re‡ect Highway Open-
       ings In Other Counties in the Corridor?
The results above indicate that the adjustments to industry structure are earlier
when new highway openings involve a small spatial demand shift than when they
involve a large one, and that these adjustments take place before the highway
opens when there is only a small spatial demand shift. One interpretation of the
latter result is that it re‡ects highway openings in other counties along the same
corridor: the demand for gasoline in a county may increase before the highway
in the county is completed because the highway has been completed elsewhere
in the corridor, and this has led tra¢ c in the corridor to increase. If so, the
latter result would not be evidence of expansion ahead of demand changes.
    We investigate this by including ccsmii in our speci…cation. Table 10 shows
the results. The top panel shows speci…cations with no leads and lags. The
coe¢ cient on ccsmii in the number of stations regression is economically and
statistically zero: the results are essentially the same as in our base speci…ca-
tion. The story is somewhat di¤erent in the station size regression. The point
estimate on csmii declines to 0.016 (down from 0.020 in the base speci…cation)
and becomes not statistically signi…cant; the point estimate on ccsmii is 0.014
and not statistically signi…cant. This speci…cation indicates that it is di¢ cult
to separately identify the impact on station size of highway openings in a county
and in a corridor.
    The bottom panel, however, provides evidence that our "expansion ahead of
the demand change" result does not re‡ect highway openings in other counties.
Here we include a lead and a lag. We …nd that the results on csmii are almost


                                        24
identical to those in Table 9; in particular, there is a positive and signi…cant
coe¢ cient on the one-year lead that is nearly identical in magnitude to our
previous result. The fact that increases in average station size in a county take
place ahead of highway openings in the county does not appear to re‡ect the
opening of highway sections outside of the county.

5.5     Do Our Results Di¤er With the Importance of Through
        Tra¢ c In the County?

The …nal subsection examines whether our results are stronger in areas where
through tra¢ c is important relative to local demand. We utilize tra¢ c count
data on Interstates from the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Highway Per-
formance Monitoring System (HPMS) to construct a variable that distinguishes
among counties by whether the amount of through tra¢ c is large relative to em-
ployment in the county. We develop a measure of through tra¢ c in the county
by taking the minimum daily tra¢ c count on the Interstate within each of our
corridors and assigning it to each county in the corridor. Call this thrui .35 We
then construct a variable thrusharei = thrui =(thrui + empi ) where empi is
the county’s 1992 employment. The mean value of thrusharei across our 677
counties is 0.55. The maximum value is 0.97, which is in Culberson County,
TX –a very small county on a fairly heavily traveled stretch of Interstate 10 in
west Texas. The minimum value is 0.01 in Kennebec County, ME, the largest
county on the corridor which includes the least-traveled stretch on the Interstate
Highway System (the northernmost part of I-95).
    Table 11 presents results where we interact (1 thrusharei ) and thrusharei
with xit . We …nd that the estimates on interactions between thrusharei and
csmiit and csmiit disti are similar to what we show in Table 9. In contrast, the
estimates on interactions between (1 thrusharei ) and these variables look quite
di¤erent; indeed, the coe¢ cient on csmiit in the number of stations regression is
negative and signi…cant. As one might expect, our main results re‡ect changes
in industry structure in counties where highway tra¢ c is large relative to local
employment. There is no evidence that either the number or size of service
stations in a county increased when the highway opened in the county in counties
where highway tra¢ c is small relative to local employment, and there is some
evidence that the number of stations actually decreased.
    This fact lends additional evidence in support of the experiment that we
envision in this paper: that highway openings represent observable, permanent
demand shifts for highway-related services and that changes in market struc-
ture for service stations around the time of these openings re‡ect the supply
  3 5 The HPMS data provide tra¢ c counts measured periodically on the Interstates in our

sample. These data are reported consistently starting in 1993. Our measure uses data
from 1993-98 to reduce noise in the counts due to sample sizes. We constructed thrui by
…rst calculating the minimum tra¢ c count on the route*county in each of these years, then
averaging this quantity across these years. We then took the minimum value of this county-
level average across the corridor.



                                           25
response to these demand shifts. We observe changes in industry structure
only in counties where through tra¢ c is important, and thus demand changes
are large. This pattern is not what one would expect if instead the relation-
ships we revealed earlier between changes in industry structure and highway
openings had other explanations that are unrelated to through-tra¢ c-related
demand changes. Along with the fact that there is no evidence that county
employment changed around the time of highway openings, this provides evi-
dence against the alternative interpretation that state o¢ cials timed highway
construction such that highways were completed when local economies were
receiving positive demand shocks that were unrelated to the highway.


6     Conclusion
The gasoline retailing industry, perhaps like many other retail industries, may
appear to satisfy standard assumptions of perfect competition. The product
itself is relatively undi¤erentiated and there are generally many competitors,
even in relatively unpopulated areas. It is tempting for economists who study
dynamics or business formation at the industry level to abstract from strate-
gic factors like product di¤erentiation when modeling how producers adjust to
demand shocks. However, we …nd that the industry dynamics associated with
highway openings conform poorly to the time-series predictions of perfect com-
petition. Instead, we …nd systematic patterns that are more easily explained
by models of imperfect competition that have been the foundation of industrial
organization, especially since the 1980s. For example, we …nd that supply grows
ahead of demand and along the intensive margin (as in models of entry deter-
rence) when demand shocks take place near incumbents’ location in product
space. In contrast, supply grows after demand and along the extensive mar-
gin when demand shocks take place away from incumbents’location in product
space –entry is greater when entry has less an e¤ect on equilibrium margins.36
    Our …ndings complement earlier, cross-sectional studies of other retail in-
dustries that question whether the competitive model is appropriate in retail
industries, even when scale economies are small. In prior work, Campbell and
Hopenhayn (2005) and Campbell (2010) rejected analogous predictions of per-
fect competition using cross-sectional data from several retail-trade industries
in U.S. cities. As in the present paper, many independent producers populate
these industries. They hypothesized that their results re‡ected unmeasured
strategic competition between producers of di¤erentiated products. That is, an
"industry", de…ned as the collection of producers in a given NAICS code and
geographic entity, is actually a composite of many unobserved "submarkets,"
each of which is populated by oligopolists. Within each submarket, competition
is Hotelling-style, while between industries it is Chamberlin-style.
  3 6 This …nding is reminiscent of the failure of incumbent cereal producers to dominate the

natural cereals segment, as documented by Schmalensee (1977), but incumbents in the markets
we examined failed to deter further entry even though the demand increase and spatial shift
were foreseen.



                                             26
    Together, our paper and this earlier work indicate that competition within
submarkets re‡ects …rms’strategic incentives in a way that leads industry dy-
namics to di¤er from in the competitive model. Even though researchers may
not be able to identify with whom each …rm competes directly, the …rms them-
selves do and it is important to incorporate this into the analysis.


7    References

Baumol, William J. and Alan S. Blinder (1985). Economics: Principles and
Policies. Harcourt, Brace, and Jovanovich: New York.


  Baum-Snow, Nathaniel (2007). "Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2), 775-805.

   Berry, Steven T. (1992). "Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline
Industry." Econometrica, 60, 889-917.

   Berry, Steven T. and Joel Waldfogel (2010).    "Quality and Market Size."
Journal of Industrial Economics, 58(1), 1-31.

   Besanko, David and Ronald R. Braeutigam (2011). Microeconomics. Wiley:
Je¤erson City.

  Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss (1990). "Entry In Monopoly
Markets." Review of Economic Studies, 57(3), 531-553.

   Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss (1991). "Entry and Competition
in Concentrated Markets." Journal of Political Economy, 99(5), 977-1009.

   Bulow, Jeremy I., John D. Geanakoplos, and Paul D. Klemperer (1985).
"Multimarket Oligopoly: Strategic Substitutes and Complements," Journal of
Political Economy, 93(3), 488-511.

    Cabral, Luís M. B. and José Mata. (2003). "On the Evolution of the Firm
Size Distribution: Facts and Theory." American Economic Review, 93(4), 1075-
1090.

   Campbell, Je¤rey and Hugo Hopenhayn (2005).        "Market Size Matters."
Journal of Industrial Economics, 53(1), 1-25.

   Campbell, Je¤rey and Beverly Lapham (2004). "Real Exchange Rate Fluc-
tuations and the Dynamics of Retail Trade Industries on the U.S.-Canada Bor-
der." American Economic Review, 94(4), 1194-1206


                                     27
   Chandra, Amitabh and Eric Thompson (2000). "Does Public Infrastructure
A¤ect Economic Activity? Evidence from the Interstate Highway System."
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 30(4), 457-490.

   Dixit, Avinash K. and Robert S. Pindyck, Investment Under Uncertainty,
Princeton University Press, 1994.

   Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1977). "Monopolistic Competition
and Optimum Product Diversity." American Economic Review, 67(3), 297-308.

   Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson (1989). "The
Growth and Failure of U.S. Manufacturing Plants." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 104(4), 671-698.

   Federal Highway Administration, Bene…ts of Interstate Highways, U.S. De-
partment of Transportation, June 1970.

   Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole (1984). "The Fat Cat E¤ect, the Puppy
Dog Ploy, and the Lean and Hungry Look," American Economic Review, 74(2),
361-368.

   Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole (1986).     Dynamic Models of Oligopoly.
Harwood, Chur, 1986.

  Jovanovic, Boyan and Glenn M. MacDonald (1994). "The Life Cycle of a
Competitive Industry." Journal of Political Economy 102(2), 322-347.

   Mazzeo, Michael J. (2002). "Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Struc-
ture." Rand Journal of Economics, 33(2), 221-242.

    Michaels, Guy (2008). "The E¤ect of Trade on the Demand for Skill:
Evidence from the Interstate Highway System." Review of Economics and Sta-
tistics, 90(4), 683-701.

   Salop, Steven C. (1979). "Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods."
Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 141-156.

    Schmalensee, Richard (1977). "Entry Deterrence in the Ready-to-Eat Break-
fast Cereal Industry." Bell Journal of Economics, 9(3), 305-327.

     Spence, A. Michael (1976). "Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopo-
listic Competition." Review of Economic Studies, 43(2), 217-235.

   Spence, A. Michael (1977). "Entry, Capacity, Investment and Oligopolistic
Pricing." Bell Journal of Economics, 8(2), 534-544.



                                     28
  Spence, A. Michael (1979). "Investment Strategy and Growth in a New
Market." Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 1-19.

  Sutton, John (1991).    Sunk Costs and Industry Structure.   MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1991.

   Texas Transportation Institute (1966). Economic E¤ ects of Bypasses and
Freeways. Texas Transportation Institute, College Station, TX, 1966.




                                   29
8     Appendix
8.1    De…nition of Corridors
De…ning corridors …rst involves establishing the locations where corridors begin
and end. These locations include most prominently major cities. After various
trial de…nitions, we found that a useful and parsimonious way to generate a
set of cities that serve as corridor endpoints is to look at the U.S. map in a
standard road atlas. We found that cities listed in bold provided reasonable
endpoints in the vast majority of cases. We spoke to cartographers at the …rm
that produced the map, and asked the criteria for including a city in bold. We
learned that all cities in bold have at least 100,000 population (for the map we
use, in 1996), but not all cities that exceed this level are included on the map
– suburban cities (e.g., Fullerton, CA) are excluded both because they are not
major destinations and because including them would make the map cluttered.
We asked the criteria for including these cities and were told “cartographic
license.”
    In any case, this rule produces a very useful set of cities; central cities with
at least 100,000 population. A list of these cities is in Table A1.
    In addition, we included the beginning and end of interstate highways as
corridor endpoints, when the beginning or end of a highway (a) was not in a
endpoint city, and (b) did not end at a junction with an interstate with the same
orientation. One example of a corridor endpoint that satis…es this is Interstate
5’s northern terminus at the Canadian border. Another is Interstate 4’s northern
terminus at its intersection with Interstate 95; this is an intersection between a
(even-numbered) east-west route and an (odd-numbered) north-south route.
    Within cities, we de…ned the beginning/end of the corridor to be at major in-
tersections. The most common situation is where two interstates intersect near
the heart of a city; when this occurs we use the interstate intersection as the
placement for the node. (Sometimes the interstate intersection close to down-
town is with a 3-digit highway.) In cities where there is a “dual-signed”segment
where a single road is part of two two-digit interstate highways (e.g., Interstate
5-Interstate 10 in downtown Los Angeles), we use one of the endpoints of this
dual-signed section. Where there is no interstate intersection near downtown,
we use an important intersection close to downtown.
    This produces an easy division of some Interstate Highways into distinct cor-
ridors. For example, it divides Interstate 25 into 4 corridors: start-Albuquerque,
Albuquerque-Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs-Denver, and Denver-end. This
is simple because every mile of Interstate 25 belongs to only one corridor.

8.2    Highway Segments and Multiple Corridors
Some segments of the interstate highway system belong to multiple corridors.
The most common examples of this occur when an east-west interstate divides
into two east-west interstates, and this division takes place outside one of our
city endpoints: forks in the road. For example, Interstate 10 west of Tucson


                                        30
divides between Interstate 8, which goes to San Diego, and Interstate 10, which
goes to Phoenix. The stretch of Interstate 10 that is west of Tucson but east
of this fork is part of two corridors: Phoenix-Tucson and San Diego-Tucson.
Another example of this is when highways merge then separate. For example,
Interstate 70 and Interstate 76 come together southeast of Pittsburgh, continue
together for a long stretch, then split. The “I70-I76”stretch is part of four cor-
ridors: Pittsburgh-Philadelphia, Pittsburgh-Baltimore, Columbus-Philadelphia,
and Columbus-Baltimore. The adjacent segments are each part of two corridors;
for example, the stretch of Interstate 76 west of this dual signed stretch is part
of Pittsburgh-Philadelphia and Pittsburgh-Baltimore. This pattern is common
within metropolitan areas, albeit for much shorter stretches than I70-I76; as
noted above, Interstate 5-Interstate 10 in Los Angeles is an example.
    A full list of highway stretches that are part of multiple corridors, and the
corridors to which they are assigned, is available upon request from the authors.

8.3    Measuring Corridor Completion When Segments Are
       Part of Multiple Corridors
An issue arises with respect to how to quantify how much of the corridor is
complete in a county when highway segments are part of multiple corridors.
For example, consider a county on Interstate 10 west of Tucson. This stretch of
Interstate 10 is part of both Phoenix-Tucson and San Diego-Tucson. We con-
struct our measure of corridor completion by …rst calculating the cumulative
share of construction along each corridor, then weighting construction along the
two corridors according to the tra¢ c volume on each of the branches, measured
at a point as close as possible to the “fork in the road;”in this case, tra¢ c vol-
umes on Interstate 8 and Interstate 10 just west of where Interstate 10 splits into
these two roads. We compute corridor-level construction variables analogously
for all counties that are part of multiple corridors.




                                        31
   250000


   200000


   150000


   100000


    50000


        0
            1957        1962        1967           1972         1977      1982        1987        1992            1997
            EC: Statio ns      EC: Statio ns w/P ayro ll    CB P : Repo rting Units    CB P : Statio ns w/P ayro ll




    Figure 1.       Service Stations in the United States. This Figure
depicts Census counts of the number of service stations in the United States,
and subsets thereof; these come from the Economic Census (EC) and County
Business Patterns (CBP). The EC series show that the number of stations
increased from the late 1950s to the early 1970s, then dropped sharply from then
until the early 1980s. The CBP …gures report the number of …rms operating in
each county before 1974, then the number of stations thereafter. The former
falls relative to the EC-reported number of stations during the late 1960s and
early 1970s, indicating that an increasing share of stations were owned by …rms
that operated other stations in the same county.




                                                           32
        9

        8

        7
        6

        5

        4

        3
        2

        1

        0
            1957        1962      1967            1972      1977             1982         1987         1992           1997
             EC: Statio ns     EC: Statio ns w/P ayro ll        CB P : Repo rting Units     CB P : Statio ns w/P ayro ll




    Figure 2. The Employment Size of Service Stations in the United
States. This Figure depicts various measures of the employment size of ser-
vice stations using data from the Economic Census (EC) and County Business
Patterns (CBP). The EC series, which report employees per station using all
stations and only stations with positive payroll, show that station size increased
steadily throughout our sample period, increasing from 2.5 in 1964 to 5.6 in
1992. The CBP series report employees per "reporting unit" (…rm*county) be-
fore 1974, then employees per station thereafter. The former increases by more
than employees per station during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Combined,
the Figure indicates that stations’ employment size roughly doubled between
1964-1992, and that about 1/4 of the increase in within-county …rm size between
1964-1973 is accounted for by an increase in the share of …rms that operated
multiple stations in the same county.




                                                           33
                                                                      S ervice S tation S ize, C haracteris tics

                                  G allons /              G allons /                  P umps /               E mployees /    S hare S elf-
                                  S tation                 P ump                      S tation                  P ump       S ervice S ales

                     1972           360.7                   68.0                         5.3                       0.77
                     1977           508.8                   97.4                         5.2                       0.88          30%
                     1982           543.1                   90.2                         6.0                       0.86          63%
                     1987           697.4                   97.1                         7.2                       0.85          75%
                     1992           802.8                  110.8                         7.2                       0.88          91%

     C hange 1972-1992              123%                    63%                         37%                        15%

                                                                S hare of R evenues by P roduct C ategory

                                    F uel,                 T ires ,               F ood, Alcohol,
                                     O il                  P arts                    T obacco                      O ther

                     1972           82%                     10%                          2%                         6%
                     1977           85%                      5%                          4%                         6%
                     1982           88%                      3%                          5%                         4%
                     1987           81%                      2%                         12%                         6%
                     1992           79%                     2%                          15%                         5%


  S ource: C ens us of R etail T rade, Various Y ears .



    Table 1. Service Station Size, Characteristics, and Revenue Sources.
This Table reports how service stations’business and characteristics changed be-
tween 1972-1992, using data from the Economic Census. Gallons per station
more than doubled, re‡ecting increases in both gallons per pump and pumps
per station. Employees per pump was constant starting in 1977. The self-
service share of sales steadily increased to 91% by 1992. Automotive parts and
accessories’share of station revenues decline between 1972-1982. The increase
in convenience store-related sales increased sharply starting in 1982.




                                                                           34
35
     Figure 3. Sample Counties, Timing of Highway Completion, Distance from Old Route.
                                                       T wo-Digit Highways In
                      All T wo-D igit Highways        B alanced P anel C ounties

                    C umulative                       C umulative
    Y ear              Miles       S hare of T otal      Miles      S hare of T otal

    1960               7732             20%              3494            19%
    1965              19423             50%             9273            49%
    1970              29260             76%             14334           76%
    1975              34884             90%             17138           91%
    1980              37238             96%             18119           96%
    1985              38065             98%             18571           99%
    1990              38597            100%             18785           100%

    1992              38665            100%             18833           100%



   Table 2. Two-Digit Interstate Highway Completion. This Table
depicts cumulative completed mileage of construction of "two-digit" Interstate
Highways in all U.S. counties, and for the 677 counties in our balanced panel.
Most of the mileage was completed during the 1960s and 1970s. The pace of
highway completion in our balanced panel counties was similar to that overall.




                                            36
                  Number of F irms /C ounty

                                                     by E mployment S ize C ategory
                    T otal                    1-3            4-7        8-19    20 or more

           1964      45.8                     35.7           7.6        2.2        0.4
           1965      45.9                     34.7           8.4        2.4        0.5
           1966      45.8                     33.4           9.1        2.8        0.5
           1967      45.2                     31.8           9.8        3.0        0.6
           1968      45.2                     30.3          10.7        3.5        0.7
           1969      46.0                     30.2          11.4        3.8        0.7
           1970      45.3                     29.2          11.5        3.9        0.7
           1971      45.3                     29.1          11.7        3.8        0.8
           1972      45.7                     27.9          12.6        4.3        0.8
           1973      44.9                     26.4          12.8        4.8        0.9

                  Number of S ervice S tations /C ounty

                                                     by E mployment S ize C ategory
                    T otal                    1-4            5-9       10-19 20 or more

           1974      47.4                     37.9           7.4        1.6        0.6
           1975      44.9                     33.3           9.0        2.0        0.6
           1976      43.5                     31.4           9.2        2.3        0.6
           1977      43.3                     30.8           9.7        2.2        0.6
           1978      40.4                     26.4          10.3        3.0        0.8
           1979      37.6                     23.7          10.2        2.8        0.9
           1980      35.6                     24.0           8.6        2.2        0.9
           1981      33.8                     22.2           8.7        2.2        0.7
           1982      33.7                     21.5           9.0        2.5        0.8
           1983      35.9                     23.0           9.7        2.5        0.7
           1984      34.0                     20.5          10.1        2.5        0.8
           1985      32.1                     18.3           9.9        3.0        1.0
           1986      31.5                     17.6           9.7        3.2        1.0
           1987      33.6                     18.2          10.6        3.6        1.1
           1988      34.1                     16.8          12.0        4.2        1.1
           1989      33.4                     15.8          11.8        4.5        1.3
           1990      33.3                     15.1          12.1        4.7        1.3
           1991      32.4                     14.9          11.7        4.5        1.4
           1992      31.9                     13.8          12.3        4.6        1.2


    Table 3. Number of Firms and Service Stations per County, Over-
all and by Employment Size Category. This Table depicts the average
number of …rms per county (in 1964-1973) and service stations per county (in
1974-1992) for counties in our balanced panel. Between 1964 and 1973, there is
a decrease in the number of small …rms and an increase in the number of larger
…rms. Between 1974 and 1992, the average number of service stations decreased
by one-third, re‡ecting a large decrease in the number of small stations and a
smaller increase in the number of large ones.




                                               37
                                     Date of Highway Completion
                                    Before 1966       After 1971

                             1964       3.0              2.9
                                                                   115%
                             1965       3.2              3.1
                             1966       3.5              3.2
                             1967       3.6              3.4
                             1968       3.9              3.6
                                                                   110%
                             1969       4.0              3.7
                             1970       4.2              3.9
                             1971       4.3              3.9
                             1972       4.4              4.2
                             1973       4.7              4.4       105%
                             1974       3.6              3.4
                             1975       4.2              4.0
                                                                                    Ratio of "After 1971" to "Before 1971"
                             1976       4.5              4.3
                             1977       4.7              4.3       100%
                             1978       5.4              5.1
                             1979       5.6              5.3
                             1980       5.3              5.0
                             1981       5.4              5.2
                                                                   95%
                             1982       5.5              5.3




38
                             1983       4.8              4.8
                             1984       5.2              5.2
                             1985       5.6              5.8
                             1986       5.7              6.0       90%
                             1987       6.0              6.2
                             1988       6.4              6.5
                             1989       6.7              6.9
                             1990       6.9              7.0       85%
                             1991       6.7              7.1              1964   1968        1972        1976         1980   1984   1988   1992
                             1992       6.7              7.0



     Figure 4. Average Employment Size of Firms/Stations, by Year and Date of Highway Completion in County.
     This Table depicts average employment per …rm (in 1964-1973) and employment per station (in 1974-1992) for counties in our
     balanced panel with nonmissing employment for each sample year (N = 470). Highway completion is "early" if completed in
     the county before 1966, and "late" if completed after 1971. N=167 and 153 for early and late counties, respectively. The
     Table shows that while the employment size of …rms and stations increased in each of these categories, it took place earlier for
     the "early" counties than the "late" counties.
Table 4
VARs of the Number and Average Employment Size of Service Stations on Highway Openings

 Autoregressive Coefficients                             Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County                               Sum of
                                                          Distributed Lag: Years From Highway Opening                               Lag Coefficients
           ln(nit-1) ln(ait-1)                  -3         -2        -1          0        1        2              3

No Leads or Lags

ln(nit)      0.768      0.029                                                  0.002                                                   0.002
            (0.005)    (0.004)                                                (0.005)                                                 (0.005)

ln(ait)      0.032      0.638                                                  0.019                                                   0.019
            (0.007)    (0.006)                                                (0.007)                                                 (0.007)

One Lead and Lag

ln(nit)      0.766      0.032                                       -0.006    -0.003      0.011                                        0.003
            (0.005)    (0.004)                                      (0.011)   (0.014)    (0.010)                                      (0.006)

ln(ait)     -0.035      0.635                                        0.030     0.002     -0.010                                        0.022
            (0.007)    (0.006)                                      (0.015)   (0.019)    (0.013)                                      (0.008)



Two Leads and Lags

ln(nit)      0.754      0.033                           -0.010       0.003    -0.001      0.009      0.002                             0.002
            (0.005)    (0.005)                          (0.013)     (0.016)   (0.015)    (0.014)    (0.010)                           (0.007)

ln(ait)      0.040      0.618                            0.011       0.018     0.007     -0.036      0.025                             0.025
            (0.008)    (0.007)                          (0.018)     (0.022)   (0.021)    (0.019)    (0.013)                           (0.009)


Three Leads and Lags

ln(nit)      0.737      0.032                -0.022      0.019      -0.013     0.000      0.015      0.007     -0.012                 -0.007
            (0.006)    (0.005)               (0.015)    (0.019)     (0.018)   (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.014)    (0.009)                (0.008)

ln(ait)      0.039      0.598                -0.001      0.013       0.016     0.013     -0.055      0.032      0.006                  0.024
            (0.008)    (0.007)               (0.021)    (0.026)     (0.025)   (0.023)    (0.021)    (0.020)    (0.013)                (0.012)


These results are from county-level VAR specifications that relate the number of service stations and
the average employment size of service stations to Interstate highway openings.
The specifications also include county and year fixed effects (not reported). We also allow the
autoregressive coefficients to differ in year 1974 to accommodate Census' change in reporting units between 1973 and 1974.

These results use all counties with non-missing reports for number of firms/establishments from 1964-1992, N=677.
Standard errors are in parentheses; bold indicates that the estimates is statistically significantly different zero using a test of size 0.05.




                                                               39
Table 5
VARs of the Number of Service Stations in Employment Size Categories on Highway Openings

      Autoregressive Coefficients                           Cumulatiive Share of Highway Opened in County                Sum of
                                                             Distributed Lag: Years from Highway Opening             Lag Coefficients
              s1         s2         s3        s4              -2        -1          0        1        2

No Leads or Lags

s1           0.802     0.149     -0.017     -0.063                                0.179                                   0.179
            (0.004)   (0.007)    (0.015)    (0.036)                              (0.156)                                 (0.156)

s2           0.077     0.650      0.271      0.114                                0.080                                   0.080
            (0.003)   (0.006)    (0.011)    (0.026)                              (0.110)                                 (0.110)

s3          -0.005     0.082      0.579      0.325                                0.234                                   0.234
            (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.015)                              (0.064)                                 (0.064)

s4          -0.002    -0.001      0.063      0.519                                0.010                                   0.010
            (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.006)                              (0.028)                                 (0.028)



One Lead and Lag

s1           0.794     0.158     -0.001     -0.021                      0.214    -0.401     -0.450                        0.263
            (0.004)   (0.008)    (0.016)    (0.038)                    (0.333)   (0.429)    (0.295)                      (0.172)

s2           0.079     0.640      0.268      0.144                      0.008    -0.088      0.193                        0.113
            (0.003)   (0.006)    (0.011)    (0.027)                    (0.236)   (0.303)    (0.208)                      (0.122)

s3          -0.004     0.086      0.573      0.293                     0.304     -0.052      0.038                        0.290
            (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.016)                   (0.136)    (0.175)    (0.121)                      (0.070)

s4          -0.004    -0.003      0.064      0.545                     0.020     -0.031      0.031                        0.020
            (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.007)                   (0.058)    (0.074)    (0.051)                      (0.030)

Two Leads and Lags

s1           0.778     0.172      0.010     -0.007           0.035      0.336    -0.428      0.273      0.017             0.232
            (0.004)   (0.009)    (0.017)    (0.040)         (0.384)    (0.489)   (0.459)    (0.431)    (0.298)           (0.206)

s2           0.082     0.622      0.277      0.179          -0.058     -0.143    -0.071      0.358      0.031             0.117
            (0.003)   (0.006)    (0.012)    (0.029)         (0.271)    (0.345)   (0.325)    (0.305)    (0.210)           (0.145)

s3          -0.006     0.083      0.569      0.303           0.408      0.022    -0.016     -0.183      0.226             0.457
            (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.016)         (0.156)    (0.198)   (0.186)    (0.175)    (0.121)           (0.083)

s4          -0.003     0.002      0.059      0.525          -0.065      0.104    -0.031     -0.040      0.052             0.021
            (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.007)         (0.066)    (0.084)   (0.079)    (0.074)    (0.051)           (0.035)



These results are from county-level VAR specifications that relate the number of service stations in different size categories to
the share of interstate highway mileage in the county that had opened by year t. S1, S2, S3, and S4 consist of firms with 1-3, 4-7, 8-19,
and 20 or more employees in the county (these categories are 1-4, 5-9, 10-19, and 20 or more after 1974).




                                                            40
41
     Table 6
     Regressions of County Employment on Highway Openings

                                                                          Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County                                   Sum of
                             Autoregressive Coefficients                   Distributed Lag: Years From Highway Opening                               Lag Coefficients
                            ln(county employment, it-1)          -3         -2        -1          0        1        2               3

     No Leads or Lags

     ln(county employment, it)         0.916                                                    -0.004                                                   -0.004
                                      (0.003)                                                   (0.003)                                                  (0.003)

     One Lead and Lag




42
     ln(county employment, it)         0.913                                          0.007     -0.009      0.000                                        -0.002
                                      (0.003)                                        (0.006)    (0.008)    (0.005)                                       (0.003)

     Two Leads and Lags

     ln(county employment, it)         0.906                              -0.002      0.006     -0.005     -0.012      0.015                              0.000
                                      (0.003)                             (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.007)    (0.005)                            (0.004)

     Three Leads and Lags

     ln(county employment, it)         0.894                    0.003     -0.008      0.010     -0.001     -0.019      0.013      0.003                   0.004
                                      (0.004)                  (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.006)                 (0.009)




     These results are from county-level AR specifications that relate county employment to Interstate Highway openings.

     The specifications also include county and year fixed effects (not reported). We also allow the
     autoregressive coefficients to differ in year 1974 to accommodate Census' change in reporting units between 1973 and 1974.

     These results use all counties with non-missing reports for number of firms/establishments from 1964-1992, N=677.
     Standard errors are in parentheses; bold indicates that the estimate is statistically significantly different zero using a test of size 0.05.
     Table 7
     VARs of the Number and Average Employment Size of Service Stations on Highway Openings
     Interactions with Post 73 Dummy

      Autoregressive Coefficients           Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County           Post 73*Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County
                                             Distributed Lag: Years from Highway Opening                Distributed Lag: Years from Highway Opening
                ln(nit-1) ln(ait-1)           -2        -1          0        1        2                  -2        -1          0        1        2



     No Leads or Lags

     ln(nit)      0.768      0.029                                -0.001                                                      0.013
                 (0.005)    (0.004)                               (0.005)                                                    (0.011)

     ln(ait)      0.032      0.638                                 0.020                                                     -0.007
                 (0.007)    (0.006)                               (0.007)                                                    (0.016)




43
     One Lead and Lag

     ln(nit)      0.766      0.032                    -0.006      -0.003      0.009                                0.009      0.002      0.008
                 (0.005)    (0.004)                   (0.012)     (0.015)    (0.010)                              (0.017)    (0.021)    (0.017)

     ln(ait)      0.039      0.617                     0.035      0.002      -0.013                               -0.024      0.002      0.020
                 (0.008)    (0.007)                   (0.016)    (0.020)     (0.014)                              (0.023)    (0.029)    (0.023)

     Two Leads and Lags

     ln(nit)      0.754      0.033          0.005     -0.008      -0.001      0.008      0.000         -0.043      0.040      0.001      0.000         0.010
                 (0.005)    (0.005)        (0.014)    (0.017)     (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.010)        (0.017)    (0.022)    (0.021)    (0.021)       (0.017)

     ln(ait)      0.039      0.618          0.004      0.029      0.008      -0.032      0.017          0.025     -0.038     -0.003     -0.009         0.044
                 (0.008)    (0.006)        (0.019)    (0.024)    (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.014)        (0.024)    (0.030)    (0.030)    (0.029)       (0.025)



     These results are from county-level VAR specifications that relate the number of service stations and
     the average employment size of service stations to Interstate highway openings.
     The specifications also include county and year fixed effects (not reported). We also allow the
     autoregressive coefficients to differ in year 1974 to accommodate Census' change in reporting units between 1973 and 1974.

     These results use all counties with non-missing reports for number of firms/establishments from 1964-1992, N=677.
     Standard errors are in parentheses; bold indicates that the estimates is statistically significantly different zero using a test of size 0.05.
     Table 8
     Interaction Specifications with Distance From Old Route: No Leads or Lags


     Dependent Variable: ln(nit)

               CSMI                                                 0.002     -0.006    -0.013
                                                                   (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.008)

               CSMI*distance from old route                                   0.0027     0.0076
                                                                             (0.0012)   (0.0035)

               CSMI*(distance from old route)^2                                          -0.0004
                                                                                        (0.0002)




44
     Dependent Variable: ln(ait)

               CSMI                                                 0.019      0.019     0.016
                                                                   (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.011)

               CSMI*distance from old route                                   -0.0002    0.0022
                                                                             (0.0017)   (0.0049)

               CSMI*(distance from old route)^2                                          -0.0002
                                                                                        (0.0003)

     These results are from county-level interactions that relate the number of service stations
     and the average employment size of service stations to interstate highway openings.

     The first column is the same as the top panel of Table 4. The second and third interact the cumulative share of
     highway opened in the county (CSMI) with the average distance between the interstate and the old route
     that it replaced in the county.
     Table 9
     VARs of the Number and Average Employment Size of Service Stations on Highway Openings
     Distance Interactions, Two Leads and Lags

      Autoregressive Coefficients           Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County          Distance*Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County             Sum of
                                             Distributed Lag: Years from Highway Opening                Distributed Lag: Years from Highway Opening             Lag Coefficients
                ln(nit-1) ln(ait-1)           -2        -1          0        1        2                  -2        -1          0        1        2               d=0       d=10



     No Leads or Lags

     ln(nit)      0.768      0.030                                -0.006                                                      0.003                             -0.005     0.021
                 (0.005)    (0.004)                               (0.006)                                                    (0.001)                            (0.006)   (0.010)

     ln(ait)      0.039      0.617                                 0.020                                                      0.000                              0.020     0.018
                 (0.008)    (0.007)                               (0.009)                                                    (0.002)                            (0.009)   (0.014)




45
     One Lead and Lag

     ln(nit)      0.765      0.032                     -0.010      0.007     -0.005                                0.001     -0.003      0.005                  -0.007     0.024
                 (0.005)    (0.004)                    (0.015)    (0.018)    (0.013)                              (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.002)                 (0.007)   (0.011)

     ln(ait)      0.039      0.617                     0.054      -0.016     -0.011                               -0.008      0.006      0.000                   0.028     0.010
                 (0.008)    (0.007)                   (0.020)     (0.026)    (0.017)                              (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.003)                 (0.010)   (0.015)

     Two Leads and Lags

     ln(nit)      0.754      0.033         -0.010      -0.010      0.016     -0.010     -0.003          0.000      0.001     -0.005      0.006         0.001    -0.008     0.024
                 (0.005)    (0.005)        (0.017)     (0.021)    (0.020)    (0.188)    (0.013)        (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.003)   (0.009)   (0.013)

     ln(ait)      0.039      0.617          0.025      0.038      -0.011     -0.028      0.010         -0.005     -0.007      0.006     -0.002         0.005     0.035     0.005
                 (0.008)    (0.007)        (0.024)    (0.030)     (0.028)    (0.026)    (0.018)        (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.005)       (0.003)   (0.012)   (0.018)



     These results are from county-level VAR specifications that relate the number of service stations and
     the average employment size of service stations to Interstate highway openings.
     The specifications also include county and year fixed effects (not reported). We also allow the
     autoregressive coefficients to differ in year 1974 to accommodate Census' change in reporting units between 1973 and 1974.

     These results use all counties with non-missing reports for number of firms/establishments from 1964-1992, N=677.
     Standard errors are in parentheses; bold indicates that the estimates is statistically significantly different zero using a test of size 0.05.
                      Number of Service Stations and
                   Year From Interstate Highway Opening

       0.1

      0.08

      0.06

      0.04

      0.02

         0
              -2      -1         0   1           2    3         4     5   6
     -0.02

     -0.04

                           0 miles       1.25 miles        10 miles



             Average Service Station Employment Size and
                Year From Interstate Highway Opening

       0.1

      0.08

      0.06

      0.04

      0.02

        0
             -2       -1        0    1           2    3         4     5   6
     -0.02

     -0.04

                           0 miles       1.25 miles       10 miles



    Figure 5. Impulse-Response Functions for Highway Openings on
Market Structure of Service Stations, by Distance from Old Route.
These graphs depict how the number and average size of service stations change
around the time that Interstate Highway segments are completed in a county,
and how this di¤ers with how close the Interstate is from the previous route.
The vertical axes scaled in log-points; 0.04 represents a 4% increase. The
horizontal axis is years from segment completion; "-2" means two years before
a segment is completed. These graphs illustrate that when the Interstate was
close to the old route, the industry adjustment was in an increase in average sta-
tion size during the two years preceding the new highway’s completion. When
it was far, the adjustment was an increase in the number of stations that took
place after the new highway was completed.

                                            46
47
     Table 10
     VARs of the Number and Average Employment Size of Service Stations on Highway Openings
     Distance Interactions, One Lead and Lag

      Autoregressive Coefficients                Cumulative Share of Highway           Cumulative Share of Highway          Cumulative Share of Highway              Sum of
                                                     Opened in Corridor                     Opened in County                 Opened in County*Distance          Lag Coefficients
                ln(nit-1) ln(ait-1)                -1         0         1                -1         0         1                -1        0         1             d=0       d=10



     No Leads or Lags

     ln(nit)      0.768      0.030                            0.005                                -0.008                                0.003                   0.005     0.019
                 (0.005)    (0.004)                          (0.010)                               (0.007)                              (0.001)                 (0.010)   (0.010)




48
     ln(ait)      0.031      0.637                            0.014                                 0.016                                0.000                   0.016     0.012
                 (0.007)    (0.006)                          (0.014)                               (0.010)                              (0.002)                 (0.010)   (0.015)

     One Lead and Lag

     ln(nit)      0.765      0.032                -0.025      0.009      0.011          -0.006      0.009     -0.008          0.001     -0.002         0.005    -0.004     0.026
                 (0.005)    (0.004)               (0.019)    (0.022)    (0.016)         (0.015)    (0.019)    (0.013)        (0.003)    (0.004)       (0.002)   (0.008)   (0.012)

     ln(ait)      0.034      0.634                 0.001      0.009      0.009           0.052     -0.013     -0.019         -0.008      0.006         0.000     0.021     0.001
                 (0.007)    (0.006)               (0.027)    (0.031)    (0.023)         (0.020)    (0.026)    (0.018)        (0.005)    (0.006)       (0.003)   (0.012)   (0.016)



     These results are from county-level VAR specifications that relate the number of service stations and
     the average employment size of service stations to Interstate highway openings.
     The specifications also include county and year fixed effects (not reported). We also allow the
     autoregressive coefficients to differ in year 1974 to accommodate Census' change in reporting units between 1973 and 1974.

     These results use all counties with non-missing reports for number of firms/establishments from 1964-1992, N=677.
     Standard errors are in parentheses; bold indicates that the estimates is statistically significantly different zero using a test of size 0.05.
Table 11
VARs of the Number and Average Employment Size of Service Stations on Highway Openings
Distance Interactions, One Lead and Lag

 Autoregressive Coefficients                     Cumulative Share of Highway          Cumulative Share of Highway           Sum of Dist. Lags:
                                                      Opened in County                 Opened in County*Distance                 County
           ln(nit-1) ln(ait-1)                     -1         0         1                -1        0         1                d=0      d=10

No Leads or Lags
                                                                    Interactions with "thrushare"

ln(nit)      0.766      0.029                                 0.017                                0.005                      0.017      0.071
            (0.005)    (0.004)                               (0.012)                              (0.003)                    (0.012)    (0.020)

ln(ait)      0.030      0.636                                 0.067                               -0.005                      0.067      0.019
            (0.007)    (0.006)                               (0.017)                              (0.004)                    (0.017)    (0.028)

                                                                 Interactions with (1-"thrushare")

ln(nit)                                                      -0.034                               -0.001                     -0.034     -0.044
                                                             (0.015)                              (0.003)                    (0.015)    (0.026)

ln(ait)                                                      -0.037                                0.006                     -0.037      0.019
                                                             (0.020)                              (0.005)                    (0.020)    (0.035)

One Lead and Lag
                                                                    Interactions with "thrushare"

ln(nit)      0.764      0.032                      0.011     -0.020      0.029          0.003     -0.001      0.004           0.019      0.079
            (0.005)    (0.004)                    (0.030)    (0.039)    (0.026)        (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.005)         (0.014)    (0.022)

ln(ait)      0.032      0.633                      0.077     -0.023     0.024          -0.023      0.012      0.002           0.077     -0.016
            (0.007)    (0.006)                    (0.042)    (0.054)    0.036          (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.007)         (0.018)    (0.031)

                                                                 Interactions with (1-"thrushare")

ln(nit)                                           -0.030      0.038     -0.046         -0.003     -0.004      0.005          -0.038     -0.049
                                                  (0.038)    (0.049)    (0.033)        (0.009)    (0.011)    (0.007)         (0.016)    (0.028)

ln(ait)                                            0.018      0.004     -0.057          0.014     -0.003     -0.003          -0.036      0.044
                                                  (0.053)    (0.068)    (0.046)        (0.012)    (0.015)    (0.011)         (0.023)    (0.039)




These results are from county-level VAR specifications that relate the number of service stations and
the average employment size of service stations to Interstate highway openings.
The specifications also include county and year fixed effects (not reported). We also allow the
autoregressive coefficients to differ in year 1974 to accommodate Census' change in reporting units between 1973 and 1974.

These results use all counties with non-missing reports for number of firms/establishments from 1964-1992, N=677.
Standard errors are in parentheses; bold indicates that the estimates is statistically significantly different zero using a test of size 0.05.




                                                               49
Table A1
Cities that Are Corridor Endpoints


Abilene, TX            Detroit, MI           Madison, WI          San Bernardino, CA
Akron, OH              Durham, NC            Memphis, TN          San Diego, CA
Albany, NY             El Paso, TX           Miami, FL            San Francisco, CA
Albuquerque, NM        Erie, PA              Milwaukee, WI        Savannah, GA
Allentown, PA          Eugene, OR            Minneapolis, MN      Seattle, WA
Amarillo, TX           Flint, MI             Mobile, AL           Shreveport, LA
Ann Arbor, MI          Fort Lauderdale, FL   Montgomery, AL       Sioux Falls, SD
Atlanta, GA            Fort Wayne, IN        Nashville, TN        South Bend, IN
Austin, TX             Fort Worth, TX        New Haven, CT        Spokane, WA
Baltimore, MD          Gary, IN              New Orleans, LA      Springfield, IL
Baton Rouge, LA        Grand Rapids, MI      New York, NY         Springfield, MO
Beaumont, TX           Greensboro, NC        Newark, NJ           St. Louis, MO
Birmingham, AL         Hartford, CT          Norfolk, VA          Stockton, CA
Boise, ID              Houston, TX           Oklahoma City, OK    Syracuse, NY
Boston, MA             Indianapolis, IN      Omaha, NE            Tacoma, WA
Bridgeport, CT         Jackson, MS           Orlando, FL          Tallahassee, FL
Buffalo, NY            Jacksonville, FL      Peoria, IL           Tampa, FL
Charlotte, NC          Kansas City, MO       Philadelphia, PA     Toledo, OH
Chattanooga, TN        Knoxville, TN         Phoenix, AZ          Topeka, KS
Chicago, IL            Lafayette, LA         Pittsburgh, PA       Tucson, AZ
Cincinnati, OH         Lansing, MI           Portland, OR         Tulsa, OK
Cleveland, OH          Laredo, TX            Providence, RI       Waco, TX
Colorado Springs, CO   Las Vegas, NV         Raleigh, NC          Washington, DC
Columbia, SC           Lexington, KY         Reno, NV             Wichita, KS
Columbus, OH           Lincoln, NE           Richmond, VA         Winston Salem, NC
Corpus Christi, TX     Little Rock, AR       Rockford, IL
Dallas, TX             Los Angeles, CA       Sacramento, CA
Dayton, OH             Louisville, KY        Salem, OR
Denver, CO             Lubbock, TX           Salt Lake City, UT
Des Moines, IA         Macon, GA             San Antonio, TX




                                      50
51
     Table A2
     VARs of the Number and Average Employment Size of Service Stations on Highway Openings
     Distance Interactions, Includes Only Counties Where Distance From Old Route Is Greater Than 1/2 Mile

      Autoregressive Coefficients        Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County       Distance*Cumulative Share of Highway Opened in County            Sum of
                                          Distributed Lag: Years from Highway Opening             Distributed Lag: Years from Highway Opening            Lag Coefficients
               ln(nit-1) ln(ait-1)         -2        -1          0        1        2               -2        -1          0        1        2              d=0       d=10



     No Leads or Lags

     ln(nit)     0.767      0.032                             -0.006                                                   0.002                            -0.006      0.018
                (0.006)    (0.005)                            (0.007)                                                 (0.001)                           (0.007)    (0.010)




52
     ln(ait)     0.027      0.635                              0.020                                                  -0.001                             0.020      0.013
                (0.008)    (0.007)                            (0.010)                                                 (0.001)                           (0.010)    (0.014)

     One Lead and Lag

     ln(nit)     0.766      0.035                  -0.018     0.025     -0.014                               0.002    -0.006       0.006                -0.007      0.020
                (0.006)    (0.005)                 (0.017)   (0.021)    (0.014)                             (0.003)   (0.004)     (0.003)               (0.008)    (0.011)

     ln(ait)     0.030      0.632                   0.060    -0.014     -0.019                              -0.009     0.006       0.001                 0.026      0.003
                (0.008)    (0.007)                 (0.023)   (0.030)    (0.020)                             (0.005)   (0.006)     (0.003)               (0.011)    (0.015)




     These results are from county-level VAR specifications that relate the number of service stations and
     the average employment size of service stations to Interstate highway openings.
     The specifications also include county and year fixed effects (not reported). We also allow the
     autoregressive coefficients to differ in year 1974 to accommodate Census' change in reporting units between 1973 and 1974.

     These results use all counties with non-missing reports for number of firms/establishments from 1964-1992, and for which distance from old route > 1/2 mile, N=518.
     Standard errors are in parentheses; bold indicates that the estimates is statistically significantly different zero using a test of size 0.05.
