                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         DURABILITY, DEADLINE, AND ELECTION EFFECTS IN BARGAINING

                                         Alp Simsek
                                        Muhamet Yildiz

                                      Working Paper 22284
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22284


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2016




We thank Glenn Ellison, Bob Wilson, the editor, and anonymous referees for helpful comments.
We also thank the seminar participants at 2008 AEA meeting, UCL, LSE, and Chinese University
of Hong Kong. Yildiz thanks Harvard University, Institute for Advanced Study, and Microsoft
Research for their hospitality and financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Alp Simsek and Muhamet Yildiz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Durability, Deadline, and Election Effects in Bargaining
Alp Simsek and Muhamet Yildiz
NBER Working Paper No. 22284
May 2016
JEL No. C73,C78,D74,D78

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a tractable model of bargaining with optimism. The distinguishing feature of our
model is that the bargaining power is durable and changes only due to important events such as
elections. Players know their current bargaining powers, but they can be optimistic that events
will shift the bargaining power in their favor. We define congruence (in political negotiations,
political capital) as the extent to which a party's current bargaining power translates into its
expected payoff from bargaining. We show that durability increases congruence and plays a
central role in understanding bargaining delays, as well as the finer bargaining details in political
negotiations. Optimistic players delay the agreement if durability is expected to increase in the
future. The applications of this durability effect include deadline and election effects, by which
upcoming deadlines or elections lead to ex-ante gridlock. In political negotiations, political
capital is highest in the immediate aftermath of the election, but it decreases as the next election
approaches.


Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Ma. 02139
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu

Muhamet Yildiz
Department of Economics
E52-515
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
myildiz@mit.edu
1    Introduction
One of the most robust empirical regularities in bargaining is the phenomenon called the
deadline e¤ect: the agreement is delayed until the very last minute before the deadline (see
e.g., Roth, Murnighan, and Schoumaker, 1988)). The labor negotiations are settled only at
the “eleventh hour” before a strike starts and the litigants pursue costly negotiations only
to reach an “agreement on the steps of the courthouse.” These are all well-known by the
practitioners of negotiation. Recently, general public also witnessed dramatic examples of
deadline e¤ect in the political arena. The Democratic and Republican leaders reached an
agreement to raise the debt ceiling on July 31 2011 and passed a law only on August 2, 2011,
under the threat of a US Treasury default on August 3, 2011. In “…scal cli¤” negotiations
of late 2012, they reached an agreement on a new tax law late on the new year eve, in order
to avert an across-the-board tax increase starting in the new year (the president signed the
bill on January 2, 2013).
    Deadlines are not the only sources of political gridlock. Elections seem to be another
factor. Mayhew (1991) shows that the US Congresses between 1947-1990 enacted 25% fewer
important laws on average when they convened in the two years before a presidential election
compared to the two years after. Binder (2000) notes as an example that House Republicans
were reluctant to negotiate over tax cuts in late 1999, after President Bill Clinton vetoed
their initial proposal, in the hopes of regaining the presidency. Their beliefs were in fact
vindicated, and under the presidency of George W. Bush, Republicans passed a sweeping
tax cut legislation in 2001 shortly after the election.
    One rationale for gridlock, proposed by many authors, is optimism: players might be
holding out since they both perceive there will be a better opportunity to strike deal (see
Yildiz (2011) for a survey of the literature). But why does optimism lead to gridlock at
certain times, such as before deadlines or elections, but not at other times, such as after
elections? When gridlock is avoided, how does optimism a¤ect the …ner details of bargaining
outcomes— such as the players’shares from an agreement? To address these questions, we
develop a bargaining model with the key feature that the bargaining power is somewhat
durable. We show that durability plays a central role in understanding bargaining delays
driven by optimism, as well as the nature of agreement outcomes in political negotiations.
    Our model features two risk-neutral players, say Ann and Bob, who are negotiating in
order to divide a dollar. Ann’s bargaining power at time t, Ann  t    2 [0; 1], determines Ann’s
share of the surplus from agreeing today rather than negotiating for one more period. Bob’s
bargaining power is the residual, Bob
                                    t   =1       Ann
                                                 t   . In sequential bargaining, the bargaining
power corresponds to the probability of making a take-it-or-leave-it o¤er at time t; there
will be another o¤er in the next round if the o¤er is rejected. We view the bargaining
power as capturing in reduced form the fundamental bargaining strength of the parties. For
example, in legal negotiations, the bargaining power of a litigant might re‡ect the extent


                                               1
to which the available evidence supports her case. In congressional negotiations, in which
players correspond to parties, the bargaining power might capture the extent to which the
President and the Congressmen support the party on the negotiated issue. We specify the
bargaining power as an exogenous stochastic process in continuous time, and characterize
how it translates into endogenous bargaining outcomes.
    We capture players’ optimism by allowing them to have subjective beliefs about the
bargaining power process. At time t, Ann may expect her bargaining power at a future time
t > t to be 3=4 on average, while, symmetrically, Bob expects his own bargaining at time t
to be 3=4 on average. Observe that Bob is optimistic about his own bargaining power relative
to Ann, who expects Bob’s bargaining power at time t to be only 1=4 on average. Likewise,
Ann is optimistic about her bargaining power relative to Bob. We quantify players’optimism
by the extent to which the sum of their expectations of their own bargaining powers exceeds
1. In this example, their optimism about time t is measured by 3=4 + 3=4 1 = 1=2.
    Our key assumption is that the bargaining power process is somewhat durable, which
also puts some discipline on optimism. Speci…cally, we assume the bargaining power changes
only due to important events. In political negotiations, the bargaining power would naturally
change due to elections, but it could also change due to major events that might in‡uence the
public opinion— such as political scandals or international con‡ict. The players observe—
and therefore agree on— the current value of the bargaining power. They also agree on how
frequently— and in the case of elections, when— important events happen. But they have
subjective and optimistic beliefs that the events will shift the bargaining power in their favor.
This setup ensures that the players cannot hold very optimistic beliefs about the short run,
especially if the bargaining power is very durable. The players can hold optimistic beliefs as
they consider the more distant future.
    Our model lends itself to a tractable and intuitive solution. A player’s expected payo¤
from bargaining can be written as a weighted average of the player’s current bargaining
power, and a second term that depends on the players’beliefs about the long-run levels of
the bargaining power. We refer to the weight on the current bargaining power as congruence.
When players reach agreement, congruence captures the extent to which the agreement shares
re‡ect their current bargaining powers. In political negotiations, congruence can also be
thought of as a form of political capital: the extent to which a player that has “won”the last
election (and thus, has higher current power) receives a higher payo¤ from bargaining. If the
political capital is high, and players reach agreement, then the player in power implements
the outcomes in its favor.
    Our model reveals a simple cost-bene…t analysis of gridlock: the parties delay the agree-
ment if their optimism about their shares in a future agreement is higher than the cost of
waiting. Optimism about shares is in turn equal to the product of optimism about bargain-
ing power and congruence— which translates bargaining power into shares. Therefore, to
understand bargaining delays, it is necessary to understand what causes high optimism, and

                                               2
more subtly, what causes high congruence.
    Durability turns out to be a key determinant of both optimism and congruence. It
decreases optimism and increases congruence. Consequently, agreement is delayed in run up
to times when durability increases. To see the rationale, suppose bargaining power becomes
more durable at some t and the durability remains constant thereafter. We show that the
players reach an agreement at t , and the congruence at t is an increasing function of the
durability level at t . Durability not only reduces optimism, pushing the players towards
agreement, but it also ensures that the current bargaining power has a high in‡uence on the
agreement outcomes. In contrast, prior to t , the players can hold highly optimistic beliefs
about the bargaining power at t — because the bargaining power is less durable there. The
combination of high congruence at t and high level of optimism about t leads to a high
level of optimism about the shares at t , enticing players to wait until t . We refer to this
phenomenon as the durability e¤ect.
    For a concrete example, imagine Ann and Bob’s bargaining power becomes constant
starting at time t ; that is, Annt    = Ann
                                          t    and Bob
                                                     t   = Bobt   for each t     t . At time t
onwards, the future bargaining powers are known. Hence, at t , they reach an agreement,
giving Annt   to Ann and Bob t   to Bob. Congruence at time t is one, the highest possible
level. Now, imagine that the bargaining power is less durable before t , and players are
highly optimistic about t at some t < t : they both expect their bargaining powers at time
t to be 3=4, as described earlier. Suppose the time t value of receiving one dollar at time
t is more than 2=3 dollars. Then, Ann believes she can obtain more than 2=3 3=4 = 1=2
dollars simply by waiting until time t . Similarly, Bob believes he can obtain more than 1=2
dollars by waiting until time t . Clearly, there is no division of the dollar at time t that can
satisfy both players’optimistic expectations, and they disagree at t.
    Times such as t at which durability increases and leads to high congruence are common
in practice. Elections provide a natural application. In political negotiations, the bargain-
ing power might change considerably depending on which party will win an upcoming the
election. Moreover, the parties’post-election bargaining powers are unlikely to change sig-
ni…cantly for a considerable while (e.g., until the next major election). In view of these
observations, we establish an election e¤ect: optimistic parties disagree before the election,
and agree after the election with terms that are congruent with the interests of the winning
party— consistent with Republicans passing a tax cut legislation in 2001.
    Less obviously, we show that deadlines provide another application of the durability e¤ect.
Suppose t corresponds to a time at which a possibly stochastic deadline becomes likely to
arrive. If the players do not agree by the time the deadline arrives, then they receive zero. In
this setting, we establish a deadline e¤ect: optimistic players delay agreement before time t ,
and agree at time t with terms that are congruent with their bargaining powers— as in the
earlier example. Intuitively, even though the bargaining power after time t is not durable
in the strict sense of the word, it is highly durable in the sense that it is unlikely to change

                                               3
much before the stochastic deadline arrives.
    Our unifying explanation for gridlock with optimism is, then, an increase in the e¤ective
durability of bargaining power. Deadlines and elections are two (seemingly distinct) phe-
nomena both of which increase e¤ective durability and lead to high congruence. Consistent
with this intuition, we …nd that the severity of gridlock in these settings depends on— among
other aspects— how much the e¤ective durability increases. For instance, the deadline e¤ect
is more prominent when the deadline is less uncertain, and the election e¤ect is more promi-
nent when the bargaining power is more durable in non-election times. We also establish
additional comparative statics for deadline and election e¤ects, linking the severity of grid-
lock to the players’optimism, their cost of delay, and— for the case of elections— the parties’
relative popularity with voters.
    While deadlines and elections can both cause gridlock, elections are often associated
with more structure. For instance, they are held periodically at …xed intervals. We use
our model to analyze political negotiations with periodically repeated elections, and show
that congruence plays a central role also in this context. Most importantly, we show that
congruence (or political capital) is highest immediately after the election, but it gradually
declines over the election cycle. As time passes, longer-run factors such as the upcoming
election also start to a¤ect the agreement shares. As the next election draws closer, the
players reach what might be called “compromise outcomes.” The party in power is forced
to leave a sizeable share of the surplus to the other party. Intuitively, the party without the
power has a credible threat to delay the agreement until the next election, which enables it
to extract some surplus. As the election draws even closer, the threat becomes real due to
optimism and the election e¤ect, which induces disagreement until after the election.
    Our …nal analysis concerns political negotiations in which a stronger election— that re-
sets the bargaining power with a higher probability— periodically alternates with a weaker
election. We view this setting as capturing (in reduced form) some important features of
the political cycle in the US. In one application, the stronger election can be thought of
as the four-year elections that feature presidential and congressional elections, whereas the
weaker election captures the midterm elections that feature only congressional elections. In
another application, the stronger election captures an election in which the incumbent pres-
ident cannot run for the o¢ ce due to a binding two-term limit, whereas the weaker election
is one in which the incumbent can rerun. The latter election is arguably associated with
less optimism because the incumbent is generally thought to have an advantage in elections,
which reduces the chance of a close election (see Section 3).
    With alternating elections, we …nd that there is a longer period of delay before the
stronger election compared to the weaker election. Moreover, political capital (or congruence)
is also higher in the aftermath of the stronger election. Intuitively, the stronger election
constitutes a greater change in durability, which leads to more severe gridlock in its run-up
and a greater political capital in its aftermath. In the context of presidential elections with

                                              4
term limits, this result suggest a lame duck e¤ect: we predict that presidents that cannot
be reelected are associated with lower political capital— or more compromise— as well as a
longer period of delay before the next presidential election. We test the latter prediction by
extending Mayhew’s (1991) analysis of legislative gridlock. The US Congresses that convene
before presidential elections with a binding term limit seem to enact fewer important laws—
consistent with our lame duck e¤ect— but the result is not statistically signi…cant due to
small sample size.

Literature Review Existing bargaining models that build upon Rubinstein (1982) specify
an explicit bargaining protocol, e.g., who makes an o¤er and when. Several papers, such
as Yildiz (2003, 2004a) and Ali (2006), assume optimistic beliefs about the protocol. In
these models, the bargaining power is implicitly determined by the protocol. Moreover, the
implied bargaining power is often highly nondurable. For example, in Rubinstein’s (1982)
alternating-o¤er model, the bargaining power shifts from one side to other every period.
This is also the case in the setups for the main results of Yildiz (2003) and Ali (2006), where
the bargaining power is assumed to be serially independent. Our methodological innovation
is to start with a bargaining model with an explicit bargaining power process, de…ned in real
time, and allow players to hold optimistic beliefs about it. This allows us to model durability
of bargaining power transparently and study the impact of durability in equilibrium.
    It turns out that durability is a necessary ingredient for obtaining high congruence, and
ultimately, for robust bargaining delays with optimism. We show that assuming serially in-
dependent (and thus, nondurable) bargaining power as in Yildiz (2003) leads to congruence
that is bounded from above by the cost of one-period delay. Intuitively, without any impact
on the future bargaining power, the current bargaining power can only a¤ect the allocation
of the current gain from trade, which is the cost of delaying agreement until the next pe-
riod. This one-period cost is typically low except for one extreme scenario: a deterministic
deadline. In this case, the cost of delaying agreement beyond the deadline is equal to the
whole pie, which yields a high congruence of one at the deadline. Under optimism, this
may lead to long delays as in the example above, which is similar to a two-period example
in Yildiz (2003). In particular, one can obtain a deadline e¤ect for deterministic deadlines
using models with nondurable bargaining power. Nonetheless, that is a singular case. In all
other cases, including cases that involve stochastic deadlines, the one-period cost of delay
is vanishingly small in the continuous-time limit in which we allow the players negotiate
frequently. Therefore, there cannot be any delay in the continuous-time limit. In particular,
the deadline e¤ect obtained in models with nondurable bargaining power is highly fragile,
and disappears if the deadline is stochastic. This is problematic because stochastic deadlines
appear to be common in practice (see Footnote 4 in Section 3).
    A strand of literature focuses on the role of learning in generating bargaining delays
(see, for instance, Yildiz (2004a), Thanassoulis (2010), Galasso (2012)). For instance, Yildiz

                                              5
(2004a) shows that, when players learn about their future bargaining power, optimism leads
to delay because each optimistic player i waits for information in the hopes that information
vindicates i and persuades the other party j to agree to i’s terms. Such a persuasion motive
plays an implicit yet important role in our election e¤ect. Intuitively, the election reveals to
the parties their future bargaining powers, which in turn ensures that they reach agreement
with high congruence. On the other hand, persuasion does not play an apparent role in our
deadline e¤ect. There, the parties reach agreement with high congruence in view of the high
time discounting due to the deadline, even if they continue to disagree about the evolution of
their bargaining powers. Thus, our durability e¤ect provides a distinct mechanism for delay,
which in some special cases (such as the election e¤ect) can be mapped into the persuasion
e¤ect from the previous literature.
    Our election e¤ect is related to a political science literature that analyzes the sources of
gridlock in legislative politics (see Binder (2003) for a review). In recent and parallel work,
Ortner (2013) formalizes an alternative mechanism for gridlock before elections based on
the idea that the terms of an agreement might a¤ect the parties’prospects in the upcoming
election. This “electoral concerns hypothesis” is complementary to our election e¤ect with
some di¤erences that we discuss in Section 4.3 (see Remark 4). A key distinction is that
electoral concerns can play a role only when the negotiated issue is visible and salient for
voters’ decisions, while optimism can cause a gridlock regardless of such visibility. Going
beyond gridlock, we also analyze the nature of agreement outcomes in political negotiations.
Our notion of political capital, as well as our results about its evolution over typical election
cycles, appear to be new.

Outline Section 2 introduces our bargaining model and characterizes the equilibrium. This
section also provides a closed form solution for a baseline scenario, which illustrates that
congruence is increasing in e¤ective durability. Section 3 establishes the durability e¤ect,
and obtains the deadline e¤ect as its corollary. This section also establishes the comparative
statics of the deadline e¤ect. Section 4 is devoted to elections, establishing election e¤ect, the
related comparative statics, and the results about the periodic elections. Section 5 analyzes
the more general determinants of delay in our framework. Section 6 discusses the extensions
of our results to general bargaining processes. Section 7 concludes. The appendix contains
the omitted proofs and some extensions of our baseline analysis.


2     Model and Equilibrium
In this section, we introduce our model and characterize its unique equilibrium. To simplify
the exposition, we focus on a tractable and parsimonious bargaining power process. In our
working paper, we analyze more general bargaining power processes and obtain the analogues
of many of our results. We discuss these generalizations in Section 6.

                                                6
2.1    Model
Consider two risk-neutral players, i 2 f1; 2g, who negotiate over a continuum of times,
t 2 R+ = [0; 1), in order to pick some x 2 [0; 1]. The players can strike a deal only at times
on a grid T = f0; 1=n; 2=n; ::; g, where n = 2m is a large integer. If the players strike a deal at
time t, then they respectively receive the payo¤s, u1 (x) = x and u2 (x) = 1 x, at that time.
We assume that the players discount the future payo¤s at a common, time-varying discount
rate r (t), which is bounded away from zero and 1. We use the time-varying discount rate
to capture stochastic deadlines
                           Rs
                                   (see Section 3). We also de…ne the discount factor between
times t and s as t;s = e t r(~s)d~s . The expected payo¤ of player i at time t from reaching an
agreement at time s is simply t;s ui (x).
     Our key object is a player’s bargaining power, denoted by it . As in the standard bar-
gaining literature, we de…ne the bargaining power as the probability that player i makes
a take-it-or-leave-it o¤er in a sequential bargaining game. We take the bargaining power
( 1t ; 1   2
           t )t2R+ as an exogenously given continuous-time stochastic process, and explore
how it translates into actual bargaining outcomes in equilibrium. Formally, at each time
t 2 T , player i is recognized as the proposer with probability it . The recognized player
o¤ers some x 2 [0; 1]. If the other player accepts the o¤er, then the game ends, picking
x. Otherwise, the game continues to the next period. We investigate the subgame perfect
equilibrium of this game.
     As usual, the model with take-it-or-leave-it o¤ers provides a convenient approach to
capture bargaining strength. However, we interpret the bargaining power more broadly as
capturing the fundamental factors that a¤ect how players split a given amount of surplus.
In fact, as we will see, the bargaining power in our model is exactly equal to the fraction of
the surplus from agreement a player gets (in addition to her continuation value from delay).
     We focus on bargaining power processes that satisfy certain reasonable properties. We
assume that, at any time t, players know the current realization of the bargaining power,
( 1t ; 1   2
           t ). Importantly, we also assume that the bargaining power is somewhat durable.
More speci…cally, the bargaining power remains constant at its current level until some
important event that a¤ects the bargaining power occurs. These two assumptions ensure
that there is considerable discipline on players’short-run beliefs.
     Formally, consider a Poisson process with time-varying arrival rate (t), which is assumed
to be piecewise continuous. At each arrival, a new pair ( 1 ; 1        1
                                                                         ) of bargaining powers is
drawn from a …xed distribution (independently from earlier values of the bargaining power
and the deadline). The bargaining powers remain constant as ( 1t ; 2t ) = ( 1 ; 1           1
                                                                                              ) until
the next arrival. The players agree about the arrival process for simplicity (common (t)),
but they might disagree about how an arrival will a¤ect their bargaining powers. Let H i
                                                                     R
denote the distribution of i according to player i. We write i =          dH i ( ) for the expected
value of bargaining power it upon arrival according to i.


                                                 7
   To explore the e¤ects of optimism, we assume

                                                1       2
                                     y              +              1 > 0.

Note that the expected value of 1t upon arrival is 1 according to player 1 while it is only
      2
1       according to player 2. Hence, y = 1 (1       2
                                                       ) is a measure of long-run optimism.
It captures the amount by which a player over-estimates her own bargaining power upon
arrival with respect to the other player. We de…ne optimism at time t about time s         t
analogously as
                                yt;s = Et1 1s + Et2 2s     1.                            (1)

Here, Eti [ is ] denotes a player’s expectation about his bargaining power at a future date
s t. In this setup, this is a weighted average of her current bargaining power, it , and the
long-run expectation, i . In particular,

                               Eti   i
                                     s     = (1             t;s )
                                                                     i
                                                                     t   +      t;s
                                                                                      i
                                                                                           (2)

where                                                         Rs
                                                                     (t0 )dt0
                                         t;s   =1       e      t                           (3)

denotes the probability of an arrival over the interval [t; s]. Combining (1) and (2), the
players’optimism can also be written as

                                               yt;s =       t;s y.                         (4)

    Eqs. (2-4) illustrate the key features of our model. Players have a perpetual tendency to
be optimistic (y > 0). However, this tendency is countered by the current realities ( it ), and
the rate at which these realities change ( t;s ). Observe that the players’beliefs about the
short run largely re‡ect the current bargaining power— especially if the important events do
not happen very frequently. As the players consider the more distant future, their beliefs are
disconnected from the current bargaining power. Their optimism increases and eventually
approaches y. These features of the model are consistent with recent survey evidence from
Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012)— albeit from a very di¤erent context. They …nd that
homebuyers in the US are typically informed and not very optimistic about their home
price changes over the next year, but they are quite optimistic that the price will increase
considerably over the next ten years.
    Our model has some extreme features that do not play an important role beyond providing
analytical tractability. For instance, the assumption that the bargaining power is completely
reset upon arrival is unrealistic. In our working paper, we extend our main results to general
bargaining processes (see Section 6). The key feature of our model is that the bargaining
power is known to be somewhat durable. The durability rate in this model, which we de…ne


                                                        8
for more general processes in our working paper, turns out to be 1= (t)— the inverse of the
rate at which important events occur. Observe from (2) that the players’ beliefs depend
on the current and the future values of the durability rate, [1= (t)]1  t0 =t . These values are
largely unrestricted in our model (except that (t) is deterministic and piecewise continuous).
Hence, although simpli…ed in some dimensions, the model is su¢ ciently rich to capture
various economically interesting scenarios, which we explore in subsequent sections.
Remark 1 (Relationship with Existing Bargaining Models). If the grid of negotiation times
T is …xed, then our game is a random-proposer model (Binmore 1987; Merlo and Wilson
1995). The closest model is provided by Yildiz (2003), who also allows the players to have
subjective beliefs about the recognition to make an o¤er. The …rst distinguishing property of
our model is that the probability it is publicly observable. In the existing models, the players
only observe the proposer (or the state that deterministically determines the proposer).
These models can be captured in our general framework (discussed in Section 6) by taking
  i          1
  t 2 f0; 1g. More importantly, we take the bargaining power as a function of the real time,
independently of how frequently players come together to negotiate. In fact we will often
focus on the solution in the continuous time limit as n ! 1. This approach is particularly
useful to model the durability of the bargaining power. In Section 5, we show that durability
plays an important role in generating bargaining delays. In contrast, in existing models, the
bargaining power varies with n, often leading to a highly non-durable bargaining power as
n ! 1. For example, the main results in Yildiz (2003) assume that the recognition process
is serially independent, so that players do not learn about future bargaining power from the
current one. This can be thought of as a special (limit) case of our model in which it 2 f0; 1g
and t;s = 1 for each t; s t (i.e. durability rate 1= (t) is zero everywhere in continuous
time.2


2.2     Characterization of Equilibrium
Let the random variable Vti denote the continuation value of player i at time t after 1t is
revealed but before the proposer at time t is recognized. By individual rationality, Vti is
restricted to be in [0; 1]. Given a subsequent negotiation time s 2 T , we de…ne

                                   Wt;s      t;s   Et1 Vs1 + Et2 Vs2                                    (5)
   1
     Since the bargaining power in these models is de…ned only implicitly, alternative interpretations might
sometimes be more appropriate. For example, the typical random proposer model can be thought of as
another special case of our model in which it = i , that is, player i makes an o¤er with known probability
 i
   in every period. Yildiz (2004a) assumes that i in the previous example is unknown and players hold
optimistic beliefs about it. This model can be interpreted as players having a durable and unobservable
bargaining power, about which they obtain public signals as they observe who makes an o¤er.
   2
     Yildiz (2003) allows the new bargaining powers to be drawn from a di¤erent distribution, while we …x
that distribution. This di¤erence is not relevant for our comparisons in Section 5.



                                                      9
as the sum of players’ perceived payo¤s from delaying agreement (or waiting) until time
s. Note that Wt;t+1=n captures players’ total perceived payo¤ from waiting until the next
negotiation time. Hence, 1 Wt;t+1=n captures players’perceived surplus from agreeing at
time t.
    First suppose Wt;t+1=n < 1, so that the surplus at time t is positive. Then, it is easy
to check that the players reach an agreement with the proposer receiving the full surplus.
Hence, player i’s expected payo¤ before the proposer is recognized is

                        Vti =   i
                                t   1      Wt;t+1=n +                   i
                                                               t;t+1=n Et
                                                                               i
                                                                             Vt+1=n .

In particular, players split the surplus according to their bargaining powers, 1t and 2t .
   Next suppose the surplus is negative, that is, Wt;t+1=n > 1. In this case, there cannot
be an agreement that satis…es both players’expectations, as the sum of their continuation
values from delay exceeds 1. Hence, there will be disagreement at such t regardless of the
proposer. Player i’s continuation value is

                                        Vti =             i
                                                 t;t+1=n Et
                                                                 i
                                                               Vt+1=n .

Finally, if Wt;t+1=n = 1, then the surplus is zero and the players are indi¤erent to agree.
   In general, the equilibrium is obtained by combining the three cases, yielding a unique
subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium up to the indi¤erence in the last case. Our next result
characterizes the equilibrium further using our speci…cation of the bargaining power process.
We write t = t;t+1=n for the one period discount rate, t = t;t+1=n for the one period arrival
probability [cf. (3)], Wt = Wt;t+1=n for the players’perceived total payo¤ from waiting for
one period [cf. (5)].
Proposition 1 (Characterization and Uniqueness of Equilibrium). In any subgame-perfect
Nash equilibrium, the continuation value of any player i 2 f1; 2g at any time t 2 T is
                                                                    i
                           Vti = Kt        i
                                           t   + (St    Kt )                  8i; t         (6)
                                                               1+y

where the deterministic weights Kt and St are the unique solutions to the di¤erence equations

                       Kt = max f1                Wt ; 0g +     t   (1       t ) Kt+1=n ,   (7)
                        St = max f1; Wt g ;                                                 (8)
                       Wt =         t    St+1=n +      t yKt+1=n         .                  (9)

At any time t, the players agree if Wt < 1 and disagree if Wt > 1.
   The proposition establishes several properties of equilibrium. First, there exists a unique
equilibrium payo¤ vector. Second, the expected payo¤ of a player i can be decomposed into

                                                       10
a combination of her current bargaining power, it , and her expected long-run bargaining
power, i , as in (6). We refer to the weight on the current bargaining power, Kt , as the
congruence, as this determines the extent to which a player’s bargaining power at time t
translates into her expected payo¤. In political negotiations, congruence can also be thought
of as political capital: the extent to which a player that has high current bargaining power
also receives a high payo¤ from bargaining (see Section 4). We have written the weight on
the long-run bargaining power as (St Kt ) = (1 + y), which ensures Vt1 + Vt2 = St . We refer
to St as the size of the pie, that is, the sum of players’(expected) payo¤s.
    Third, the functions Kt and St are the unique solutions to the di¤erence equations (7-9).
The size of the pie, St , is the maximum value of agreement and disagreement outcomes. To
understand the determinants of Kt , note that solving the equations forward yields:
                                  X
                         Kt =                max f1        Ws ; 0g   t;s   (1   t;s ) :      (10)
                                fs2T js tg


That is, the congruence is a discounted sum of the gains from agreement, max f1 Ws ; 0g,
because the bargaining power translates those gains into actual payo¤s. The contribution
of the future gains depend not only on the discount factor, t;s , but also on the probability
that the current bargaining power will remain unchanged, 1          t;s . The e¤ects of the events
after a change in bargaining power are captured by the other term, St Kt .
    Finally, equation (9) characterizes the value of waiting— and thus, the players’agreement
decisions— in terms of the functions Kt and St . The value of waiting depends on the size of
the surplus in the next period, as well as the optimism, t y, and the congruence, Kt+1=n .
Intuitively, waiting is more valuable if optimism about the bargaining power is large and the
bargaining power will translate into a greater payo¤ in the next period.
    Note that (7-9) represents a deterministic system of equations. That is, although the
continuation values and equilibrium shares are stochastic (as they depend on the realizations
of it ), the functions Kt ; St , and Wt are deterministic. In particular, whether there is agree-
ment (i.e., Wt < 1) or disagreement (i.e., Wt > 1) at any instant is deterministic. Hence,
the settlement date is known at the beginning of the game.
    We next study the solution to the deterministic the di¤erence equations (7-9). We will
analyze cases in which the piecewise continuous functions r and might be stationary, or
might change over time in view of the arrival of deadlines or various elections. We solve
the equilibrium corresponding to these cases in discrete time, that is, for a …xed n with the
corresponding grid T = f0; 1=n; 2=n; ::; g. However, to simplify the exposition in the main
text, we often describe the equilibrium variables such as Kt in the continuous time limit,
that is, as n ! 1 (when the limit exists).




                                                      11
2.3     Equilibrium in a Stationary Environment
We start by analyzing a baseline speci…cation in which r (t) and                                (t) are constant.

Stationary Model. Suppose r (t) = r0 and (t) = 0 for each t, where r0 and 0 are
positive constants that capture the baseline levels of the discount rate and the arrival rate.

    This case is useful to illustrate how a combination of durability and time discounting
leads to high congruence. To state the result, we de…ne the e¤ective durability rate as the
product of the instantaneous durability rate with the discount rate:

                                            (t) = 1= (t)                  r (t) .                                   (11)

We let 0 = r0 = 0 denote the baseline level of the e¤ective durability rate. We also de…ne
the stationary congruence as a function of the e¤ective durability rate:

                                            k( )                             .                                      (12)
                                                                +1+y

Proposition 2 (Stationarity). Consider the Stationary Model. Players reach agreement at
each time. In the continuous-time limit, the congruence is limn!1 Kt = k ( 0 ).

Proof. We conjecture that there is agreement at all dates: Wt < 1 and St = 1 for each t.
Using (9), the one period gain from agreement can be written as

                             1       Wt = 1             t       1+        t yKt+1=n         :

Substituting this into (7), and rearranging terms, we obtain

                                       Kt = 1               t   + ^Kt+1=n

where
                                       ^=      t   (1           t   (1 + y)) :                                      (13)

Since the environment is stationary, Kt = Kt+1                           K stat , yielding

                                                        1            t
                                 Kt = K stat =                            !k        0
                                                                                        .                           (14)
                                                            1       ^

                                                     stat
It is easy to verify that Wt =   t   (1 +     t yK          ) < 1.

   The result shows that the players in the stationary model reach agreement immediately.
This is perhaps surprising since a naive view could posit that a su¢ ciently high level of
optimism, y, could lead to disagreement. Intuitively, if there were disagreement at some

                                                        12
time, there would be disagreement at all times since the environment is stationary and the
solution is deterministic. Since the players cannot disagree forever, there is agreement at
all times. Optimism a¤ects the agreement shares, as illustrated by (12), but it need not
generate delays (see Section 5 for an extension in which there are delays with stationarity).
    The result also implies that higher e¤ective durability increases congruence. In partic-
ular, the function k ( ) is increasing [cf. (12)]. Thus, with greater e¤ective durability, the
agreement shares re‡ect relatively more the current bargaining power. This leaves less room
for long-run factors, including the players’ optimism [cf. (6)]. In fact, as 0 ! 1, the
congruence approaches one and optimism has no impact on agreement shares.
    To obtain an intuition, note that Eq. (14) can be equivalently written as a sum:
                                              X
                                   K stat =         (1   s)
                                                              ^n(s   t)
                                                                                            (15)
                                              s t


(since s = t for each s). That is, the congruence (over an agreement region) can be
viewed as a sum of the “frictionless”gains from agreement that would obtain in the absence
of disagreement, 1      s . The e¤ect of optimism is now captured as a reduction of the
discounting term, ^ = t (1      t (1 + y)) < t (1    t ). Intuitively, the earlier representation
in (10) accounted for optimism as a drag on the (endogenous) gains from agreement, whereas
the new representation pushes the e¤ect into discounting. This representation is useful and
enables us to obtain a closed form solution.
    Eq. (15) illustrates that a rapidly arriving deadline, captured by high r0 and low s ,
leads to high congruence because it increases the gains from agreement in the short run.
Optimism cannot overturn this outcome since the parties cannot be optimistic about the
short run (by assumption). High durability, captured by high 0 and low t , leads to a very
similar outcome for a slightly di¤erent reason. In this case, the gain from agreement in any
time interval can be relatively small. However, since the bargaining power is durable, the
discounting in the sum largely re‡ects time discounting or deadlines (^ ' t ). The discounted
sum of these small gains translates into high congruence. Optimism cannot overturn this
outcome because it is disciplined by high durability.
    There is, in fact, a deeper connection between the disciplining roles of deadlines and
durability. To see this, consider the change of variable, t = =r0 , where            captures the
                                                         r0 t
payo¤ relevant distance of time t from time 0 (since e        = e ). The continuous time limit
of Eq. (15) can then be written as:
                                            Z 1
                                                e (1+(1+y)= ) d .
                                                               0
                                     stat
                             lim K        =
                             n!1               0

Thus, when written in terms of the payo¤ relevant distance, the congruence becomes a
function of the single variable, 0 = r0 = 0 , as opposed to two separate variables, r0 and
  0
    . Intuitively, in view of the relation, t = =r0 , a high discount rate, r0 , shortens the

                                                    13
                    Figure 1: The e¤ective durability rate in Section 3.

time intervals over which players face equivalent trade-o¤s. Over short time intervals, the
bargaining power cannot change very much even if the bargaining power is not very durable.
Hence, the case in which r0 is high is mathematically equivalent to a hypothetical case in
which r0 is lower and the durability rate, 1= 0 , is proportionally higher. This point applies
more generally beyond the stationary environment. The continuous time payo¤s in our
model often depend on the e¤ective durability rate, (t) = r (t) = (t).


3    Durability and Deadline E¤ects
In this section, we present our main result on the durability e¤ect, and obtain a robust
deadline e¤ect as its corollary. We establish these results using the following special case of
our model.

Increasing Durability Model: Imagine that the arrival and the discount rates (t) and
r (t) are stationary at their baseline levels up to some negotiation time t 2 T . They change
at t and remain stationary at a new level after t . That is,
            (                               (                             (
                1
                    if t t                     r1 if t t                    1
                                                                               if t t
      (t) =     0                   r (t) =     0
                                                                    (t) =   0
                                                                                          .
                    otherwise                  r otherwise                     otherwise
                                                                                         (16)
            1     0                                       1    1   1
Suppose       >     so that the e¤ective durability rate    = r = after t is higher than the
                            0    0   0
e¤ective durability rate = r = before t as in Figure 1. We further assume

                                              1        0
                                        yk         >       .                              (17)


    It can be checked from (12) that > k ( ) y for each . Thus, condition (17) requires
 1
   to be su¢ ciently larger than 0 . The increase in e¤ective durability can be driven by an
increase in the discount rate, r (t), or the durability rate, 1= (t). As we formalize below,
the increase in r (t) captures the arrival of a stochastic deadline. The increase in 1= (t)
can capture several other applications. For example, a pending reform, such as a labor law

                                              14
or tort reform, might increase the durability of the bargaining power of individual parties
in related negotiations, such as wage negotiations or pre-trial negotiations. The players’
bargaining power is less durable before the law is enacted— since there could be last minute
changes in the law— and it arguably becomes more durable after the law is enacted— since
it takes time to enact a new law.
    Our next result shows that these types of increase in e¤ective durability induces delays.
To state the result, we de…ne the following function:

                                                             =   0
                          w ( ; K; ) = e       1+ 1      e           Ky .                      (18)

To understand this function, imagine that the congruence at some later negotiation time t
is given by K. Consider an earlier negotiation time, t        =r0 ,which has payo¤ relevant
                              0
distance from t (since e r (t t) = e ). Imagine that the probability that the bargaining
                                                               0              0
power remains unchanged between these times is given by e = . Here, e = captures the
e¤ect of arrivals due to the baseline speci…cation, and   1 captures the e¤ect of additional
arrivals (if any) beyond the baseline speci…cation. Then, w ( ; K; ) captures the value
of waiting from time t        =r0 until time t .3 The players are willing to wait as long as
w ( ; K; ) > 1. Our next result shows that players choose to wait in the run-up to time t .

Proposition 3 (Durability E¤ect). Consider the Increasing Durability Model. There exists
a negotiation time t t , such that players agree at each t < t, disagree at each t 2 [t; t ),
and agree at t and thereafter. In the continuous time limit, limn!1 t = max 0; t      =r0 ,
where > 0 denotes the unique positive solution to w ; k ( 1 ) ; 1 = 1.

   The result implies that the disagreement threshold, t, is strictly below t as long as n is
su¢ ciently large. Hence, if the e¤ective durability increases to 1 from 0 at some t , then
there is a strict period of inactivity prior to t during which the players must disagree in
equilibrium. In the continuous time limit, the payo¤ relevant length of the disagreement
period is given by that equates the value of waiting to 1.

Durability E¤ect As a special case, suppose the discount rate is constant, r0 = r1 = r^,
but the durability rate 1= increases su¢ ciently at time t , so that condition (17) holds.
Then, Proposition 3 implies that there is a period of disagreement before t , establishing the
durability e¤ect.

Deadline E¤ect As another special case, suppose a deadline arrives starting at time t
with a constant hazard rate > 0, so that the probability of deadline arriving before time
     3
    To derive this expression, note that the representation in (6) implies, Et1 Vt1 + Et1 Vt1 = St +
Kt Et1 1t + Et1 1t         1 = St + yt;t Ks . Hence, by (5), we have Wt;t = t;t (St + yt;t Kt ). We
then obtain Wt;t = w ( ; K; ) by substituting t;t = e , St = 1, Kt = K, and yt;t = t;t y =
                 0
             =
 1       e           y.


                                                15
t t is 1 e (t t ) . If the deadline arrives at t, and players have not agreed before time
t, then negotiations end at time t with each player receiving 0. Then, the discount rate is
                                        (
                                          r^ +   if t t
                                r (t) =                                                 (19)
                                          r^     otherwise

where r^ is the baseline discount rate. The corresponding e¤ective durability rates are given
by 0 = r^= 0 and 1 = (^   r + ) = 1 . Suppose the deadline arrival rate is su¢ ciently large
(and the baseline e¤ective durability rate 0 is not too large) so that condition (17) holds.
Then, Proposition 3 implies the players wait for t to reach an agreement, establishing the
deadline e¤ect.4
   We describe a sketch of the proof for Proposition 3 (completed in the appendix). Note
that the environment becomes stationary at t with e¤ective durability rate 1 . Hence,
Proposition 2 applies starting at t after replacing with 1 . In particular, players reach
agreement at time t with congruence in the continuous time limit given by k ( 1 ). Next
note that the value of waiting at time t     =r0 until time t is given by w ( ; k ( 1 ) ; 1). By
(18), this expression can be approximated around = 0 as

                                          1                k ( 1) y
                              w     ;k        ;1 ' 1 +          0
                                                                       1     .

Under condition (17), w ( ) > 1 for su¢ ciently small . This suggests that, in the contin-
uous time limit, there is a period of delay before t . The length of delay is characterized by
solving w ( ; K ( 1 ) ; 1) = 1. The appendix shows that a similar argument also applies for
any …nite n.
    Intuitively, the low e¤ective durability prior to t implies there is little discipline on
beliefs at time t, so that players can be optimistic about their bargaining powers at time t .
In contrast, the high e¤ective durability following t implies there is high congruence at t .
The combination of undisciplined optimism before time t and the increase in congruence
at time t makes waiting valuable, and induces players to delay agreement. Note also that
the increase in the e¤ective durability rate = r= can come from either an increase in the
durability rate 1= or from an increase in the deadline arrival rate . Hence, durability and
deadline e¤ects are two sides of the same coin.
    How costly are the delays generated by deadline or durability e¤ects? To get a sense of
magnitudes, consider the payo¤ relevant length of the delay region, . The total cost of
delaying the agreement until time t , as opposed to agreeing at time t = t         =r, is given
   4
     Bargaining deadlines in practice are often uncertain, captured by a stochastic deadline. For example, in
the recent US debt ceiling negotiations, the deadline can be thought of as the time at which the Treasury
will reach the statutory debt limit. In practice, this time is quite uncertain since the Federal government
expenses are not entirely predictable. For another example, in legal negotiations, such as plea bargaining,
the deadline can be thought of as the time at which the court will reach a judgement, an uncertain deadline.


                                                     16
by 1   e   . Using (18) and Proposition 3, the total cost is bounded from above:

                                                    y
                                      1   e            .                                  (20)
                                                   1+y

There are parameters under which the upper bound is attained (e.g., 0 = 0 and k ( 1 ) = 1).
Hence, the cost of delay, measured as a fraction of the total pie, is in the same ballpark
as players’ optimism about their long-run bargaining power, y. When parties are highly
optimistic, so that y = 1, the cost can be as large as half of the total pie.
    Proposition 3 has several testable implications. For instance, we have noted that the
enactment of a major law, such as a labor reform, might increase the durability of the
bargaining power in negotiations among individual parties a¤ected by the law, such as wage
negotiations between …rms and their workers. Proposition 3 would then predict that pending
major laws induces gridlock in related negotiations among individual parties. Intuitively,
before the law is enacted, the parties can be optimistic about the exact terms that will be
implemented. After the law is enacted, the terms are set for the near future, which would
lead to durable bargaining power and high congruence. The combination of optimism before
the enactment and durability after the enactment induces delay.
    Another testable implication of Proposition 3 is the deadline e¤ect. We next analyze
when the deadline e¤ect more prominent and obtain additional predictions. Recall that
is the solution to the equation w ( ; k ( 1 ) ; 1) = 1. Our analysis in the appendix shows that
the solution, , is increasing in any change that increases the value of waiting evaluated at
the (pre-change) length of delay, w ; k ( 1 ) ; 1 . Our next result combines this observation
with Eq. (18) to establish the comparative statics.
Proposition 4. Given the deadline described in (19), the length of delay,      , is

  1. decreasing in the durability rate before the deadline arrival 1= 0 , and increasing in the
     durability rate during deadline arrival 1= 1 ,

  2. increasing in the deadline arrival rate ,

  3. increasing in players’long-run optimism y,

  4. decreasing in the discount rate r^ provided that the deadline is su¢ ciently …rm (i.e.,
     is su¢ ciently high).

    The …rst part shows that the durability rate before and during the deadline arrival period
have di¤erent e¤ects on delays. Intuitively, greater durability during the deadline arrival
period increases congruence, which in turn exacerbates delays. In contrast, greater durability
before the deadline arrival disciplines optimism and mitigates delays.
    The second part suggests that there might be a silver lining to setting an uncertain or
soft deadline in negotiations. An uncertain deadline, which we capture with low , leads to

                                              17
lower congruence at time t , k ( 1 ) (recall that 1 = (^ r + ) = 1 ). Lower congruence might
be interpreted as more compromise by the player that has the higher bargaining power.
Depending on the context, this e¤ect might be desirable in itself. Moreover, low congruence
at time t also induces a shorter delay, because the players’ optimism about bargaining
powers at time t translates relatively less into optimism about payo¤s.
    The third part links optimism to delays. Optimism has a direct e¤ect that tends to
increase the value of waiting. However, optimism after time t also has an indirect e¤ect
that tends to reduce this value by reducing the congruence k ( 1 ). Eq. (18) illustrates that
the net e¤ect is governed by the product k ( 1 ) y. In our model, the net e¤ect is positive (see
(12)), which implies that optimism leads to longer and costlier delays.
    The last part considers the e¤ect of the discount rate r^, which captures players’ cost
of delay. Higher cost of delay generates a direct e¤ect that tends to reduce the value of
waiting. However, higher r^ also generates an indirect e¤ect that tends to increase this value
via greater congruence, k ( 1 ) (recall that 1 = (^  r + ) = 1 ). The net e¤ect is in general
ambiguous. If the deadline were deterministic, the indirect e¤ect would be absent because
k ( 1 ) would be equal to 1 regardless of r^. Likewise, as long as the deadline is su¢ ciently
…rm, the direct e¤ect dominates, and greater r^ leads to shorter and less costly delays.
Remark 2 (Other Models of the Deadline E¤ect). Several theoretical papers establish a dead-
line e¤ect using ingredients and mechanisms that are quite di¤erent than in our paper. Spier
(1992) shows that, in a pre-trial negotiation with incomplete information, the settlement
probability will be a U-shaped function of time, consistent with the deadline e¤ect. Re-
cently, Fanning (2013) obtains deadline e¤ect in the incomplete-information model of Abreu
and Gul (2000). He shows that, when the deadlines are stochastic as in our paper, the hazard
rate of settlement is an a¢ ne function of the hazard rate of the deadline— as a consequence
of the indi¤erence condition in the war of attrition. A similar U-shaped function arises in a
recent paper by Wasserman and Yildiz (2016) due to learning motives under optimism. Ma
and Manove (1993) develop a model in which delay is not costly and a player can wait as
much as she wants before making an o¤er. They show that the player waits until the deadline
and makes a last minute take-it-or-leave it o¤er. Roth, Murnighan, and Schoumaker (1988)
informally discuss a possible explanation based on the idea that there is no cost of delay
except for a cost at the end due to a slight uncertainty about the deadline.


4    Political Negotiations
In this section, we use variations in the durability rate (t) to establish our results about
political negotiations. We start with a baseline setting with a single election, which is useful
to illustrate the basic election e¤ect and its comparative statics. We then consider a richer
setting in which elections are periodically held, and characterize the bargaining outcomes


                                              18
                    Figure 2: E¤ective durability rate for a single election.

over the election cycle. We also analyze the outcomes when a stronger election periodically
alternates with a weaker election.


4.1    Election E¤ect
Single Election Model: Suppose the discount rate is constant at a baseline rate, r (t) = r0 ,
throughout. Imagine the arrival rate (t) is constant everywhere except for a short period
of “election date”at which it increases. That is,
                                (         E
                                    0
                                      + "(n) if t  " (n) < t < t
                         (t) =      0
                                                                 ,                      (21)
                                             otherwise

where t 2 T is a negotiation time, E > 0 is a constant, and " (n) is a parameter that
only depends on the negotiation frequency. Note that the e¤ective durability rate starts at
                                                E
  0
    = r0 = 0 , dips down to 1 = r0 = 0 + " over a period of (t              " (n) ; t ) and switches
back to the original level as in Figure 2. The parameter " (n) > 0 captures the length of
the election period. We assume that the election takes place over a short time. Formally,
" (n) < 1=n for each n so that the election starts after the negotiation time t             1=n and
ends before the subsequent negotiation time t ; this assumption is made for expositional
simplicity.
    The election model is meant to capture political negotiations for which the baseline
durability rate is likely to be relatively high. In this context, the arrival rate 0 re‡ects major
events that might in‡uence the public opinion (and ultimately a¤ect the parties’bargaining
strength) such as political scandals, terrorist attacks, mass protests, or international con‡ict.
                                               E
In contrast, the higher arrival rate 0 + " re‡ects the impact of (one or more) elections
in which many political o¢ ces are contested and can change hands. Our normalization
ensures that the probability that bargaining power changes due to the election is given by
        E
1 e       . Note that this expression is independent of the length of the election, " (n), and it
is increasing in the parameter, E . We refer to E as the strength of the election, and use it
to capture various comparative statics (see Section 4.3).


                                                19
    How do upcoming elections a¤ect the dynamics of negotiation? Observe that the main
impact of elections comes from the fact that elections lower the overall durability and thereby
increases the room for optimism. Indeed, at any negotiation time, t < t , the probability
                                                                0         E
that the bargaining powers remain unchanged until t is e (t t) e            . Hence, the overall
                                                                    0          E
                                                                      (t t)
optimism about the bargaining power at t is yt;t = 1 e                      e     y. Thus, the
                                                                                         E
election lowers the discipline on optimism. Indeed, note that yt;t    1 e       y > 0 for
each negotiation time t < t . That is, players have signi…cant optimism regardless of how
soon the upcoming election will take place. Our next result establishes that this leads to
delays in the run-up to the election.

Proposition 5 (Election E¤ect). Consider the Single Election Model. There exists a nego-
tiation time, t < t , such that players agree at each t < t, disagree at each t 2 [t; t ), and
agree at t and thereafter. In the continuous time limit, limn!1 t = max 0; t             =r0 ,
                                                                              E
where    > 0 denotes the unique positive solution to w         ; k ( 0) ; e       = 1.

   A dip in durability due to an election generates a delay prior to the election, illustrating
the election e¤ect. The sketch proof of Proposition 5 is similar to the proof of Proposition 3.
The congruence at t is k ( 0 ) by Proposition 2. The survival probability of the bargaining
                                           E
power during the election is given by e      . Thus, the value of waiting from a time prior to
                                                                                             E
the election, t = t     =r0 , until time t is now given by, w ( ; k ( 0 ) ; ), where = e       .
Evaluating this expression at = 0, we obtain [cf. Eq. (18)]
                                         E                 E
                                0                                     0
                      w 0; k        ;e       =1+ 1     e        yk        > 1.

Hence, there is a period of delay before the election. The length of delay is characterized by
                            E
solving w      ; k ( 0) ; e   = 1.
    Intuitively, the players are optimistic about their likelihood of “winning” the election.
More speci…cally, they both believe the bargaining power will be reset during the election to
a new value that is on average in their favor. Hence, there is little discipline on the players’
optimism in the run-up to an election. In addition, there is some (typically, high) congruence
after the election in view of durability, k ( 0 ) > 0. It follows that the players disagree before
the election in the hope that they will get a better deal after the election.
    Hence, similar to the durability and deadline e¤ects, the election e¤ect also stems from
an increase of e¤ective durability. The election e¤ect further illustrates the discipline on
optimism at a prior time is determined by the “weakest link”of e¤ective durability following
that time. In particular, note that there is little discipline at time t < t for beliefs at time
t despite the fact that the bargaining power is quite durable over most of the interval [t; t ].
Put di¤erently, if there is a period of transience, such as an election, durability in the rest
of that period does not create much discipline.
    We next establish comparative statics for the payo¤ relevant length of the delay region,

                                               20
  , which also captures the cost of delay, 1 e . When the baseline bargaining power is
highly durable, i.e., when 0 ! 1, the cost of delay has a closed form solution:
                                                           E
                                              (1 e   )y
                                 1    e   =           E    :
                                            1 + (1 e    )y

As in deadline and durability e¤ects, the cost due to the election e¤ect can be as large as half
of the total pie. Moreover, the cost is increasing in the players’optimism due to the election,
         E
(1 e       )y. Our result establishes these and other comparative statics more generally. As
before, the delay is increasing in any change that increases the value of waiting evaluated at
                                                      E
the (pre-change) length of delay, w      ; k ( 1) ; e   .

Proposition 6. The length of delay before an election is increasing in the strength of the
election E , players’long-run optimism, y, and the baseline durability rate, 1= 0 .

    This proposition establishes three results. First, a stronger election, in which the bargain-
ing power changes with greater probability, induces longer and costlier delays. Intuitively,
a stronger election implies a greater drop in durability, which facilitates greater optimism
about post-election bargaining powers. This result generates several testable implications
that we discuss further in Section 4.3. Second, optimism increases the length of delay, as in
the deadline e¤ect. Third, a greater baseline durability rate also increases the length of delay.
To understand this result, note that greater 1= 0 a¤ects the length of disagreement in two
                                                                         0
ways. First, it lowers optimism before the election (through the e = term in (18)), thereby
shortening the delay. More importantly, it increases the rate k ( 0 ) at which post-election
bargaining powers translate into agreement shares, increasing the delay. The proof in the
appendix shows that the latter e¤ect dominates. High 1= 0 could be thought of as capturing
politically stable democracies in which most of the important changes to bargaining power
happen during elections— as opposed to unstable political settings in which the bargaining
power can also change considerably in non-election times. Under this interpretation, the
third part suggests the election e¤ect is more prominent in politically stable democracies.
Remark 3 (Popularity with Voters and Endogenous Optimism). Our baseline model assumes
that the arrival during an election resets the bargaining power to a new level drawn from a
…xed distribution. Consequently, the optimism about the bargaining power after the election
depends only on the strength of the election, E , and the optimism parameter, y. This
speci…cation is tractable, but it does not speak to some important features of elections in
practice. In Appendix A, we analyze a richer model that provides many intuitive comparative
statics. Speci…cally, we assume that the election resets the bargaining power as

                                           1
                                           t   = G (Zt )

where Zt is a publicly observable Brownian motion, representing the relative popularity of

                                                21
player 1, and G is a symmetric S-shaped function, capturing the idea that results are more
sensitive to the vote shares in close elections. We assume that the players are optimistic
about the drift, by taking i as the drift of Zt according to i and assuming that 1 > 2 .
We show that there is delay prior to election at some t close to t if and only if

                         1       e       E
                                              G0 (Zt )    1         2
                                                                        (t   t) > r (t     t) :                (22)

Here, the left side is the parties’optimism about post-election bargaining powers, yt;t . Note
that yt;t depends on the parties’optimism about the drifts in popularity and the time left
until the election, as well as how popularity translates into bargaining power. The right side
is the cost of delay, which depends on the discount rate and the time left until the election.
Condition (22) leads to a key observation: the players delay agreement when the election
is su¢ ciently close (jZt j < Z for some Z), but they reach immediate agreement otherwise.
Intuitively, since G ( ) is an S-shaped function, optimism is decreasing in the absolute value
of the relative popularity, jZt j. There is greater optimism about the bargaining power when
the election results are expected to be close (jZt j near zero) and no optimism when a landslide
is expected (i.e., jZt j is large), verifying common sense.
    This analysis has an important implication for comparing elections with and without an
incumbent candidate in the race. Empirically, incumbents tend to have an advantage in the
election (see, for instance, Mayhew (2008)). We show that the incumbency advantage makes
elections less likely to be close and reduces the likelihood of delay. In Section 4.3, we capture
the incumbency advantage in our baseline model (in reduced form) by assuming that an
election with an incumbent is relatively weak (low E ). Note that a weaker election in our
baseline model, like greater incumbency advantage, leads to a weaker election e¤ect.


4.2    Periodic Elections
In Section 4.1, we focused on a single election for simplicity. In practice, elections are often
held periodically at …xed time intervals. For instance, the US presidential elections are held
every four years. We next extend our baseline election model to analyze the bargaining
outcomes over a typical election cycle.

Periodic Election Model: Fix r (t) = r0 for all t and consider the arrival rate:
                     (               E
                         0
                             +   "(n)
                                             if t 2 (kt        " (n) ; kt )
             (t) =       0
                                                                                   , for k 2 f1; 2; : : :g .   (23)
                                             if t 2 [(k       1) t ; kt     " (n)]

Here, t 2 T denotes a negotiation time, which implies that kt 2 T is also negotiation time
for each k 2 f1; 2; :::g. Elections are now held periodically slightly before these negotiation
                                                                                        E
times. Thus, the e¤ective durability periodically dips to a low level 1 = r0 = 0 + "(n) , as

                                                               22
                  Figure 3: E¤ective durability rate for periodic elections.

illustrated in Figure 3. We continue to assume " (n) < 1=n for each n.
    To characterize the equilibrium with periodic elections, we de…ne

                                                    e (r t           )=k(
                                                        0
                                                                            0)
                                          1
                     K0 ( ) =            (r0 t       )=k(                     0)          E   k ( 0) .
                                 1   e                      0)   e    (1+1=        e

As we will see, K0 ( ) describes the congruence as a function of the length of delay before
elections.
Proposition 7 (Periodic Elections). Consider the Periodic Election Model. The equilibrium
behavior is periodic with cycle t . There exists a negotiation time t 2 (0; t ], such that players
agree at each t 2 [0; t) and disagree at each t 2 [t; t ). Over the agreement region, t 2 [0; t),
Kt is strictly decreasing in t. In the continuous time limit, limn!1 t = t                r0 , and
                                                                                          E
limn!1 K0 = K0         , where     is the unique positive solution to w    ; K0      ;e       = 1.
    The result characterizes the equilibrium with periodic elections. The players disagree in
the run-up to every election, and agree immediately after the election, consistent with the
election e¤ect. As before, the length of delay is characterized by setting the value of waiting
equal to 1. The congruence after an election, K0 , is jointly determined with the length of
delay. The new result is that the congruence, Kt , is strictly decreasing over the range of the
election cycle on which there is agreement. Recall that we referred to Kt in this context as
a form of political capital: the extent to which the party that “won” the last election can
implement outcomes that it prefers (controlling for its bargaining power). The result says
that political capital is highest immediately after the election, and it gradually declines as
the next election approaches.
    We present a sketch proof for Proposition 7 (formalized in the appendix), which is useful
to understand the intuition. Recall from (15) that, over an agreement region, the congruence
can be described as a discounted sum in which the e¤ect of optimism is captured by the
discounting term ^ = t (1       t (1 + y)). Using similar steps, we obtain for each t 2 [0; t):

                                     X
                            Kt =               (1      s)
                                                             ^n(s      t)
                                                                            +^
                                                                                 n(t t)
                                                                                          Kt
                                     s2[t;t)

                                = K stat 1             ^n(t      t)
                                                                        +^
                                                                              n(t t)
                                                                                       Kt .              (24)

                                                      23
                    1.4




                    1.2




                      1
                                                                          Agree Disagree
                    0.8




                    0.6




                    0.4




                    0.2




                      0
                          0   0.5    1     1.5    2            2.5              3   3.5    4




Figure 4: The equilibrium values of Kt and St with periodic elections for a particular para-
meterization.

Here, K stat = 11 ^t describes the congruence that would obtain in the stationary model (see
(14)). In the present model with elections, the congruence is a weighted average of K stat and
the congruence at the disagreement threshold, Kt . The latter term incorporates the e¤ect
of the upcoming elections. In fact, applying (7) over the disagreement region, we obtain

                                    Kt = e (r + )(t
                                             0  0                    E
                                                      t)
                                                           e             K0 :                      (25)
                                                                                               E
That is, Kt is lowered by the arrivals due to the election (captured by e          < 1) as well
the delay caused by the election (captured by e    (r0 + 0 )(t t)
                                                                  < 1). Combining (24) and (25),
K0 can be solved in closed form. Doing so reveals that K0 < Ktstat , which in turn implies
Kt < Ktstat . Hence, the sum in (24) is a weighted average of two terms, with the weight
on the larger term declining as t approaches t. This establishes that Kt is declining over
the agreement range. The proof in the appendix completes the argument and derives the
continuous time limit of the solution.
    Intuitively, relative to the stationary model, periodic elections reduce the congruence at
agreement times through two e¤ects. First, an upcoming election reduces durability, which
lowers Kt . If the bargaining power will change soon, then its current level is less relevant for
payo¤s. Second, an upcoming election also induces disagreement, which further lowers Kt
at agreement times. Even though the players currently reach agreement, if they will soon
start to disagree, then the current bargaining power matters less for payo¤s. These e¤ects
imply that the congruence is highest immediately after an election, and it declines as the
next election looms closer.
    Figure 4 plots the equilibrium for a particular parameterization. At the beginning of the
cycle, political capital (or congruence) is highest. The player that wins the election is able
to implement the outcomes in its favor. As time passes, the political capital is depleted,


                                                 24
and players start to reach agreement outcomes that could be thought of a “compromise.”
In a compromise outcome, the agreement shares re‡ect long-run factors [cf. (6)] relatively
more than the identity of the player who won the last election. The winner is forced into
the compromise because the other player has a credible threat to delay the agreement until
after the next election. As the election draws even closer, the threat becomes real (due to
optimism) and the agreement is actually delayed. Hence, Proposition 7 adds to our list of
testable predictions by establishing that the nature of the bargaining outcomes systematically
change over the election cycle, with the outcomes …rst steering towards agreement with
compromise, before they eventually feature disagreement.


4.3      Alternating Elections
In the above model, we assumed that all elections have the same strength. In practice, there
are also systematic variations in the strength of periodically repeated elections. In the US,
the Congressional elections take place every two years, and the presidential elections take
place every four years. Hence, the political cycle is one in which the four-year joint elections
alternate with the midterm elections that feature only congressional elections. The latter
elections are arguably weaker, and have a smaller impact on the parties’bargaining powers.
    A similar variation in strength also applies to the alternating US presidential elections.
By law, the president is not allowed to be reelected more than two times. This suggests
a longer (eight year) political “supercycle” in which the presidential election in which the
incumbent cannot run for the o¢ ce, alternates alongside with a presidential election in which
the incumbent can also run.5 The latter elections arguably represent a smaller drop in dura-
bility because the bargaining power associated with the president’s o¢ ce will not change in
case the incumbent wins the election. As we argued in Section 3, these elections are also
associated with less optimism (and less gridlock) on average in view of the incumbent’s popu-
larity advantage in the election. We capture both features by assuming that the presidential
election with an incumbent is weaker (smaller E ) than an election without one.
    We next extend our model to analyze the bargaining outcomes over alternating elections
with heterogeneous strength.

Alternating Election Model: Fix r (t) = r0 for all t and consider the arrival rate:
               8   0        E;odd
               >
               <       +    "(n)
                                    if t 2 (kt     " (n) ; kt ) and k is odd
                   0       E;even
       (t) =           +            if t 2 (kt      " (n) ; kt ) and k is even , for k 2 f1; 2; : : : g .   (26)
               >
               :           0
                            "(n)
                                          if t 2 [(k 1) t ; kt      " (n)]
   5
   This mapping is not perfect as it assumes that the incumbent presidents always stay for two full terms.
We could make the mapping more realistic by introducing stochasticity into the alternation process. We
work with the deterministic speci…cation for tractability.



                                                         25
                   Figure 5: E¤ective durability rate for alternating elections.

In particular, there are now two types of elections, with strengths respectively given by E;odd
and E;even . The elections alternate over time with a …xed time distance. Without loss of
generality, we assume that E;odd < E;even , so that the elections that take place in even
periods are stronger. This implies that the e¤ective durabilities during the elections also
satisfy 0;even < 0;odd < 0 . Thus, the e¤ective durability dips more in even periods relative
to the level it falls in odd periods, as illustrated in Figure 5.
    We assume the parameters satisfy two additional conditions:

                                             0                 0t
                                        k        y        er        1,                                 (27)
                                            E;even
                                       e                  y= (1 + y) .                                 (28)

Condition (27) says that the distance between the two elections is su¢ ciently large. This
ensures that delay before an election does not extend beyond the other election. Condition
(28) says that the stronger of the two elections is su¢ ciently strong. This condition does not
play an important role beyond facilitating analytical tractability.6 For simplicity, we also
focus on the cases with large n, that is, n > n where n is characterized in the appendix.

Proposition 8 (Alternating Elections). In the Alternating Election Model, the equilibrium
behavior is periodic with cycle 2t . There exist todd 2 (0; t ] and teven 2 (t ; 2t ], such that
players agree on the intervals, [0; todd ) and [t ; t + teven ), and disagree at remaining times.
Moreover, the solution features t      todd < 2t     teven and Kt < K0 .

    This result characterizes the equilibrium with alternating elections with heterogeneous
strength. The players disagree in the run-up to either election, and agree immediately after
the election. Moreover, the stronger (even) elections feature a longer delay in their run-
up and greater congruence in their aftermath. Figure 6 illustrates the equilibrium for a
particular parameterization. Note that there is a longer period of disagreement before the
stronger election compared to the weaker election. Moreover, the congruence (or the political
capital) is also greater after the stronger election.
   6
    In our numerical simulations, these comparative statics continue to hold even if we drop condition (28).
See the proof of Lemma 4 in the online appendix for a detailed explanation of the role this condition plays
in our our analysis.


                                                     26
             1.5




               1
                                            Disagree                            Disagree



             0.5




               0
                   0   1        2       3           4     5        6        7         8




Figure 6: The equilibrium values of Kt and St with two alternating elections for a particular
parameterization. The second election is stronger ( E;even > E;odd ).

    The comparative statics for delay can be understood from Proposition 6 (…rst part),
which illustrates in a single election context that a stronger election leads to greater optimism
and longer delay. With alternating elections, there are additional subtleties regarding the
endogenous determination of congruence, but these do not undo the basic e¤ect identi…ed
in Proposition 6. To understand the comparative statics for congruence, consider the limit,
  E;odd
        ' 0, so that there is e¤ectively only the strong election held with a period of 2t .
In this hypothetical scenario, Proposition 7 would apply and imply that the congruence at
the beginning of the election cycle is greater than the congruence in the middle, K0 > Kt .
Proposition 8 says that the presence of a weaker election in the middle does not undo this
comparison. The congruence after the strong election (or at the beginning of the “strong
election cycle”) is greater than the congruence after the weaker election (or at the beginning
of the “weak election cycle”).
    Proposition 8 generates various testable implications regarding the length of disagreement
before various elections, as well as the terms of the agreement after elections. For instance,
when applied to the political cycle with alternating midterm and four-year elections, the
result predicts that there will be more gridlock in the run-up to the four-year elections
compared to the midterm elections. The result also predicts that the winner of the four-year
elections will have greater political capital than the winner of the midterm elections.
    Likewise, when applied to the political supercycle with alternating presidential elections,
the result predicts that there will be more gridlock in the run-up to the presidential elections
in which the incumbent president cannot run due to the two-term limit. Moreover, the result
also predicts that the party that has the presidency will have more political capital when
the president is elected for the …rst time compared to when she is elected for a second time.
An incumbent president approaching the end of his/her term limit is sometimes referred to


                                               27
Figure 7: The average number of important laws enacted by the US Congresses between
1953-2012, as a function of the time within the 8-year presidential term. The capped lines
illustrate the 5% con…dence intervals around the mean.

as a lame duck. Using these terminology, Proposition 8 implies that lame duck presidents
are associated with smaller political capital— or more compromise— in agreement outcomes,
as well as a greater likelihood of observing disagreement outcomes.
    We next present preliminary evidence from legislative politics in the US that is consistent
with this lame duck e¤ect. We categorize the 30 US Congresses between 1953-2012 based on
the time frame they fall within the maximum 8-year presidential term. More speci…cally, we
use “years 1-2” to label the US Congresses during the …rst two years of a …rst presidential
term, “years 5-6”to label the US Congresses during the …rst two years of a second presidential
term, and so on. We measure (the inverse of) legislative gridlock by the number of important
laws enacted by the Congress, as categorized by Mayhew (1991) (see the online appendix for
details of our data). Figure 7 illustrates that an average congress in years 3-4 of a presidency
enacted about 14% fewer laws than a congress in years 5-6, which suggests a positive yet
somewhat weak election e¤ect during the …rst term. In contrast, an average congress in years
7-8 enacted 37% fewer important laws than a congress in years 1-2, which suggests a stronger
election e¤ect during the second term— consistent with the lame duck e¤ect. However, these
results are not statistically signi…cant. This is expected, partly because we only have 30 data
points in total divided across four categories, and partly because there are many more factors
excluded from our analysis that might also a¤ect legislative gridlock (see Binder (2003) for
a review). We therefore view our …ndings as preliminary evidence, which should be subject
to closer empirical scrutiny as the relevant data becomes available.
Remark 4 (Comparison with Electoral Concerns). The parties’concerns with their perfor-
mance in the upcoming election provide an alternative hypothesis for bargaining delays before
elections. In recent work, Ortner (2013) formalizes and theoretically analyzes this “electoral
concerns hypothesis.”In Ortner’s model, the terms of agreement can a¤ect the parties’rel-
ative popularity, and thereby, their probability of winning the next election. The winner

                                              28
of the election receives a nontransferable bene…t, which introduces electoral concerns into
negotiations. Ortner shows that electoral concerns can lead to a delay only if they con‡ict
with the parties’desired policies. Speci…cally, if implementing each party’s most favorable
policy would also increase the popularity of that party (perhaps because the parties and
their potential voters share similar preferences), then the parties …nd a way to compromise
and reach immediate agreement. On the other hand, if one of the parties faces a trade-o¤,
then electoral concerns can lead to delays. For example, if the majority party would have
to sacri…ce its popularity with voters by passing its favorite policy, then the party might
prefer to postpone the bill until the post-election period. A second example arises when
a particular party loses its popularity with voters because of bargaining delays, regardless
of how the delay arises. In that case, the other party may obstruct agreement in order to
improve its popularity.
    We view the electoral concerns hypothesis as mainly complementary to our election e¤ect,
with two main di¤erences. First, our mechanism for gridlock arguably applies more broadly
because it requires fewer assumptions than the key assumption, optimism. In contrast,
electoral concerns apply only if the negotiated issue is su¢ ciently visible and salient for
voters. For instance, such concerns might be invoked to investigate delays in appointing
a judge to the supreme court. However, they are unlikely to be relevant for less salient
issues such as the appellate court appointments. Even for the salient issues, however, the
electoral concerns do not immediately ensure delay. As Ortner’s (2013) analysis illustrates,
delay requires additional and somewhat subtle conditions.7 Second, we make several testable
predictions regarding the strength of the election e¤ect, some of which do not necessarily
follow from electoral concerns. For instance, our election e¤ect causes more gridlock when
there is a lame duck president— as weakly corroborated by our empirical analysis above. In
contrast, one can plausibly envision that a lame duck president is concerned more with his
own legacy than the results of the next election, which could create less gridlock through the
electoral concerns channel. In addition to these di¤erences regarding gridlock, our analysis
also characterizes how the agreement outcomes evolve over typical political cycles.


5       What Causes Delay?
One of our main contributions is to provide a new mechanism for delay, the durability
e¤ect, which provides the deadline and election e¤ects as its special cases. In this section,
we inspect the more general determinants of delay in our framework. We show that some
    7
    In the second example, gridlock is assumed to make one of the parties less popular relative to the other
party. While it is intuitive that gridlock will reduce the popularity of the parties, it is not clear that this will
bene…t the other party— especially the one that obstructs the bills. It is more plausible that disillusioned
voters go to third parties or outside/anti-establishment candidates (as int he case of 2016 US presidential
elections). If this is the case, then one could expect electoral concerns to increase the parties’incentive to
reach an agreement.


                                                        29
durability of bargaining power is necessary to obtain robust bargaining delays with optimism.
We also illustrate that nonstationarity of the environment— while essential in our baseline
framework— is not necessary once we consider a natural generalization of the model.
   In our model, delay before some future time t is driven by a combination of optimism
about the time, yt;t , and high congruence at the time, Kt . This induces the players to be
optimistic about their bargaining shares in the future, yt;t Kt , and induces them to wait.
An increase in durability at time t ensures that both conditions are satis…ed. Our next
result shows that some form of durability is also necessary to obtain delays. We capture
nondurability by assuming that the one-period arrival probability is equal to one, t = 1 for
each t, that is, the bargaining power is reset in every period [cf. (3)].

Proposition 9 (Immediate Agreement without Durability). Assume               t   = 1 for all t. Then,

                           Kt = max f1      Wt ; 0g   1     t     (8t) ;

and there is immediate agreement in the continuous-time limit (i.e. limn!1 tA            A
                                                                            n = 0 where tn
is the …rst time with agreement).

     The …rst part of the result immediately follows from Proposition 1, which also ap-
plies in the limit case with non-durable bargaining power. The displayed equality is
obtained by substituting t = 1 in (7). The inequality is obtained by noting that
Wt = t St+1=n + t yKt+1=n             t . Intuitively, when the bargaining power is highly non-
durable and changes in every period, the current bargaining power can a¤ect only the gain
from agreement in the current period. This gain is equal to the cost of waiting until the next
period, which is bounded from above by the loss due to one-period time discounting, 1             t.
The one-period loss is vanishingly small in the continuous-time limit in which the parties can
frequently negotiate. This implies that the continuous-time limit features low congruence,
limn!1 Kt = 0 for each t, which in turn leads to the second part. Absent congruence, the
parties cannot be optimistic about their shares from bargaining at the agreement time, that
is, limn!1 y0;tAn KtAn = 0, which leads to a vanishingly short period of delay, tAn . (Results with
vanishing delays has also been established by Ali (2006) and Ortner (2013) in other setups,
which implicitly assume non-durable bargaining power.)
     Proposition 9 reinforces the key role that durability plays for our results on gridlock. It
also helps to di¤erentiate our paper from the related literature on bargaining with optimism.
As discussed before, Yildiz (2003) analyzes delays with optimism under a special structure in
which the bargaining power is serially independent over time— and thus, highly non-durable.
This structure ensures that the players’optimism satis…es yt;s = y0;s for each t < s, that is,
the players’optimism about a future time s is the same at all earlier times. Yildiz (2003)
relates delays to a sudden drop in optimism about the future times. Speci…cally, if the
optimism changes smoothly throughout (y0;s y0;s+1=n (1              t ) = t for each s and t < s),



                                                30
then he shows that there is immediate agreement. Conversely, if there is a future time s = t
at which the optimism drops su¢ ciently fast (y0;t y0;t +1=n is su¢ ciently large), then there
is a period of delay before t . Proposition 9 reveals that the delay obtained in Yildiz (2003)
is vanishingly short in the continuous-time limit. A drop in optimism at time t is necessary
for delays, as emphasized in Yildiz (2003), but it is by itself not su¢ cient. One also needs
high congruence at time t , which requires some form of durability. We further show that
high e¤ective durability, combined with the observability of the bargaining power, provides
an intuitive structure— with various applications— that delivers high congruence.
    One feature of our model is that there is immediate agreement under stationarity (see
Proposition 2). From here, it might be tempting to conclude that a nonstationary envi-
ronment is necessary for delays. This conclusion would be incorrect. In Appendix A, we
generalize the model to the case in which the durability rate can also be stochastic, s (t),
where the state s 2 S follows a Markov chain. We then present an example in which the
environment is stationary (all variables are time-independent), and yet there are delays in
some of the states. Speci…cally, we take S = fH; Lg where H denotes a state with high
e¤ective durability and L denotes a state with low e¤ective durability, and establish a con-
dition under which the optimistic players disagree at state s = L and agree at state s = H.
The condition for the delay is more likely to hold when the e¤ective durability in state H is
greater, and when the transition from state L to state H is more rapid. Intuitively, at the
low-durability state, the players wait for the bargaining power to become more durable in
order to reach an agreement. Thus, the example reinforces our earlier explanation that the
delay in our model— the durability e¤ect— is driven by an increase in e¤ective durability.
Nonstationarity does not play an important role beyond enabling us to capture the increase
in e¤ective durability using a tractable model. The example also illustrates that the increase
in e¤ective durability does not have to be deterministic but it should be expected by both
parties with su¢ ciently high probability.


6    General Model
In our working paper, we allow bargaining power t to be any stochastic process with piece-
wise continuous paths almost surely. We show that there (generally) exists a unique subgame-
perfect Nash equilibrium up to the indi¤erence discussed in Section 2. Moreover, the contin-
uation value process Vti is the unique solution to a system of stochastic di¤erence equations.
Under the common-prior assumption, the solution is straightforward: Vti is the discounted
average value of the future bargaining powers. Absent the common-prior assumption, the
equation system is in general not tractable. The special structure we consider in this paper
enables us to replace the stochastic di¤erence equations with a more tractable and intuitive
system of deterministic di¤erence equations (see Proposition 1).
    While we cannot solve the general model in closed form, we are able to generalize the

                                             31
main results and insights. The key step is to introduce a notion of the durability of bargain-
ing power as a condition on the stochastic process t . Our notion of durability requires each
player’s expectation of the future bargaining power to be Lipschitz-continuous in time. This
means that: (i) the expectation for nearby future times is almost the same as the current
bargaining power, (ii) and as one considers more distant times, the rate at which the expec-
tation changes is bounded from above. We de…ne the inverse of this allowed rate of change
(or the Lipschitz constant) as the durability rate. The special structure we analyze in this
paper satis…es this general durability condition with the durability rate given by 1= (t).
    With this de…nition, durability induces high congruence more generally. Speci…cally, we
show that, when the bargaining power is highly durable over a su¢ ciently long time interval
(from today onwards), the players’ expected payo¤s from bargaining re‡ect their current
bargaining powers— resulting in high congruence. Moreover, by slightly strengthening the
durability condition, we also show that the players reach agreement with high probability.
This generalizes the main insights from the stationary model (Proposition 2).
    A more subtle insight from our analysis also applies more generally: What matters for
congruence and agreement is e¤ective durability, which re‡ects a combination of durability
and time discounting (cf. (11)). Speci…cally, if the time discounting is su¢ ciently large, e.g.,
in view of a deadline, then the above results hold even if the bargaining power is durable over
a short time interval (from today onwards). Even though the bargaining power might not
be durable in the strict sense of the word, it is su¢ ciently durable in payo¤-relevant terms,
which leads to similar bargaining outcomes. Thus, as in the stationary model, deadlines and
durability provide similar disciplining roles on beliefs and bargaining outcomes.
    Armed with these results, our working paper also establishes the analogues of the dura-
bility, deadline, and election e¤ects in the more general setup. If the optimism about time t
at a prior time t is su¢ ciently high (compared to an inverse measure of the durability after
time t ), then there is disagreement at t, generalizing the durability e¤ect. We obtain the
deadline e¤ect as a special case of this result after observing that the arrival of a deadline
starting at time t increases the e¤ective durability after time t without a¤ecting optimism
before time t . We also obtain the election e¤ect as a special case after observing that elec-
tions schedules just before time t allow for optimism about time t at prior times without
a¤ecting the e¤ective durability after time t .


7     Conclusion
In this paper, we develop a tractable model of bargaining with optimism. The distinguishing
feature of our model is that the bargaining power is somewhat durable and changes only
due to important events (such as elections). Players know their current bargaining powers,
but they can be optimistic that events will shift the bargaining power in their favor. The
durability of bargaining power— the rate at which important events happen— provides a

                                               32
natural discipline on the player’s beliefs. We de…ne congruence (in political negotiations,
political capital) as the extent to which a player’s current bargaining power translates into
expected payo¤s from bargaining. We show that durability in‡uences congruence and plays
an important role in understanding bargaining gridlock driven by optimism, as well as the
…ner details of bargaining outcomes in political negotiations.
    The model leads to a simple cost-bene…t analysis of gridlock: the parties delay the
agreement if their optimism about the bargaining shares in the future is higher than cost of
waiting. The latter optimism is measured by the multiplication of optimism about bargaining
power and the congruence at the future date. The question of gridlock then turns into the
question of what causes high congruence. We show that some degree of durability is essential
to obtain high congruence and robust bargaining delays. We also establish a general durability
e¤ect by which an increase in e¤ective durability— a combination of durability and time
discounting— leads to high congruence and ex-ante delays. As applications of the durability
e¤ect, we establish deadline and election e¤ects by which an upcoming deadline or election
leads to ex-ante delays in bargaining. The deadline e¤ect is more prominent when players
are more optimistic and when the deadline is less uncertain. For …rm deadlines, the e¤ect
is less prominent when players perceive a greater cost of delay. The election e¤ect is more
prominent when the players are more optimistic, when the election is stronger (more likely to
shift the bargaining power), when the bargaining power is more durable during non-election
times (i.e., in more stable democracies), when the election is closer (in terms of the parties’
popularities), and when there is not an incumbent in the race.
    Our analysis of political negotiations reveals that political capital (or congruence) changes
systematically over typical election cycles. With periodic elections, political capital is highest
in the immediate aftermath of the election. The parties agree and give a large share to the
party that just won the election. As the next election approaches, political capital declines.
The parties reach “compromise solutions,”giving some surplus to the party with low current
bargaining power, before they eventually start to disagree in view of the upcoming election.
We also analyze political cycles in which a stronger election that changes the bargaining
power with greater probability alternates with a weaker election. The stronger election leads
to a greater political capital in its aftermath, as well as a more severe gridlock in its run-up.
This result suggests that the four-year elections in the US are associated with more gridlock
compared to the midterm elections. The result also suggests a lame-duck e¤ect: presidents
that are not eligible to be reelected are associated with less political capital and more gridlock,
relative to presidents that can be reelected. Our empirical analysis of legislative gridlock in
the US lends some preliminary support to the election and lame duck e¤ects. We leave a
more complete empirical test of the predictions of our theory for future work.




                                               33
References
 [1] Abreu, D. and F. Gul (2000): “Bargaining and reputation,” Econometrica 68(1), 85–117.

 [2] Ali, S. Nageeb M. (2006): “Waiting to Settle: Multilateral Bargaining with Subjective Biases,”
     Journal of Economic Theory, 130, 109-137.

 [3] Ambrus, Attila and Shih En Lu (2009): “A Continuous-time Model of Multilateral Bargain-
     ing,” working paper.

 [4] Babcock, Linda and George Loewenstein (1997): “Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role
     of Self-Serving Biases,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 109-126.

 [5] Binmore, Kenneth (1987): “Perfect Equilibria in Bargaining Models,” in The Economics of
     Bargaining, ed. by K. Binmore and P. Dasgupta. Oxford, U.K.: Basil Blackwell, 77-105.

 [6] Binder, Sarah (2000): “Going Nowhere: A Gridlocked Congress?,” The Brookings Review, 18,
     16-19.

 [7] Binder, Sarah (2003): Stalemate: Causes and Consequences of Legislative Gridlock, Washing-
     ton: Brookings Institution Press.

 [8] Case, Karl, Robert Shiller, and Anne Thompson (2012): “What Have They Been Thinking?
     Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

 [9] Fanning, J. (2013): “Reputational bargaining and deadlines,”Brown University working paper.

[10] Galasso, Alberto (2012): “Broad Cross-License Negotiations,”Journal of Economics and Man-
     agement Strategy, 21, 873-911.

[11] Ma, Ching-to Albert and Michael Manove (1993): “Bargaining with Deadlines and Imperfect
     Agent Control,” Econometrica 61, 1313-1339.

[12] Mayhew, David R. (1991): Divided We Govern, New Haven: Yale University Press.

[13] Mayhew, D. R. (2008): “Incumbency Advantage in US Presidential Elections: The Historical
     Record,” Political Science Quarterly, 123(2), 201-228.

[14] Merlo, Antonio, and Charles Wilson (1995): “A Stochastic Model of Sequential Bargaining
     with Complete Information,” Econometrica, p.371-399.

[15] Ortner, Juan (2013): “Political Bargaining in a Changing World,”Boston University working
     paper.

[16] Ortner, Juan (2013): “Optimism, Delay and (In)E¢ ciency in a Stochastic Model of Bargain-
     ing,” Games and Economic Behavior, 77, 352-366.

[17] Roth, Alvin, Keith Murnighan, and Francoise Schoumaker (1988): "The Deadline E¤ect in
     Bargaining: Some Experimental Evidence," American Economic Review 78, 806-823.

[18] Roth, Alvin and Axel Ockenfels (2002): "Last-Minute Bidding and the Rules for Ending
     Second-Price Auctions: Evidence from eBay and Amazon Auctions on the Internet," American
     Economic Review, 92, 1093-1103.


                                               34
[19] Rubinstein, Ariel (1982): “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica 50,
     97-110.

[20] Simsek, Alp and Muhamet Yildiz (2008): “Durable Bargaining Power and Stochastic Dead-
     lines”, working paper.

[21] Spier, Kathryn E. (1992): “The Dynamics of Pretrial Negotiation,” The Review of Economic
     Studies, 59 (1), 93-108.

[22] Thanassoulis John (2010): “Optimal stalling when bargaining,”Journal of Economic Dynam-
     ics and Control 34, 101–120.

[23] Wasserman, Susana and Muhamet Yildiz (2016): “Pretrial Negotiations Under Optimism,”
     working paper.

[24] Yildiz, Muhamet (2003): “Bargaining without a Common Prior — An Agreement Theorem,”
     Econometrica 71, 793-811.

[25] Yildiz, Muhamet (2004a): “Waiting to persuade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1),
     223-249.

[26] Yildiz, Muhamet (2004b): “Optimism, Deadline E¤ect, and Stochastic Deadlines”, MIT work-
     ing paper.

[27] Yildiz, Muhamet (2011): “Bargaining with Optimism”Annual Review of Economics, 3:451–78.




                                             35
A      Appendix: Extensions
This appendix contains the omitted extensions of our baseline model. Appendix B conatains the
omitted proofs. The online appendix contains the description of the data used in Section 4.3 and
the proofs of the lemmas used in Appendix B.

A.1      Election Model with Popularity and Endogenous Optimism
In our election model, the arrival during an election resets the bargaining power to a new level
drawn from a …xed distribution. Consequently, the optimism about the bargaining power after the
                                                         E
election depends on the probability of reset, 1 e          , which we interpreted as the strength of the
election, and optimism conditional on reset, y. This speci…cation is tractable and enables us to
obtain several results. However, it does not speak to some important features of elections in practice
such as the parties’relative popularities with voters, and how the elections map those popularities
into bargaining power. In this section, we sketch a richer model in which we explicitly account for
these features. The model illustrates that closer elections— in which the parties’popularity is close
to one another— are associated with greater optimism and a more prominent election e¤ect. The
model also illustrates that the incumbency advantage reduces the severity of the election e¤ect,
which motivates our reduced form modeling of the incumbency e¤ect in the main text.
     Consider the single-election model and set baseline arrival probability to zero, so that (t) =
  E =" for t 2 [t   "; t ] and (t) = 0 otherwise, where " is vanishingly small. Hence, the bargaining
power can change only at the election date. As before, the probability of reset during the election
            E
is 1 e        . The di¤erence is that, in case of a reset, the bargaining power is set according to
                                               1
                                               t   = G (Zt ) .

Here, Zt is an adapted (observable) stochastic process, and G : R ! [0; 1] is an increasing function.
    The process, Zt , captures the relative popularity of party 1 (compared to party 2). The baseline
model can be thought of as the extreme case in which Zt is iid. In this section, we suppose each
player i believes Zt follows a Brownian motion with variance 2 and drift i , that is,
                                                    i
                                          dZt =         dt + dBt .

We capture optimism by assuming 1 > 2 : that is, player 1 believes its relative popularity will
increase faster than (or decrease slower than) what player 2 believes.
    The function G ( ) maps popularity into relative bargaining power. The mapping depends in
part on how the election translates relative popularity into political o¢ ces. For instance, in the
US congressional elections, the seats (in the aggregate) are allocated according to a mapping that
is (roughly) linear in popularity. In contrast, in the US presidential elections, the presidency is
allocated according to a mapping that is (roughly) binary in popularity. In addition, the map-
ping G ( ) also depends on how the political system translates the political o¢ ces into bargaining
strength. For instance, obtaining a majority of seats in the US House or the US Senate provides a
large advantage to the majority party. However, obtaining at least 40% of the seats in the Senate is
also important, since it allows the senators from the minority party to …libuster legislative action.
    These considerations suggest that, for a variety of reasons, the function G ( ) is steeper when the
parties are close in popularity (jZt j ' 0) as opposed to when one party is more popular than another
(jZt j high). Therefore, we take G ( ) to be an S-shaped function: that is, G0 (Zt ) is single peaked with
maximum obtained at Zt = 0, and it also satis…es limZt ! 1 G0 (Zt ) = limZt !1 G0 (Zt ) = 0. We
also assume the mapping is symmetric for the two parties, G (Zt ) = G ( Zt ). Since 1t = G (Zt )

                                                     36
represents the bargaining power, this also implies G (0) = 21 . An example function that satis…es all
of these assumptions is G (Zt ) = eZ = eZ + 1 .
    The rest of the model is unchanged. We next characterize the solution. After the election, the
parties reach agreement with Kt = 1 (since the baseline durability rate is set to one). Thus, there
is disagreement at some time t < t as long as
                                            r(t    t)
                                        e               (1 + yt;t (Zt )) > 1                               (29)

where yt;t (Zt ) is the level of optimism about the election date t at time t, which depends now on
Zt as well as t and t . In particular,

                                   yt;t (Zt ) = 1                    e   E
                                                                                 yt;t (Zt )

where
                            yt;t (Zt ) = E 1 [G (Zt ) jZt ]                  E 2 [G (Zt ) jZt ] :
In our baseline example, the analogous expression was yt;t = 1 e E y. In this extension,
optimism depends on the strength of the election e¤ect, as before, but it also depends on the
current level of popularity, Zt , as well as the current time, t.
    We use Ito’s lemma to characterize the solution further. Note that party i believes the bargain-
ing power evolves according to the process

                                      i                     1
                      dG (Zt ) =          G0 (Zt ) +            2
                                                                    G00 (Zt ) dt + G0 (Zt ) dBt .
                                                            2

Since this is a nonlinear di¤usion process, the party’s expectations for a future time t does not have
a simple closed form solution. However, for times close to the election time, t ' t , the expectation
is approximately equal to G (Zt )+ i G0 (Zt ) + 12 2 G00 (Zt ) (t   t). Thus, optimism shortly before
the election is approximately

                            yt;t ' 1         e     E
                                                            G0 (Zt )         1       2
                                                                                          (t        t) :   (30)

Note that, since G ( ) is an S-shaped function, optimism is decreasing in the absolute value of the
relative popularity, jZt j, and approaches 0 as jZt j ! 1. Intuitively, there is greater optimism about
the bargaining power when the election results are expected to be close (jZt j near zero) and no
optimism when a landslide is expected (i.e., jZt j is large).
    Combining Eqs. (29) and (30) (and using t          t ' 0) provides condition (22) in the main text
that characterizes delay. If optimism is su¢ ciently large, so that, 1 e E           1     2 > r=G0 (0),

then there is delay as long as

                                                        1                     r
                            jZt j < Z         G0                                      1        2)
                                                                                                      .    (31)
                                                                (1       e   E) (



That is, the players delay agreement when the election is su¢ ciently close (jZt j < Z) but they
reach immediate agreement otherwise. Hence, closer elections are associated with greater optimism
and a more prominent election e¤ect. Note also that the cuto¤ level of popularity that induces
disagreement, Z, is increasing in the discount rate, r, and decreasing in the strength of the election,
                                                                      1     2 . Hence, the analogues of
 E , as well as the degree of optimism about the underlying process,
the comparative statics in Proposition 3 also apply in this case. Unlike in the main text, however,
the disagreement period prior to the election is no longer deterministic. Whether there is an


                                                                37
agreement depends on the evolution of relative popularity, Zt . As the election approaches, the
parties receive information about how close the election will be. Shortly before the election, they
might reach agreement or disagreement depending on the resolution of uncertainty.
    Condition (31) can also be used to analyze the e¤ect of an incumbent candidate on the incidence
of gridlock. To this end, suppose the unconditional (objective) distribution of the popularity on
the election eve is given by a Normal distribution, Zt N ; 2 , with mean and variance 2 > 0.
If player 1 (resp. player 2) is an incumbent, then we set > 0 (resp. < 0). This captures the
idea that the incumbent candidates often have an advantage in popularity. The case without an
incumbent is captured by = 0. Suppose also that the parties’ optimism, 1            2 , is the same

regardless of whether there is an incumbent in the race. Then, using (31), the likelihood of delay
with an incumbent can be written as
                                                          Z                                Z
                          Pr jZt j < Z;      =                    2                            2
                                                                                                           ,

where ( ) denotes the cdf for the standard normal distribution. The e¤ect of the incumbency
advantage, , on delay is then given by

                     d                            1                   Z                            Z
                       Pr jZt j < Z;         =    2                       2                            2
                                                                                                               ,   (32)
                     d

where ( ) denotes the pdf for the standard normal distribution. This expression is negative when
   > 0 and positive when < 0. Thus, the likelihood of delay is maximized when there is no
incumbent, = 0.
     To understand this result, imagine raising the incumbency e¤ect further for a party that already
has some incumbency advantage ( > 0). This has two counteracting e¤ects on the likelihood of
delay. On the one hand, it tends to mitigate delay by increasing the probability that the incumbent
will win by a su¢ ciently large margin (Zt > Z). On the other hand, it tends to exacerbate delay
by reducing the probability that the incumbent will lose by a large margin (Zt < Z). Eq. (32)
illustrates that the …rst e¤ect dominates. This is intuitively because the incumbent is more likely
to win by a large margin than to lose by the same margin. Hence, the incumbency e¤ect reduces
the likelihood of delay by increasing the chance of a landslide election on average (equivalently, by
reducing the chance of a close election). In the main text, we have captured this e¤ect in reduced
                                                 E
form via a smaller probability of reset, 1 e       , which reduces the length of the delay by reducing
the average optimism about the election.


A.2     Stochastic Durability
In our model, the arrival rate, (t), is deterministic although it can vary with time. We next
describe an extension of the model in which the arrival rate can also be stochastic. We use the
extended model to show that the our main result, the durability e¤ect, is not driven by the non-
stationarity of the environment per se, but instead by an increase in e¤ective durability.
    Suppose the arrival rate, s (t), can depend on a state s 2 S in addition to time. To be more
speci…c, suppose the arrival rate between the negotiation times t and t + 1=n is still …xed but it is
given by the level, s (t), that might depend on the state realization s 2 S at time t. Thus, the one
period arrival rate is now given by,
                                                           R t+1=n            0    0
                                                                          s (t )dt
                                       s;t   =1       e       t                        .



                                                          38
The state space, S, has …nite elements and follows a Markov chain. We let s0 js denote the prob-
ability that the state at the next negotiation time, t + 1=n, is equal to s0 given state s at time t.
Our next result generalizes Proposition 1 to this case (the proof is omitted).
Proposition 10. For each time t 2 T , state s 2 S, and player i 2 f1; 2g, the continuation value
of a player is given by,
                                                                                i
                                i              i
                              Vs;t = Ks;t      t   + (Ss;t        Ks;t )                     8i; t; s,
                                                                            1+y

where the weights Kt (s) and St (s) are the unique solutions to the di¤ erence equations
                                                                 X
                   Ks;t = max f1 Ws;t ; 0g + t (1          s;t )    s0 js Ks0 ;t+1=n ,
                                                                                         s0 2S
                    Ss;t = max f1; Ws;t g ;
                             X
                    Ws;t = t      s0 js Ss0 ;t+1=n +                    s;t yKs0 ;t+1=n          .
                                   s0 2S

At any time t and state s, the players agree if Ws;t < 1 and disagree if Ws;t > 1.
    The main di¤erence in this case is that the di¤erence equations that determine Ks;t and Ws;t are
stochastic and re‡ect the potential future changes in durability. The analysis becomes particularly
tractable when the discount rate r is constant, and the durability rate can be written as only a
function of the state, s (i.e., does not depend on time). In this case, the di¤erence equations do
not depend on time, and thus, the solution can also be written as a function the state, Ks and Ws .
The following example characterizes the solution further for a special case.
Example 1. Suppose r is constant, s depends only on the state s, and there are two possible states,
s 2 fH; Lg, with H > L . Thus, the e¤ective durability H = r= H at state H is higher than the
e¤ective durability L = r= L at state L. There is a positive probability of switching from state L
to state H, that is, (HjL) = 1 e =n . Note that we have speci…ed the probability in terms of
the switch rate, , which will enable us to take the continuous time limit. For simplicity, there is
zero probability of switching from state H to state L, that is, (LjH) = 0.
    Since state H is an absorbing state, Proposition 2 applies at this state. The parties reach
agreement with congruence KH = k ( H ). The sum of the expected payo¤s is SH = 1. At state
L, the equilibrium is characterized by the di¤erence equations in Proposition 10 after dropping the
time subscripts. We conjecture an equilibrium in which there is disagreement at this state (i.e.,
WL > 1). Then, the di¤erence equation for congruence implies,

                                                             =n                            =n
                             KL = (1            L)    e           KL + 1             e           KH ,

where   =e   r=n   and       =1    e    L =n   . Solving for KL and taking the limit, we obtain,
                         L


                                        lim KL =                                k(   H) :
                                        n!1               r+        +       L

The di¤erence of the value of waiting implies,

                                  =n                                                 =n
                    WL = e             (WL +        L yKL )   +         1       e            (1 +    L yKH ) .


Here, we have used SL = WL and SH = 1. Substituting the expressions for KH and KL and taking

                                                              39
the limit, we obtain,
                                                                      L
                                lim WL =                    1+                     yk (   H)     :
                               n!1             r+                r+       +    L

In the continuous-time limit, there is disagreement at state L (i.e., limn!1 WL > 1) if and only if,
                                                                               r
                                          yk (   H)     >   L   + (1 +    L)       :                 (33)

This veri…es the conjecture and completes the characterization (for su¢ ciently large n).
    Note that the left side of Eq. (33) is increasing in the level of optimism, y, and in the e¤ective
durability at high-durability state, H . The right-hand side is increasing in the e¤ective durability
in low-durability state, L , and in the ratio, r= . Hence, there is disagreement at state L as long as
y and H are su¢ ciently large and L and r= are su¢ ciently low. Intuitively, at the low-durability
state, the players wait for the bargaining power to become more durable in order to reach an
agreement. In contrast, if the bargaining power were more durable at state L (i.e. If L            H ),
then players would also agree at state L.8 Thus, the delay in the example is caused by an expected
increase in durability.
    The example provides an analogue of the durability e¤ect established in Proposition 3 for
the case in which durability rate is stationary (or time-independent) but stochastic. Condition
(33) is the analogue of the condition (17), yk ( H ) > L , that was necessary and su¢ cient in the
deterministic case. In this case, we have an additional term, ( L + 1) r= , in the lower bound.
Intuitively, not only the durability at state H should be su¢ ciently higher than at state L, but
there should also be su¢ ciently fast transition to state H (high ).
    Importantly, the example illustrates that non-stationarity of the environment per se is not
essential to obtain bargaining delays. The delay in Proposition 3 is caused by an expected increase
in the e¤ective durability at time t . Note also that, unlike in Proposition 3, the delay in this
example can be arbitrarily long depending on the realization of uncertainty.


B        Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Combining the agreement and the disagreement cases described in
Section 2.2, the players’payo¤s are characterized as the solution to the di¤erence equation
                                                                  h       i
                                                                     i
                        Vti = it max 0; 1 Wt;t+1=n + t;t+1=n Eti Vt+1=n     .                        (34)

We claim that the payo¤s described by Eqs. (6-8) solve this di¤erence equation at all times. Since
V is the limit of the solutions to the models truncated at …nite dates t, it su¢ ces to prove the
claim for the truncated problem. Thus, consider the truncated model with a …rm deadline at t.
We prove the claim by induction. Since Vti = ti and t = 0, Eq. (6-8) holds at t = t with Kt = 1,
St = 1, and Wt = 0. Towards an induction, assume the equations hold for time t + 1=n onwards,
  8
      This follows by observing the inequalities,

                                  L   + (1 +   L ) r=   >    L   > yk (   L)       yk (   H) :




                                                             40
and consider time t. Then, the expected payo¤ of i from waiting is
               h       i              h                         i
                                                              St+1=n Kt+1=n i
            Eti Vt+1=n
                  i
                         = Kt+1=n Eti             i
                                                  t+1=n             +
                                                                   1+y
                                                          i              St+1=n Kt+1=n                                           i
                           = Kt+1=n (1                t ) t + Kt+1=n t +                                                             .
                                                                              1+y

Plugging this expression into (5), we obtain (9) for time t. Plugging the same expression into (34),
we also obtain
                                     h     i
  i                        i       i   i
Vt = max f1 Wt ; 0g t + t Et Vt+1=n
                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                    i
    =    max f1     Wt ; 0g +   t (1        t ) Kt+1=n              t   +       t   Kt+1=n               t (1    + y) + St+1=n   Kt+1=n             .
                                                                                                                                           1+y
                                                                        i
Hence, Vti is also a weighted average of          i
                                                  t   and       1+y .           We obtain (7) and (8) by setting the weights
equal to Kt and St Kt , respectively.

   We de…ne the variables
                                                                                                    0
                                       0        r0 =n                       0                           =n
                                           =e           and                     =1              e            ,                              (35)
to denote the one period discount rate and the arrival rate when r (t) and (t) are constant at their
baseline levels r0 and 0 . Given some t and t , we also de…ne the e¤ ective durability in discrete
time as,
                                                    1     t
                                         ( t; t) =          .                                   (36)
                                                                                t    t
Here, ( t ; t ) is the discrete time analogue of the e¤ective durability,                                            (t), which plays a central
role in the analysis. It can be checked that
                                                                0           0               0
                                                lim                 ;           =               :                                           (37)
                                                n!1

It can also be checked that
                                                        0           0               0
                                                            ;               >           .                                                   (38)
Hence, the e¤ective durability rate is always higher in discrete time, and approaches
its continuous time counterpart from above.           Recall also from (18) that w ( ; K; ) =
                   = 0
e     1+ 1 e              K y . In the online appendix, we prove the following lemma, establish-
ing useful properties of the function w ( ; K; ) for our subsequent proofs.

Lemma 1. Suppose = 1 and K y > 0 , or < 1 and K > 0.
   (i) There exists a unique solution to the equation w ; K; = 1.
   (ii) At the solution = , w is strictly decreasing in ; w ( ; K; ) > 1 is for each                                                     2 0;       ,
and w ( ; K; ) < 1 for each > .

Proof of Proposition 3. Note that the environment becomes stationary at t with e¤ective
durability rate 1 . Hence, Proposition 2 applies starting at t after replacing 0 with 1 . As we
show in the proof of Proposition 2 (for …xed n), players reach agreement at time t (and thereafter)
                                                     1                    1
with congruence Kt = k( ( 1 ; 1 )), where 1 = e r =n and 1 = 1 e =n .
   Next consider a negotiation time t = t         =r0 < t . Using (4) and (6), the value of waiting


                                                                41
until time t can be written as

                                      Wt;t = e           (1 + yt;t Kt ) = w( ; Kt ; 1).

Recall also that Kt = k( ( 1 ; 1 )) > k 1 since               1
                                                                ; 1 > 1 [cf. (38)]. Combining this
                                                            0
observation with condition (17), we also have Kt y > . Then, Lemma 1 implies that there is a
unique positive solution, ~ n > 0, to the equation, w( ; Kt ; 1) = 1.
    Let t~ = t   ~ n =r0 denote the time corresponding to delay, ~ n . We de…ne t = t           0
                                                                                            n =r 2 T as
the …rst negotiation time that is weakly greater than t~. Lemma 1 (part (ii)) also implies that Wt;t =
w( ; Kt ; 1) 1 for each t 2 [t; t ). Hence, there is disagreement at times t 2 [t; t ) \ T . Note also
that t 1=n < t~. Then, Lemma 1 (part (ii)) also implies that Wt 1=n = w( + r0 =n; Kt ; 1) < 1.
Hence, there is agreement at time t 1=n.
    It remains to characterize the continuous time   n limit.o      First recall that limn!1 Kt =
      1   1
k( ( ; )) = k       1  . Next note that the sequence     ~ n     has a convergent subsequence (since it
                                                                                         n
lies in a compact set). Let      denote the limit of an arbitrary convergent subsequence. Then,
taking the limit of the equation w( ~ n ; k( ( 1 ; 1 )); 1) = 1 over this subsequence, we obtain
the equation w( ; k 1 ; 1) = 1. Lemma 1 implies that there is a unique positive solution,
    > 0, to this equation. Since all convergent subsequences have the same limit, we obtain
limn!1 ~ n = . Recall that we de…ned t as the …rst negotiation time that weakly exceeds t~.
This implies t = max 0; t     ~ n r0 + fn t    ~ n r0 ; where fn t~ is an “error function” which
satis…es fn t~ < 1=n for each t~ 2 R. Taking the limit, we obtain limn!1 t = max 0; t       =r0 ,
completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 4. By Lemma 1,                                   is increasing in any change that increases the value
of waiting evaluated at the solution, w                      ;k       1 ; 1 . Substituting 0 = r^= 0 and 1 = (^ r + )= 1
into (18), we obtain
                                                                               0
                              1                                                    =^
                                                                                    r                           1
             w       ;k           ;1 = e            1+ 1              e                 k (^
                                                                                           r + )=                       y         f ( ; r^) .

Here, the second equality de…nes the function f ( ; r^). Then, the …rst two parts follow because
f   ; r^ is decreasing in 1= 0 , and increasing in 1= 1 and    (since k 1 is increasing in 1 ).
The third part also follows after observing that k 1 y is increasing in y. It remains to prove
                                                                                                 d                      @w              1 @f
the last part. By the Implicit Function Theorem, we have,                                        d^r   =                @ j =             @ r^ j =   . Since
@w
@ j = < 0, the derivative has the same sign as

                                                                                                                              1
                 @f                    1    0       0
                                                        =^
                                                         r                1                            0
                                                                                                           =^
                                                                                                            r           dk          d 1
                      j   =       =             e        e        k            y+ 1          e                      y                   .
                 @ r^                 r^2                                                                                 d   1     dr
                                        dk( 1 )
As ! 1, we have k 1 ! 1 and d 1 ! 0. Hence, the …rst term on the right hand side
remains strictly negative whereas the second term approaches zero. Let < 1 su¢ ciently large so
that @f
      r j = < 0 for each
     d^                     > . Then, we also have dd^r < 0 for each > .

Proof of Proposition 5. The proof closely parallels the proof of Proposition 3 with minor
di¤erences. In this case, the environment becomes stationary at t with e¤ective durability rate
 0 . Hence, the players agree at each time t (and thereafter) with K          0  0 )) > k   0 .
                                                                    t = k( ( ;




                                                                          42
Consider a negotiation time t = t                                =r0 < t . The value of waiting is now given by

                                                                                  =    0
                                   Wt;t = e              1+ 1              e               Kt       = w( ; Kt ; ),

                                                             E
where we use the notation = e         to describe the survival probability corresponding to the
election. Since < 1 and Kt > 0, Lemma 1 implies there is a unique positive solution, n > 0,
to the equation w( ; Kt ; ) = 1. Let t = t              0
                                                    n =r . Then, the same steps as in the proof
of Proposition 3 yield disagreement at each t 2 [t; t ) \ T and agreement at t 1=n. We also
obtain limn!1 t = max 0; t        =r0 , where     denotes the unique solution to the equation
w( ; k    0  ; ) = 1.

Proof of Proposition 6. Now,                                     is increasing in any change that increases
                                                         E                                              0       E
                                                0                                                                           0
                           w           ;k           ;e           =e             1+ 1           e            e       k           y :

                                            E                                                           E                                    E
Then,     is increasing in                      and y because w                    ;k      0   ;e               is increasing in                 and y; recall
         0                                                                                                          0                                      d
that k        y is increasing in y. To show that                                  is increasing in 1=                   , we will show that                d     0   > 0;
                                                                                                                                                           0         E
                                                                                                                                        1 @w         ;k(       );e
              0                0                                                                    d               @w
recall that           = r0 =       . By the Implicit Function Theorem,                              d   0   =       @ j =                              @   0             .
                                       @w
By Lemma 1, we have                    @ j =        < 0, and we show in the online appendix that

                                        0           E                                                                               !
                      @w       ;k           ;e                             k       0
                                                                                           e        11+y                        0
                                                                                                                            =
                                                         =e            y                                                e               > 0.                         (39)
                                   @    0
                                                                               ( 0 )2                 y

              d
Therefore,    d   0   > 0, completing the proof.

    The following lemmas facilitate subsequent proofs. The …rst lemma provides an upper bound
for congruence in the election models analyzed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. The second lemma is an
analogue of Lemma 1 in this context. The proofs of the lemmas are relegated to the online appendix.
                                            0                      0                                                                     0       0
Lemma 2. Suppose                   t   =        and      t             for each t 2 T . Then, Kt 2 0; k                                      ;             for each
t 2 T.

Lemma 3. Consider the function f ( )        w ( ; K ( ) ; ) where < 1 and K ( ) is a function
that satis…es K 0 ( ) < 0 for each   2 [0; max ] and K ( ax ) = 0. Then, the equation f ( ) = 1
has a unique solution over the range [0; max ]. Moreover, 2 (0; max ).

Proof of Proposition 7. The equilibrium is periodic since otherwise we could construct mul-
tiple equilibria, violating the uniqueness result. We next de…ne the threshold time, t. If there is no
agreement date (with Wt < 1), we let t = 0. Otherwise, we let t 1=n 2 T be the last agreement
time (Wt 1=n < 1) within [0; t ). By de…nition, there is disagreement (Wt         1) over the range
t 2 [t; t ) (which could be empty).
    We next claim that there is agreement (Wt < 1) over the interval [0; t). If t = 0, then the
interval is empty and the statement is true. Suppose t > 0 and consider t 2 [0; t) \ T . We prove
the claim by backward induction. Note that there is agreement at time t 1=n. Suppose there is
agreement at some t + 1=n 2 [0; t) \ T and consider the prior negotiation time. Using Eq. (9) along


                                                                                43
with St+1=n = 1 (since there is agreement), we obtain
                                    0                0                                     0                    0                       0            0
                         Wt =           1+                yKt+1=n                                1+                 yk                      ;                  < 1:

Here, the …rst inequality follows from Lemma 2, which applies to this model and implies Kt+1=n
       0                                                               0                                                                                                            0
k        ; 0 . The second inequality follows after substituting k        ; 0 = 1 0 +1 0 0 (1+y) [cf.
(14)]. Hence, there is also agreement at time t, completing the proof of the claim.
                                                                             E
    We next characterize the congruence levels. We use the notation = e         2 (0; 1). Since there
is disagreement over the range [t; t ), Eq. (7) implies
                                            0  0                                             0  0
                                   Kt = e (r + )(t                         t)
                                                                                    Kt = e (r + )(t                                         t)
                                                                                                                                                     K0 .
This expression implies in particular that t > 0. Next consider an agreement time t 2 [0; t).
Substituting Wt = 0 1 + 0 yKt+1=n into (7), we obtain

                        Kt = 1          0
                                            +        0
                                                              1       0
                                                                          (1 + y) Kt+1=n = 1                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                 + ^Kt+1=n ,

where ^ =   0
                1       0 (1   + y) (see (13)). Solving the di¤erence equation forward, for each t 2 [0; t),
we obtain
                         0
                1                   ^n(t        t)                n(t t)
                                                                                                                                                 ^n(t         t)        n(t t)
         Kt =                  1                         +^                Kt = k                           0
                                                                                                                ;       0
                                                                                                                                        1                          +^            Kt :    (40)
                    1   ^

                                                                           0           0                  1 0
Here, the second equality substitutes k                                        ;                 =            .         This establishes Eq. (24) in the main
                                                                                                          1 ^
text. Substituting for Kt , we obtain

                        Kt = 1          ^n(t             t)
                                                                  k        0
                                                                                ;          0
                                                                                                 +^
                                                                                                           n(t t)            0  0
                                                                                                                         e (r + )(t                           t)
                                                                                                                                                                   K0

for each t 2 [0; t). Applying this expression for t = 0, we obtain

                                                                      1        ^nt
                                                                                                                                0           0
                                    K0 =                                                                    k                       ;                 .
                                                     1        ^nt e (r0 + 0 )(t                       t)

                                                                                  0   0
Note that K0 < k          0
                            ; 0 since     < 1. This in turn implies Kt = e (r + )(t t) K0 <
      0
k       ; 0 . Hence, by (40), Kt is strictly decreasing in t over the agreement range [0; t).
    Let n = r0 (t      t) denote the payo¤ relevant distance of the threshold time, t. Since there is
disagreement over the range [t; t ) and agreement at t 1=n, we have Wt;t       1 > Wt 1=n;t . Using
Wt;t = w r0 (t     t) ; K0;n ; , the threshold, n , satis…es

                                   w        n ; K0;n ;                     1>w                        n    + r0 =n; K0;n ;                                .                              (41)
From the above analysis, K0;n can also be written as a function of                                                                                   n:

                                                                                                  0
                                                        1             ^n(t                 n =r       )
                                                                                                                                             0            0
                               K0;n =                                                                                       k                    ;             :                         (42)
                                                     ^n(t                          )
                                                                               0
                                                                      n =r                                 0)
                                            1                                          e       (1+1=                n


The equilibrium for any …nite n is characterized as the solution to Eqs. (41 42).
   It remains to characterize the continuous time limit. Note that the sequence K0;n ;                                                                                                  n n   is


                                                                                       44
bounded (since K0;n 2 [0; 1] and      2 0; t r0 ). Thus, it has at least one limit point denoted
                                              n
                                                                            n       0   0
by K (0) ;    . Taking the limit of Eqs. (41) and (42), and using limn!1 ^ = e (r + (1+y)) =
   0    0
e r =k( ) , we obtain the system


                   w    ; K (0) ;        = 1,                                                                                                 (43)
                                                                           0
                                                              1        e (r t      )=k( 0 )
                                K (0) =                                                                           k ( 0) .
                                                      e (r t            )=k( 0 ) e (1+1= 0 ) e
                                                          0                                                  E
                                                  1
By Lemma 3, this system has a unique and interior solution, 2 (0; max ). Since there is a unique
limit point, we conclude that limn!1      n n =   and limn!1 K0;n = K0      . This also implies
limn!1 t = t       =r0 , completing the proof.

    The following lemma facilitates the subsequent proof. The lemma establishes the uniqueness
and the comparative statics of the solution to an equation system, which is the analogue of the
system in (43) for the case of alternating elections. The equation system of interest can be written
as F xj odd ; even = 0 where F j odd ; even : X ! R4 is a vector valued function over the
domain

      n                                                                                                                                   o
                        odd            even
   X = x = K0 ;               ; Kt ;              2 R4       j K0 ; Kt 2 0; k                  0
                                                                                                   ;        odd
                                                                                                                  ;   even
                                                                                                                             2 0; t r0        :

The components of the function F              j   odd ; even       are de…ned by

                                F1 (x) = K0                  k sum         odd
                                                                                 ; Kt ;    odd
                                                                                                                                              (44)
                                                                  odd              odd
                                F2 (x) = 1               w              ; Kt ;
                                F3 (x) = K (t )                   k sum (     even
                                                                                     ; K0 ;      even
                                                                                                        )
                                                                  even             even
                                F4 (x) = 1               w(              ; K0 ;           ).

where
                                       0
   k sum   ; K next ;   = 1        e (r t         )=k( 0 ) k           0         0
                                                                           + e (r t            )=k( 0 ) e (1+1= 0 )            K next :       (45)

Lemma 4. Suppose condition (27) holds. Then:
   (i) For each odd ; even 2 (0; 1), the system F xj odd ;                         even     = 0 has a unique solution over X,
which is also interior, that is, K (0) ; K (t ) 2 (0; 1) and                       odd ;    even 2 0; t r 0 .

   (ii) Suppose, in addition, that condition (28) holds and                         odd    > even . Then, the solution satis…es
 even >    odd and K (0) > K (t ).


    The proof is relegated to the online appendix. We brie‡y explain the proof since the analysis is
not trivial. The …rst part relies on the Poincare-Hopf Index Theorem. We show that the Jacobean
matrix evaluated at any interior solution, @F @x jx=x , has a positive determinant. Moreover, the
vector valued function F points “outwards” on the boundary of its domain, X. In view of these
observations, the Poincare-Hopf Theorem implies that there is a unique solution.
    The second part of the lemma uses the Implicit Function Theorem (together with tedious
algebra) to characterize how the solution changes in the inverse strength of the odd election d dx
                                                                                                 odd .




                                                                  45
In particular, we show
                                                odd                                    even
                           dK (0)      d                   dK (t )          d
                              odd
                                  > 0;          odd
                                                      < 0;    odd
                                                                   < 0; and            odd
                                                                                              > 0.
                            d          d                    d                d
                                                                                                   odd                   odd
That is, reducing the strength of the odd election (increasing odd = e                ) decreases          and
                                     even
K (t ), and increases K (0) and           . We also observe that if the two elections were equally
strong, then the model would be the same as the periodic election model and the solution would
                                                                        odd                  even
be symmetric, that is, K (0) j~odd = even = K (t ) j~odd = even and         j~odd = even =        j~odd = even .
Combining these observations implies that, when      odd >   even , the odd election (which is the weaker
                                                                odd
election) is associated with a smaller delay in its run-up,          < even , and a smaller congruence
in its aftermath, K (t ) < K (0).

                                                            E;odd                    E;even
Proof of Proposition 8. We let               =e   odd  ; even = e          2 (0; 1) denote the survival
probabilities with respect to odd and even elections. In this case, the uniqueness of the solution
implies that the outcomes are periodic with cycle 2t . We de…ne the thresholds todd and teven
similar to the proof of Proposition 7. If there is no agreement date (with Wt < 1) over [0; t ), then
we let todd = 0. Otherwise, we let todd 1=n be the last agreement date over [0; t ). Note that in
both cases, there is disagreement over the range, [todd ; t ) (which could be empty). We de…ne teven
symmetrically over the range, [t ; 2t ).
    With these de…nitions in place, the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 7 imply that
there is agreement over the intervals [0; t) and [t ; 2t ) (which could be empty). Moreover, the
congruences at election times satisfy
                                odd                        ntodd
            K0 =        1    ^nt          k ( ( ; )) + ^
                                                                       0  0
                                                                   e (r + )(t      t) odd
                                                                                            Kt ;                               (46)
                                   even                            n(teven t )
           Kt    =     1     ^n(t         t )
                                                k ( ( ; )) + ^
                                                                                     0  0
                                                                                 e (r + )(2t       teven ) even
                                                                                                                  K0 .

    These equations also imply that todd > 0 or teven > t (since otherwise there would be a
contradiction). We next establish more strongly that, if n is su¢ ciently large, then todd > 0
and teven > t . That is, there is an agreement date on each election cycle. To establish this,
                               0
…rst recall that limn!1 k        ; 0 = k 0 (see (37)). Recall also that condition (27) implies
                  0
1 + k 0 y < er t . Then, there exists a su¢ ciently large nint such that, for each n, the discrete
                                                            0             0
time analogue of the same condition also holds, 1 + k         ; 0 y < er t . Next let n > nint and
suppose, to reach a contradiction, that todd = 0. Then, there is disagreement on the interval, [0; t ),
                                                                            0
and we have W0;t = w r0 t ; Kt ; odd         1. Using (18) and 1 e = odd < 1, this implies
  0                                                          0
er t < 1 + Kt y. By Lemma 2, we also have Kt          k        ; 0 . This yields a contradiction to
                          0   0        r 0t               odd
the condition, 1 + k        ;     y < e , proving that t       > 0. The same steps also imply that
teven >t .
    Since todd > 0, there is agreement at time todd 1=n and disagreement over the range, [t; t ).
Likewise, there is agreement at time teven 1=n and disagreement over the range, [teven ; 2t ). In
view these observations, the thresholds are characterized by the system




                                                            46
                                         odd                                odd
                                   w     n ; K0 ;                 1>w       n     + r0 =n; K0 ;                                 (47)
                                        even                                even
                               w        n    ; Kt    ;            1>w       n      + r0 =n; Kt ;            .

Here, odd
        n   = r0 t      todd and even  n     = r0 (2t    teven ) denote the payo¤ relevant distances for
delay as before. The equilibrium for any …nite n is characterized by Eqs. (46 47).
    As before, we also characterize the continuous time limit. Taking the limit as n ! 1, any limit
point of the sequence K0;n odd ; odd ; K even ; even    solves the following system:
                                 n       t ;n   n     n


                                                           K (0) = k sum           odd
                                                                                         ; K (t ) ;   odd


                                                          K (t ) = k sum          even
                                                                                         ; K (0) ;    even

                                        odd                 odd
                               w              ; K (t ) ;          = 1
                                       even                even
                             w                ; K (0) ;           = 1:

Here, k sum ( ) denotes the function de…ned in (45). Thus, the equation system in the continuous time
limit is given by F xj odd ; even = 0 where F j odd ; even is the vector valued function de…ned
in (44). By the …rst part of Lemma 4, there is a unique and interior solution, K (0) ; K (t ) 2 (0; 1)
and odd ; even 2 0; t r0 . Since there is a unique limit point, we conclude that
                              n       o
                                  odd
     lim K0;n = K (0) ; lim       n     = odd ; lim Kt ;n = K (t ) ; lim     even
                                                                             n     n
                                                                                     = even .    (48)
    n!1                        n!1                  n             n!1                          n!1

   Next consider the comparative statics. By the second part of                                 Lemma 4, the solution to the
continuous time limit also satis…es even > odd and K (0) > K (t                                 ). In view of (48), there exists
n > nint such that the discrete time solution also satis…es the same                            inequalities, even
                                                                                                               n    > odd
                                                                                                                        n and
K0;n > Kt ;n , for each n > n. These inequalities also imply teven                                    odd
                                                                                                t < t , which completes the
proof of the proposition for each n > n.


Proof of Proposition 9. The …rst part is proven in the main text. To prove the second part,
observe that the value of waiting for agreement time tA
                                                      n at time 0 is


              W0;tA
                  n
                    =   0;tA
                           n
                                   StA
                                     n
                                       +       0;tA
                                                  n
                                                    yKtA
                                                       n
                                                              =   0;tA
                                                                     n
                                                                         1 + yKtA
                                                                                n             0;tA
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                      1+y 1     tA
                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                       .

Here, the …rst equality is by substituting (6) to de…nition (5). The next equality is by StA
                                                                                           n
                                                                                             =
    A
 0;tn =  1, and the  inequality is by the …rst  part. Since W     A
                                                               0;tn  1 in equilibrium, we  have
 0;tA
    n
         1= 1 + y 1              tA
                                  n
                                        . When r is bounded, the right-hand limits to 1. Hence,                      0;tA
                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                            limits to
1, and   tA
          n   limits to 0.




                                                                    47
         Online Appendix for “Durability, Deadline, and
                      Election E¤ects”
                                     Alp Simsek and Muhamet Yildiz



A        Description of the Data Used in Section 4.3
Our data for gridlock comes from Mayhew (1991), who constructed a list of enactments of important
laws in the US since 1947. The major measurement challenge here is to identify the important laws
among the numerous laws that the congresses regularly pass. Mayhew constructs two separate
lists— which he refers to as “sweeps”— that uses two related but distinct principles to establish
importance. Sweep One is based on the contemporary judgement of journalists, who appraised
the laws as they were passed. Sweep Two is based on the retrospective judgements by policy
specialists— who assigned importance to the laws in the more recent writings. The second list has
the advantage that importance is arguably best judged with hindsight, but the …rst list has the
advantage of being available for a longer period of time. Mayhew also provides a master list that
combines these two lists by taking a union (as opposed to the intersection). In his own empirical
analysis, Mayhew uses this master list. Mayhew also argues that the master list provides a cleaner
measurement than alternative ways of combining the two sweeps.9
     Following Mayhew, we have also used the master list in our analysis. We have obtained the
extended data set that covers the years between 1947 and 2012 from Mayhew’s website.10 We have
linked this data with information on the US presidential elections and term limits. Speci…cally,
we have coded each US Congress according to whether it corresponds to “years 1-2”, “years 3-4”,
“years 5-6”, or “years 7-8” of a presidency. There are some exceptions in the data, which we have
addressed as follows:

        The two-term limit for the US presidents was established in the post-war years by a consti-
        tutional amendment. The amendment passed the Congress in 1947, and it was rati…ed in
        1951. During this period, Harry Truman was the president. As the sitting president, he was
        exempted from the limit. Thus, there was some uncertainty about whether he would rerun
        in 1952. Truman decided not to run in 1952, and a new president (Eisenhower) took o¢ ce
        in 1953. In view of these observations, we have started our analysis in 1953 (that is, we have
        excluded the congresses between 1947-1952).

        John F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1963. The vice president, Lyndon Johnson, took the
        o¢ ce. We have coded the Kennedy-Johnson presidency in years 1963-1964 as “years 3-4” to
        ensure consistency with the electoral cycle.

        Lyndon Johnson won the election in 1964 and extended his presidency. We have coded
        Lyndon Johnson’s presidency of 1965-1968 as “years 1-2”and “years 3-4,”since Johnson was
        eligible to be reelected in 1968.

        During his second term as president, Richard Nixon resigned from the o¢ ce on August 9,
        1974. The vice president, Gerald Ford, took the o¢ ce. We have coded the Nixon–Ford
        presidency in years 1973-1974 as “years 5-6”. That is, we treated these years as if Nixon was
        the president throughout, because Ford took o¢ ce towards the end of this period.
  9
      See Mayhew, D. R. (1993), “Reply: Let’s Stick with the Longer List,” Polity, p.485-488.
 10
      http://davidmayhew.commons.yale.edu/datasets-divided-we-govern/


                                                      1
      We have coded Ford’s presidency of 1975-1976 as “years 3-4” since Ford was eligible to be
      reelected in 1976 (but not in 1980 had he won the election in 1976).


B      Omitted Proofs
                                                         @w
Proof of Lemma 1. We …rst claim that                     @ j =          < 0 for each > 0 that solves w ; K; = 1.
                        @w                                             @ log w
Note that the sign of   @    is the same as the sign of                  @     .The latter derivative can be calculated
as
                                                                         =   0       0
                                  @ log w                         e              =           Ky
                                          =          1+                              =   0           .
                                    @                      1+ 1              e                  Ky
When evaluated at a solution, the derivative becomes
                                                                                 0
                             @ log w                          e = = 0 e        1
                                     j   =       =        1+         = 0
                               @                             1 e             e
                                                                1       1
                                                 <        1+ = 0           1 e
                                                             e       1 0
                                                                  1
                                                 <        1+ 0     0
                                                                        1 = 0,

proving the claim. Here, the …rst line uses w ; K; = 1 to substitute for K y; the second line uses
    1 and rearranges terms; and the third line uses the inequalities = 10 < 0 and 1 e         < 1.
                                                                                                     e        1
    Since @@w j = < 0 at each solution, the function, w ( ; K; ), crosses the horizontal line w = 1
always from above. This implies that the equation, w ; K;           = 1, has at most one positive
solution. To show that a solution exists, note that lim !1 w ( ; K; ) = 0. Hence, the solution
exists (and is unique) as long as w ( ; K; ) > 1 for su¢ ciently small        > 0. We next show
that this is the case as long as the parametric conditions in the statement of the lemma hold.
First consider the case, = 1 and K y > 0 . A Taylor approximation of the function w ( ; K; )
around      = 0 gives, w (K; ; 1) ' 1 + K0y . Since K y > 0 , this implies w ( ; K; ) > 1 for
su¢ ciently small     > 0. Next consider the case,       < 1 and K > 0. In this case, we have,
w (K; 0; ) = 1 + (1     ) K y > 1. This also implies w ( ; K; ) > 1 for su¢ ciently small      > 0,
and completes the proof of the …rst part.
    Since @@w j = < 0 and the solution is unique, we also have that w ( ; K; ) > 1 for each < ,
and w ( ; K; ) < 1 for each > , proving the second part.


Proof of Lemma 2. The nonnegativity of Kt follows from (10). To establish the upper bound,
…rst consider some time t with disagreement (Wt                        1). In this case, (7) implies

                                             Kt          t (1          t ) Kt+1=n .

Next consider some time t with agreement. In this case, we have Wt =                                      t   St+1 +   t yKt+1=n   < 1.
Plugging this into Eq. (7), we obtain.

                        Kt = 1           t   St+1 +        t yKt+1=n             +       t (1        t ) Kt+1=n
                                  1      t   +    t (1          t (1   + y)) Kt+1=n .



                                                                 2
Combining the two cases, we obtain the inequality,

              Kt       max       t (1         t ) Kt+1=n ; 1          t   +       t (1             t (1     + y)) Kt+1=n ,
                                 0             0                          0         0                0
                       max            1           Kt+1=n ; 1                  +           1             (1 + y) Kt+1=n .
                                                                 0                            0.
Here, the second line uses the assumptions,              t   =       and          t                This inequality can be equivalently
rewritten as,
                                                                                                                                      0
                                         Kt                                                                     Kt             1
             Kt+1=n     min          0          0)
                                                     ; f (Kt )       where f (Kt ) =                        0                  0 (1
                                                                                                                                                          (49)
                                       (1                                                                       (1                    + y))

Note also that, using (14), we have,
                                     8                                                    0        0
                                     < < Kt ,                 if Kt < k                     ;
                                                                                          0        0
                             f (Kt )   = Kt ,                 if Kt = k                     ;                   .
                                     :                                                    0        0
                                       > Kt ,                 if Kt > k                     ;
                                                            0
    Next, to reach a contradiction, suppose Kt > k            ; 0 for some t. Since f (Kt ) > Kt and
    Kt                                                                  1
 0
   (1  0 ) > Kt , the inequality (49) implies Kt+1=n > Kt . Hence, fKt~gt~=t is an increasing sequence.

Since it is also bounded from above (by one), it has a limit point denoted by K . Applying the
                                                                                            0
inequality (49) in the limit, we obtain K       f (K ). This in turn implies K       k        ; 0 , and
                                                               0   0
yields a contradiction to the assumption that Kt > k             ;   .


                                              @w( ;K( ); )                                          =   0
Proof of Lemma 3. Note that                       @K             =e                   1   e                         y > 0 for each                0. Next
note that,
                                  @w ( ; K ( ) ; ) @w ( ; K ( ) ; ) 0
                      f0 ( ) =                      +                 K ( ).
                                        @                   @K
Hence, the second term in the derivative is always negative. In view of the proof of Lemma 3, we
also have that @w( ;K(
                    @
                         ); )
                              j = < 0 for each > 0 that satis…es w ; K           ; = 1. It follows
that f 0      < 1 for each       > 0 such that f       = 1. This in turn implies that there can be
at most one positive solution to the equation, f         = 1. The result that there is a unique and
interior solution, 2 (0; max ), follows after observing that f (0) = 1 + (1     ) K (0) y > 1 (since
                           max         max                max
K (0) > 0) and that f (         )=e        < 1 (since K (     ) = 0).

   We next prove Lemma 4.                 Recall that this lemma concerns the solution to the system,
F xj odd ; even = 0, where F              j odd ; even : X ! R4 is a vector valued function over the do-
main,

       n                                                                                                                                              o
                      odd             even
    X = x = K0 ;            ; Kt ;             2 R4          j K0 ; Kt 2 0; k                       0
                                                                                                                ;    odd
                                                                                                                           ;       even
                                                                                                                                          2 0; t r0       ,




                                                                 3
The components of the function F                       j   odd ; even       are de…ned by,

                                          F1 (x) = K0                 k sum          odd
                                                                                           ; Kt ;      odd

                                                                           odd               odd
                                          F2 (x) = 1              w                ; Kt ;
                                          F3 (x) = K (t )                  k sum (        even
                                                                                                 ; K0 ;      even
                                                                                                                    )
                                                                           even              even
                                          F4 (x) = 1              w(               ; K0 ;           ).

where
                                                      0
     k sum         ; K next ;       = 1           e (r t       )=k( 0 ) k            0          0
                                                                                          + e (r t             )=k( 0 ) e (1+1= 0 )        K next :

    The proof of Lemma 4 relies on the properties of the Jacobean matrix of F evaluated at a
solution x = K0 ; odd ; Kt ; even . This can be written as,
                                2                                                                                                      3
                                                                  @ksum odd                  @ksum odd
                                              1                    @                          @K                             0
              @F        6                                          @w odd                     @w odd                                   7
                        6                     0                                                                              0         7
                 jx=x = 6                  @ksum even
                                                                   @                          @K
                                                                                                                         @ksum even
                                                                                                                                       7.             (50)
              @x        4                                              0                           1                                   5
                                            @K even                                                                       @
                                            @w                                                                            @w even
                                            @K                         0                           0                      @

             sum    odd             odd                 sum    even                even
Here, @k@            ; @@w      and @k@          ; @@w    denote the derivatives of the functions
k sum ( ) ; w ( ) evaluated respectively at the vectors odd ; K (t ) ; odd and      even ; K (0) ; even .

Before we prove Lemma 4, we state and prove another lemma that establishes various properties
of these partial derivatives as well as the Jacobean matrix @F @x jx=x . To state the result, we de…ne
the following auxiliary variables,
                                          j                j                   j                   j
                       j        @w            @k sum              @w                @k sum
                                                                                                       for j 2 fodd; eveng .
                                @              @K                 @K                 @

Lemma 5. Suppose the derivatives are evaluated at some x 2X that satis…es F xj                                                        odd ; even      = 0.
  (i) For each, j 2 fodd; eveng, we have,
                                              j                                j                         j                   j
                                @k sum                          @k sum                       @w                         @w
                                                  2 (0; 1) ;                       < 0;                      < 0;                >0
                                 @K                              @                           @                          @K
                                                     odd                            odd
                                          @k sum                       @w
                            and                            > 0;                           < 0:
                                          @ odd                       @ odd

   (ii) @F                                @F
         @x jx=x is nonsingular with det @x > 0.
                                        y
   (iii) If parameters satisfy even 1+y    , then even > 0.

    The …rst part establishes the signs of the partial derivatives of k sum ( ) and w ( ). The second
part establishes the nonsingularity of the Jacobean matrix and characterizes the sign of its deter-
minant. The last part characterizes the sign of the auxiliary variable, even , under condition (28).
As we will see, the second part is useful to establish the uniqueness of the solution (to prove the
…rst part of Lemma 4), whereas the …rst and the third parts are useful to establish comparative
statics (to prove the second part of Lemma 4).



                                                                           4
Proof of Lemma 5. Without loss of generality, consider the case j = odd. The results for
j = even follow from a symmetric analysis.
Part (i). First consider the partial derivatives of the function k sum ( ). Note that,
                                                      odd
                                   @k sum                         0                 odd
                                                                                            )=k( 0 ) e (1+1= 0 )
                                                                                                                                         odd
                                                            = e (r t                                                                               odd
                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                    @K

                 @ksum odd
which implies     @K                2 (0; 1). Note also that
                                   odd
                 @k sum                                    r0 t
                                                                        odd
                                                                              =k(   0
                                                                                        )                        0                   odd      y     odd K         (t )
                                             =    e                                             1        e (1+1= )                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                .
                  @
          @ksum odd
Hence,     @          < 0 if and only if the term in the brackets is positive. This term can be rewritten
as,
                                                                                                                                              odd
                     odd           odd                  odd                                                1         1           e
                                         =   0
             1        0
                           e                     e                yK (t )           = 1                     0       odd
                                                                                                                            =    0        odd
                                                                                                                e                    =                    1
                                                                                                                                     odd
                                                                                                           1 1          e                                         1    0
                                                                                    > 1                     0        odd                      >1                  0
                                                                                                                                                                               = 0.
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                e                     1
                                                                   odd                                              odd ; K                           odd
Here, the …rst line substitutes for e                                    K (t ) y from w                                             (t ) ;                       = 1 [cf. (18)]. The
                                                                                                                                               odd
                                                     odd                                                                         1 e                                  0.
second line uses the inequality                             < 1 as well as the inequality                                         odd
                                                                                                                                      =        0
                                                                                                                                                          <                This proves that
                                                                                                                                e                     1
 @ksum odd
  @       < 0.
   Next consider the partial derivatives of the function w ( ). Note that,
                                                            odd
                                                 @w                                 odd                 odd = 0                 odd
                                                                   = 1                      e                       e                    y,
                                                 @K

                 @w odd
which implies    @K            > 0. Next note that
           odd                                                                                                                           odd
     @w                            odd                       odd          odd = 0                   odd                                                       odd = 0               odd
                 =         e                      1                e                    e                  K (t ) y +                      0
                                                                                                                                                  e                        e              K (t ) y
     @
                                             0                    odd
                                                                         odd yK     (t )
                 =             1     e (1+1= )                                  0
                                                                                                    ,

where the second line uses w                     odd ; K       (t ) ;     odd       = 1. We have established earlier that the bracketed
                                                     @w odd
term is positive, which implies         < 0.         @
   Finally, note that the partial derivatives with respect to                                                        odd        satisfy,
                                                 odd
                               @k sum                            0                  odd
                                                                                            )=k( 0 ) e (1+1= 0 )
                                                                                                                                          odd
                                                           = e (r t                                                                               K (t ) > 0
                               @ odd
                                                 odd
                                @w                                              0               odd
                 and                                       =            e (1+1= )                       K (t ) y < 0.
                               @ odd




                                                                                    5
Part (ii). The determinant of the Jacobean matrix in (50) can be calculated as,
                                                                                    even                odd
                                                       @F                @w                     @w                even odd
                                             det                 =                                                                 .
                                                       @x                @                      @

We claim that
                                                                           j
                                                   j             @w
                                                        <                        for each j 2 fodd; eveng ,
                                                                 @

which in turn implies det @F
                           @x > 0.
   To prove the claim, suppose j = odd (the other case is symmetric). After substituting the
expressions from part (i) and rearranging terms, we obtain
                               odd                     odd                      odd
    odd              @w                  @k sum                      @w                @k sum odd
            =                                                                                                                                                               (51)
                     @                    @K                         @K                 @
                  0                odd
                                                                                        odd yK (t )
            = e (r t           )=k( 0 ) 1 e (1+1=                              0
                                                                                 ) odd              e
                                                                                                                     odd
                                                                                                                               y         (1 + y)         odd
                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                       odd = 0
                                                                                             0
                                  !
                           @w odd       0  odd =k 0
                                    e (r t    ) ( )e                                      odd                        odd               odd = 0
            =                                                                                    y      (1 + y)            e                      .
                           @

                                                                                                                                   @w odd
Here,          the     last         line      substitutes                back           the      de…nition           of            @      .                    Note         that
                       odd e       odd = 0                                                               odd e     odd = 0
 y        (1 + y)                                            y       <         1.           Since                                       <        1,   we also have
                       odd e       odd = 0
 y        (1 + y)                                  > y           (1 + y) =                      1.      Combining these observations implies
                     odd e         odd = 0                                                                                                               odd
y         (1 + y)                             < 1. Combining this inequality with the expression for                                                               shows that
    odd         @w odd
           <    @              .

Part (iii). Redoing the calculation in (51) for j = even, we obtain,
                                           even
                                   @w                      0          even
                                                                               )=k( 0 ) e
                                                       e (r t
            even                                                                                 even                          even              even = 0
                   =                                                                                     y       (1 + y)                  e                        .        (52)
                                   @
                                                                                    even          y                                           even = 0
Suppose the additional regularity condition,                                                     1+y ,    holds. Using e                                  < 1, this also
                                   even e      even = 0                                                       even
implies y (1 + y)                                            > 0. This in turn implies                               > 0 and completes the proof of
the lemma.


Proof of Lemma 4. Part (i). We establish the uniqueness of the solution by applying the
Poincare-Hopf Index Theorem. To this end, we …rst show that the function F (when viewed
as a vector …eld) points “outwards” on the boundaries of the box-constrained region, X. More
speci…cally, we conjecture (and verify below) that the function satis…es,
                                                                                    0
                                    F1 > 0 when K0 = k                                                                                                                      (53)
                                                                                                                               odd                0
                                    F1             0 when K0 = 0, with strict inequality if                                              <t r ,                             (54)
                                                                     odd              0
                                    F2 > 0 when                            =t r ,                                                                                           (55)
                                                                     odd
                          and F2 < 0 when                                  = 0, with strict inequality if Kt > 0.                                                           (56)


                                                                                        6
We also claim that symmetric conditions hold for F3 and F4 (by appropriately modifying the
corresponding variables). Note that these conditions also rule out the boundary solutions to the
system, F = 0. The …rst two conditions rule out the boundary solutions for K0 except possibly
when odd = t r0 . The third condition rules out the boundary solution, odd = t r0 , eliminating
the remaining conditionality with respect to K0 . The fourth condition rules out the boundary
condition, odd = 0, except possibly when Kt = 0. The analogous conditions for F3 and F4
rule out the boundary solutions for Kt and even , including Kt = 0, eliminating the remaining
conditionality.
    In view of the conditions (53) (56), a standard Poincare-Hopf Index Theorem applies to the
vector valued function, F (see, for instance, Simsek, Ozdaglar, Acemoglu (2008)). In particular, if
@F
@x jx=x is nonsingular for each solution, then we have,

                                            X                                       @F
                       1=                                            sign det          jx=x        .                    (57)
                                                                                    @x
                            fx2X     j F (xj   odd ; even
                                                            )=0g

Here, the left hand side is the Euler characteristic of the region X, which is equal to 1. The
right hand side is the sum of the indices of F at the solutions (which are all interior in view of the
boundary conditions). The index of a solution is equal to the sign of the Jacobean matrix evaluated
at the solution. By Lemma 5, the determinant is nonsingular with a strictly positive determinant,
det @F@x jx=x > 0, at any solution x. Combining this with Eq. (57) implies that there is a unique
interior solution.
    It remains to establish the boundary conditions (53) (56). Using the de…nition of k sum ( ) in
                                            0
(10), together with the inequality, e (1+1= ) K < k 0 (since < 1 and K k 0 ), we have,
                                       0
         k sum ( ; K; ) < 1        e (r t       )=k( 0 ) k           0         0
                                                                         + e (r t     )=k( 0 ) k       0
                                                                                                           =k   0
                                                                                                                    .

In particular, F1 jK0 =k( 0 ) = k 0     k sum < 0, proving (53). Note also that k sum ( ; K; )      0,
where the equality holds only if      = r0 t and K = 0. In particular, F1 jK0 =0 = k sum       0 with
strict inequality if odd < t r0 , proving (54). Next using the de…nition of w ( ) in (18), we have,

                              w t r0 ; K;              w t r0 ; k          0
                                                                               ; 0 < 1.

Here, the …rst inequality follows since w ( ) is increasing in K and decreasing in , and the second
inequality follows from condition (27). This implies F2 j odd =t r0 = 1 w > 0, proving (55).
Finally, note also that w (0; K; ) = 1 + (1        ) Ky > 1, with strict inequality if K > 0. This
implies, F2 j odd =t r0 = 1 w < 0 with strict inequality if Kt > 0, proving (56). After relabeling,
symmetric conditions also hold for F3 and F4 . This completes the proof of the uniqueness of the
solution.

Part (ii). To prove this part, we …rst establish the comparative statics of the solution with respect
                               E;odd
to the parameter, odd = e            , which provides an inverse measure of the strength of the odd
                       @F
election. Recall that @x jx=x is nonsingular with a positive determinant (cf. Lemma 5). Then,
implicitly di¤erentiating the equation, F = 0, we obtain,
                                                                 1
                                  dx           @F                         @F
                                    odd
                                          =       jx=x                         jx=x .                                   (58)
                              d                @x                        @ odd
                                                @F
   Recall also that the Jacobean matrix,        @x jx=x ,    is given by (50). Taking the inverse of this matrix,


                                                             7
                                                                                                                     @F   @F     1
the …rst two columns of the Jacobean matrix multiplied by the determinant, det                                       @x   @x         , is
given by,         2                                                        3
                         @w odd @w even              @ksum odd @w even
                        @         @          (   1)   @          @
                  6          @w odd even       @w even
                                                                           7
                                                            @ksum odd even 7
                  6                                     +
                  6          @K                @             @K            7:                                                    (59)
                  6        @w odd even                 @ksum odd even      7
                  4        @                    (  1)    @                 5
                            @w even @w odd        @w even @ksum odd
                    ( 1) @K          @            @K          @
From the third part of Lemma 5, even is strictly positive. From the …rst part of the lemma, all
of the partial derivatives with respect to   are strictly negative, and all of the partial derivatives
with respect to K are strictly positive. Thus, the signs of the entries of the columns in (59) can be
calculated as,                              2         3
                                               +
                                            6      + 7
                                            6         7.
                                            4      + 5
                                               +
                                                         @F
Note also that the partial derivative vector,        @       odd   jx=x , can be calculated as,
                                  "                                                           #0
                                               odd                          odd
                                      @k sum                  @w
                                                     ;                                ; 0; 0       .                             (60)
                                      @ odd                  @ odd

Using the …rst part of Lemma 5, the corresponding signs are given by,
                                                                             0
                                               +                 0 0             .

    Combining Eqs. (58) (59), together with the calculated signs, we obtain the comparative
statics,
                                 odd                          even
                    dK (0)     d         dK (t )           d
                           > 0; odd < 0;         < 0; and          > 0.                (61)
                     d odd     d          d odd             d odd
                                                                                                               odd         odd
Hence, reducing the strength of the odd election (increasing odd = e         ) decreases      and
                                   even
K (t ), and increases K (0) and         .
                                                                                     odd
    We next use these comparative statics to prove the result. Note that odd = e         > even =
   even         even     odd
e        since       >       . For each ~odd 2 even ; odd , let X ~odd denote the equilibrium
corresponding to survival probabilities ~odd and even . Using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,
we have,
                                                         Z       odd
                            odd           even                              dx
                       X          = X(           )+                         odd
                                                                                                          d~odd .
                                                             even       d              ~odd =      even


Note that the comparative statics in Eq. (61) apply for each derivative term inside the integral.
Consequently, we have,

                                      K (0) > K (0) j~odd =                           even

                                         odd                 odd
                                               <                   j~odd =           even

                                      K (t ) < K (t ) j~odd =                          even
                                        even                 even
                                               >                       j~odd =        even




                                                             8
When ~odd = even , the elections are equally strong and the equilibrium is the same as in Proposition
                                                                       odd                even
7. In particular, we have K (0) j~odd = even = K (t ) j~odd = even and     j~odd = even =      j~odd = even .
                                                         odd               even
Combining these observations, we obtain           <         and K (0) > K (t ), completing the proof
of Lemma 4.
     We conclude by providing an intuition for the comparative statics in (61), which is also useful
to illustrate the role of the additional parametric condition (28). Intuitively, increasing the survival
probability during the odd election (or reducing its strength) decreases the length of delay before
                 odd
this election,       . The shortening of the delay in the …rst election cycle also increases the initial
                                                                                                   even
congruence, K (0). The increase in K (0) in turn increases the delay before the other election,         .
The increase in delay in the other election cycle tends to reduce the initial congruence, K (t ). On
the other hand, the increase in K (0) tends to increase K (t ). Hence, there are counteracting
                                                                 y
forces on K (t ). The required parametric condition, even 1+y       , ensures that the e¤ect of K (0) is
relatively weak so that K (t ) declines. This is captured by Eqs. (58) (59), which illustrate that
sgn dK(t
       d odd
            )
               =      even
                           . The parametric condition ensures that even is positive and thus dK(t d odd
                                                                                                       )

                                                                                                                                               odd
is negative (see Lemma 5). The decline in K (t ) further contributes to the decline in             and
                                 odd
reinforces the initial e¤ect on      .
                                                         y
     Hence, the main role of the condition, even        1+y , concerns the knock-on e¤ects of
                                                                                                odd on

the K (t ) of the previous election cycle (which is at time distance 2t ). The condition ensures
                                            odd
that these knock-on e¤ects in‡uence             in the same way as the direct e¤ect. The knock-on
e¤ects are typically small, especially if the distance between the elections are large (Eq. (52) below
illustrates that even is decreasing in t r0 ). Consequently, our comparative statics results typically
hold in numerical simulations even when the additional condition fails. We assume the condition
only because it provides analytical tractability and enables us to formally establish the comparative
statics.

Proof of (39). We compute

                                  E
         @w     ;k       0   ;e
                                                                             =    0           0                       =   0
                                           = e       y              e                     k       + 1          e                  k0   0
                    @    0
                                                          (    0 )2
                                                                                                                          !
                                                               k       0
                                                                                      =   0     e    1 0              0
                                           = e       y                      e                 +       k                       :
                                                               ( 0 )2                              0
                                                                                                k( )y

                                                 0                                                                                     =   0
Here, the second line uses w               ;k        ;   = 1 to substitute for the term,                                  1       e                . Next
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                               2
                0            0=        0                                                          k(       )
note that k          =            1+       + y implies k 0             0    = (1 + y)                  0           . After substituting this
                                                                                                                                               =   0
expression and rearranging terms, we obtain (39). In (39), the inequality follows since e                                                              <1
and e 1 1.




                                                                   9
