                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  QUANTITATIVE EASING AND FINANCIAL STABILITY

                                        Michael Woodford

                                       Working Paper 22285
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22285


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2016




I would like to thank Vasco Cúrdia, Emmanuel Farhi, Robin Greenwood, Ricardo Reis, Hélène
Rey, and Lars Svensson for helpful comments, Chengcheng Jia and Dmitriy Sergeyev for
excellent research assistance, and the National Science Foundation for supporting this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22285.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Quantitative Easing and Financial Stability
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 22285
May 2016
JEL No. E44,E52

                                           ABSTRACT

The massive expansion of central-bank balance sheets in response to recent crises raises
important questions about the effects of such "quantitative easing" policies, both their effects on
financial conditions and on aggregate demand (the intended effects of the policies), and their
possible collateral effects on financial stability. The present paper compares three alternative
dimensions of central bank policy — conventional interest-rate policy, increases in the central
bank's supply of safe (monetary) liabilities, and macroprudential policy (possibly implemented
through discretionary changes in reserve requirements) — showing in the context of a simple
intertemporal general-equilibrium model why they are logically independent dimensions of
variation in policy, and how they jointly determine financial conditions, aggregate demand, and
the severity of the risks associated with a funding crisis in the banking sector. In the proposed
model, each of the three dimensions of policy can be used independently to influence aggregate
demand, and in each case a more stimulative policy also increases financial stability risk.
However, the policies are not equivalent, and in particular the relative magnitudes of the two
kinds of effects are not the same. Quantitative easing policies increase financial stability risk (in
the absence of an offsetting tightening of macroprudential policy), but they actually increase such
risk less than either of the other two policies, relative to the magnitude of aggregate demand
stimulus; and a combination of expansion of the central bank's balance sheet with a suitable
tightening of macroprudential policy can have a net expansionary effect on aggregate demand
with no increased risk to financial stability. This suggests that quantitative easing policies may be
useful as an approach to aggregate demand management not only when the zero lower bound
precludes further use of conventional interest-rate policy, but also when it is not desirable to
further reduce interest rates because of financial stability concerns.


Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu
    Since the global financial crisis of 2008-09, many of the leading central banks
have dramatically increased the size of their balance sheets, and also have shifted
the composition of the assets that they hold, toward greater holdings of longer-term
securities (as well as toward assets that are riskier in other respects). While many
have hailed these policies as contributing significantly to contain the degree of damage
to both the countries’ financial systems and real economies resulting from the collapse
of confidence in certain types of risky assets, the policies have also been and remain
quite controversial. One of the concerns raised by skeptics has been the suggestion
that such “quantitative easing” by central banks may have been supporting countries’
banking systems and aggregate demand only by encouraging risk-taking by ultimate
borrowers and by financial intermediaries of a kind that increases the risk of precisely
the sort of destructive financial crisis that had led these policies to be introduced.
    The most basic argument for suspecting that such policies create risks to financial
stability is simply that, according to proponents of these policies in the central banks
(e.g., Bernanke, 2012), they represent alternative means of achieving the same kind
of relaxation of financial conditions that would under more ordinary circumstances
be achieved by lowering the central bank’s operating target for short-term interest
rates — but a means that continues to be available even when short-term nominal
interest rates have already reached their effective lower bound, and so cannot be
lowered to provide further stimulus. If one believes that cuts in short-term interest
rates have as a collateral effect — or perhaps even as the main channel through which
they affect aggregate demand, as argued by Adrian and Shin (2010) — an increase
in the degree to which intermediaries take more highly leveraged positions in risky
assets, increasing the likelihood of and/or severity of a potential financial crisis, then
one might suppose that to the extent that quantitative easing policies are effective
in relaxing financial conditions in order to stimulate aggregate demand, they should
similarly increase risks to financial stability.
    One might go further and argue that such policies relax financial conditions by
increasing the supply of central-bank reserves,1 and one might suppose that such
an increase in the availability of reserves matters for financial conditions precisely
because it relaxes a constraint on the extent to which private financial intermediaries
   1
    The term “quantitative easing,” originally introduced by the Bank of Japan to describe the
policy that it adopted in 2001 in attempt to stem the deflationary slump that Japan had suffered in
the aftermath of the collapse of an asset bubble in the early 1990s, refers precisely to the intention to
increase the monetary base (and hence, it was hoped, the money supply more broadly) by increasing
the supply of reserves.


                                                  1
can issue money-like liabilities (that are subject to reserve requirements) as a way
of financing their acquisition of more risky and less liquid assets, as in the model of
Stein (2012). Under this view of the mechanism by which quantitative easing works,
one might suppose that it should be even more inevitably linked to an increase in
financial stability risk than expansionary interest-rate policy (which, after all, might
also increase aggregate demand through channels that do not rely upon increased
risk-taking by banks).
    Finally, some may be particularly suspicious of quantitative easing policies on
the ground that these policies, unlike conventional interest-rate policy, relax finan-
cial conditions primarily by reducing the risk premia earned by holding longer-term
securities, rather than by lowering the expected path of the risk-free rate.2 Such a
departure from the normal historical pattern of risk premia as a result of massive
central-bank purchases may seem a cause for alarm. If one thinks that the premia
that exist when market pricing is not “distorted” by the central bank’s intervention
provide an important signal of the degree of risk that exists in the marketplace, one
might fear that central-bank actions that suppress this signal — not by actually re-
ducing the underlying risks, but only by preventing them from being reflected so fully
in market prices — run the danger of distorting perceptions of risk in a way that will
encourage excessive risk-taking.
    The present paper considers the extent to which these are valid grounds for concern
about the use of this policy tool by central banks, by analyzing further the mechanisms
just sketched, in the context of an explicit model of the way in which quantitative
easing policies influence financial conditions, and the way in which monetary policies
more generally affect the incentives of financial intermediaries to engage in maturity
and liquidity transformation of a kind that increases the risk of financial crisis. It
argues, in fact, that the concerns just raised are of little merit. But it does not reach
this conclusion by challenging the view that quantitative easing policies can indeed
effectively relax financial conditions (and so achieve effects on aggregate demand that
are similar to the effects of conventional interest-rate policy); nor does it deny that
risks to financial stability are an appropriate concern of monetary policy deliberations,
or that expansionary interest-rate policy tends to increase such risks (among other
   2
    Again see Bernanke (2012) for discussion of this view of how the policies work, though he also
discusses the possibility of effects of quantitative easing that result from central-bank actions being
taken to signal different intentions regarding future interest-rate policy.


                                                 2
effects). The model developed here is one in which risk-taking by the financial sector
can easily be excessive (in the sense that a restriction on banks’ ability to engage in
liquidity transformation to the degree that they choose to under laissez-faire would
raise welfare); in which, when that is true, a reduction in short-term interest rates
through central-bank action will worsen the problem by making it even more tempting
for banks to finance acquisitions of risky, illiquid assets by issuing short-term safe
liabilities; and in which the purchase of longer-term and/or risky assets by the central
bank, financed by creating additional reserves (or other short-term safe liabilities,
such as reverse repos or central-bank bills, that would also be useful in facilitating
transactions), will indeed loosen financial conditions, with an effect on aggregate
demand that is similar, though not identical to, the effect of a reduction in the central
bank’s operating target for its policy rate. Nonetheless, we show that quantitative
easing policies should not increase risks to financial stability, and should instead tend
to reduce them.
    The reason for this different conclusion hinges on our conception of the sources
of the kind of financial fragility that allowed a crisis of the kind just experienced to
occur, and the way in which monetary policy can affect the incentives to create a more
fragile financial structure. In our view, the fragility that led to the recent crisis was
greatly enhanced by the notable increase in maturity and liquidity transformation in
the financial sector in the years immediately prior to the crisis (Brunnermeier, 2009;
Adrian and Shin, 2010) — in particular, the significant increase in funding of financial
intermediaries by issuance of collateralized short-term debt, such as repos (financing
investment banks) or asset-backed commercial paper (issued by SIVs). Such financing
is relatively inexpensive, in the sense that investors will hold such instruments even
when they promise a relatively low yield, because of the assurance they provide that
the investor can be sure of payment and can withdraw their funds at any time on short
notice if desired. But too much of it is dangerous, because it exposes the leveraged
institution to funding risk, which may require abrupt de-leveraging through a “fire
sale” of relatively illiquid assets. The sudden need to sell relatively illiquid assets
in order to cover a shortfall of funding can substantially depress the price of those
assets, requiring even more de-leveraging and leading to a “margin spiral” of the
kind described by Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 2010) and Brunnermeier and Pederson
(2009).
    It is important to ask why such fragile financial structures should arise as an


                                          3
equilibrium phenomenon, in order to understand how monetary policy may increase
or decrease the likely degree of fragility. According to the perspective that we adopt
here, investors are attracted to the short-term safe liabilities created by banks or other
financial intermediaries because assets with a value that is completely certain are
more widely accepted as a means of payment.3 If an insufficient quantity of such safe
assets are supplied by the government (through means that we discuss further below),
investors will pay a “money premium” for privately-issued short-term safe instruments
with this feature, as documented by Greenwood et al. (2010), Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), and Carlson et al. (2014). This provides banks with an
incentive to obtain a larger fraction of their financing in this way. Moreover, they may
choose an excessive amount of this kind of financing, despite the funding risk to which
it exposes them, because each individual bank fails to internalize the effects of their
collective financing decisions on the degree to which asset prices will be depressed in
the event of a “fire sale.” This gives rise to a pecuniary externality, as a result of
which excessive risk is taken in equilibrium (Lorenzoni, 2008; Jeanne and Korinek,
2010; Stein, 2012).
    Conventional monetary policy, which cuts short-term nominal interest rates in
response to an aggregate demand shortfall, can arguably exacerbate this problem, as
low market yields on short-term safe instruments will further increase the incentive
for private issuance of liabilities of this kind (Adrian and Shin, 2010; Giavazzi and
Giovannini, 2012). The question of primary concern in this paper is, do quantitative
easing policies, pursued as a means of providing economic stimulus when conventional
monetary policy is constrained by the lower bound on short-term nominal interest
rates, increase financial stability risks for a similar reason?
    In the model proposed here, quantitative easing policies lower the equilibrium real
yield on longer-term and risky government liabilities, just as a cut in the central bank’s
target for the short-term riskless rate will, and this relaxation of financial conditions
has a similar expansionary effect on aggregate demand in both cases. Nonetheless,
the consequences for financial stability are not the same. In the case of conventional
monetary policy, a reduction in the riskless rate lowers the equilibrium yield on risky
assets as well because, if it did not, the increased spread between the two yields
   3
    The role of non-state-contingent payoffs in allowing an asset to be widely acceptable as a means
of payment is stressed in particular by Gorton and Pennacchi (2010), and in recent discussions such
as Gorton (2010) and Gorton, Lewellen and Metrick (2012).


                                               4
would provide an increased incentive for maturity and liquidity transformation on
the part of banks, which they pursue until a point at which the spread has decreased
(because of diminishing returns to further investment in risky assets) to where it
is again balanced by the risks associated with overly leveraged investment. (This
occurs, in equilibrium, partly through a reduction in the degree to which the spread
increases — which means that the expected return on risky assets is reduced — and
partly through an increase in the risk of a costly “fire sale” liquidation of assets.)
In the case of quantitative easing, instead, the equilibrium return on risky assets is
reduced, but in this case through a reduction, rather than an increase in the spread
between the two yields. The “money premium,” which results from a scarcity of safe
assets, should be reduced if the central-bank asset purchases increase the supply of
safe assets to the public, as argued by Caballero and Farhi (2013) and Carlson et al.
(2014). Hence the incentives for creation of a more fragile financial structure are not
increased as much by expansionary monetary policy of this kind.
    The idea that quantitative easing policies, when pursued as an additional means
of stimulus when the risk-free rate is at the zero lower bound, should increase risks to
financial stability because they are analogous to an expansionary policy that relaxes
reserve requirements on private issuers of money-like liabilities is also based on a
flawed analogy. It is true, in the model of endogenous financial stability risk presented
here, that a relaxation of a reserve requirement proportional to banks’ issuance of
short-term safe liabilities will (in the case that the constraint binds) increase the
degree to which excessive liquidity transformation occurs. And it is also true that in
a conventional textbook account of the way in which monetary policy affects financial
conditions, an increase in the supply of reserves by the central bank relaxes the
constraint on banks’ issuance of additional money-like liabilities (“inside money”)
implied by the reserve requirement, so that the means through which the central
bank implements a reduction in the riskless short-term interest rate is essentially
equivalent to a reduction in the reduction in the reserve requirement. However, this
is not a channel through which quantitative easing policies can be effective, when the
risk-free rate has already fallen to zero (or more generally, to the level of interest paid
on reserves). For in such a case, reserves are necessarily already in sufficiently great
supply for banks to be satiated in reserves, so that the opportunity cost of holding
them must fall to zero in order for the existing supply to be voluntarily held. Under
such circumstances (which is to say, those existing in countries like the US since


                                           5
the end of 2008), banks’ reserve requirements have already ceased to constrain their
behavior. Hence, to the extent that quantitative easing policies are of any use at the
zero lower bound on short-term interest rates, their effects cannot occur through this
traditional channel.
    In the model presented here, quantitative easing is effective at the zero lower
bound (or more generally, even in the absence of reserve requirements, or under cir-
cumstances where there is already satiation in reserves); this is because an increase
in the supply of safe assets (through issuance of additional short-term safe liabili-
ties by the central bank, used to purchase assets that are not equally money-like)
reduces the equilibrium “money premium.” But whereas a relaxation of a binding
reserve requirement would increase banks’ issuance of short-term safe liabilities (and
hence financial stability risk), a reduction in the “money premium” should reduce
their issuance of such liabilities, so that financial stability risk should if anything be
reduced.
    The idea that a reduction in risk premia as a result of central-bank balance-sheet
policy should imply a greater danger of excessive risk-taking is similarly mistaken.
In the model presented here, quantitative easing achieves its effects (both on the
equilibrium required return on risky assets and on aggregate demand) by lowering
the equilibrium risk premium — that is, the spread between the required return on
risky assets and the riskless rate. But this does not imply the creation of conditions
under which it should be more tempting for banks to take on greater risk. To the
contrary, the existence of a smaller spread between the expected return on risky assets
and the risk-free rate makes it less tempting to finance purchases of risky assets by
issuing safe, highly liquid short-term liabilities that need pay only the riskless rate.
Hence again a correct analysis implies that quantitative easing policies should increase
financial stability, rather than threatening it.
    The remainder of the paper develops these points in the context of an explicit
intertemporal monetary equilibrium model, in which it is possible to clearly trace the
general-equilibrium determinants of risk premia, the way in which they are affected by
both interest-rate policy and the central bank’s balance sheet, and the consequences
for the endogenous capital structure decisions of banks. Section 1 presents the struc-
ture of the model, and section 2 then derives the conditions that must link the various
endogenous prices and quantities in an intertemporal equilibrium. Section 3 considers
the effects of alternative balance-sheet policies on equilibrium variables, focusing on


                                          6
the case of a stationary long-run equilibrium with flexible prices. Section 4 compares
the ways in which quantitative easing and adjustments of reserve requirements af-
fect banks’ financing decisions. Finally, section 5 compares (somewhat more briefly)
the short-run effects of both conventional monetary policy, quantitative easing, and
macroprudential policy in the presence of nominal rigidities that allow conventional
monetary policy to affect the degree of real economic activity. Section 6 concludes.


1       A Monetary Equilibrium Model with Fire Sales
This section develops a simple model of monetary equilibrium, in which it is possible
simultaneously to consider the effects of the central bank’s balance sheet on financial
conditions (most notably, the equilibrium spread between the expected rate of return
on risky assets and the risk-free rate of interest) and the way in which private banks’
financing decisions can increase risks to financial stability. An important goal of the
analysis is to present a sufficiently explicit model of the objectives and constraints
of individual actors to allow welfare analysis of the equilibria associated with alter-
native policies that is based on the degree of satisfaction of the individual objectives
underlying the behavior assumed in the model, as in the modern theory of public
finance, rather than judging alternative equilibria on the basis of some more ad hoc
criterion.4
    Risks to financial stability are modeled using a slightly adapted version of the
model proposed by Stein (2012). The Stein model is a three-period model in which
banks finance their investments in risky assets in the first period; a crisis may occur in
the second period, in which banks are unable to roll over their short-term financing
and as a result may have to sell illiquid risky assets in a “fire sale”; and in the
third period, the ultimate value of the risky assets is determined. The present model
incorporates this model of financial contracting and occasional fire sales of assets into
a fairly standard intertemporal general-equilibrium model of the demand for money-
like assets, the “cash-in-advance” model of Lucas and Stokey (1987). In this way,
the premium earned by money-like assets, that is treated as an exogenous parameter
in Stein (2012), can be endogenized, and the effects of central-bank policy on this
    4
    The proposed framework is further developed in Sergeyev (2016), which considers the interaction
between conventional monetary policy and country-specific macroprudential policies in a currency
union.


                                               7
variable can be analyzed, and through this the consequences for financial stability.


1.1     Elements of the Model
Like most general-equilibrium models of monetary exchange, the Lucas and Stokey
(1987) model is an infinite-horizon model, in which the willingness of sellers to accept
central-bank liabilities as payment for real goods and services in any period depends
on the expectation of being able to use those instruments as a means of payment in
further transactions in future periods. The state space of the model is kept small
(allowing a straightforward characterization of equilibrium, despite random distur-
bances each period) by assuming a representative household structure; the two sides
of each transaction involving payment using cash are assumed to be two members of
a household unit with a common objective, that can be thought of as a “worker” and
a “shopper.” During each period, the worker and shopper from a given household
have separate budget constraints (so that cash received by the worker as payment for
the sale of produced goods cannot be immediately used by the shopper to purchase
goods, in the same market), as is necessary for the “cash-in-advance” constraint to
matter; but at the end of the period, their funds are again pooled in a single house-
hold budget constraint (so that only the asset positions of households, that are all
identical, matter at this point).
    We shall employ a similar device, but further increasing the number of distinct
roles for different members of the household, in order to introduce additional kinds
of financial constraints into the model, while retaining the convenience of a repre-
sentative household. We suppose that each infinite-lived household is made of four
members with different roles during the period: a “worker” who supplies the inputs
used to produce all final goods, and receives the income from the sale of these goods;
a “shopper” who purchases “regular goods” for consumption by the household, and
who holds the household’s cash balance, for use in such transactions; a “banker” who
buys risky durable goods, and issues short-term safe liabilities in order to finance
some of these purchases; and an “investor” who purchases “special” final goods, and
can also bid for the risky durables sold by bankers in the event of a fire sale.5 As
   5
    The distinction between bankers, investors, and worker/shopper pairs corresponds to the dis-
tinction in the roles of “bankers,” “patient investors,” and “households” in the model of Stein (2012).
In the Stein model, these three types of agents are distinct individuals with no sharing of resources
among them, rather than members of a single (larger) household; the device of having them pool


                                                 8
in the Lucas-Stokey model, the different household members have separate budget
constraints during the period (which is the significance of referring to them as differ-
ent people), but pool their budgets at the end of each period in a single household
budget constraint.
    Four types of final goods are produced each period: durable goods and three types
of non-durable goods, called “cash goods,” “credit goods,” and “special goods.” In
addition, we suppose that workers also produce intermediate “investment goods”
that are used as an input in the production of durable goods. Both “cash” and
“credit” goods are purchased by shoppers; the distinction between the two types of
goods is taken from Lucas and Stokey (1987), where the possibility of substitution
by consumers between the two types of goods (one subject to the cash-in-advance
constraint, the other not) allows the demand for real cash balances to vary with the
size of the liquidity premium (opportunity cost of holding cash), for a given level of
planned real expenditure. This margin of substitution also results in a distortion in
the allocation of resources that depends on the size of the liquidity premium, and
we wish to take this distortion into account when considering the welfare effects of
changing the size of the central bank’s balance sheet.
    The introduction of “special goods” purchased only by the investor provides an
alternative use for the funds available to the investor, so that the amount that in-
vestors will spend on risky durables in a fire sale depends on how low the price of
the durables falls.6 The produced “durable goods” in our model play the role of the
risky investment projects in the model of Stein (2012): they require an initial outlay
of resources, financed by bankers, in order to allow the production of something that
may or may not yield a return later. The device of referring separately to investment
goods and to the durable goods produced from them allows us to treat investment
goods as perfect substitutes for cash or credit goods on the production side, allowing
a simple specification of workers’ disutility of supplying more output, without having
also to treat durable goods as perfect substitutes for those goods, which would not
allow the relative price of durables to rise in a credit boom.
assets at the end of each “period” is not needed to simplify the model dynamics, because the model
simply ends when the end of the first and only “period” is reached (in the sense in which the term
“period” is used in this model). Note that in the present model, the representative household device
also allows more unambiguous welfare comparisons among equilibria.
   6
     The opportunity of spending on purchases of special goods plays the same role in our model as
the possibility of investment in “late-arriving projects” in the model of Stein (2012).


                                               9
   All of the members of a given household are assumed to act so as to maximize a
common household objective. Looking forward from the beginning of any period t,
the household objective is to maximize
                   ∞
                   X
              Et          β τ −t [u(c1τ , c2τ ) + ũ(c3τ ) + γsτ − v(Yτ ) − w(xτ )].           (1.1)
                   τ =t

Here c1t , c2t , c3t denote the household’s consumption of cash goods, credit goods, and
special goods respectively in period t; st denotes the quantity of durables held by the
household at the end of period t that have not proven to be worthless, and hence
the flow of services in period t from such intact durables; Yt denotes the household’s
supply of “normal goods” (a term used collectively for cash goods, credit goods, and
investment goods, that are all perfect substitutes from the standpoint of a producer)
in period t; and xt denotes the household’s supply of special goods in period t.
The functions u(·, ·), ũ(·), v(·), and w(·) are all increasing functions of each of their
arguments; the functions u(·, ·) and ũ(·) are strictly concave; and the functions v(·)
and w(·) are at least weakly convex. We also assume that the function u(·, ·) implies
that both cash and credit goods are normal goods, in the sense that it will be optimal
to increase purchases of both types of goods if a household increases its expenditure
on these types of goods in aggregate, while the (effective) relative price of the two
types of goods remains the same.7 In addition, the discount factor satisfies 0 < β < 1,
and γ > 0. The operator Et [·] indicates the expectation conditional on information
at the beginning of period t.
    Each of the infinite sequence of periods t = 0, 1, 2, . . . is subdivided into three
subperiods, corresponding to the three periods in the model of Stein (2012). The
sequence of events, and the set of alternative states that may be reached, within
each period is indicated in Figure 1. In subperiod 1, a financial market is open
in which bankers issue short-term safe liabilities and acquire risky durables, and
households decide on the cash balances to hold for use by the shopper.8 In subperiod
2, information is revealed about the possibility that the durable goods purchased
by the banks will prove to be valueless. With probability p, the “no crisis” state is
   7
     By the effective relative price we mean the relative price taking into account the cost to the
household of having to hold cash in order to purchase cash goods, as discussed further below.
   8
     This sub-period corresponds both to the first period of the Stein (2012) model, in which risky
projects are financed, and to the securities-trading subperiod of the model in section 5 of Lucas and
Stokey (1987), in which bonds are priced and hence the liquidity premium on cash is determined.


                                                10
                                                         1
                                                             no asset
                                       no crisis
                                                             collapse

                                  p



        period t        asset                                           period t+1
        (state ξt )    trading

                                                             no asset
                                 1-p                q        collapse


                                        crisis


                                                   1-q        asset
                                                             collapse




         Figure 1: The sequential resolution of uncertainty within period t.

reached, in which it is known with certainty that the no collapse in the value of the
assets will occur, but with probability 1 − p, a “crisis” state is reached, in which it
is understood to be possible (though not yet certain) that the assets will prove to
be worthless. Finally, in subperiod 3, the value of the risky durables is learned. In
both of the states labeled “no asset collapse,” a unit of the durable good produces
one unit of services, while in the “asset collapse” state (that occurs with probability
1 − q, conditional on the crisis state being reached), durables provide no service flow.
     The various types of goods are produced and sold in sub-period 2. The markets in
which the different goods are sold differ in the means of payment that are accepted.
It is assumed, as in Lucas and Stokey (1987), that “cash goods” are sold only for cash
that is transferred from the buyer to the seller at that time; the cash balances used for
this purpose must have been acquired in sub-period 1 by the household to which that
shopper belongs. (The liquidity premium associated with cash is thus determined in
the exchange of cash for other financial claims in subperiod 1.) “Credit goods” are
instead sold to shoppers on credit; this means (as in Lucas and Stokey) that accounts


                                            11
are settled between buyers and sellers only at the end of the period, at which point
the various household members have again pooled their resources, so that charges by
shoppers during the period can be paid out of the income received by workers for
goods sold during that same period. The only constraint on the amount of credit of
this kind that a household can draw upon is assumed to be determined by a no-Ponzi
condition (that is, the requirement that a household’s debts be able to be paid off
eventually out of future income, rather than rolled over indefinitely). “Investment
goods” are sold on credit in the same way. “Special goods” are also assumed to be
sold on credit, but in this case, the amount of credit that investors can draw upon is
limited by the size of the line of credit arranged for them in subperiod 1. In particular,
it is assumed that a given credit limit must be negotiated by the household before
it is learned whether a crisis will occur in subperiod 2, and thus whether investors
will have an opportunity to bid on “fire sale” assets. The existence of the non-state-
contingent credit limit for purchases by investors (both their purchases of special
goods and their purchases of risky durables liquidated by the bankers in a fire sale)
is important in order to capture the idea that only a limited quantity of funds can
be mobilized (by potential buyers with the expertise required to evaluate the assets)
to bid on the assets sold in a fire sale.9
    The nature of the “cash” that can be used to purchase cash goods requires further
comment. Unlike Lucas and Stokey, we do not assume that only monetary liabilities
of the government constitute “cash” that is acceptable as a means of payment in this
market. We instead identify “cash” with the class of short-term safe instruments
(STSIs) discussed by Carlson et al. (2014) in the case of the U.S., which includes
U.S. Treasury bills (and not simply monetary liabilities of the Federal Reserve), and
certain types of collateralized short-term debt of private financial institutions. The
assumption that only these assets can be used to purchase cash goods is intended to
stand in for the convenience provided by these special instruments, that accounts for
their lower equilibrium yields relative to the short-period holding returns on other
assets.10 The fact that all assets of this type, whether issued by the government (or
   9
      In the model of Stein (2012), this limit is ensured by assuming that the “patient investors” have
a budget that is fixed as a parameter of the model. Here we endogenize this budget, by allowing
it to be chosen optimally by the household in subperiod 1; but it is important that we still assume
that it cannot be changed in subperiod 2.
   10
      One interpretation of the “cash-in-advance” constraint is that it actually represents a constraint
on the type of assets that can be held by money-market mutual funds (MMMFs). But such a


                                                12
central bank) or by bankers, are assumed equally to satisfy the constraint is intended
to capture the way in which the demand for privately-issued STSIs is observed to
vary with the supply of publicly-issued STSIs, as shown by Carlson et al. (2014).
    We do not, of course, deny that there are also special uses for base money (currency
and reserve balances held at the Fed) as a means of payment, of the kind that Lucas
and Stokey sought to model. In particular, when the supply of reserves by the Fed
is sufficiently restricted, as was chronically the case prior to the financial crisis of
2008, the special convenience of reserve balances in facilitating payments between
financial intermediaries results in a spread between the yield on reserves and that on
STSIs such as Treasury bills; and the control of this spread by varying the supply of
reserves was the focus of monetary policy prior to the crisis. Nonetheless, the spread
between the yield on reserves and the T-bill rate (or federal funds rate) is not the one
of interest to us here. Under the circumstances in which the Fed has conducted its
experiments with “quantitative easing,” the supply of reserves has been consistently
well beyond the level needed to drive the T-bill yield down to (or even below) the
yield on reserves. Hence while certain kinds of payments by banks are constrained by
their reserve balances, we may assume that this has not been a binding constraint in
the period in which we wish to consider the effects of further changes in the central-
bank balance sheet. And granting that reserves have special uses that can result
in a liquidity premium specific to them (under circumstances no longer relevant at
present) does not in any way imply that STSIs cannot also have special uses for which
other assets will not serve, giving rise to another sort of money premium — one that
need not be zero simply because the premium associated with reserve balances has
been eliminated.
    The acceptability of a financial claim as “cash” that can be used to purchase cash
goods is assumed to depend on its having a value at maturity that is completely
certain, rather than being state-contingent. This requires not only that it be a claim
to a fixed nominal quantity at a future date, but that it be viewed as completely
safe, for one of two possible reasons: either it is a liability of the government (or
constraint gives rise to a “money premium” only to the extent that there are special advantages
to investors of holding wealth in MMMFs; the ability to move funds quickly from them to make
purchases is one such advantage. Rather than explicitly introducing a demand for cash on the
part of MMMFs and assuming that households use their MMMF balances to make certain types
of purchases, we obtain the same equilibrium money premium more simply by supposing that the
STSIs can directly be used as a means of payment in certain transactions.


                                            13
central bank),11 or it is collateralized in a way that allows a holder of the claim to
be certain of realizing a definite nominal value from it. We suppose that bankers can
issue liabilities that will be accepted as cash, but that these liabilities will have to be
backed by specific risky durables as collateral, and that the holder of the debt has the
right to demand payment of the debt at any time, if they cease to remain confident
that the collateral will continue to guarantee the fixed value for it.
    When bankers purchase risky durables in the first subperiod, they can finance
some portion of the purchase price by issuing safe debt (that can be used by the
holder during the second sub-period to purchase cash goods), collateralized by the
durables that are acquired. If in the second subperiod, the “no-crisis” state is reached,
the durables can continue to serve as collateral for safe debt, as the value of the
asset in the third subperiod can in this case be anticipated with certainty. In this
case, bankers are able to roll over their short-term collateralized debt, and continue
to hold the durables. If instead the “crisis” state is reached, the durables can no
longer collateralize safe debt, as there is now a positive probability that in the third
subperiod the durables will be worthless. In this case, holders of the safe debt demand
repayment in the second sub-period, and the bankers must sell durables in a fire sale,
in the amount required to pay off the short-term debt. It is the right to force this
liquidation that makes the debt issued by bankers in the first sub-period safe.
    To be more specific, we suppose that the sale of goods (and in particular, cash
goods) occurs at the beginning of the second subperiod: after it has been revealed
whether the crisis state will occur, but before the decision whether to demand imme-
diate repayment of the short-term debt is made. Thus at the time that shoppers seek
to purchase cash goods, they may hold liabilities issued by bankers that grant the
holder the right to demand repayment at any time; it is the fact that the short-term
debt has this feature that allows it to be accepted as cash in the market for cash
goods. After the market for cash goods has taken place, the holders of the bankers’
short-term debt (who may now include the sellers of cash goods) decide whether to
demand immediate repayment of the debt. At this point, these holders (whether
shoppers or workers) only care about the contribution that the asset will make to
  11
    Of course, a claim on a government need not be completely safe. If, however, a government
borrows in its own fiat currency, and if it is committed to ensure that its nominal liabilities are
paid with certainty (by monetizing them if necessary), then it is possible for it to issue debt that is
correctly viewed as completely safe (in nominal terms).



                                                14
the household’s pooled end-of-period budget. In the crisis state, they will choose
to demand repayment, since this ensures them the face value of the debt, whereas
if they do not demand repayment, they will receive the face value of the debt with
probability q < 1, but will receive nothing if the “asset collapse” state occurs. If they
demand repayment, they receive a claim on the investors who purchase the collateral
in the fire sale; such a claim is assumed to guarantee payment in the end-of-period
settlement, if within the bound of the line of credit arranged for the investor in the
first subperiod.
    The other source of assets that count as cash is the government. Some very
short-term government liabilities (Treasury bills) count as cash. In addition, we shall
suppose that the central bank can issue liabilities that also count as cash. If the central
bank increases its supply of SFSIs by purchasing Treasury bills (that are themselves
SFSIs), the overall supply of cash will be unchanged. (This is again a demonstration
that our concept of “cash” differs importantly from that of Lucas and Stokey.) But if
the central bank purchases non-cash assets (either longer-term Treasury bonds, that
are less able to facilitate transactions than are shorter-term bills, or assets subject
to other kinds of risk) and finances these purchases by creating new short-term safe
liabilities, it can increase the net supply of SFSIs. We are interested in the effects of
this latter kind of policy.


1.2     Budget Constraints and Definition of Equilibrium
Each household begins period t with It−1 units of the investment good (purchased
in the previous period) and financial wealth At , which may represent either claims
on the government or on other households, and is measured in terms of the quantity
of cash that would have the same market value in subperiod 1 trading (even though
the assets aggregated in At need not all count as cash). In the first subperiod, the
investment good is used to produce F (It−1 ) units of the durable good, which can
sold on a competitive market at price Qt per unit.12 The banker in each household
purchases a quantity st of these durables, financed partly from funds provided by the
household for this purpose, and partly by issuing short-term collateralized debt in
  12
    We may alternatively suppose that the investment goods are purchased by construction firms
that produce the durables and sell them to bankers, and that households simply begin the period
owning shares in these construction firms. The explicit introduction of such firms would not change
the equilibrium conditions presented below.


                                              15
quantity Dt . Here Dt is the face value of the debt, the nominal quantity to which the
holder is entitled (with certainty) in the settlement of accounts at the end of period t.
The price Qt of the risky asset is quoted in the same (nominal, end-of-period) units;
thus the quantity of funds that the household must provide to the banker is equal to
Qt st − Dt in those units.
     The household’s other uses of its beginning-of-period financial wealth are to ac-
quire cash, in quantity Mt , for use by the shopper, or to acquire (longer-term) bonds
Bt , which are government liabilities that do not count as cash. The quantity Mt rep-
resents the end-of-period nominal value of these safe assets; thus if interest is earned
on cash (as we allow), Mt represents the value of the household’s cash balances inclu-
sive of the interest earned on them, rather than the nominal value at the time that
they are acquired.13 The quantity of bonds Bt is measured in terms of the number
of units of cash that have the same market value in subperiod 1 trading (as with the
measurement of At ). Hence the household’s choices of st , Dt , Mt and Bt in the first
subperiod are subject to an interim budget constraint
                       (Qt st − Dt ) + Mt + Bt ≤ At + Qt F (It−1 ).                                (1.2)
    The financing decisions of bankers are also subject to a constraint that safe debt
Dt cannot be issued in a quantity beyond that for which they can provide sufficient
collateral, given their holdings of the durable st .14 This requires that
                                             Dt ≤ Γt st ,                                          (1.3)
where Γt is the market price of the durable good in the fire sale, should one occur in
period t. (Here Γt is quoted in terms of the units of nominal value to be delivered by
  13
      If we think of cash as Treasury bills, Mt represents their face value at maturity, rather than the
discounted value at which they are purchased.
   14
      We might suppose that bankers can also issue debt that is not collateralized, or not collateralized
to this extent. But such liabilities would not be treated as cash by the households that acquire them,
so that allowing such debt to be issued by a banker would have no consequences any different from
allowing the household itself to issue such debt in the first subperiod, in order to finance a larger
equity contribution to its banker. And allowing households to trade additional kinds of non-cash
financial liabilities would make no difference for the equilibrium conditions derived here; it would
simply allow us to price the additional types of financial claims. The ability of bankers to issue
collateralized short-term debt that counts as cash instead matters; this is not a type of claim that
a household can issue other than by having its banker issue it (because it must be collateralized by
risky durable goods), and issuing such claims has special value because they can relax the cash-in-
advance constraint.


                                                 16
investors in the end-of-period settlement of accounts. Note that while it is not yet
known in subperiod 1 whether a crisis will occur, the price Γt that will be realized
in the fire sale if one occurs is perfectly forecastable.) Constraint (1.3) indicates the
amount of collateral required to ensure that whichever state is reached in subperiod
2, the value of the collateralized debt will equal Dt , since sale of the collateral in a
fire sale will yield at least that amount.
    Regardless of the state reached in subperiod 2, cash goods purchases of the shopper
must satisfy the cash-in-advance constraint

                                           Pt c1t ≤ Mt ,                                         (1.4)

where Pt is the price of “normal goods” in period t (that may depend on the state
reached in subperiod 2), quoted in units of the nominal value to be delivered in the
end-of-period settlement. It is this constraint that provides a reason for the household
to choose to hold cash balances Mt . The common price for all normal goods follows
from the fact that these goods are perfect substitutes from the point of view of their
producers (workers), and that all payments that guarantee the same nominal value
in the end-of-period settlement are of equal value to the sellers, once the problem of
verifying the soundness of payments made in the cash goods market has been solved.15
    There is no similar constraint on credit goods or investment goods purchases by
the shopper, as these are sold on credit. The investor’s purchases c3t of special goods,
and purchases s∗d
                t of durables in the fire sale
                                               16
                                                  must however satisfy a state-contingent
budget constraint
                                P̃t c3t + η t Γt s∗d
                                                  t  ≤ Ft ,                          (1.5)
where P̃t is the price of special goods (in the same units as Pt , and that similarly
may depend on the state reached in subperiod 2); η t is an indicator variable for the
occurrence of a crisis in period t;17 and Ft is the line of credit arranged for the investor
in subperiod 1, quoted in units of the nominal quantity that the investor can promise
  15
     Cash goods and credit goods sell for the same price in any given period for the same reason in
the model of Lucas and Stokey (1987).
  16
     We use the notation s∗t for the quantity of durables liquidated in the fire sale, if one occurs
in period t. An additional superscript d is used for the quantity demanded on this market, and a
superscript s for the quantity supplied. Note that s∗d            ∗s
                                                          t and st are two independent choice variables
for an individual household, and need not be chosen to be equal, even though in equilibrium they
must be equal (given common choices by all households) in order for the market to clear.
  17
     That is, η t = 1 if a crisis occurs, while η t = 0 if the no-crisis state is reached.


                                                17
to deliver in the end-of-period settlement, and with a value that must be independent
of the state that is realized in subperiod 2. (Note that (1.5), like (1.4), is actually
two constraints, one for each possible state that may be reached in subperiod 2.)
    If the crisis state is reached in subperiod 2, the banker offers s∗s
                                                                       t units of the
durable for sale in the fire sale, which quantity must satisfy the bounds

                                  Dt ≤ Γt s∗s
                                           t ≤ Γt st .                                (1.6)

The first inequality indicates that the banker must liquidate assets sufficient to allow
repayment of the short-term debt (given that in this state, the holders will necessarily
demand immediate repayment); the second inequality follows from the fact that the
banker cannot offer to sell more shares of the durable than she owns. (The range
of possible quantity offers defined in (1.6) is non-empty only because (1.3) has been
satisfied; thus a plan that satisfies (1.6) necessarily satisfies (1.3), making the earlier
constraint technically redundant.)
    Given these decisions, the durables owned by the household in subperiod 3 will
equal
                                 st = st + η t [s∗d     ∗s
                                                  t − st ]                           (1.7)
if the durables prove to be valuable, while st = 0 regardless of the household decisions
in the “asset collapse” state. The household’s pooled financial wealth at the end of
the period (in nominal units) will be given by

Wt = Mt + (Rtb /Rtm )Bt + Pt Yt − Pt [c1t + c2t + It ] + P̃t xt + η t Γt s∗s
                                                                          t − Dt − Ft + Tt .
                                                                                       (1.8)
This consists of the household’s cash balances at the end of subperiod 1, plus the end-
of-period value of the bonds that it holds at the end of subperiod 1, plus additional
funds obtained from the sale of both normal goods and special goods in subperiod 2,
plus funds raised in the fire sale of assets in the event of a crisis, minus the household’s
expenditure on normal goods of the various types in subperiod 2, and the amounts
that it must repay at the end of the period (if not sooner) to pay off the collateralized
debt issued by the banker, and to pay for the line of credit arranged for the investor,
plus the nominal value Tt of net transfers from the government. We assume that the
household must pay Ft regardless of the extent to which the line of credit is used; we
then do not need to subtract expenditure by the investor, as this has already been


                                           18
paid for when Ft is paid.18 Note also that bonds that cost the same amount as one
unit of cash in subperiod 1 are worth as much as Rtb /Rtm units of cash at the end of
the period, where Rtm is the gross nominal yield on cash (assumed to be known when
the cash is acquired in subperiod 1, since these assets are riskless in nominal terms)
and Rtb is the gross nominal holding return on bonds (which may depend on the state
reached by the end of the period).
   We assume that each household is subject to a borrowing limit

                                             Wt ≥ Wt ,                                            (1.9)

expressed as a lower bound on its net worth after the end-of-period settlement of
accounts. (We do not further specify the precise value of the borrowing limit, but note
that it can be set tight enough to ensure that any end-of-period net indebtedness can
eventually be repaid while at the same time being loose enough so that the constraint
(1.9) never binds in any period.) Finally, the household carries into period t + 1 the
investment goods It purchased in subperiod 2 of period t, and financial wealth in the
amount
                                             m
                                   At+1 = Rt+1   Wt ,                            (1.10)
                                     m
where the multiplicative factor Rt+1      converts the value of the household’s financial
wealth at the beginning of period t + 1 into an equivalent quantity of cash (measured
in terms of the face value of the STSIs rather than their cost in subperiod 1 trading).
     A feasible plan for a household is then a specification of the quantities Mt , Bt , st , Dt ,
Ft , s∗s   ∗d
      t , st for each period t, as a function of the history ξ t of shocks up until then,
and a specification of the quantities c1t , c2t , c3t , It , Yt , xt for each period t, as a func-
tion of both ξ t and η t (that is, whether a crisis occurs in period t), that satisfies the
constraints (1.2)–(1.3) for each possible history ξ t and the constraints (1.4)–(1.10) for
  18
    The assumption that Ft must be paid whether or not the full line of credit is used is important
because it prevents the household from simply asking for a large line of credit, as much as would be
desired in the crisis state, and then not using all of it in the non-crisis state. If that were possible
at no cost, the non-state-contingency of the credit available to the investor would have no bite.
The assumption that the line of credit must be paid for whether used or not makes this costly, and
results in the household’s wishing ex post in the crisis state that it had provided more funds to the
investor — though it also wishes ex post in the non-crisis state that it had provided less credit to
the investor. This device implies that the credit available to the investor will be optimal on average,
though not optimal in each state because it cannot be state-contingent.



                                                19
each possible history (ξ t , η t ), given initial financial wealth A0 and pre-existing invest-
ment goods I−1 , and given the state-contingent evolution of the prices, net transfers
from the government to households, and the borrowing limit. An optimal plan is a
feasible plan that maximizes (1.1).
    Equilibrium requires that all markets for goods and assets clear. Thus it requires
that in the first subperiod of period t,

                                     Mt = M̃t + Dt ,                                   (1.11)

                                         Bt = Bts ,                                    (1.12)
                                       st = F (It−1 ),                                 (1.13)
where M̃t is the public supply of cash (short-term safe liabilities of the government
or of the central bank) and Bts is the supply of longer-term government bonds (not
held by the central bank). Note that we assume for simplicity that durables fully
depreciate after supplying a service flow (in the event that there is no asset collapse)
in the period in which they are produced and acquired by bankers; thus the supply of
durables to be acquired by bankers in period t is given simply by the new production
F (It−1 ), and is independent of the quantity st−1 of valuable durables in the previous
period.
    Equilibrium also requires that in the second subperiod, if a crisis occurs,

                                         s∗d
                                          t  = s∗s
                                                t ,                                    (1.14)

and that in either the crisis or in the non-crisis state,

                                   c1t + c2t + It = Yt ,                               (1.15)

and
                                         c3t = xt .                                    (1.16)
    We can then define a (flexible-price) equilibrium as a specification of prices Qt , Γt
and yield Rtm on cash for each history ξ t , and prices Pt , P̃t and bond yields Rtb for
each history (ξ t , η t ), together with a plan (as described above) for the representative
household, such that (i) the plan is optimal for the household, given those prices, and
(ii) the market-clearing conditions (1.11)–(1.14) are satisfied for each history ξ t and
conditions (1.15)–(1.16) are satisfied for each history (ξ t , η t ).

                                            20
1.3     Fiscal Policy and Central-Bank Policy
The equilibrium conditions above involve several variables that depend on government
policy: the supplies of outside financial assets M̃t and Bts , the net transfers Tt , and
the yields Rtm and Rtb on the outside financial assets. Fiscal policy determines the
evolution of end-of-period claims on the government,

                                Lt ≡ M̃t + (Rtb /Rtm )Bts + Tt ,                              (1.17)

by varying state-contingent net transfers to households appropriately. The Treasury
also has a debt management decision: at the beginning of each period t, it must
decide how much of existing claims on the government will be financed through STSIs
(issuance of Treasury bills), as opposed to longer-term debt that cannot be used to
satisfy the cash-in-advance constraint. If we let M̃tg be T-bill issuance by the Treasury
in the first subperiod of period t, it follows that the total supply of longer-term debt
by the Treasury will equal19

                                     Btg = Rtm Lt−1 − M̃tg .                                  (1.18)

    Of these longer-term securities issued by the Treasury, a quantity Btcb will be held
as assets of the central bank, backing central-bank liabilities M̃tcb of equal value. We
shall suppose that all of these central-bank liabilities are STSIs that count as cash.
The supply of outside assets to the private sector is then given by

                                       M̃t ≡ M̃tg + M̃tcb ,                                   (1.19)

                                        Bts ≡ Btg − Btcb .                                    (1.20)
    In equilibrium, the net wealth Wt of the representative household at the end
of period t must equal net claims Lt on the government. (A comparison of the
definition of Wt in (1.8) with the definition of Lt in (1.17) shows that the market-
clearing conditions imply that Wt = Lt .) It then follows from (1.10) and (1.18) that
the beginning-of-period assets At of the representative household must equal

                                        At = M̃tg + Btg .
  19
    Note that liabilities with a market value the same as M̃tg + Btg units of cash in subperiod 1 will
have a market price of (M̃tg + Btg )/Rtm .



                                               21
Since M̃tcb = Btcb , we alternatively have

                                         At = M̃t + Bts ,                                      (1.21)

in terms of the supplies of outside assets to the private sector.
    At the end of period t, the assets of the central bank are worth (Rtb /Rtm )Btcb , while
its liabilities are worth M̃tcb = Btcb . In general, these quantities will not be equal; we
suppose, however, that net balance-sheet earnings must be rebated to the Treasury
at the end of the period, in a transfer of magnitude

                                  Ttcb = (Rtb /Rtm )Btcb − M̃tcb .

A transfer from the central bank to the Treasury allows the Treasury to make a larger
transfer to the private sector while achieving the same target for end-of-period claims
on the government. However, this does not change formula (1.17) for the size of net
transfer that is made to the private sector, because that equation was already written
in terms of a consolidated budget constraint for the Treasury and central bank. If
instead we write
                            Ttg = Lt − M̃tg − (Rtb /Rtm )Btg
for the net transfer from the Treasury required to achieve the target Lt neglecting
any transfers from the central bank, then

                                         Tt = Ttg + Ttcb .

   Finally, in addition to choosing the size of its balance sheet, the central bank
can choose the nominal interest rate Rtm paid on its liabilities. In our model, where
central-bank liabilities (reserves, reverse repos, or central-bank bills) are treated as
perfect substitutes for all other forms of cash (Treasury bills or STSIs issued by private
banks), this policy decision directly determines the equilibrium yield on those other
forms of cash as well.20 There are thus two independent dimensions of central-bank
  20
     In a more complex model in which reserve balances at the central bank play a special role that
other STSIs cannot fulfill, and are in sufficiently scarce supply, there will be a spread between the
interest rate paid on reserves and the equilibrium yield on other STSIs, though the central bank
will still have relatively direct control over the equilibrium yield on STSIs, by varying either the
interest rate paid on reserves or the degree of scarcity of reserves. Even before the increased size
of central-bank balance sheets resulting from the financial crisis, many central banks implemented
their interest-rate targets largely by varying the interest rate paid on reserve balances, as discussed
in Woodford (2003, chap. 1).


                                                22
policy each period, each of which can be chosen independently of fiscal policy (that
is, of the evolution of both total claims on the government Lt and the supply of
short-term safe government liabilities), except to the extent that perhaps Btcb must
be no greater than Btg .21 These can alternatively be described as implementation of
the central bank’s target for the interest rate paid on cash, and variation in the size
of its balance sheet holding fixed its target for that interest rate.
    There is a further potential dimension of central-bank policy, which is choice of
the composition of its balance sheet. Above we have assumed that the central bank
holds only longer-term Treasury securities, but it might also hold Treasury bills on
its balance sheet (as indeed the Fed does). In our model, however, it is easy to see
that central-bank acquisition of T-bills (financed by issuing central-bank liabilities
that are perfect substitutes for T-bills and pay the same rate of interest) will have
no effect on any other aspect of equilibrium. To simplify the algebra, we do not even
allow for this possibility in the notation introduced above.


2      Determinants of Intertemporal Equilibrium
We turn now to a characterization of equilibrium in the model just described. We
shall give particular attention to the determinants of the supply of and demand for
safe assets, and the supply of and demand for risky durables, both when originally
produced and in the event of a fire sale.


2.1     Conditions for Optimal Behavior
We begin our characterization of equilibrium by noting some necessary conditions
for optimality of the representative household’s behavior. An optimal plan for the
  21
     In fact, within the logic of the model, there is no problem with allowing Btcb to exceed Btg ;
this would simply require negative holdings of government bonds by the private sector (issuance of
“synthetic” bonds by the private sector), which can already be accommodated in the constraints
specified above.




                                              23
household (as defined in the previous section) is one that maximizes a Lagrangian
       ∞
       X
             βt       u(c1t , c2t ) + ũ(c3t ) + γ[(1 − η t )st + η t q(st + s∗d   ∗s
                  
E0                                                                            t − st )] − v(Yt ) − w(xt )
       t=0
                  −ϕ1t [Mt + Bt + Qt (st − F (It−1 )) − At − Dt ] − η t ϕ2t [Dt − Γt s∗s
                                                                                      t ]

                  −η t ϕ3t [Γt s∗st − Γt st ] − ϕ4t [Pt c1t − Mt ] − ϕ5t [η t Γt s∗d
                                                                                  t + P̃t c3t − Ft ]
                                m
                  −ϕ6t [(At+1 /Rt+1 ) − Mt − (Rtb /Rtm )Bt − Pt (Yt − c1t − c2t − It ) − P̃t xt
                                    −η t Γt s∗s
                                             t + Dt + Ft − Tt ]} ,                                   (2.1)

where we have substituted (1.7) for st in the utility function, and (1.8) for Wt in
(1.10), in order to eliminate two variables and constraints from the maximization
problem (and thus allow simplification of the Lagrangian). We have also included no
term corresponding to the constraint (1.9), as in the equilibria discussed below we
assume that the borrowing constraint is set so as not to bind in any period.22
    Differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to the choice variables Mt , Bt , Dt , st , s∗s      t ,
 ∗d
st , Ft , c1t , c2t , c3t , It , Yt , xt , and At+1 respectively, we obtain the first-order conditions

                                         ϕ1t = Et [ϕ4t + ϕ6t ],                                 (2.2)

                                       ϕ1t = Et [(Rtb /Rtm )ϕ6t ],                              (2.3)
                                     ϕ1t = (1 − p)ϕ2t + Et ϕ6t ,                                (2.4)
                             ϕ1t Qt = γ[p + (1 − p)q] + (1 − p)ϕ3t Γt ,                         (2.5)
                                    γq = (ϕ2t − ϕ3t )Γt + ϕc6t Γt ,                             (2.6)
                                              γq = ϕc5t Γt ,                                    (2.7)
                                            Et ϕ5t = Et ϕ6t ,                                   (2.8)
                                     u1 (c1t , c2t ) = Pt [ϕ4t + ϕ6t ],                         (2.9)
                                         u2 (c1t , c2t ) = Pt ϕ6t ,                            (2.10)
                                           ũ0 (c3t ) = P̃t ϕ5t ,                              (2.11)
                                     βϕ1,t+1 Qt+1 F 0 (It ) = Pt ϕ6t ,                         (2.12)
  22
    We assume a borrowing limit that constrains the asymptotic behavior of the household’s net
wealth position far in the future, so as to preclude running a “Ponzi scheme,” but that does not
constrain the household’s borrowing over any finite number of periods.


                                                  24
                                          v 0 (Yt ) = Pt ϕ6t ,                                  (2.13)
                                         w0 (xt ) = P̃t ϕ6t ,                                   (2.14)
and
                                               m
                                       ϕ6t = βRt+1 ϕ1,t+1 ,                                     (2.15)
for each t ≥ 0.
     In these conditions, it should further be understood that the first 7 choice variables
(Mt through Ft ) must be chosen only as a function of the history ξ t (i.e., the state
at the beginning of period t), while the other 7 variables (c1t through At+1 ) may
depend on η t (i.e., whether a crisis occurs in period t) as well as ξ t . This means
that while there is only one condition corresponding to each of the equations (2.2)–
(2.8) for each history ξ t , each of the equations (2.9)–(2.15) actually corresponds to
two conditions for each history ξ t , one for each of the two possible states that may
be reached in subperiod 2 (crisis or non-crisis). Similarly, the Lagrange multipliers
ϕ1t , ϕ2t , ϕ3t will each have a single value for each history ξ t , but the values of the
multipliers ϕ4t , ϕ5t , ϕ6t may differ depending on the state reached in subperiod 2.
The conditional expectation E[·] that appears in conditions such as (2.2) refers to
the expected value (as of the first subperiod of period t) of variables that may take
different values depending which state is reached in subperiod 2.
     The superscript c appearing on Lagrange multipliers in equations (2.6)–(2.7) in-
dicates the value of the multiplier in the case that the crisis state occurs in subperiod
2. Thus (2.6) indicates the way in which the values of the multipliers ϕ2t , ϕ3t (which
relate to constraints that apply only in the event that the crisis state is reached)
depend on the value of the multiplier ϕ6t in the event of a crisis in period t; but note
that this value may be different from the value of ϕ6t if no crisis occurs.
     In writing the FOCs in this form, we have assumed for simplicity that any random
disturbances (other than learning whether or not an “asset collapse” occurs, after a
crisis state is reached in subperiod 2) are realized in subperiod 2 of some period.
Under this assumption, there is no difference between the information set in the first
subperiod of period t + 1 (which we have denoted ξ t+1 ) and the information set in
subperiod 2 of period t.23 We also assume that while the yield Rt+1     b
                                                                            on longer-term
  23
     There is of course the difference that by the beginning of period t + 1, it will be known whether
an asset collapse occurred in period t, while this is not yet known in period in subperiod 2 of period t
(in the case that the crisis state is reached). However, because of the assumption of full depreciation


                                                25
government debt may depend on the state reached in subperiod 2 of period t + 1, the
          m
yield Rt+1    on safe short-term liabilities of the central bank does not; hence this also
must be known as of subperiod 2 of period t. Thus the central bank’s decision about
                    m
the policy rate Rt+1    (which should actually be regarded as the period t interest-rate
decision ) must be announced in subperiod 2 of period t.25 This allows us to write
          24

conditions (2.12) and (2.15) without conditional expectations, as the variables with
subscripts t + 1 in these equations are ones with values that are already perfectly
predictable in subperiod 2 of period t.
    In addition to the FOCs (2.2)–(2.15), the household’s decision variables must
satisfy the constraints of the household problem, together with a set of complementary
slackness conditions. We can see from condition (2.13), together with the assumption
that v 0 (Y ) > 0 for all possible values of Y , that ϕ6t > 0 necessarily; similarly, if we
assume non-satiation in special goods, (2.11) implies that ϕ5t > 0 necessarily. Because
it is associated with an inequality constraint (condition (1.4)), the multiplier ϕ4t is
necessarily non-negative; condition (2.2) then implies that ϕ1t > 0 necessarily. The
remaining multipliers, ϕ2t , ϕ3t , ϕ4t , are associated with inequality constraints and so
are necessarily non-negative, but may be equal to zero if the constraints in question do
not bind. (We discuss further below when this will occur.) If any of these multipliers
has a positive value, the corresponding inequality constraint must hold with equality.
of existing durables at the end of each period, while the occurrence of an asset collapse affects the
utility of the household, it has no consequences for the assets carried by the household into the
following period, the amounts of which are already predictable in subperiod 2 as long as no other
random disturbances (such as an unexpected change in the size of net transfers Tt ) are allowed to
occur in subperiod 3. We assume that policy in periods t+1 and later is also independent of whether
an asset collapse has occurred in period t. Given this, the relevant information set for equilibrium
determination in subperiod 1 of period t+1 is independent of whether an asset collapse has occurred.
   24             m
      Note that Rt+1  is the nominal yield between the settlement of accounts at the end of period t
and the settlement of accounts at the end of period t + 1 on wealth that is held in the form of cash.
This would often be called the period t riskless rate of interest, as it must be determined before the
                                                                                m
period for which the safe return is guaranteed. We have used the notation Rt+1      rather than Rtm for
                                 b
consistency with the notation Rt+1 for the one-period holding return on longer-term bonds over the
same time period; the latter variable is generally not perfectly predictable in subperiod 2 of period
t.
   25                                                                               g
      We similarly assume that the Treasury’s decision about the T-bill supply M̃t+1    and the central
                                                       cb
bank’s decision about the size of its balance sheet M̃t+1   are announced in subperiod 2 of period t.
The Treasury’s decision about the size of net transfers Tt , and hence the value of total claims on
the government Lt at the end of period t, are also announced in subperiod 2 of period t.


                                                26
2.2     Characterizing Equilibrium
In an equilibrium, all of the necessary conditions for optimality of the household’s plan
just listed must hold, and in addition, the market-clearing conditions (1.11)–(1.16)
must hold. We now draw some further conclusions about relations that must exist
among the various endogenous variables in an equilibrium, in order to understand
how they are affected by central-bank policy.
    To simplify the discussion, in the present paper we shall restrict attention to the
case in which any exogenous factors that change over time (apart from the occurrence
of crisis states and asset collapses, as depicted in Figure 1) are purely deterministic
(that is, simply a function of the date t). That is, when we consider the effects
of a temporary disturbance of any other type, we shall consider only the case of a
shock that occurs in the initial period t = 0, with consequences that are perfectly
predictable after that. We shall also restrict attention to the effects of alternative
monetary and fiscal policies that are similarly deterministic; this means that while
we can consider the effects of responding in different ways to a one-time disturbance
(in section xx below), we do not consider the effects of responding to the occurrence
of a crisis that results in a fire sale of bank assets (or to an asset collapse). The
reason is that our concern here is with the consequences for the risks to financial
stability of alternative central-bank policies prior to the occurrence of a crisis; the
interesting (but more complex) question of what can be achieved by suitable use of
these instruments to respond to a crisis after it occurs is left for a later study.
    Under this assumption, neither the occurrence of a crisis nor an asset collapse in
any period t affects equilibrium determination in subsequent periods, and we obtain
an equilibrium in which the variables listed above as functions of the history ξ t depend
only on the date t, and those listed as functions of the history (ξ t , η t ) will depend only
on the date t and the value of η t . Moreover, because the resolution of uncertainty
during the period has no effect on equilibrium in later periods, the Lagrange multiplier
ϕ6t indicating the shadow value of additional funds in the end-of-period settlement
of accounts will be independent of whether a crisis occurs in period t, and as a
consequence of this, the price Pt of normal goods, the quantities purchased of normal
goods (c1t , c2t , It ), and the quantity Yt that are produced will all be independent
whether a crisis occurs. Similarly, the Lagrange multiplier ϕ4t associated with the
cash-in-advance constraint will have a value that is independent of whether a crisis


                                            27
occurs.
     Thus an equilibrium can be fully described by sequences {At , Mt , Bt , Dt , Ft , st , s∗t ,
c1t , c2t , It , Yt , cc3t , cn3t } describing the choices of the representative household,26 se-
quences {Qt , Γt , Pt , P̃tc , P̃tn } of prices and sequences {Rtm , Rtbc , Rtbn } of yields on govern-
ment securities, and sequences {ϕ1t , ϕ2t , ϕ3t , ϕ4t , ϕc5t , ϕn5t , ϕ6t } of Lagrange multipliers.
Here the superscripts c and n are used to indicate the values that variables take in
a given period conditional upon whether the crisis state (superscript c) or the non-
crisis state (superscript n) is reached; variables without superscripts take values that
depend only on the date. In order for these sequences to represent an equilibrium,
they must satisfy all of the equilibrium conditions stated above for each date, and
for each of the possible states in subperiod 2. Note that conditional expectations
are no longer needed in equilibrium relations such as (2.2) or (2.4), and that the c
superscript is no longer needed in (2.6).


2.3     Prices and Quantities Transacted in a Crisis
We turn now to a more compact description of the conditions that must hold in equi-
librium. We begin with a discussion of the relations that determine the equilibrium
supply of special goods, the degree to which investors are financially constrained, and
the price of durable goods in the event of a fire sale.
    We first note that (2.11) and (2.14), together with the requirement that c3t = xt
in each state, require that
                                ũ0 (cs3t )     s    ϕs5t
                                            = ϕ̃5t ≡                             (2.16)
                                w0 (cs3t )           ϕ6t
for each possible state s (equal to either c or n) that may be reached in subperiod 2.
Since the left-hand side of (2.16) is a monotonically decreasing function, we can solve
this equation uniquely for the demand for special goods in each state,

                                          cs3t = c3 (ϕ̃s5t ),

where we introduce the notation ϕ̃kt ≡ ϕkt /ϕ6t for any k 6= 6, and c3 (·) is the
monotonically decreasing function implicitly defined by (2.16).
  26
     Here we have reduced the number of separate variables by using a single symbol s∗t to refer to
both s∗s       ∗d
       t and st , as these are necessarily equal in any equilibrium, and similarly eliminated separate
reference to xt since it must always be equal to c3t in any equilibrium.



                                                28
     Here ϕ̃s5t measures the degree of financial constraint of investors in state s of
subperiod 2. The value ϕ̃s5t = 1 would imply no ex post regret in state s about the
size of the credit line arranged for the investor, and a demand for special goods that
is the same as if there were no constraint separating the funds of the investor from
those of the rest of the household; ϕ̃s5t > 1 indicates that ex post, the household would
wish it had arranged more credit for the investor, while ϕ̃s5t < 1 would imply that
it would wish it had arranged less. We also note that the socially efficient level of
production and consumption of special goods in either state is given by the quantity
c∗3 such that
                                        ũ0 (c∗3 )
                                                   = 1.
                                        w0 (c∗3 )
Hence special goods are under-produced or over-produced in state s according to
whether ϕ̃s5t is greater or less than 1.
   We can then use (2.14) to obtain the implied state-contingent price of special
goods (in units of end-of-period marginal utility),

                           ϕ6t P̃ts = p̃(ϕ̃s5t ) ≡ w0 (c3 (ϕ̃s5t )),

and the implied state-contingent expenditure on special goods (in the same units),

                        ϕ6t P̃ts cs3t = e3 (ϕ̃s5t ) ≡ p̃(ϕ̃s5t )c3 (ϕ̃s5t ).

Note that e3 (ϕ̃5 ) will be a monotonically decreasing function.
    Since ϕ5t > 0 in each state, budget constraint (1.5) must hold with equality in each
state. The fact that Ft must not be state-contingent then implies that the left-hand
side of (1.5) must be the same whether a crisis occurs or not, so that in equilibrium,

                               e3 (ϕ̃n5t ) = e3 (ϕ̃c5t ) + Γ̃t s∗t                 (2.17)

each period, where Γ̃t ≡ ϕ6t Γt . We note also that condition (2.8) implies that

                                (1 − p) ϕ̃c5t + p ϕ̃n5t = 1.

We can solve this equation for ϕ̃n5t = ϕ̃n5 (ϕ̃c5t ), a monotonically decreasing function
with the property that ϕ̃n5 (1) = 1. Substituting this for ϕ̃n5t in (2.17), we obtain an
equation
                                   D̃(ϕ̃c5t ) = Γ̃t s∗t ,                          (2.18)

                                              29
where
                                D̃(ϕ̃c5 ) ≡ e3 (ϕ̃n5 (ϕ̃c5t )) − e3 (ϕ̃c5t )
is a monotonically increasing function with the property that D̃(1) = 0.
    Finally, we note that (2.7) implies that

                                             ϕ̃c5t Γ̃t = γq.                                     (2.19)

This together with (2.18) implies that

                                        ϕ̃c5t D̃(ϕ̃c5t ) = γqs∗t .

Since the left-hand side of this equation is a monotonically increasing function of ϕ̃c5t ,
it can be uniquely solved for
                                     ϕ̃c5t = ϕ̃c5 (s∗t ),                        (2.20)
where ϕ̃c5 (s∗ ) is a monotonically increasing function with the property that ϕ̃c5 (0) = 1.
    This solution for the equilibrium value of the multiplier ϕ̃c5t then allows us to solve
for the implied values of Γ̃t , ϕ̃n5t , cc3t , cn3t , ϕ6t P̃tc , and ϕ6t P̃tn , each as a function of the
quantity s∗t of durable goods that are sold in the fire sale (if one occurs) in period
t. We observe that ϕ̃c5t and cn3t will be increasing functions of s∗t , and ϕ6t P̃tn will be
non-decreasing, while Γ̃t , ϕ̃n5t , and cc3t will be decreasing functions of s∗t and ϕ6t P̃tc will
be non-increasing.
    In the case that s∗t = 0 (no assets are sold in a fire sale), we will have cc3t = cn3t = c∗3
(the efficient quantity of special goods are produced in both states), ϕ̃c5t = ϕ̃n5t = 1
(no regret about the size of the line of credit arranged for the investor, in either
state), and Γ̃t = γq (the market price of durables in the crisis state is equal to their
“fundamental” value). Instead, if s∗t > 0 (that is, if any assets are sold in a fire
sale), cc3t < c∗3 < cn3t , ϕ̃n5t < 1 < ϕ̃c5t , and Γ̃t < γq. This means that special goods
are under-produced in the crisis state and over-produced in the non-crisis state, and
that ex post, the household wishes it had supplied more credit for its investor if
the crisis state occurs, while it wishes that it had supplied less credit if the crisis
state does not occur. It also means that if the crisis state occurs, the price at which
durables are sold in the fire sale is less than their “fundamental” value, conditional
on reaching that state. Moreover, the size of these distortions is greater the larger
is the aggregate value of s∗t . The fact that households do not take these equilibrium
effects into account when choosing their planned value of s∗s                   t results in a pecuniary
externality.

                                                  30
2.4     Implications of the Demand for Safe Assets
We turn next to a discussion of the consequences of the supply of short-term safe
instruments for equilibrium purchases of cash and credit goods. We consider first the
implications of optimality conditions (2.9)–(2.10), together with the cash-in-advance
constraint (1.4) and the associated complementary slackness condition.
    Let us first define the demand functions c∗1 (λ), c∗2 (λ) as the solution to the problem
of choosing c1 and c2 to maximize

                                      u(c1 , c2 ) − λ(c1 + c2 )

for an arbitrary “price” λ > 0. Under the assumption that cash and credit goods
are both normal goods, both c∗1 (λ) and c∗2 (λ) must be monotonically decreasing func-
tions.27 We can then consider the constrained problem

                        max u(c1 , c2 ) − λ(c1 + c2 )        s.t. c1 ≤ m,                     (2.21)
                        c1 ,c2

where m > 0 represents real cash balances available to the household. The solution
c1 (λ; m), c2 (λ; m) to problem (2.21) can be characterized as follows: if m ≤ c∗1 (λ),
then c1 (λ; m) = m and c2 (λ; m) is implicitly defined by the equation

                                         u2 (m, c2 ) = λ.                                     (2.22)

If instead m ≤ c∗1 (λ), then c1 (λ; m) = c∗1 (λ) and c2 (λ; m) = c∗2 (λ).
    The Kuhn-Tucker conditions for this latter, constrained problem are easily seen
to correspond precisely to conditions (2.9)–(2.10) and constraint (1.4) together with
the complementary slackness condition, where the price of normal goods in units of
end-of-period marginal utility is given by λt ≡ ϕ6t Pt , and available real cash balances
are given by mt ≡ Mt /Pt . It follows that our model implies that c1t , c2t must satisfy

                                       cjt = cj (λt ; Mt /Pt )

for j = 1, 2, where the functions cj (λ; m) are defined in the previous paragraph.
      Associated with this solution will be a value for the normalized Lagrange multiplier
ϕ̃4t , given by
                                   ϕ̃4t = ϕ̃4 (λt ; Mt /Pt ),
  27
    The paths followed by the two variables as λ is reduced correspond to the “income-expansion
path” as a result of increasing the budget available to spend on these two goods, for a fixed relative
price (equal prices of the two goods).


                                               31
where we define
                                           u1 (c1 (λ; m), c2 (λ; m))
                           ϕ̃4 (λ; m) ≡                              − 1.
                                           u2 (c1 (λ; m), c2 (λ; m))
Note further that the Kuhn-Tucker conditions for the problem (2.21) imply that
ϕ̃4 (λ; m) = 0 for all m ≥ c∗1 (λ), while ϕ̃4 (λ; m) > 0 for all m < c∗1 (λ). Furthermore, in
the latter case (where the cash-in-advance constraint binds), the assumption that both
cash goods and credit goods are normal goods implies that ϕ̃4 (λ; m) is a decreasing
function of λ for fixed m,28 and a decreasing function of m for fixed λ.29
     A comparison of (2.2) with (2.4) (and recalling that the conditional expectations
have been eliminated from both of these conditions) implies that under any optimal
plan, we must have ϕ̃4t = (1 − p)ϕ̃2t . Hence in any equilibrium where the cash-in-
advance constraint binds in some period, so that ϕ̃4t > 0, we must also have ϕ̃2t > 0,
so that the first inequality in (1.6) is also a binding constraint, and Dt = Γt s∗t (as
much as collateralized debt is issued by bankers as can be repaid in the event of a
crisis, given the quantity of durables that bankers plan to sell in a fire sale). More
generally, we can conclude that the normalized Lagrange multiplier ϕ̃2t will be given
by
                                    ϕ̃2t = ϕ̃2 (λt ; Mt /Pt ),
where we define
                                 ϕ̃2 (λ; m) ≡ ϕ̃4 (λ; m)/(1 − p).
   Condition (2.2) implies that the normalized multiplier ϕ̃1t will similarly be given
by a function
                               ϕ̃1t = ϕ̃1 (λt ; Mt /Pt ),                       (2.23)
  28
      Concavity of the utility function implies that increasing c2 while c1 remains fixed at m implies
a decrease in the marginal utility of credit goods consumption, so that increasing λ with fixed m
must correspond to a reduction in the quantity of c2 that is purchased. In order for the demand
m for cash goods to remain the same despite a budget contraction that requires fewer credit goods
to be purchased, the relative price of cash goods must decrease (under the assumption of normal
goods). This means that u1 /u2 must decrease, and hence that ϕ̃4 must decrease.
   29
      In the λ − m plane, the level curves of the function ϕ̃4 correspond to income-expansion paths,
as the budget for cash and credit goods changes with the relative price of the two types of goods
fixed. If the two goods are both normal goods, m must increase along such a path as λ decreases, as
discussed above; hence the level curves must have a negative slope at all points. It then follows that
the sign of this partial derivative follows from the sign of the one discussed in the previous footnote.




                                                32
where we define
                                  ϕ̃1 (λ; m) ≡ 1 + ϕ̃4 (λ; m).
It follows that ϕ̃1t > 1 if and only if the cash-in-advance constraint binds, while it is
equal to 1 otherwise. Note also that both ϕ̃1 (λ; m) and ϕ̃2 (λ; m) will be decreasing
in both arguments, in the region where the cash-in-advance constraint binds.
    A comparison of (2.6) with (2.7) similarly implies that under any optimal plan,
we must have
                                 ϕ̃c5t − 1 = ϕ̃2t − ϕ̃3t .                        (2.24)
This allows us to solve for the implied value of the normalized multiplier ϕ̃3t as

                                       ϕ̃3t = ϕ̃3 (λt ; s∗t , Mt /Pt ),

where we define

                  ϕ̃3 (λt ; s∗t , Mt /Pt ) ≡ ϕ̃2 (λt ; Mt /Pt ) + 1 − ϕ̃c5 (s∗t ).          (2.25)

The supply of real cash balances Mt /Pt and the quantity of assets s∗t sold in the event
of a fire sale must be endogenously determined in such a way as to guarantee that in
equilibrium, the value of this function is always non-negative. (We show below the
existence of such a solution.)
    Finally, (2.5) can be used to determine the equilibrium price of risky durables in
the subperiod 1 market. If we let Q̃t ≡ ϕ6t Qt denote this price in marginal-utility
units, then we obtain a solution of the form

                                       Q̃t = Q̃(λt ; s∗t , Mt /Pt ),

where we define
                                          Q̃∗ + (1 − p)ϕ̃3 (λt ; s∗t , Mt /Pt )Γ̃(s∗t )
              Q̃(λt ; s∗t , Mt /Pt )    ≡                                               .   (2.26)
                                                    ϕ̃1 (λt ; Mt /Pt )

Here we use the notation
                                        Q̃∗ ≡ γ [p + (1 − p)q]
for the expected marginal utility of the anticipated service flow from a durable pur-
chased in subperiod 1, and
                                 Γ̃(s∗ ) ≡ γq/ϕ̃c5 (s∗ )


                                                   33
for the solution for Γ̃t derived in the previous section.
    Note that the “fundamental value” of a durable purchased in subperiod 1, if the
anticipated future service flow were to be valued using the same pricing kernel that
is used to price bonds in (2.3),30 would equal31
                                                       Q̃∗
                                          Q̃ft und   ≡      .                                  (2.27)
                                                       ϕ̃1t
Thus (2.26) implies that durables will be priced at their fundamental value in subpe-
riod 1 if and only if the second inequality in (1.5) is not a binding constraint; that is,
the quantity of durables held by bankers (and thus the availability of collateral) does
not constrain bankers to issue less collateralized debt than they would otherwise wish.
When the constraint binds, so that ϕ̃3t > 0, durables are over-valued in subperiod 1.
Our discussion above of the equilibrium value of ϕ̃3t implies that in order for this to
happen, the cash-in-advance constraint must bind (so that ϕ̃2t > 0), while the supply
of durables (and hence the equilibrium value of s∗t ) must not be too large (so that
ϕ̃c5 (s∗t ) is not too much greater than 1).


2.5     Determinants of the Supply of Safe Assets
We turn now to the endogenous determination of the cash supply Mt , as a result of
the financing decisions of bankers. Since ϕc5 (s∗t ) > 1 if s∗t > 0, we can conclude that
if any assets will be sold by bankers in the event of a fire sale, the left-hand side, and
hence also the right-hand side, of (2.24) must be positive. But the right-hand side of
(2.24) can be positive only if ϕ̃2t is positive, which occurs only if the cash-in-advance
constraint binds. This in turn would require that Dt = Γt s∗t , as argued in the previous
paragraph, and hence (using (1.11)) that

                                        Mt = M̃t + Γt s∗t .                                    (2.28)

On the other hand, if s∗t = 0, constraint (1.5) requires that Dt = 0 as well, so that
(2.28) must hold in this case as well. We may thus conclude that in any equilibrium,
  30
      Note that is a general pricing relation for non-cash assets, since we make no particular assump-
tion about the nature of the state-contingent return on bonds, only that this asset cannot be used
as a means of payment in the cash goods market.
   31
      Equation (2.3) states that an asset that yields Yt at the end of period in marginal-utility units
should have a price in subperiod 1 of PtY = Et [Yt ]/ϕ1t . (For the case of longer-term bonds,
Yt = ϕ6t Rtb and the price in the subperiod 1 market is PtY = Rtm .)


                                                34
the total supply of cash will be given by (2.28).
    It remains to determine the equilibrium value of s∗t . We first note that in marginal-
utility units, (2.28) can be written

                                   M̂t ≡ ϕ6t Mt = λt m̃t + Γ̃t s∗t ,                                  (2.29)

using the notation m̃t ≡ M̃t /Pt for the real supply of safe assets by the government.
Then in any equilibrium where

                                       m̃t + Γ̃t s∗t /λt > c∗1 (λt ),

the cash-in-advance constraint will not bind; but since this implies that ϕ̃2t = 0,
(2.24) implies that ϕ̃c5t cannot be greater than 1, which requires that s∗t = 0.
    Hence such an equilibrium occurs if and only if

                                      m̃t > m̃∗ (λt ) ≡ c∗1 (λt ),                                    (2.30)

and involves M̂t = λt m̃t . In this case, (2.25) implies that ϕ̃3t = 0, so that Q̃t
is equal to the fundamental value (2.27). In addition, because s∗t = 0, we must
have Γ̃t = Γ̃(0) = 1, so that durables are also priced at their fundamental value in
subperiod 2, even if the crisis state is reached.
    Let us consider now the possibility of an equilibrium in which the supply of real
cash balances is no greater than c∗1 (λt ) (the level required for satiation in cash), but
the supply of durables st is large enough so that bankers are unconstrained in the
amount of collateralized debt that they can issue (so that ϕ̃3t = 0). Because of (2.24),
this requires a value of s∗t such that

                             ϕ̃c5 (s∗t ) − 1 = ϕ̃2 (λt ; m̃t + Γ̃(s∗t )s∗t /λt ).                     (2.31)

It follows from our discussion above that the left-hand side of this equation is an
increasing function of s∗t , while the right-hand side is a non-increasing function of s∗t
(decreasing until the point at which the cash-in-advance constraint ceases to bind,
and constant thereafter).32 Moreover, the right-hand side is at least as large as the
left-hand side if s∗t = 0, given our assumption now that m̃t ≤ c∗1 (λt ). Hence there is
  32
     Recall that Γ̃(s∗ )s∗ = D̃(ϕ̃c5 (s∗ )) is a monotonically increasing function of s∗ , and that ϕ̃2 (λ; m)
is a decreasing function of m as long as the cash-in-advance constraint binds, and independent of
the value of m for all higher values.


                                                   35
a unique value of 0 ≤ s∗t < st that satisfies (2.31) if and only if the left-hand side is
greater than the right-hand side when s∗t = st , which is to say, if and only if

                         ϕ̃c5 (st ) − 1 > ϕ̃2 (λt ; m̃t + Γ̃(st )st /λt ).             (2.32)

    Thus such an equilibrium exists in period t if and only if the outside supply of safe
assets m̃t fails to satisfy (2.30) while the supply of durables st does satisfy (2.32); in
such a case, s∗t is implicitly defined by (2.31), and the total supply of cash is given by
(2.29). In this case, again ϕ̃3t = 0, and hence Q̃t = Q̃ft und . Moreover, if m̃t < c∗1 (λt ),
the solution must involve s∗t > 0 and hence Γ̃t < 1, so that durables are under-priced
in the fire sale in the event of a crisis.
    If, instead, m̃t does not satisfy (2.30) and the supply of durables st fails to satisfy
(2.32), then there can only be an equilibrium in which s∗t = st . In this case, the supply
of safe assets is given by
                                   M̂t = λt m̃t + Γ̃(st )st .                        (2.33)
The value of ϕ̃3t is given by (2.25), which will be positive in the case of any value
of st such that the inequality in (2.32) is reversed. In any such case, we must have
Q̃t > Q̃ft und , so that durables are overvalued in subperiod 1. In addition, the fact that
s∗t > 0 implies that Γ̃t < 1, so that durables are under-priced in the event of a fire
sale, even though they are over-priced in subperiod 1. In this case, an asset “boom”
can be followed by a “crash.”
    Thus we are able to completely characterize the equilibrium pricing of risky
durables in any period t (both in subperiod 1 and in the event of a crisis), as a
function of three quantities: the real supply m̃t of safe assets by the government (de-
termined by fiscal policy and central-bank asset purchases), the supply of durables st
(which follows directly from the quantity It−1 of investment goods produced in the
previous period), and the marginal utility λt that the representative household assigns
to additional real end-of-period wealth. The latter quantity depends on expectations
about subsequent periods, as we discuss next.
    In particular, we can write the subperiod 1 equilibrium price of durables, expressed
in marginal-utility units, as a function

                                   ϕ̃1t Q̃t = φ(λt ; st , m̃t )

derived in the manner just explained. It is useful for the discussion below to consider
how this function depends on the supply of durables st . In the case of an outside cash

                                              36
supply satisfying m̃t > c∗1 (λt ), or a supply of durables satisfying (2.32), in equilibrium
we must have ϕ̃3t = 0, so that (2.26) implies that φ(λt ; st , m̃t ) = Q̃∗ . Thus the value
of the function is independent of the value of st in either of these cases. If instead we
have both an outside cash supply below the satiation level and a supply of durables
too small to satisfy (2.32), the equilibrium supply of safe assets is given by (2.33).
The right-hand side of this equation is a monotonically increasing function of st , so
that Mt /Pt = M̂t /λt is also an increasing function of st .
    It follows from this that the equilibrium value of ϕ̃3t given by (2.25) will be a
monotonically decreasing function of st . It then follows from (2.26) that ϕ̃1t Q̃t will be
a monotonically decreasing function of st , and hence that the function φ(λt ; st , m̃t )
is decreasing in this argument. Thus in the case that m̃t < c∗1 (λt ), the function
φ(λt ; st , m̃t ) will be a decreasing function of st for all supplies of durables too small
to satisfy (2.32), and will instead be constant at its minimum value of Q̃∗ for all st
large enough to satisfy (2.32). The function is constant (and equal to Q̃∗ ) whenever
m̃t > c∗1 (λt ), regardless of the value of st .
    It will also be useful for our discussion below of intertemporal equilibrium to note
that the relative value of funds available in subperiod 1 as opposed to the end of the
period will be given by a function of the form

                                  ϕ̃1t = ϕ̂1 (λt ; st , m̃t ).                       (2.34)

This function depends only on the value of λt , in the case that m̃t ≥ c∗1 (λt ), so that
there is satiation in cash. It depends on both λt and m̃t in the case that m̃t < c∗1 (λt )
but st is large enough to satisfy (2.32), but does not depend on st , since in this case
bankers’ collateral constraint does not bind, and s∗t is independent of the size of st .
Finally, in the case that m̃t < c∗1 (λt ) and st is too small to satisfy (2.32), the value
of the function depends on all three of its arguments. (In this latter case, Mt /Pt will
be an increasing function of st , for given values of the other two arguments, as just
discussed; hence ϕ̃1t will be a decreasing function of st , for st in this range.)


2.6    Intertemporal Equilibrium
We now consider the connections between variables in successive periods required for
an intertemporal equilibrium. One such connection is given by condition (2.12) for
optimal investment demand. Using the solution for the subperiod 1 equilibrium price


                                            37
of durables just derived, condition (2.12) can be written in the alternative form

                             λt = β φ(λt+1 ; F (It ), m̃t+1 ) F 0 (It ).                    (2.35)

(Here we have also used the fact that the supply of durables in period t + 1 must
equal st+1 = F (It ).)
   Since the right-hand side of this expression must be a monotonically decreasing
function of It ,33 condition (2.35) has a unique solution for the equilibrium value of It ,
which we can write in the form

                                    It = I(λt ; λt+1 , m̃t+1 ).                             (2.36)

Because the right-hand side of (2.35) is a decreasing function of It , the function
I(λ; λ0 , m̃) implicitly defined by this equation will be a monotonically decreasing
function of λ. Thus we obtain a “demand curve” for investment that is a decreasing
function of λt , similar to the demands for cash and credit goods as decreasing functions
of λt that can be derived in the way explained above. But whereas the demands for
cash and credit goods depend on st and m̃t along with the value of λt , investment
demand depends on expectations regarding the values of λt+1 and m̃t+1 along with
the value of λt .
    If we write our solution for the sum of the demands for cash and credit goods as

                                   c1t + c2t = y(λt ; st , m̃t ),

then the aggregate demand for normal goods can be written as

                           Yt = y(λt ; st , m̃t ) + I(λt ; λt+1 , m̃t+1 ).                  (2.37)

In a flexible-price equilibrium (the kind assumed thus far), this quantity of normal
goods will also have to be voluntarily supplied, which requires that condition (2.13)
be satisfied. Hence the equilibrium value of λt must satisfy

                     v 0 (y(λt ; F (It−1 ), m̃t ) + I(λt ; λt+1 , m̃t+1 )) = λt .           (2.38)

Since the left-hand side of this equation is a non-increasing function of λt (strictly
decreasing if v 00 > 0), there will be a unique solution for λt corresponding to given
values of It−1 , m̃t , m̃t+1 , and λt+1 .
  33
    Here we rely upon the demonstration above that φ(λ; s, m̃) is a non-increasing, positive-valued
function of s, in addition to our assumption that the function F (I) is strictly concave.


                                               38
    In the initial period of the model, the value of It−1 will be given as an initial
condition; but in all subsequent periods, the value will be endogenously determined
by (2.36). Hence for all periods after the initial period, we obtain an equilibrium
relation of the form

               v 0 (y(λt ; F (I(λt−1 ; λt , m̃t )), m̃t ) + I(λt ; λt+1 , m̃t+1 )) = λt .   (2.39)

Given an initial stock of investment goods I−1 in period t = 0, and a path for {m̃t } for
all t ≥ 0 (determined by fiscal policy and the central bank’s balance-sheet policy), an
intertemporal equilibrium is then a sequence of anticipated values {λt } for all t ≥ 0
that satisfy equation (2.38) when t = 0 and the second-order nonlinear difference
equation (2.39) for all t ≥ 1.
    Given a solution for the path {λt }, the associated path for the production of invest-
ment goods is given by (2.36) for all t ≥ 0. This in turn implies a supply of durables st
for each period t ≥ 0, using (1.13). One then has sequences of values {λt , st , m̃t } for
each of the periods t ≥ 0. The implied values for the variables s∗t , Mt /Pt , and so on,
as well as for the various normalized Lagrange multipliers, can then be determined
for each of these periods using the results derived in the previous sections.
    This gives us a solution for the allocation of resources, all relative prices and all
real asset prices, that involves no reference to any nominal variables, as long as the
central bank’s balance-sheet policy is specified in real terms (since the real supply
of outside safe assets is used in the above calculations). In fact, the only element of
policy that matters for the determination of real variables in the flexible-price version
of the model is the path of {m̃t }. The path of government debt as a whole does not
matter for the determination of any variables in the model: “Ricardian equivalence”
obtains (given our assumption of a representative household and lump-sum taxes and
transfers), except for the qualification that changes in the government supply of safe
assets are not neutral in this model, owing to the cash-in-advance constraint.34
    Conventional monetary policy (the central bank’s control of the interest rate on
cash balances Rtm ) is also irrelevant to the determination of real variables, though it
can be used to control the general level of prices (the path {Pt }, and along with it
the prices of other goods and assets in monetary units). Condition (2.15) requires
  34
    For the same reason, it does not matter exactly what type of liabilities the government issues
other than short-term safe assets; and it similarly does not matter, in this model, what type of
non-cash assets are held on the balance sheet of the central bank.


                                                39
that in equilibrium
                                     m           m         Pt+1
                                    Rt+1 = (1 + rt+1 )          ,                            (2.40)
                                                            Pt
where
                                 m                      λt
                            1 + rt+1 ≡
                                           βλt+1 ϕ̂1 (λt+1 ; st+1 , m̃t+1 )
is the equilibrium real return on cash between the end of period t and the end of period
                                               m
t + 1. Note that the path of the variable {rt+1   } is determined for all t ≥ 0 by the path
of {m̃t } in the manner discussed above, as with all other real variables. Equation
(2.40) then describes the Fisher relation that must hold between the nominal interest
rate on cash and the rate of inflation.
    The equilibrium paths of the price level {Pt } for t ≥ 0 and of the nominal interest
         m
rate {Rt+1  } for t ≥ 0 are jointly determined by the equilibrium relation (2.40) and
                                                                   m
the reaction function (that may for example be of the form Rt+1        = ψ(Pt /Pt−1 )) that
specifies how the central bank’s interest-rate target responds to variation in the price
level. The discussion of how this occurs follows exactly the lines of the discussion of
price-level determination in a flexible-price “cashless economy” in Woodford (2003,
chap. 2). Note that while the present model includes a number of financial frictions
and other complications not present in the simple model used in that discussion, what
                                m
matters is that the variable rt+1   in equation (2.40) evolves in a way that is completely
exogenous with respect to the evolution of the price level and independent of the
specification of (conventional) monetary policy.
    It will simplify the discussion that follows if we let conventional monetary policy
be specified not by a central-bank reaction function, but rather by a target path for
the price level {Pt } for all t ≥ 0. Since this target path can be achieved by a suitable
                                      m
rule for setting the interest rate Rt+1   (assuming that equation (2.40) does not imply
a negative nominal rate at any time,35 given the target path of prices), we will simply
assume that the path of the price level conforms to the target path chosen by the
central bank, and use equation (2.40) to determine the implied equilibrium evolution
of the nominal interest rate on cash.
  35
    The model as described above would in fact not preclude a negative nominal interest rate
                                m
in equilibrium, i.e., a value Rt+1  < 1. It is more realistic, however, to add an assumption that
households can demand currency from the central bank at any time in exchange for interest-earning
cash, which would for institutional reasons earn a zero nominal interest rate, and that such currency
would be acceptable as payment for cash goods. The possibility of holding currency would then
                           m
preclude equilibria with Rt+1  < 1 in any period.


                                               40
    Finally, condition (2.3) requires that the equilibrium expected return on bonds
satisfy
                                Et [Rtb ] = ϕ̂1 (λt ; st , m̃t )
in all periods t ≥ 0. Given a specification of the character of this alternative form
of government debt to determine the relative value of bonds in states c and n, this
relation then completely determines the state-contingent returns on bonds. Note that
solution for equilibrium bond yields is not necessary in order to solve for any of the
other variables discussed earlier; hence we need not further discuss the character of
bonds or their equilibrium prices.


3     The Size of the Central-Bank Balance Sheet and
      Stationary Equilibrium
We wish to compare the effects of the two dimensions of central-bank policy: vari-
ation in its target for the interest rate Rtm paid on cash, and variation in the size
of its balance sheet holding fixed its target for that interest rate. We first compare
alternative possible long-run stationary equilibria, in which the inflation rate, the
various interest rates, and relative prices are all constant over time, and the real size
of the central-bank balance sheet and the real supply of T-bills by the Treasury are
constant over time as well. We can show that there exists a two-dimensional family of
such stationary equilibria. Moreover, fixing the real supply of Treasury bills, it is still
possible to move in both directions within this two-dimensional family of stationary
equilibria by varying the two independent dimensions of central-bank policy. Thus
even a simple consideration of stationary equilibria allows us to observe the separate
effects of the two dimensions of policy.


3.1    Alternative Stationary Equilibria
In a stationary equilibrium, we assume that the government pursues a constant in-
flation target
                                   Pt
                                       = Π > 0
                                  Pt−1




                                          41
for all t ≥ 0, starting from some given initial price level P−1 , and chooses to supply a
constant quantity of real outside cash balances m̃t = m̃ in all periods t ≥ 0 as well.36
We further assume that there are no transitory disturbances to preferences, techno-
logical possibilities or financial constraints (so that the equations derived above apply
in all periods, with no modifications), and that the economy starts from an initial
stock of investment goods I−1 that takes the particular value I with the property that
starting with this level of investment goods results in an equilibrium in which It = I
for all t ≥ 0 as well. In such a case (and for choices of the targets Π and m̃ within
suitable ranges), we can show the existence of an intertemporal equilibrium with the
special property that the variables c1t , c2t , cc3t , cn3t , st , s∗t , λt , Q̃t , Λ̃t , p̃ct , p̃nt , M̂t , Rtm , and
the various normalized Lagrange multipliers all have the same constant values for all
t ≥ 0, which constant values we shall simply denote c1 , c2 , and so on.
    From equation (2.39) it is evident that such a stationary equilibrium must corre-
spond to a constant value λ for the marginal-utility value of end-of-period real income
that satisfies
                       v 0 (y(λ; F (I(λ; λ, m̃)), m̃) + I(λ; λ, m̃)) = λ.                                          (3.1)
This gives us a single equation to solve for the stationary equilibrium value of λ
corresponding to a given stationary target m̃. Given the solution for λ from this
equation, the implied stationary value of I is then given by I = I(λ; λ, m̃), which is
the value of I−1 that we must assume for existence of such an equilibrium. Such an
equilibrium will obviously involve a constant supply of durables, equal to s = F (I).
These constant values for λt , st , and m̃t in all periods then allow us to solve for
constant values of all of the other variables listed above, using the methods explained
in the previous section.
    The constant value of the nominal interest rate on cash will be given by Rm =
(1 + rm (m̃))Π, where
                                                   1
                                   1 + rm ≡
                                               β ϕ̃1 (m̃)
and ϕ̃1 (m̃) is the stationary value of ϕ̃1t , that depends on the value chosen for m̃, as
discussed above, but is independent of the choice of Π. Thus for any choice of m̃, it
  36
    Note that given our assumption of a constantly growing target path for the price level and
our assumption that this target is precisely achieved each period, there is no difference between
specifying the target path for the supply of outside cash balances as a constant real level or as a
nominal target with a constant growth rate equal to the target inflation rate.


                                                        42
is possible to choose any value of Π such that

                                       Π ≥ β ϕ̃1 (m̃),

so that the required stationary nominal interest rate satisfies Rm ≥ 1.
    There is a stationary equilibrium corresponding to any value m̃ > 0, but for all
m̃ greater than a critical value m∗ , the stationary equilibrium is the same. Here
m∗ is the level of outside real cash balances required for satiation in cash balances,
which we can determine as follows. In a stationary equilibrium with satiation in cash
balances, we must have c1 = c∗1 (λ) and c1 = c∗1 (λ). In addition, ϕ̃1 = 1 Q̃ = Q̃∗ ,
so that φ(λ; s, m̃) = Q̃∗ , regardless of the values of λ and s. It follows that the
stationary level of investment goods production I must equal I ∗ (λ), the quantity
implicitly defined by the equation
                                                     λ
                                       F 0 (I) =         .
                                                   β Q̃∗
From this it follows that the stationary value of λ must satisfy

                             v 0 (c∗1 (λ) + c∗2 (λ) + I ∗ (λ)) = λ.                     (3.2)

    Since c∗1 (λ), c∗2 (λ), and I ∗ (λ) are all monotonically decreasing functions, it follows
that the left-hand side of (3.2) is a non-increasing function of λ, and the equation
must have a unique solution for λ. The associated stationary level of cash balances can
be any level greater than or equal to m∗ ≡ c∗1 (λ). Hence such a stationary equilibrium
exists in the case of any value of m̃ that is greater than or equal to m∗ .
    Finally, in any stationary equilibrium, the equilibrium real return on longer-term
bonds (and indeed, any asset that can neither be used as cash nor used as collateral
in order to issue liabilities that can be used as cash) will equal

                              E[Rb ]/Π = Rm ϕ̃1 /Π = β −1 .

Note that this is independent of both m̃ and Π. Thus a higher value of Rm /Π =
1 + rm (m̃) corresponds to a reduced spread between the returns on longer-term bonds
and those on holding cash. We also note that the value of ϕ̃1 (or more precisely, the
log of ϕ̃1 ) measures this spread.
    We thus find that there is a two-dimensional family of possible stationary equilib-
ria, which can be indexed by the choice of the two policy variables Π and m̃, which

                                            43
can be independently varied using the two dimensions of central-bank policy: conven-
tional monetary policy (interest-rate policy) and balance-sheet policy (quantitative
easing). These two dimensions of monetary policy have quite different effects. In
our flexible-price model, interest-rate policy has no effect on any real variables, but
can be used (within the limit imposed by the zero lower bound) to control inflation.
Balance-sheet policy (changing the total supply of outside safe assets by increasing
or reducing the quantity of longer-term bonds held by the central bank) can instead
affect the steady-state values of all of the real variables in our model, except that
further increases in the real supply of outside safe assets beyond the level m̃ = m∗
have no further effects.
    The possible stationary values of the various real variables that can be achieved
by alternative monetary policies can thus be fully characterized by considering the
one-parameter family of stationary equilibria corresponding to different values of m̃.
These equilibria can be classified as of three possible types, according to which of the
financial constraints bind. (The three possible cases correspond to the three cases
discussed in our treatment in the previous section of the endogenous determination
of the safe asset supply.)
    First, there are equilibria in which the real outside supply of safe assets equals or
exceeds the level m∗ required for satiation; in these equilibria, the cash-in-advance
constraint is slack, bankers finance none of their purchases of durables by issuing
collateralized short-term debt (so that the collateral constraint on such issuance is
also slack), and as no assets are sold in a fire sale even if the crisis state occurs, there
is no ex post regret of the size of investors’ credit limit (so that the constraint that
this must be fixed in advance also does not bind).
    Second, there are equilibria in which the real outside supply of safe assets is
insufficient, and there is some private issuance of safe debt, but the quantity of safe
debt issued by bankers is still small enough for the collateral constraint not to bind.
And third, there are equilibria in which the incentive for issuance of safe debt by
bankers is so strong that their issuance of such liabilities is limited by the availability
of suitable collateral. The three cases correspond to different ranges of real outside
supply of safe assets: high values of m̃, an intermediate range of values of m̃, and low
values of m̃ respectively.
    This one-parameter family of stationary equilibria can alternatively be param-
eterized by the associated value of Rm /Π = 1 + rm (m̃), the stationary gross real


                                           44
       10


        9


        8


        7

                                                                              c1
        6
                                                                              c2
                                                                              cn3
        5
                                                                              cc3

        4                                                                     I


        3


        2


        1


        0
               0.6    0.65     0.7    0.75         0.8   0.85   0.9    0.95         1
                                              Rm


Figure 2: The allocation of resources in alternative stationary equilibria corresponding
to different constant values of Rm /Π.

rate of return on cash. Values of m̃ increasing from 0 up to m∗ correspond to val-
ues of Rm /Π increasing from some minimum value 1 + rm (0) (which may well be
positive, though it will generally correspond to a negative real rate of return) up to
1+rm (m∗ ) = β −1 > 1 (the point at which the spread between the return on bonds and
that on cash is completely eliminated). A numerical example may usefully illustrate
how systematic variation in this parameter changes the character of the stationary
equilibrium.
    Figure 2 shows how the stationary equilibrium values of c1 , c2 , cc3 , cn3 , and I vary
with alternative stationary values for Rm /Π. (The figure thus completely displays
the allocation of real resources in each possible equilibrium, and supplies all of the
information needed to evaluate the level of expected utility of the representative
household in each case, and draw conclusions about the welfare effects of alternative
possible long-run policy targets.) The values of Rm /Π considered vary from 1 + rm (0)


                                             45
at the left boundary of the figure to 1 + rm (m∗ ) = β −1 > 1 at the right boundary.
    In this example, cash and credit goods enter the household’s utility function sym-
metrically, so that in an efficient allocation equal quantities of the two goods are
produced and consumed; thus a comparison of the magnitudes of c1 and c2 can be
used to see the size of the distortion created by the cash-in-advance constraint. There
is no distortion (c1 = c2 ) at the extreme right of the figure, i.e., when Rm /Π = β −1 ,
so that there is no spread between the return on longer-term bonds and cash. Moving
left in the figure, as the real return on cash is reduced (meaning that the spread is
made progressively larger), the extent to which c1 is less than c2 grows progressively
greater.
    The efficiency of the level of production and consumption of special goods can
also be seen directly from the figure. Because both the utility from consuming spe-
cial goods and the disutility of supplying them are independent of which state occurs
in subperiod 2, an efficient allocation requires that cn3 equal cc3 ; and for the parameter-
ization used in this example, the common efficient level of special goods production
is equal to 1 (regardless of the level of production and consumption of other goods).
Thus the degree to which cn3 is greater than cc3 (and to which the former quantity is
greater than 1, while the latter quantity is smaller) indicates the degree to which the
production and consumption of special goods is distorted by the fact that investors
spend some of their resources on acquiring risky durables in the fire sale that occurs
in the crisis state. As one moves from right to left in the figure, the incentive of
bankers to issue collateralized short-term debt increases, but the consequence is an
increasing quantity of durables that must be sold to redeem such debt in the even of
a fire sale, increasing the wedge between cn3 and cc3 .
    The three different possible types of equilibrium correspond to different regions of
the horizontal axis in the figure. The possibility of an equilibrium in which the cash-in-
advance constraint is slack is represented by the right boundary (Rm /Π = β −1 ); while
this corresponds to an entire range of possible values of m̃ (any m̃ ≥ m∗ ), they all
correspond to the same real return on cash and the same allocation of resources. The
case in which the cash-in-advance constraint binds but bankers’ collateral constraint
is slack corresponds to values of Rm /Π from around 0.91 to 1.01, while the case in
which both constraints bind corresponds to all values of Rm /Π from the left boundary
to about 0.91.
    In the relatively high-cash-return region, because bankers’ collateral constraint


                                           46
       12




       10




        8




        6




        4


                     Qs
                     M
        2
                     Γs
                     D

        0
               0.6        0.65   0.7   0.75         0.8   0.85   0.9   0.95   1
                                               Rm



Figure 3: The endogenous supply of safe assets in alternative stationary equilibria
corresponding to different constant values of Rm /Π, with its implications for both
the capital structure of banks and the total supply of safe assets.

does not bind, the quantity of short-term debt issuance by bankers increases relatively
rapidly as Rm /Π is decreased, as a consequence of which the wedge between cn3 and cc3
increases relatively sharply; but because durables are still valued at their fundamental
value in subperiod 1, the production of durables does not increase greatly. In the
lower-cash-return region, instead, further reductions in Rm /Π do not increase debt
issuance as rapidly (because now the quantity of debt issued can increase only to the
extent that the quantity of durables purchased by bankers also increases enough to
provide the required additional collateral), so that the wedge between cn3 and cc3 no
longer increases so rapidly; but because the ability of durables to allow additional
short-term debt issuance increases the price of durables above their fundamental
value, the equilibrium production of durables now increases more rapidly with further
reductions in Rm /Π.


                                              47
    Figure 3 shows the stationary values of another set of variables, across the same
one-parameter family of stationary equilibria: the supply of short-term collateralized
debt D̃ (the stationary value of the variable D̃t ≡ ϕ̃6t Dt ), the resulting total supply
of cash M̂ , the upper bound Γ̃s on issuance of short-term debt by bankers given by
the expected market value of their assets in the event of a crisis, and for purposes
of comparison, the market value Q̃s of those same assets in subperiod 1.37 One sees
that as the equilibrium return on cash falls, and the money premium correspondingly
increases, as one moves from the right boundary of the figure to the left, that the
issuance of short-term debt by banks increases from an initial value of zero (when
the money premium is zero) to progressively higher values. The rate of increase is
sharpest in the high-cash-return region, because the upper bound on debt issuance
does not bind; after that constraint begins to bind (around Rm /Π = 0.91), D̃ increases
less sharply with further declines in Rm /Π, as it can only increase to the extent
that Γ̃s also increases. In fact, in the high-cash-return region, Γ̃s decreases as the
money premium increases; the reason is that, as short-term debt issuance increases
the quantity of assets that must be sold in a fire sale in the event of a crisis increases,
depressing the fire-sale value of bankers’ assets. Once Rm /Π falls to around 0.91,
the constraint comes to bind, both because of the increase in desired debt issuance
and the reduction in the value of the collateral available to back such debt. Beyond
this point, further increases in the size of the money premium cause Γ̃s to increase,
rather than continuing to decrease; this is because the value of relaxing the constraint
on short-term debt issuance now contributes to a larger market value of durables in
subperiod 1,38 which induces a larger market supply of durables (as can be seen from
the I curve in Figure 2), so that Γ̃s increases slightly, even though the fire-sale price
Γ̃ continues to fall.
  37
     Each of these variables is measured in marginal-utility units, as they have a constant value in
marginal-utility units in a stationary equilibrium, regardless of the rate of inflation. Also, we have
shown above that the equilibrium relations determining the values of these variables are in many
cases simpler when written in terms of the variables expressed in marginal-utility units.
  38
     Specifically, the value of ϕ̃1 Q̃/λ increases, which is the ratio of the marginal-utility value of the
sale price of a unit of the durable good in subperiod 1, given that payment received in subperiod 1
can be used to acquire cash for use by the shopper, to the marginal-utility value of the sale price
of a unit of normal goods in subperiod 2. This relative price determines the incentive to produce
additional investment goods, as shown by condition (2.12), and hence the supply of durables. Note
that the stationary value of Q̃ does not increase, as can be seen from the Q̃s curve in this figure.



                                                  48
    We can also see, from the size of the gap between the solid line indicating the value
of M̂ and the dashed line indicating the value of D̃, how the part of the cash supply
that comes from outside safe assets (the value of λm̃, in marginal-utility units) varies
across the alternative stationary equilibria. This value decreases monotonically as one
proceeds from right to left in the figure, both because D̃ increases and because M̂
decreases; the latter effect represents the reduction in the demand for cash balances
as the opportunity cost of holding them (i.e., the money premium) increases. The
fact that the equilibrium relationship between the size of the money premium and the
quantity of outside safe assets is monotonic indicates how the choice of a stationary
level for the supply of outside safe assets (through the combination of the Treasury’s
debt-management policy and the central bank’s balance-sheet policy) can be used to
determine the stationary value of Rm /Π, and thus to select which of the stationary
equilibria depicted in these figures should occur.
    Note that there is a limit to how far Rm /Π can be reduced by shrinking the supply
of outside safe assets; at the left edge of the figure, m̃ falls to zero, while Rm /Π is still
positive. (This is because this lower bound does not correspond to an opportunity
cost high enough to reduce the demand for cash balances to zero; it is only necessary
that the demand for cash balances fall to a low enough level that it is no greater than
the quantity of safe liabilities that bankers wish to supply, which grows the larger
the money premium gets.) However, this lower bound for Rm /Π can easily be well
below 1 (as shown in the figure), corresponding to a negative long-run equilibrium
short-term real rate. Thus our model is one in which it is perfectly possible to have
an equilibrium short-term real rate that remains negative forever, as a result of a
shortage of safe assets; this results in a “safety trap” in the sense of Caballero and
Farhi (2013), in the case that the inflation target Π is too low. An advantage of
working with a fully developed monetary equilibrium model, however, is that we see
that the existence of a safety trap depends not simply on too low a supply of safe
assets (or too great a demand for them), but also on choosing too low an inflation
target, just as in the “liquidity trap” model of Krugman (1998) and Eggertsson and
Woodford (2003).
    Figure 4 shows how the degree to which durables are both over-valued in subperiod
1 (and at the time that the decision to divert resources into the production of durables
is made) and under-valued in the event of a fire sale varies across the alternative
stationary equilibria. The dashed plots the stationary value of ϕ̃1 Q̃/Q̃∗ , which is


                                            49
         1.4

                                                                 Λs /(βγ[p + (1 − p)q])
         1.3
                                                                 ΛΓ/(γq)


         1.2



         1.1



          1



         0.9



         0.8



         0.7




                 0.6      0.65     0.7     0.75         0.8   0.85      0.9        0.95   1
                                                   Rm



Figure 4: The degree of initial over-valuation of durables (dashed line) and the degree
of their subsequent under-valuation in the event of a crisis (solid line), in alternative
stationary equilibria corresponding to different constant values of Rm /Π.

to say the ratio of the subperiod 1 market price of durables to their “fundamental”
value.39 Thus durables are over-valued in subperiod 1 to the extent that this quantity
exceeds 1. We see that it equals 1 (there is no over-valuation) in the high-cash-return
region, given that banks do not wish to acquire additional durables for the sake of
being able to issue more collateralized short-term debt. However, for all values of
Rm /Π below 0.91, durables are over-valued, and the degree of over-valuation gets
progressively higher the larger is the money premium.
    The solid line in the same figure plots the stationary value of Γ̃/γq, which is the ra-
tio of the fire-sale price of durables to their fundamental value under this contingency
  39
    Alternatively, the quantity plotted is the ratio of Λs to its fundamental value β Q̃∗ , where Λs is
the marginal-utility valuation assigned to an additional quantity of investment goods sufficient to
allow production of an additional unit of durables, so that the demand curve for investment goods
can be written as F 0 (I) = λ/Λs .


                                                  50
(which is smaller than their fundamental value in subperiod 1, since if a crisis occurs
the probability that the durables are worthless is higher than previously realized).
Thus durables are under-valued in the fire sale to the extent that this quantity is less
than 1. As shown in the figure, durables are under-valued in the fire sale in the case of
any Rm /Π < β −1 (corresponding to any m̃ < m∗ ), and the degree of under-valuation
increases steadily the larger the money premium. The degree of under-valuation
increases especially sharply with increases in the money premium in the high-cash-
return region, since in this region s∗ (the quantity of assets sold in the fire sale if one
occurs) increases relatively sharply with increases in the money premium. Once the
constraint that s∗ can be no larger than the total quantity s of assets held by bankers
becomes a binding constraint, s∗ increases much less rapidly with further increases in
the money premium, and the degree of equilibrium under-valuation correspondingly
ceases to increase so rapidly, though it grows somewhat.
    We can alternatively measure the extent to which distortions are created by finan-
cial constraints in the alternative stationary equilibria by looking not at how market
valuations differ from fundamental values, but at the extent to which the constraints
affect households’ decisions, as indicated by the size of the Lagrange multipliers as-
sociated with the various constraints. Figure 5 plots the values of the three key
(normalized) Lagrange multipliers in our model: ϕ̃1 (which indicates a binding cash-
in-advance constraint to the extent that it is greater than 140 ), ϕ̃3 (which indicates a
binding constraint on the quantity of collateralized short-term debt that bankers can
issue to the extent that it is positive), and ϕ̃c5 (which indicates a binding constraint
on the ability of investors to spend as much in the crisis state as the household would
wish ex post, to the extent that it is greater than 1).
    The value of ϕ̃1 is equal to u1 /u2 , the marginal rate of substitution between cash
and credit goods, and the more this exceeds 1, the greater the inefficiency of the allo-
cation of expenditure between these two types of goods (which have equal disutility
of supply). We see from the figure that the magnitude of this distortion increases
steadily as Rm /Π is reduced (which is to say, as the money premium increases),
starting from zero distortion when Rm /Π = β −1 , so that there is no money premium.
Moreover, the magnitude of the distortion is a convex function of the size of the
money premium, so that the rate at which the distortion increases becomes greater
  40
    Note that the quantity ϕ̃1 − 1 plotted in the figure is also the value of ϕ̃4 , as well as 1 − p times
the value of ϕ̃2 .


                                                 51
        3.5


                                                                       ϕ1 − 1

         3                                                             ϕ3

                                                                       ϕc5 − 1

        2.5




         2




        1.5




         1




        0.5




         0
                0.6    0.65    0.7    0.75         0.8   0.85   0.9   0.95       1
                                              Rm



Figure 5: Lagrange multipliers indicating the degree to which the various financial
constraints bind, in alternative stationary equilibria corresponding to different con-
stant values of Rm /Π.

for larger values of the money premium.
    As explained in section 2.3, the stationary equilibrium values of cc3 and cn3 are both
monotonic functions of ϕ̃c5 (the first an increasing function, the latter a decreasing
function), with ϕ̃c5 = 1 corresponding to the efficient level of production c∗3 of special
goods in both states. Hence the extent to which ϕ̃c5 is greater than 1 indicates the
degree of inefficiency in the level of production and consumption of special goods
(in both states) owing to the possibility of a fire sale of assets by banks. The figure
shows that the magnitude of this distortion also increases as Rm /Π is reduced, starting
from zero distortion when Rm /Π = β −1 . However, the magnitude of this distortion
increases sharply with increases in the size of the money premium only in the high-
cash-return region; once the availability of collateral becomes a binding constraint
on issuance of short-term debt by bankers, the degree of inefficiency in the level of


                                             52
production of special goods increases only gradually with further increases in the size
of the money premium.
    Finally, the figure indicates that ϕ̃3 > 0, indicating that the constraint that short-
term debt issuance cannot exceed the amount that can be backed by the collateral
value of bankers’ assets binds, only for values of Rm /Π less than 0.91. Below this
point, however, the value of the multiplier rises sharply with further increases in the
money premium; this accounts for the increase in the subperiod 1 market price of
durables, shown in Figure 4, over this same region.


3.2     Consequences of a Larger Central-Bank Balance Sheet
We can now consider how a quantitative easing policy that permanently increases
the size of the central bank’s balance sheet (in real terms, or relative to the size of
the economy) — and more specifically, a policy of purchasing longer-term assets and
financing these purchases by issuing short-term safe liabilities — affects the economy’s
long-run equilibrium. To the extent that the effects of the policy are not undercut by
an offsetting shift in the maturity composition of the debt issued by the Treasury,41
such a policy can increase the steady-state level of m̃. If m̃ < m∗ , so that there is
not already satiation of the demand for safe assets even without any creation of safe
assets by the private sector, then increasing m̃ will mean moving to a stationary
equilibrium with a higher value of Rm /Π, corresponding to a movement further to
the right in each of the figures just presented.
    This has real effects, and in particular has consequences for financial stability.
However, a larger supply of outside safe assets as a result of a policy of quantitative
easing should improve financial stability. Specifically, whether the economy begins in
the low-cash-return or high-cash-return region, a higher value of Rm /Π (and hence
a smaller money premium) reduces private issuance of short-term debt D̃. As a
consequence, it reduces the quantity s∗ of durables that will have to be sold in a fire
sale in the event of a crisis, and so reduces the severity of the distortions associated
with a crisis.42 Both the degree to which durables are under-valued in the crisis (as
  41
     Note that such a shift in Treasury policy did offset a significant part of the effect of the Fed’s
asset purchases in recent years, as shown by Greenwood et al. (2014).
  42
     Note that in the simple model presented here, the probability of a crisis is exogenous, and so
cannot be affected by policy. But policy can affect the severity of a crisis, conditional on the crisis
state being reached.


                                                53
shown in Figure 4) and the degree of inefficiency in the level of production of special
goods (as shown in Figure 2) are smaller, the larger the value of Rm /Π.
     Thus from the standpoint of financial stability, a larger central-bank balance sheet
is clearly to be preferred (at least as far as long-run steady states are concerned). In
fact, the other real effects of a quantitative easing policy on the long-run steady
state are also beneficial. A higher value of Rm /Π implies that the cash-in-advance
constraint binds less tightly (as shown by the value of ϕ̃1 in Figure 5), and this
results in a more efficient allocation of household expenditure on cash and credit
goods between the two types of goods (a ratio of c1 /c2 closer to 1, in Figure 2). And
in the low-cash-return region (where ϕ̃3 > 0), a higher value of Rm /Π also results in
less over-valuation of durables in subperiod 1, so that there is less inefficient over-
production of durables (as is also seen in Figure 2). Thus each of these considerations
points in the same direction: the equilibrium allocation of resources is more efficient
(and the welfare of the representative household is increased) if the real supply of
outside safe assets is increased.
     The conclusion that expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet is associated
with a more efficient allocation of resources between cash and credit goods might
seem surprising in light of the analysis of Lucas and Stokey (1987), who conclude,
in the context of a similar model (but without durable goods production or fire
sales), that efficiency in this respect is greater the lower the rate of growth of the
monetary base — with the highest levels of efficiency (and hence of welfare for the
representative household) being achieved only in the case of steady contraction of
the size of the central bank’s balance sheet. The difference in conclusions results
from their assumption that the safe liabilities that count as cash must earn a nominal
interest rate of zero (so that Rm = 1 is assumed). In that case, steady states with
different values of Rm /Π must correspond to different rates of inflation Π — whereas
here the choice of the inflation target Π is independent of the aspects of policy that
determine Rm /Π, within the bound required by the lower bound on nominal interest
rates.
     Lucas and Stokey conclude, as we do, that relaxation of the cash-in-advance con-
straint, and a more efficient allocation of expenditure between cash and credit goods,
requires a higher value of Rm /Π, but in their analysis this requires a lower rate of
inflation, and hence a lower rate of growth of the nominal value of outside safe assets
M̃t . In our model, it is also true that in a long-run stationary equilibrium, the rate of


                                          54
growth of M̃t must equal the inflation rate. But it is possible for the central bank to
control the value of the currency unit other than through its control of the path of M̃t
(by appropriate variation in Rtm ), so that there is a decision to make about how large
M̃t should be relative to the level of Pt aimed at through interest-rate policy, that is
separate from the question of the long-run rate of growth of both variables. Thus it
is not correct, more generally, to identify a decision to increase the size of the cen-
tral bank’s balance sheet with a decision to pursue a more inflationary policy; in the
long run, these are two distinct issues. The short-run consequences of balance-sheet
expansion are instead considered in section 5.


4      Quantitative Easing Compared with Macropru-
       dential Policy
Another implication of increasing the supply of central-bank reserves through a quan-
titative easing policy, not discussed in the analysis above, is relaxation of the con-
straint on private banks’ ability to issue money-like liabilities that may result from a
requirement that they hold reserves in proportion to their issuance of such liabilities.
Such reserve requirements apply (at least in some countries, like the US) to at least
some kinds of short-term safe instruments issued by commercial banks — though
not, even in the US, to the kind of privately issued STSIs that were most responsible
for the financial fragility exposed by the recent crisis.43 And under many traditional
textbook accounts of the way that monetary policy affects the economy, the key ef-
fect of a central-bank open-market operation is precisely to relax this constraint on
private bank behavior by increasing the quantity of reserves that are available to
satisfy the reserve requirement. This might seem to have important implications for
financial stability that would cut in the opposite direction to the analysis above; that
is, it might seem that expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet should have as
an effect, or even as its primary effect, an increase in the extent to which private
banks acquire risky assets and finance those assets by issuing money-like liabilities.
  43
    The kinds of liabilities, such as retail deposits at commercial banks, to which such requirements
apply were not the ones the demand for which proved to highly volatile. While these funds could in
principle be withdrawn on short notice, they were not, probably owing to the existence of deposit
insurance; and so they were not responsible for any appreciable funding risk.



                                               55
This is in fact a key theme of the analysis by Stein (2012), and the basis for the
proposal there that monetary policy decisions be considered from the standpoint of
“financial-stability regulation.”
    In the analysis here, we have abstracted from reserve requirements, since even
in the US, these have not been binding constraints on banks’ behavior during the
period when the Fed’s experiments with quantitative easing have occurred.44 We
can, however, use our framework to discuss the consequences for financial stability
of increasing or decreasing the cost to financial institutions of issuing collateralized
short-term debt as a source of financing, even when they hold sufficient assets to
provide the collateral for such issuance. But we view this as a separate dimension of
policy — macroprudential policy — that should be distinguished, conceptually, from
both conventional monetary policy (interest-rate policy) and central-bank balance-
sheet policy.45 One might well use instruments of macroprudential policy that affect
the ability and/or incentives of banks to issue money-like liabilities that are unrelated
to the central bank’s balance sheet (and that do not depend on the existence of reserve
requirements). And even when the tool that is used is a reserve requirement, one can
loosen or tighten this constraint independently of the way one that changes the size
of the central bank’s balance sheet; first, because one can vary the required reserve
ratio as well as the supply of reserves, and second, because the central bank can vary
the supply of STSIs without varying the supply of reserves, if it issues central-bank
bills or engages in reverse repo transactions,46 or by varying the quantity of Treasury
bills on its own balance sheet.
    The effects of varying macroprudential policy are in fact quite different from the
effects (considered above) of varying the central bank’s supply of outside safe assets,
when the latter policy is implemented in a way that has no direct effects on finan-
cial institutions’ cost of short-term debt issuance. We can introduce macroprudential
  44
     They were not relevant, even earlier, for most of the kinds of financing decisions modeled in this
paper. As noted earlier, the privately supplied “cash” in this model should be identified primarily
with repos or asset-backed commercial paper.
  45
     Macroprudential policy, modeled in a way similar to that used here, is also compared with
conventional monetary policy in Sergeyev (2016), which also discusses Ramsey policy when the two
distinct types of policy instruments exist. The discussion of optimal policy by Sergeyev does not
treat the use of balance-sheet policies of the kind that are the central focus here.
  46
     See in particular Carlson et al. (2014) on the usefulness of reverse repo transactions, such as
the Fed’s proposed ON RRP facility, for this purpose.



                                                56
policy into the model set about above in the following way. Suppose that a banker
who issues short-term debt with face value Dt obtains only ξ t Dt in additional funds
with which to acquire assets in subperiod 1, where 0 ≤ ξ t ≤ 1; the quantity (1 − ξ t )Dt
represents a proportional tax on issuance of safe debt, collected by the government.
The variable ξ t (or alternatively the tax rate) then represents an instrument of macro-
prudential policy. Note that ξ t may be varied from period to period, if the degree to
which it is desirable to provide a disincentive to safe debt issuance varies over time;
and that the choice of the path of {ξ t } is independent of the choice of the path of
{m̃t }, the real outside supply of safe assets.
     One possible way of implementing such a tax on safe debt issuance is through
a reserve requirement. Suppose that a bank that issues safe debt with face value
D̂t is required to hold reserves Ht ≥ kt D̂t , where Ht is the value of the reserves in
the end-of-period settlement. Suppose furthermore that reserves pay a gross nominal
interest rate of Rtcb ≤ Rtm , which means that θt ≡ Rtm /Rtcb ≥ 1 units of cash must
be paid in subperiod 1 to acquire a unit of reserves. Finally, suppose that a bank’s
reserve balance can be used to pay off its safe debt in subperiod 2, if the holders of
the bank’s short-term debt are not willing to roll it over, with one unit of reserves
serving to retire one unit of short-term debt. Then the bank’s collateral constraint
again takes the form (1.3), and the assets sold in a fire sale must satisfy (1.6), where
now Dt ≡ D̂t − Ht is short-term debt issuance not covered by the bank’s reserve
balance. The funds obtained by the bank with which to purchase additional assets
in subperiod 1 are only D̂t − θt Ht , owing to the need to acquire reserves with some
of the proceeds of the debt issuance. This quantity can alternatively be expressed as
ξ t Dt , where
                                         1 − kt θt
                                   ξt ≡            ≤ 1.
                                           1 − kt
If we assume that kt θt ≤ 1, so that it is possible for the bank to acquire the required
reserves out of the proceeds of its short-term debt issuance,47 then ξ t ≥ 0 as assumed
above. Thus reserve requirements are an example of the kind of macroprudential
policy that can be modeled in the way proposed above (in the case that the interest
rate paid on reserves is less than the rate paid on cash). Note that in this case, ξ t can
be reduced either by reducing the interest rate Rtcb paid on reserves (relative to the
  47
   Note that tighter reserve requirements than this would have no effect, since when kt θt = 1,
banks are already completely precluded from raising any funds by issuing short-term debt.



                                            57
       12




       10




        8




        6




        4


                                                                            Qs

                                                                            M
        2
                                                                            Γs
                                                                            D


        0
            0.7       0.75        0.8        0.85        0.9         0.95
                                             ξ



Figure 6: Short-term debt issuance by banks (and the other variables shown in Figure
3) in alternative stationary equilibria corresponding to different constant values of ξ,
for a fixed value of Rm /Π.

central bank’s target for the interest rate paid on cash), or by increasing the required
reserve ratio kt .
    The FOCs that characterize optimal household behavior are not changed by the
introduction of macroprudential policy, except that (2.4) now takes the more general
form
                             ξ t ϕ1t = (1 − p)ϕ2t + Et ϕ6t .                       (4.1)
With this change, the derivation of the conditions for an intertemporal equilibrium
proceeds as in section 2. The equilibrium paths of the endogenous variables now
depend on the specification of the series {Pt , m̃t , ξ t }, representing three distinct di-
mensions of policy: conventional monetary policy, the determination of the outside
supply of safe assets by debt management policy and quantitative easing, and macro-
prudential policy.

                                           58
        1.3

                       Λs /(βγ[p + (1 − p)q])

        1.2            ΛΓ/(γq)




        1.1




         1




        0.9




        0.8




        0.7




              0.7     0.75             0.8           0.85   0.9      0.95
                                                     ξ



Figure 7: The degree of initial over-valuation of durables (dashed line) and the degree
of their subsequent under-valuation in the event of a crisis (solid line), in alternative
stationary equilibria corresponding to different constant values of ξ, for the same fixed
value of Rm /Π as in Figure 6.

    In this more general version of the model, we obtain a three-parameter family of
stationary equilibrium, indexed by stationary values Π, m̃, and ξ. The stationary real
allocation of resources depends only the stationary values of m̃ and ξ. In the previous
section, we have shown how variation in m̃ (or alternatively, in Rm /Π) affects the
stationary equilibrium values of real variables and relative prices, for a fixed value of ξ.
(In that section, we assumed ξ = 1; but similar qualitative conclusions would obtain in
the case of any fixed value of ξ.) Here we consider instead the consequences of varying
the stationary value of ξ, and in particular, the extent to which the effects of varying
the strength of macroprudential policy (perhaps by relaxing or tightening reserve
requirements) are equivalent to the effects of variations in the supply of reserves,
discussed in the previous section.


                                                59
    Figure 6 shows again the stationary values of the variables plotted in Figure 3
(that compare short-term debt issuance by banks with the total supply of cash and
with the available collateral to back such issuance), for alternative constant values
of ξ ≤ 1, holding fixed the target that determines the central bank’s balance-sheet
policy (here assumed to be a fixed target for the term premium associated with
longer-term bonds, or equivalently a fixed value of Rm /Π). In the case shown in
the figure, the target for Rm /Π is low enough that, in the absence of any reserve
requirement or other regulation of short-term debt issuance by banks (i.e., the case
ξ = 1), the stationary equilibrium is of the “low-cash-return” type discussed in the
previous section; that is, the incentive for short-term debt issuance by banks is great
enough for the collateral constraint to bind, resulting in over-valuation of durables
in subperiod 1, so that durables are over-supplied. We consider this case for our
numerical illustration because it is the case in which there is the most reason to be
interested in whether macroprudential policy can reduce the distortions resulting from
banks’ excessive incentive to issue short-term debt. The corresponding stationary
values for the market valuation of durables are shown in Figure 7.
    Figure 6 shows that as we increase the tax rate on short-term debt issuance (or
increase the effective tax rate, by increasing the required reserve ratio or reducing the
rate of interest paid on reserves), and thus lower ξ, the stationary value of D̃ falls.
And for a sufficiently large tax rate (the case of ξ less than 0.77, in our numerical
example), the collateral constraint ceases to bind; this implies that durables are no
longer over-valued in subperiod 1, as shown in Figure 7. In the case of an even
larger tax rate (though still less than 100 percent taxation of the proceeds from
issuing short-term debt), short-term debt financing of banks is completely driven
out (D̃ = 0), because the macroprudential tax fully offsets the value of the money
premium to issuers of financial claims that can be used as cash. (In our numerical
example, this occurs when ξ = 0.69, the left boundary of the figures.) When this
occurs, bankers no longer have to sell assets in a fire sale, even if the crisis state
occurs, and the under-valuation of durables in the crisis state is eliminated, as is also
shown in Figure 7. Further reductions in ξ below this value are irrelevant, as banks’
issuance of short-term debt cannot be further reduced.
    The implications of these alternative equilibria for the allocation of resources are
shown in Figure 8. Because balance-sheet policy is used to fix the value of Rm /Π,
the stationary value of ϕ̃1 , and hence the stationary value of ϕ̃4 , are unaffected by


                                         60
       10


        9


        8


        7


        6
                   c1

        5          c2
                   cn3
        4          cc3
                   I
        3


        2


        1


        0
            0.7          0.75    0.8        0.85        0.9        0.95
                                            ξ


Figure 8: The allocation of resources in the same set of alternative stationary equi-
libria shown in Figures 6 and 7.

changing ξ. This means that the degree of inefficiency in the allocation of expenditure
between cash and credit goods (as measured by the degree to which the marginal
rate of substitution u1 /u2 is greater than 1, the relative cost of producing them) is
unaffected, and hence the equilibrium levels of production of cash and credit goods
are little affected. However, as ξ is decreased from 1 (while still greater than 0.77),
the degree of inefficient over-production of investment goods is reduced, owing to
the decrease in the degree to which banks are willing to pay to relax their collateral
constraints. (Once ξ is less than 0.77, the collateral constraint no longer binds, as
shown in Figure 6; hence further reductions in ξ produce no further reductions in
this distortion.) Moreover, because reductions in ξ reduce short-term debt issuance
(as long as ξ remains greater than 0.69), and hence the value of s∗ , they reduce the
degree of inefficiency in the production and consumption of special goods: both cc3
and cn3 move closer to the efficient level of 1, which they reach exactly if ξ is reduced


                                         61
to 0.69.
    We can now ask to what extent the effects of expanding the supply of central-bank
liabilities through quantitative easing are equivalent, or even similar, to the effects
of relaxing a reserve requirement that limits the ability of banks to issue money-like
liabilities. In the context of our model, the former sort of policy corresponds to an
increase in m̃ (resulting in an increase in Rm /Π, if there is not already satiation in
cash balances), which can be implemented while keeping ξ fixed; the latter sort of
policy corresponds to an increase in ξ (assuming a reserve requirement tight enough
to bind), which can be implemented while keeping m̃ fixed, or with an appropriate
adjustment of the central bank’s balance sheet, while keeping Rm /Π fixed.
    A comparison of Figures 6-8 with Figures 2-4 shows that not only are these two
policies not equivalent, their effects are in many respects exactly the opposite. An
expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet while fixing ξ corresponds to a movement
from left to right in Figures 2-4: short-term debt issuance by private banks falls,
both the over-valuation of durables in subperiod 1 and their under-valuation in the
event of a crisis are reduced, the over-production of durables is reduced, and level of
production of special goods in both the c and n states becomes more nearly efficient. A
relaxation of a binding reserve requirement while fixing Rm /Π corresponds instead to
a movement from left to right in Figures 6-8, which essentially reverses the effects seen
in the earlier figures: short-term debt issuance by private banks increases, both the
over-valuation of durables in subperiod 1 and their under-valuation in the crisis state
increase, the over-production of durables in increased, and the level of production of
special goods is progressively more severely distorted.
    In fact, both an expansion of the outside supply of safe assets and a tightening
of reserve requirements (or other forms of macroprudential policy) have similar con-
sequences for financial stability, insofar as both reduce the extent to which banks
finance themselves by issuing short-term safe debt. Either of these policies, pur-
sued far enough, will completely eliminate private issuance of money-like claims (the
right boundary of Figures 2-4, or the left boundary of Figures 6-8), and consequently
eliminate the distortions resulting from the risk of a fire sale of assets and from the
desire of bankers to obtain assets that can be used to collateralize short-term debt
issuance. Thus each of these policies, either of which is welfare-enhancing (when
not irrelevant), can serve to some extent as a substitute for the other. It is worth
noting, however, that while a sufficient increase in the outside supply of safe assets


                                         62
would make macroprudential policy unnecessary in our model (since private issuance
of money-like claims can be completely eliminated, even if ξ = 1), the reverse is not
true: even a macroprudential policy of the maximum possible stringency (one that
completely prevents private issuance of STSIs) will not eliminate the welfare gains
from further expansion of the outside supply of safe assets, since even when D̃ = 0
(as in the case with ξ = 0.69 in Figures 6-8), there will still be inefficient under-
consumption of cash goods, owing to the binding cash-in-advance constraint, as long
as m̃ < m∗ .


5    Conventional and Unconventional Monetary
     Policy in the Presence of Nominal Rigidities
In the analysis thus far, all prices have been assumed to be perfectly flexible, and
to clear markets each period. In such a model, conventional monetary policy has
no real effects, and affects only the general level of prices in terms of the monetary
unit. It follows that conventional monetary policy has no consequences for financial
stability. This establishes a sharp distinction between the effects of conventional
monetary policy (interest-rate policy) and balance-sheet policy, since as shown above,
the central bank’s balance sheet (specifically, the real supply of safe assets by the
central bank) does have consequences for financial stability.
    Such an analysis is adequate for consideration of the possible long-run stationary
equilibria achievable under alternative policies, as in the previous two sections. But it
does not suffice for an analysis of the considerations at play when alternative dimen-
sions of monetary policy are used to address short-run macroeconomic stabilization
objectives, and this is the context in which central banks’ recent experiments with
quantitative easing have been conducted. To address the issues raised by recent poli-
cies, we need to consider the consequences for financial stability of using quantitative
easing as a substitute for an interest-rate cut that is prevented by the effective lower
bound on short-term nominal interest rates, in a situation where such an interest-rate
cut would otherwise be desired in order to achieve a higher level of output.
    The notion that an interest-rate cut would be desired in order to increase real
activity only makes sense in the presence of nominal rigidities of some kind. Here
we discuss a simple extension of the model presented above, that shows how sticky


                                         63
prices allow conventional monetary policy to have real effects in the short run, while
it affects only the general level of prices in the long run. We can then compare the
effects of quantitative easing to those of an interest-rate cut, both with respect to
the effects of these policies on aggregate demand, and their consequences for financial
stability.


5.1    Equilibrium with a Sticky Price for Normal Goods
We suppose that it is only the price Pt of normal goods that must be set in advance,
while the prices of special goods, durable goods, and all financial assets are assumed to
be perfectly flexible, as above. (Because all three types of normal goods are perfect
substitutes from the standpoint of their suppliers, we suppose that a single price
Pt is posted, at which goods of any of these types can be purchased; we suppose
that the buyer determines which type of good will be obtained.) For simplicity,
we also consider here the case of a single unexpected aggregate shock (apart from
the kind of uncertainty represented in Figure 1) at some date t, in response to which
monetary policy (both interest-rate policy and balance-sheet policy) may be adjusted;
we suppose that there is no further uncertainty (except for the kind depicted in Figure
1) about how the economy will evolve after this shock occurs, and that the shock is
completely unanticipated prior to its occurrence.
    The fact that the shock is completely unexpected means that before it occurs,
people expect an equilibrium in which there will never be any random developments
except the kind depicted in Figure 1. We may suppose that this equilibrium is
a stationary equilibrium of the kind described in section 3. Note that in such an
equilibrium, the price Pτ of normal goods in any period τ is a deterministic function
of time; it does not depend on which state is reached in subperiod 2 of period τ , nor
does it depend on the history ξ τ of states revealed in previous periods. Hence we
may suppose that the same price Pτ is set for normal goods in all periods τ ≤ t as
would clear markets in the flexible-price stationary equilibrium analyzed above, even
if the price Pτ must be set before subperiod 2 of period τ is reached. For purposes of
the present discussion, we need not discuss how exactly the predetermined price of
normal goods is determined, beyond the assumption that in an environment where
the future is perfectly predictable (except for the uncertainty each period depicted in
Figure 1), the price that is set each period is the one that would clear the market for


                                         64
normal goods.
     Let us suppose that period t is one in which no crisis occurs in subperiod 2 (though
it is not known up until this time that this would be the case). But let us also suppose
that in subperiod 2 of period t, an unexpected shock occurs, as a result of which the
utility of cash and credit goods consumption is equal to χu(c1t , c2t ), and the disutility
of supplying normal goods is equal to χv(Yt ), for some factor χ > 0 that need not
equal 1; the other components of the utility function are unaffected by the shock.
The factor χ is assumed to take a value different from 1 only in period t (and prior
to period t, it is assumed to equal 1 with probability 1 in period t as well). The point
of assuming a shock of this particular type is that for a given level of production
of investment goods, the efficient level of production and consumption of cash and
credit goods would not be changed by the shock χ; however, the real rate of interest
required to sustain that level of demand will change (will be lower if χ is lower).
Hence the shock χ represents a “demand disturbance” to which it would be desirable
to respond by lowering interest rates, if this is not precluded by the interest-rate lower
bound.
     Both conventional monetary policy and balance-sheet policy are allowed to re-
spond to the occurrence of the shock, though their paths are assumed to be perfectly
predictable from then on, as with all other exogenous variables. We suppose that Rτm
and m̃τ are both determined in subperiod 2 of period τ − 1. Hence neither Rtm nor
m̃t can be affected by the value of χ; these variables are both equal to their values
in the stationary equilibrium. But Rτm and m̃τ can both differ from their stationary
equilibrium values in periods τ ≥ t + 1.
     For simplicity, we shall here consider only policy responses to the shock of a
special sort. We continue to suppose that from period t + 1 onward, conventional
monetary policy (that is, the choice of Rτm + 1 for all τ ≥ t + 1) is used to ensure that
the path of normal goods prices {Pτ } grows at the constant rate π ∗ in all periods
τ ≥ t + 1.48 We similarly continue to suppose that balance-sheet policy is used to
  48
    Note that Pt+1 is set in advance on the basis of expectations about the demand for normal
                                                               m
goods in period t + 1, which will depend on the interest rate Rt+2 because of condition (2.15). Thus
                      m
the rule for setting Rτ +1 in periods τ ≥ t + 1 can be used to ensure that the market-clearing price
for normal goods in all periods τ ≥ t + 1 are consistent with the inflation target. This desideratum
                      m
leaves the value of Rt+1  undetermined. Note that the value of Pt reflects expectations about how
  m
Rt+1 would be set; but these are expectations about monetary policy in period t that were held
prior to the unexpected shock, that may not be confirmed, as a result of the shock.


                                               65
achieve a real outside supply of cash mτ +1 equal to the stationary equilibrium value
m̃ for all τ ≥ t + 1. We can then reduce the set of alternative monetary policies that
we consider to a two-parameter family, corresponding to different possible choices of
   m
Rt+1  and m̃t+1 (both of which must be chosen in subperiod 2 of period t, but which
may depend on the value of χ).49
     Because the price Pt has been fixed in advance, it is assumed to be independent
of the value of χ, and equal to the price associated with the stationary equilibrium
that had previously been expected to continue. Once the shock χ occurs, there is
no further uncertainty about how the economy will evolve from then on (except the
uncertainty depicted in Figure 1). Hence we may suppose that the price Pτ of normal
goods in each period τ ≥ t + 1 is set so as to clear the market for normal goods in
that period. (While we assume that Pτ must be set prior to subperiod 2 of period
τ , we suppose that it is not set prior to subperiod 2 of period τ − 1.50 ) Thus in the
equilibrium considered in this section, the only period in which the market for normal
goods need not clear is period t (the period in which the shock χ occurs); in that
period, Pt is set at the level that would clear the market in the event that χ = 1.
     More generally, we shall suppose that all variables that are determined in sub-
period 1 of period t, or earlier, are determined in the way that they are in the
equilibrium in which χ = 1 is expected (that is, as in the stationary equilibrium with
flexible prices implied by the initial policy). Thus the values of At , Mt , Bt , Dt , Ft , st ,
and Qt are unaffected by the shock, in addition to Pt and all variables dated t − 1
or earlier. Instead the variables c1t , c2t , c3t , It , Yt , xt , and P̃t , as well as all variables
dated t + 1 or later, are determined in a way that takes account of the occurrence of
the shock χ.51 The Lagrange multipliers ϕ4t , ϕ5t , and ϕ6t are jointly determined with
this latter set of variables (as well as the Lagrange multipliers for later periods).
     The variables that are affected by the shock χ are determined by a system of
intertemporal equilibrium conditions of the form stated earlier, with the following
  49
     For simplicity, in this section we abstract from the possible use of macroprudential policy, as in
sections 1-3; that is, we consider only equilibria in which ξ t = 1 at all times.
  50
     This means that the length of time for which prices are sticky is limited in the proposed model.
A quantitatively realistic model would doubtless need to allow some prices to remain fixed for a
longer period, but the simple case considered here suffices to illustrate the qualitative effects of
temporary stickiness of prices.
  51
     Note that the variables s∗t and Γt are undefined, as we have assumed that the crisis state does
not occur in period t.


                                                66
exceptions. First, the fact that the suppliers of normal goods must supply whatever
quantity of such goods is demanded at the predetermined price Pt means that the
FOC (2.13) need not be satisfied in period t ex post (that is, after the shock χ occurs).
However, the other FOCs for optimal household behavior stated above continue to
apply, and (2.13) also must hold in periods t + 1 and later (since normal goods prices
in those periods are set in a way that clears the market). Thus we drop one (but only
one) of the conditions that would determine a flexible-price intertemporal equilibrium
from subperiod 2 of period t onward, replacing it by the requirement that Pt equal a
predetermined value, whether this clears the market for normal goods or not. Second,
the partial derivatives ui (c1 , c2 ) in FOCs (2.9)–(2.10) are replaced by χui (c1 , c2 ) (for
i = 1, 2) in period t only. All other FOCs and market-clearing conditions continue to
take the forms stated above.
    The demand for cash and credit goods in period t will then be given by

                  c1t = c1 (λt /χ; Mt /Pt ),        c2t = c2 (λt /χ; Mt /Pt ),

where Mt /Pt is unaffected by the shock. Aggregate demand for normal goods in
period t is accordingly

            Yt = c1 (λt /χ; Mt /Pt ) + c2 (λt /χ; Mt /Pt ) + I(λt ; λt+1 , m̃t+1 ).      (5.1)

Since c1 (λ; m) and c2 (λ; m) are both non-increasing functions of λ, and at least c2
must be decreasing, it follows that aggregate demand is a monotonically increasing
function of χ, for given values of λt and λt+1 .
   Condition (2.40) continues to be a requirement for equilibrium, as a result of
which we must have

                                                                          m      Pt
              λt = β λt+1 ϕ̂1 (λt+1 ; F (I(λt ; λt+1 , m̃t+1 )), m̃t+1 ) Rt+1        .   (5.2)
                                                                                Pt+1
                                                         m
This equation indicates the way in which the choice of Rt+1  in period t affects the value
of λt , and through it aggregate demand Yt , for given expectations about conditions
in period t + 1. Note that if the price Pt were required to clear the market for
normal goods, substitution of (5.1) into (2.13) would yield a condition to determine
the required value of λt in equilibrium; (5.2) would then indicate the interest rate
  m
Rt+1   required to achieve the price-level target Pt . Under the assumption that Pt is
                                                                        m
predetermined and need not clear the market, it is possible for Rt+1        to change in

                                              67
response to the shock, resulting in a value of Yt that need not satisfy the voluntary
supply condition (2.13).
   In each period from t + 1 onward, we effectively have flexible prices, so that
                                                                                   m
condition (2.39) is again required for equilibrium. Thus for any specification of Rt+1
and of the path {m̃τ } for all τ ≥ t + 1, the equilibrium sequence {λτ } for τ ≥ t is
determined by condition (5.2) and the sequence of conditions of the form (2.39) for
each period from t + 1 onward. Given a solution for the sequence {λτ }, aggregate
demand for normal goods is determined by (5.1) in period t, and by (2.37) in each
period from t + 1 onward. The implied equilibrium values of other variables are then
determined in the way discussed in section 2.


5.2    Real Effects of              Conventional          and      Unconventional
       Monetary Policy
We can now compare the effects of quantitative easing with those of conventional
                                                                                 m
interest-rate policy, as possible responses to a shock χ. Note that if both Rt+1      and
the path {m̃τ } for t ≥ t + 1 remain fixed at the values associated with the stationary
equilibrium in which there is no shock, then the values λτ = λ̄ for all τ ≥ t will satisfy
condition (2.39) in period t and condition (2.39) for each of the periods t+1 and later,
where λ̄ is the constant value of λτ in the stationary equilibrium. Aggregate demand
for normal goods in period t is then given by (5.1). If χ = 0, this implies Yt = Ȳ , the
constant level of output in the stationary equilibrium. If instead χ < 0, we will have
Yt < Ȳ . This reduction in the production of normal goods will be inefficient, since it
will imply that
                      u2 (c1t , c2t ) = χλ̄ < λ̄ = v 0 (Ȳ ) ≤ v 0 (Yt ),
so that the marginal utility of additional consumption of normal goods would exceed
the marginal disutility of supplying them.
    We consider now the extent to which monetary policy can be used to respond to
such a shock. In addition to the effects of policy on production and consumption,
we shall be interested in how each of our possible dimensions of central-bank policy
influence financial conditions. Two measures of financial conditions are especially
useful. One is the size of the money premium earned by cash, which we can measure




                                          68
by the extent to which the ratio
                                         b
                                    Et [Rt+1 ]
                                        m
                                               = ϕ̃1,t+1
                                     Rt+1

is greater than one. This is a measure of financial conditions that determines the
incentives for short-term debt issuance by banks. Another important measure is the
expected one-period real return on longer-term bonds,
                                           b      
                               b           Rt+1 Pt     λt
                         1 + r̄t+1 ≡ Et+1            =      .
                                            Pt+1       β λ̄

(Note that this aspect of financial conditions can alternatively be measured by the
value of λt .) This is the measure of financial conditions that is relevant for determining
the aggregate demand for non-durable normal goods, as a result of (5.1). Below we
analyze the effects of each of the dimensions of policy on both of these measures of
financial conditions.

5.2.1   Conventional Monetary Policy

Conventional monetary policy can be used to mitigate the effects of a χ shock by
lowering Rtm (if this is not prevented by the lower bound on the nominal interest
rate). The effects of such policy are most easily seen in the special case that v(Y )
is linear, so that v 0 (Y ) = λ̄ regardless of the value of Y . Then (2.39) requires that
λt+1 = λ̄, and (5.2) reduces to

                                                               m
                          λt = β λ̄ ϕ̂1 (λ̄; F (It ), m̃t+1 ) Rt+1 /Π.               (5.3)

Here we have also substituted the target gross inflation rate Π for Pt+1 /Pt , on the
assumption that interest-rate policy in period t + 1 is used to ensure that the target
inflation rate is realized, regardless of other conditions.
    For simplicity, we discuss here only the case of an equilibrium in which bankers’
collateral constraint binds in period t+1, so that durables are over-valued in subperiod
1. (Note that this is the case in which risks to financial stability are of the greatest
concern.) In this case, we can use

                               Mt /Pt = m̃t + λ−1
                                               t Γ̃(st )st




                                            69
(which follows from (2.29)), together with the fact that ϕ̃1 (λ; m) is decreasing in both
arguments (as shown in section 2), to conclude that ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m̃) will be a decreasing
function of both s and m̃, for any fixed value of λ.
   In addition, (2.35) requires that

                             λt = β φ(λ̄; F (It ), m̃t+1 ) F 0 (It ).                     (5.4)

This establishes an equilibrium relationship between investment demand It and fi-
nancial conditions as measured by λt (though it is important to note that the value
of m̃t+1 remains of independent relevance). Equating the right-hand sides of (5.3)
and (5.4), we see that equilibrium investment It must satisfy

                                                 Π
                ϕ̂1 (λ̄; F (It ), m̃t+1 ) =       m
                                                      φ(λ̄; F (It ), m̃t+1 ) F 0 (It ).   (5.5)
                                              λ̄ Rt+1

   Again restricting attention to the case where bankers’ collateral constraint binds
in period t + 1, we can alternatively express the function φ(λ; s, m̃) in terms of the
function ϕ̂1 . Note that

                     ϕ̃1t Q̃t = Q̃∗ + (1 − p)ϕ̃3t Γ̃t
                               = Q̃∗ + (1 − p)[(ϕ̃2t + 1) Γ̃t − γq]
                               = γp) + [ϕ̃1t − p] Γ̃t ,

using (2.5), (2.6), and (2.4) in succession. It follows that we can express the function
φ as
                             φ(λ; s, m̃) ≡ φ̂(ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m̃); s),                  (5.6)
where
                             φ̂(ϕ̃1 ; s) ≡ γp + [ϕ̃1 − p] Γ̃(s).                          (5.7)
   Condition (5.5) can then be written alternatively in the form

                                         Π
                         ϕ̃1,t+1 =        m
                                              φ̂(ϕ̃1,t+1 ; F (It )) F 0 (It )             (5.8)
                                      λ̄ Rt+1

using (5.6). This describes a relationship that must exist between investment demand
It and the money premium ϕ̃1,t+1 in the case of any given specification of conven-
tional monetary policy. It is worth noting (for the sake of our discussion below of
quantitative easing) that this relationship is unaffected by the value of m̃t+1 .

                                                70
       Because Γ̃(s) ≤ γq < γ, (5.7) implies that

                                      ∂ φ̂     φ̂          ∂ φ̂
                               0 <          <     ,             < 0.
                                      ∂ ϕ̃1   ϕ̃1          ∂s

It follows from these that (5.8) implicitly defines a function

                                                           m
                                      ϕ̃1,t+1 = ϕ̄1 (It , Rt+1 )                                (5.9)

which is decreasing in both arguments.
   Using this together with (2.34), we see that the equilibrium level of investment It
must satisfy
                                                                m
                         ϕ̂1 (λ̄; F (It ), m̃t+1 ) = ϕ̄1 (It , Rt+1 ).          (5.10)
This can be solved for the effects of monetary policy on investment. Given that
ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m) is a decreasing function of s (when the collateral constraint binds), we see
that both sides of (5.10) are decreasing functions of It .
                                                                             m
     The comparative statics of It in response to a change in either Rt+1       or m̃t+1 then
depend on the relative slopes of these two schedules. We shall assume that in the
initial equilibrium, relative to which we wish to consider the effects of a change in
monetary policy,
                                     ∂ ϕ̄1    ∂ ϕ̂1
                                           <        < 0,                                (5.11)
                                      ∂I       ∂I
as shown in the upper part of Figure 9. In this case we obtain the conventional signs
for the short-run effects of interest-rate policy.52 In particular, because ϕ̄1 (I, Rm ) is a
decreasing function of Rm , a reduction of Rt+1 m
                                                    will increase It , as shown in the figure.
     It also follows from (5.6) and the fact that ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m) is a decreasing function of
s that φ(λ; s, m̃) is also a decreasing function of s. Thus the right-hand side of (5.4)
is a decreasing function of It , for any fixed value of m̃t+1 . Hence (5.4) establishes an
inverse relationship between λt and It that must hold regardless of the value chosen
  52
     Note that if the inequality (5.11) is reversed, our model would imply that a reduction in the
interest rate on cash is associated with a decrease, rather than an increase, in aggregate demand.
Condition (5.4) establishes an inverse relationship between λt and It , regardless of whether (5.11)
                               m
holds; so if a reduction of Rt+1    were associated with a reduction of It , this would have to mean
an increase in λt , and hence a decrease in all three terms on the right-hand side of (5.1). Such an
effect would be contrary to familiar evidence regarding the effects of interest-rate policy, and would
also preclude the possibility of a “liquidity trap” in which the lower bound on nominal interest rates
prevents rates from being cut enough to maintain a desired level of real activity.


                                               71
                                         m
Figure 9: The effects of a reduction in Rt+1 , the interest rate paid on safe assets, on
the money premium and equilibrium investment in risky real assets (upper graph)
and on financial conditions as measured by λt (lower graph).

      m
for Rt+1 . This relationship is graphed in the lower part of Figure 9. Since a reduction
     m
in Rt+1  increases It , it must also reduce λt , as shown in the figure. This in turn will
imply an increase in Yt , because of (5.1).53
    While interest-rate policy can be used to stimulate aggregate demand in this way,
and so to reduce some of the distortions created by the demand shock χ, it has the
side effect of increasing risks to financial stability. Part of the increase in aggregate
demand associated with a reduction of λt will be an increase in the production of
  53
    Note that the expression I(λt ; λt+1 , m̃t+1 ) in this equation is just the quantity It , that we have
shown must increase.



                                                 72
investment goods, as a result of which st+1 will be higher. In the case of an equilibrium
in which the collateral constraint binds, this will mean a correspondingly higher value
of s∗t+1 , as a consequence of which the degree of under-valuation of durables in the
event of a crisis and fire sale will be more severe. Thus in the sticky-price version
of the model, it is indeed the case that reducing short-term nominal interest rates
increases risk-taking by banks in a way that makes the distortions associated with a
crisis more severe, should one occur.

5.2.2   Effects of Unconventional Policies
                                                                   m
In the event that the lower bound on interest rates prevents Rt+1       from being reduced
to the extent that would be necessary to maintain aggregate demand at the desired
level, quantitative easing provides an alternative channel through which aggregate
demand may be increased. Like conventional interest-rate policy, an expansion of
the supply of short-term safe assets by the central bank affects aggregate demand by
easing financial conditions, as indicated by a reduction in λt (which can be thought
of as the price of a particular very-long-duration indexed bond).
                                                                 m
    Consider the effects of an increase in m̃t+1 , holding Rt+1      fixed. We can again
determine the effect on equilibrium investment demand using (5.10). The schedule
corresponding to the right-hand side of this equation does not shift as a result of an
increase in m̃t+1 , but the fact that ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m̃) is a decreasing function of m̃ means
that the schedule corresponding to the left-hand side of the equation shifts down for
each possible value of It , as shown now in the upper part of Figure 10. Then again
assuming that the relative slopes of the two schedules are given by (5.11), we can
again conclude that It must increase while ϕ̃1,t+1 must decrease.
    We can also again use (5.4) to determine the change in λt required by a given
size increase in It . As argued above, an increase in It reduces the right-hand side
of this equation, for any given value of m̃t+1 . In addition, (5.6) together with the
result above that ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m̃) is a decreasing function of m̃ implies that the function
φ(λ; s, m̃) is also a decreasing function of m̃. This means that the curve (the graph
of equation (5.4)) graphed in the lower part of Figure 10 shifts down as a result of
an increase in m̃t+1 , as shown in the figure. It then follows that λt is reduced by an
increase in m̃t+1 , both because of the decrease in It (the shift along the curve) and
because of the direct effect of an increase in m̃t+1 (the downward shift of the curve).
    It follows that an increase in m̃t+1 must loosen financial conditions, in the sense

                                          73
Figure 10: The effects of an increase in the central-bank supply of safe liabilities m̃t+1
on the money premium and equilibrium investment in risky real assets (upper graph)
and on financial conditions as measured by λt (lower graph).

that λt is reduced. This in turn means that, as in the case of an interest-rate cut, Yt
must increase because of (5.1). Thus the effects of quantitative easing are qualitatively
similar to those of an interest-rate cut: financial conditions are eased, the aggregate
demand for normal goods increases (both because of an increase in the demand for
credit goods and an increase in the demand for investment goods), but at the same
time risks to financial stability increase, because of an increase in short-term debt
issuance by banks, leading to larger expected distortions in the case that a crisis state
occurs in period t + 1.
    Nonetheless, the two policies do not have quantitatively equivalent effects. If we


                                          74
                                                    m
compare an interest-rate cut (reduction in Rt+1         ) and an increase in the net supply
of safe assets by the central bank (increase in m̃t+1 ) that increase the equilibrium
demand for investment goods It by the same amount, the increase in m̃t+1 reduces λt
by a greater amount.54 This can be seen from the fact that (5.4) must apply in either
case. If, by hypothesis, It increases by the same amount in both cases, then the only
difference in the implied value for λt is that m̃t+1 increases in the second case, but
remains constant in the first; and this implies a lower value of λt in the second case.
This means that in the case of quantitative easing, a greater share of the total increase
in aggregate demand comes from increased demand for credit goods, as opposed to
increased demand for investment goods. Thus a given degree of aggregate demand
stimulus can be achieved with less risk to financial stability if it is brought about
through an expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet, rather than by cutting the
interest rate paid on cash.
    We can also consider the effects of aggregate demand stimulus through relaxation
of macroprudential constraints (that is, an increase in ξ t+1 ). Let us generalize the
analysis presented in the earlier part of this section to allow for a macroprudential
tax (or reserve requirement), so that ξ t need not equal 1 (as assumed thus far in this
section). Conditions (5.1), (5.3) and (5.4) continue to be required for an equilibrium,
and the definition of the function ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m̃) is unchanged; but in (5.4), the expression
φ(λ̄; F (It ), m̃t+1 ) must be replaced by φ(λ̄; F (It ), m̃t+1 , ξ t+1 ), where we define

                             φ(λ; s, m̃, ξ) ≡ φ̂(ξ ϕ̂1 (λ; s, m̃); s),

generalizing (5.6).
   Condition (5.8) then takes the more general form
                                       Π
                        ϕ̃1,t+1 =       m
                                            φ̂(ξ t+1 ϕ̃1,t+1 ; F (It )) F 0 (It ).
                                    λ̄ Rt+1
As above, this implicitly defines a function
                                                      m
                                 ϕ̃1,t+1 = ϕ̄1 (It , Rt+1 , ξ t+1 ),                       (5.12)

where now ϕ̄1 (I, Rm , ξ) is decreasing in I and Rm , and increasing in ξ. The equilib-
rium level of investment is again determined by (5.10), but now the schedule corre-
  54
    Compare Figures 9 and 10. In Figure 10, the amount of quantitative easing is chosen so as to
achieve the same increase in investment (from I1 to I2 ) as the interest-rate cut in Figure 9. The
reduction in λt is instead larger (from λ1 to λ3 < λ2 ).


                                                75
sponding to the left-hand side is shifted only by m̃t+1 , while the schedule correspond-
                                                                 m
ing to the right-hand side is shifted by changes in either Rt+1      or ξ t+1 . To a linear
approximation (which is to say, in the case of small enough policy changes), then, an
increase in ξ t+1 (a relaxation of macroprudential policy, as by reducing the required
                                                                                     m
reserve ratio) has the same effects on It and ϕ̃1,t+1 as a certain size of cut in Rt+1  .
    We can also use (5.12) to rewrite (5.3) in the form

                                                m              m
                           λt = β λ̄ ϕ̄1 (It , Rt+1 , ξ t+1 ) Rt+1 /Π.                (5.13)

From this it follows that since a relaxation of macroprudential policy reduces the value
of ϕ̃1,t+1 , it must reduce the value of λt . Hence it increases demand for credit goods,
and so must increase Yt , like the other two policies just considered. But it also follows
                                                                 m
from (5.13) that in the case of two policy changes (a cut in Rt+1   or an increase in ξ t+1 )
                                                                               m
that reduce ϕ̃1,t+1 to the same extent, and that therefore reduce ϕ̄1 (It , Rt+1 , ξ t+1 ) to
the same extent, the interest-rate cut must reduce λt by more, and so must stimulate
demand for credit goods to a greater extent. Thus an even greater share of the
increase in aggregate demand achieved by relaxing macroprudential policy comes
from an increase in investment demand, as opposed to an increase in the demand for
credit goods, than in the case of an increase in aggregate demand achieved by cutting
the interest rate on cash.
    We can therefore order the three types of expansionary policy: for a given degree
of increase in aggregate demand, achieving it by increasing m̃t+1 increases It the least,
                              m
achieving it by reducing Rt+1     increases It to an intermediate extent, and achieving
it by increasing ξ t+1 increases It (and hence short-term debt issuance by banks, and
risks to financial stability) the most. One consequence of this is that increasing
aggregate demand through monetary policy need not involve any increased risks to
financial stability at all. For example, one might combine an increase in m̃t+1 with
a tightening of macroprudential policy (reduction of ξ t+1 ) that exactly offsets the
effects of the quantitative easing on desired investment demand, so that there is no
net change in It . Since the former policy change will reduce λt more than the latter
policy change increases it, the net effect will be a loosening of financial conditions,
and an increase in the demand for credit goods. Since there is (by hypothesis) no
change in investment demand, aggregate demand Yt will increase; but there will be
no associated increase in st+1 , and hence no increase in the severity of the distortions
associated with a crisis state in period t + 1.

                                             76
    We conclude that while quantitative easing may increase risks to financial stabil-
ity in the case that nominal rigidities allow short-run effects of monetary policy on
aggregate demand, it need not have any such effect. If the increase in the central
bank’s balance sheet is combined with an increase in the interest rate paid on cash, or
a tightening of macroprudential policy to a sufficient extent, it can increase aggregate
demand without any adverse consequences for financial stability. It is particularly
easy to achieve this outcome by combining the quantitative easing with macropruden-
tial policy, if a suitable macroprudential instrument exists; for in our model, reduction
of ξ t+1 provides an even greater disincentive to issuance of short-term debt by banks
                       m
than does raising Rt+1    , for a given degree of reduction in aggregate demand.
    These results imply that quantitative easing may be a useful addition to a central
bank’s monetary policy toolkit, even when interest-rate policy is not yet constrained
by the effective lower bound on short-term nominal interest rates. In the case of a
contractionary shock χ, the effects on aggregate demand can be offset purely through
                     m
a reduction in Rt+1    , if the lower bound does not prevent the size of rate cut that
is needed; but such a response increases risks to financial stability more than is
necessary. One could alternatively counter the effects of the χ shock by increasing
                         m
m̃t+1 , while leaving Rt+1   unchanged; and this would have the advantage of posing less
of a threat to financial stability. Even better, one could combine a somewhat larger
increase in m̃t+1 with a tightening of macroprudential policy, allowing the effects of
the χ shock on aggregate demand to be offset, with even less of an increased risk to
financial stability, possibly none at all.


6     Conclusions
We can now assess the validity of the concerns about the consequences of quantitative
easing for financial stability sketched in the introduction, in the light of the model
just presented. Our model is one in which monetary policy does indeed influence risks
to financial stability; in particular, policies that loosen financial conditions, either by
lowering the central bank’s operating target for its policy rate (conventional monetary
policy), or by relaxing reserve requirements (or other macro-prudential constraints),
should each increase the attractiveness of private issuance of “money-like” liabilities,
resulting in increased leverage and as a consequence an increased risk of serious
resource misallocation in the event of a funding crisis. This means that there can

                                          77
at times be a tension between the monetary policy that would be preferable strictly
from the standpoint of aggregate demand management and inflation stabilization, on
the one hand, and the policy that would minimize risks to financial stability.
    The question is whether it is correct to think of quantitative easing as a policy
analogous to these, and hence that poses similar risks to financial stability. Our model
implies that such an analogy is imperfect. A quantitative easing policy (increasing the
public supply of safe assets, by issuing additional safe liabilities of the central bank,
used to purchase assets that do not earn a similar safety premium) similarly increases
aggregate demand by lowering the equilibrium rate of return on non-safe assets. But
unlike conventional monetary policy, it does this by lowering the equilibrium safety
premium (by making safe assets less scarce), rather than by lowering the equilibrium
return on safe assets; and this does not have the same consequences for financial
stability. Lowering the equilibrium return on risky investments (such as the “durable
goods” modeled here, which one may think of as housing) by lowering the return on
safe assets works only insofar as the increased spread between the two returns that
would result if the return on risky investments did not also fall increases the incentive
to finance additional risky investment by issuing safe liabilities, thus increasing the
leverage of the banks and the degree to which they engage in liquidity transformation;
this results in a reduced equilibrium return on risky investment, but not by enough
to fully eliminate the increased spread that induces banks to issue additional safe
asset-backed liabilities. This mechanism necessarily increases the risk to financial
stability at the same time as it increases aggregate demand. Quantitative easing
instead decreases the spread between these two returns, at least in the absence of
any change in the private supply of safe liabilities. This reduction in the spread
reduces the incentive for private issuance of such liabilities, and reduced issuance of
safe asset-backed liabilities by banks offsets some of the reduction in the spread, but
does not completely eliminate it as otherwise banks would not have a reason to reduce
their issuance. Hence in this case the reduction in the equilibrium return on risky
investments is associated with a reduction of the incentive for liquidity transformation
by banks, rather than an increase.
    Similarly, quantitative easing increases the total supply of safe assets and so re-
duces the safety premium; but unlike a reduction in reserve requirements (or relax-
ation of macroprudential policy), it achieves this by increasing the public supply of
safe assets (and actually reducing the incentive for private issuance), rather than by


                                         78
increasing the incentive that banks have to finance risky investment by issuing safe
asset-backed liabilities. Again the consequences for the degree of liquidity transfor-
mation by the banking sector, and hence the risk to financial stability, are entirely
different.
    Likewise, it is true that quantitative easing eases financial conditions by reducing
the spread between the required return on risky investments and the return on safe
assets; but this does not mean that risk premia are “artificially” reduced in a way that
distorts incentives for prudent behavior, leading to excessive risk-taking. In the model
presented here, quantitative easing reduces the safety premium, but because the pub-
lic supply of safe assets for private investors to hold is increased, and not because
anyone is misled into under-estimating the degree of risk involved in undertaking
risky investments. Moreover, the reduced spread reduces the incentive for private is-
suance of safe liabilities, and instead favors financing of investment through issuance
of non-safe liabilities, which is desirable on financial stability grounds. Rather than
threatening financial stability by encouraging more risk-taking, it favors it by encour-
aging forms of financing that reduce the magnitude of the distortions associated with
a funding crisis.
    In our model, we can compare the effects of three alternative policies that can in-
crease aggregate demand by easing financial conditions: reducing the central bank’s
operating target for the nominal interest rate on safe assets (conventional monetary
policy, on the assumption that the zero lower bound does not yet preclude such
easing), relaxing reserve requirements (or other macro-prudential constraints), and
quantitative easing. We find that among these, quantitative easing is the policy that
increases risks to financial stability the least, for any given degree of increase in aggre-
gate demand. Not only does quantitative easing make it possible for a central bank
to increase aggregate demand even when conventional monetary policy is constrained
by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, but it is possible, at least in prin-
ciple, to increase aggregate demand without the collateral effect of an increased risk
to financial stability, if the increased supply of safe liabilities by the central bank
is combined with a sufficient tightening of macroprudential measures. (The latter
measures would by themselves reduce aggregate demand; but when combined with
quantitative easing, the net effect is an increase in aggregate demand, even when the
degree of macroprudential tightening is enough to fully offset any increase in risks to
financial stability as a result of the balance-sheet policy.)


                                           79
    This indicates that a concern for the effects of monetary policy on financial sta-
bility need not preclude using quantitative easing to stimulate aggregate demand in
circumstances where (as in the US in the aftermath of the recent crisis) conventional
monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound. In fact, the fact that de-
mand stimulus through quantitative easing poses smaller risks to financial stability
than demand stimulus through lowering short-term nominal interest rates suggests
that balance-sheet policy may be a useful tool of monetary stabilization policy even
when a central bank is far from the zero lower bound. In the model presented here,
aggregate demand stimulus achieved by lowering nominal interest rates increases the
risk to financial stability more than would a quantitative easing policy that is equally
effective in increasing aggregate demand. This implies that (even if macropruden-
tial policy is unavailable or ineffective) it should be possible to increase aggregate
demand without increasing the risk to financial stability by combining expansionary
balance-sheet policy with an appropriate size of increase in the policy rate. In such
a case, conventional monetary policy would essentially be used for macroprudential
purposes (to control the risk to financial stability) while balance-sheet policy is used
for demand stabilization.
    Further study of the effects of quantitative easing policies would therefore seem to
be warranted, not simply for the sake of having a more effective policy toolkit for use
the next time that conventional policy is again constrained by the zero lower bound,
but also, arguably, in order to improve the conduct of stabilization policy under
more normal circumstances as well. The availability of this additional dimension
of monetary policy is particularly likely to be of use under circumstances where
additional monetary stimulus through interest-rate reduction is unattractive owing
to concerns about financial stability. Such a situation could easily arise even when
interest rates are well above their effective lower bound.




                                         80
References

[1] Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary
    Economics,” Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier
    Press, 2010.

[2] Bernanke, Ben S., “Opening Remarks: Monetary Policy Since the Onset of the
    Crisis,” in The Changing Policy Landscape, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank
    of Kansas City, 2012.

[3] Brunnermeier, Markus K., “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-
    2008,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1): 77-100 (Winter 2009).

[4] Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pederson, “Market Liquidity and
    Funding Liquidity,” Review of Financial Studies 22: 2201-2238 (2009).

[5] Caballero, Ricardo J., and Emmanuel Farhi, “A Model of the Safe Asset Mech-
    anism (SAM): Safety Traps and Economic Policy,” NBER Working Paper no.
    18737, January 2013.

[6] Carlson, Mark, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Fabio Natalucci, William R. Nelson,
    Marcelo Ochoa, Jeremy Stein, and Skander Van den Heuvel, “The Demand for
    Short-Term Safe Assets and Financial Stability: Some Evidence and Implications
    for Central Bank Policies,” FEDS paper no. 2014-102, Federal Reserve Board,
    November 25, 2014.

[7] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest
    Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
    2003-1, pp. 139-211.

[8] Giavazzi, Francesco, and Alberto Giovannini, “Central Banks and the Financial
    System,” in S. Eijffinger and D. Masciandaro, eds., Central Banking, Financial
    Regulation and Supervision After the Financial Crisis, Cheltenham, UK: Edward
    Elgar, 2012.

[9] Gorton, Gary, Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007, Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2010.


                                     81
[10] Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
     Creation,” Journal of Finance 45: 49-71 (1990).

[11] Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick, “The Safe-Asset Share,”
     American Economic Review 102(3): 101-106 (2012).

[12] Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, Joshua S. Rudolph, and Lawrence H.
     Summers, “Government Debt Management at the Zero Lower Bound,” Hutchins
     Center Working Paper no. 5, September 30, 2014.

[13] Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, “A Gap-Filling
     Theory of Corporate Debt Maturity Choice,” Journal of Finance 65: 993-1028
     (2010).

[14] Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A
     Pigouvian Taxation Approach,” NBER Working Paper no. 16377, September
     2010.

[15] Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Aggregate De-
     mand for Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 120: 233-267 (2012).

[16] Krugman, Paul R., “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity
     Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998-2, pp. 137-206.

[17] Lorenzoni, Guido, “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies 75:
     809-833 (2008).

[18] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey, “Money and Interest in a Cash-in-
     Advance Economy,” Econometrica 55: 491-513 (1987).

[19] Sergeyev, Dmitriy, “Optimal Macroprudential and Monetary Policy in a Cur-
     rency Union,” working paper, Università Bocconi, March 2016.

[20] Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity:
     A Market Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47: 1343-1366 (1992).

[21] Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, “Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeco-
     nomics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 29-48 (Winter 2011).



                                       82
[22] Stein, Jeremy C., “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 127: 57-95 (2012).

[23] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                      83
