                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CURBING SHOCKS TO CORPORATE LIQUIDITY:
                            THE ROLE OF TRADE CREDIT

                                         Niklas Amberg
                                          Tor Jacobson
                                        Erik von Schedvin
                                        Robert Townsend

                                       Working Paper 22286
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22286


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2016




Discussions with and suggestions from Vicente Cuñat and Tore Ellingsen, as well as seminar and
conference participants at Sveriges Riksbank, Lund University, and the 2015 Norges Bank
Conference on Banking and Financial Intermediation have been very helpful in improving upon
earlier drafts. We are also grateful for the generous data support provided by
Upplysningscentralen AB. Special thanks to Lars-Henric Andersson at Lindahl law firm in
Stockholm, appointed trustee of the Panaxia bankruptcy estate, for sharing his deep insights about
this complex event. Amberg gratefully acknowledges research support from Jan Wallanders och
Tom Hedelius Stiftelse. Townsend gratefully acknowledges research support from Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD and
Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries (PEDL). We assume full responsibility
for any and all errors in the paper. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Executive Board of
Sveriges Riksbank or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Niklas Amberg, Tor Jacobson, Erik von Schedvin, and Robert Townsend. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Curbing Shocks to Corporate Liquidity: The Role of Trade Credit
Niklas Amberg, Tor Jacobson, Erik von Schedvin, and Robert Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 22286
May 2016
JEL No. D22,G30

                                          ABSTRACT

Using data on exogenous liquidity losses generated by the fraud and failure of a cash-in-transit
firm, we demonstrate a causal impact on firms’ trade credit usage. We find that firms manage
liquidity shortfalls by increasing the amount of drawn credit from suppliers and decreasing the
amount issued to customers. The compounded trade credit adjustments are at least as great, if not
greater than corresponding adjustments in cash holdings, suggesting that trade credit positions are
economically important sources of reserve liquidity. The underlying mechanism in trade credit
adjustments is in part due to shifts in credit durations—both upstream and downstream.


Niklas Amberg                                    Erik von Schedvin
Stockholm School of Economics                    Sveriges Riksbank
Box 6501                                         10337 Stockholm
SE-113 83 Stockholm                              Sweden
Sweden                                           erik.vonschedvin@riksbank.se
niklas.amberg@hhs.se
                                                 Robert Townsend
Tor Jacobson                                     Department of Economics, E52-538
Sveriges Riksbank                                MIT
10337 Stockholm                                  77 Massachusetts Avenue
Sweden                                           Cambridge, MA 02139
tor.jacobson@riksbank.se                         and NBER
                                                 rtownsen@mit.edu
1        Introduction
Do firms use their trade credit positions to handle shortfalls in liquidity? Theoretical and em-
pirical research has shown that corporate cash holdings play a prominent role in firms’ liquidity
management by ensuring funding of future investments, see, e.g., Almeida, Campello, and
Weisbach (2004), and as a buffer against shortfalls in liquidity, see Acharya, Davydenko, and
Strebulaev (2012). It is intuitive that firms’ choices of buffer liquidity levels hinge on a range
of capital structure attributes; bankruptcy risk and cash flow volatility to mention two prime
candidates, and obviously also to what extent firms can access outside funding, be it market or
bank financing, cf. Sufi (2007). Less recognized is that firms’ trade credit positions give rise to
sizable financial assets and liabilities on their balance sheets, and thereby provide opportunities
for firms to extract liquidity from their suppliers and customers by adjusting these positions;
for instance, by postponing payments on their trade credit obligations (accounts payable), or by
promoting prompt payments on their trade credit claims (accounts receivable).
        It is thus conceivable that adjustment capacity at the trade credit margins—next to cash
holdings—can potentially function as an important source of reserve liquidity. This perspective
has in part been put forward by Wilner (2000) and Cuñat (2007), who propose that trade credit
networks can function as a liquidity insurance mechanism by allocating liquidity from suppliers
to constrained counterparties further down the supply chain; that is, firms’ ability to exploit their
accounts payable to accrue liquidity.1 Cuñat (2007) argues that suppliers, incentivized by the
rents from maintaining long-term relationships, may choose to support downstream counterpar-
ties that experience temporary liquidity shocks. The idea is that firms experiencing a liquidity
shock can offset the impact by postponing payments on the trade credit claims held by its sup-
pliers, a temporary default if you will; or, alternatively, by increasing the maturity of future
trade credit contracts; both measures will generate liquidity, without necessarily affecting the
volume of input purchases. Here we go one step further to envision an insurance mechanism,
in which upstream and downstream firms are connected to each other as if in an implicit risk
sharing arrangement. We suggest that such a liquidity insurance mechanism may operate sym-
metrically, by also allocating liquidity from unconstrained customers to otherwise constrained
    1
     Closely related, Boissay and Gropp (2013) empirically show that firms experiencing late customer payments
are more likely to postpone their own payments to suppliers, illustrating that trade credit chains may function as
an insurance mechanism against liquidity shocks.


                                                        1
counterparties further up the supply chain; that is, firms can manage their accounts receivable
to generate liquidity. We should, from the downstream perspective, expect that firms can seek
to generate additional liquidity by reducing the amount of issued trade credit to their customers
by reversing the measures that apply upstream; i.e., either reducing net days on issued trade
credit contracts, or by proactive monitoring and management of outstanding contracts to avoid
overdue customer payments.
   More generally one can envision that firms in a risk sharing network are subject to idiosyn-
cratic, firm-specific shocks and to sectoral or macro aggregate shocks. If there were no obstacles
to such risk sharing, idiosyncratic shocks would be pooled away, internally, within the network,
leaving management of aggregate shocks to group level cash management or to external formal
bank relationships. No doubt in practice there are obstacles to and hence more limited risk
sharing; obstacles such as limited information and limited commitment. In particular, firms
may threaten non-cooperation, e.g., to pull out of the network if they are unwilling to provide
the requisite liquidity of the implicit sharing rules. But such a threat might be mitigated by
potential loss of established relationships within the current supply chain, given pre-established
specificity in inputs, tailored monitoring technologies, and so on. Risk sharing is better, the
more specific these relationships are. Nevertheless, threats may not be sufficient, and on some
paths of shock realizations firms will file legal claims for recovery or be forced themselves to
consider bankruptcy. In sum, we are allowing both an ex ante risk sharing perspective and an
ex post contagion perspective, simultaneously. This then is the overall framework we have in
mind. Which of these various forces we can plausibly identify in data is the empirical quest of
this paper.
   The main challenge is to demonstrate that adjustments at trade credit margins can be caused
by firms’ increased liquidity needs, while ruling out potentially confounding factors, such as
changes in demand and supply conditions in the supply-chain. We conduct the empirical analy-
ses on two primary data sets. On the one hand, we use a population-wide data set on Swedish
corporate firms. For our purpose, this data set has two distinct advantages. Firstly, for a (small)
sub-sample of the firms, we can evaluate the impact of exogenous liquidity shocks imposed by
the fraud and failure of a large cash-in-transit firm. Secondly, the data set covers the universe
of Swedish firms, which enables an evaluation covering the full spectrum of firms, from very


                                                2
small firms to large ones. On the other hand, we make use of the familiar Compustat data for
very large, publicly traded U.S. corporations, which have been used in many previous empirical
contributions to this literature. By conducting the empirical analyses—when possible—on two
data sets that concern hugely divergent firm-sizes, we hope to achieve results that are general in
nature and not size-, nor country-specific.
   The empirical setup comprises three steps. Firstly, simply to quantify orders of magnitude,
we apply a variance decomposition approach similar to that proposed by Asdrubali, Sorensen,
and Yosha (1996). The variance decomposition framework allows us to evaluate the extent
to which variations in cash flow shortfalls are associated with shifts in various asset and lia-
bility components of firms’ balance sheets. Our findings suggest that cash flow shortfalls are
indeed associated with drawdowns in cash holdings and reductions in the amounts of issued
trade credit to customers, but the amount of drawn trade credit from suppliers also decreases,
which is counterintuitive from a liquidity perspective. However, one pressing concern for the
interpretation of the variance decomposition estimates is that they may reflect shifts in demand
and supply conditions—over and above increased liquidity needs—which points to a quest for
causal inference.
   Secondly—which brings us to our main contribution—we examine effects of alternative,
and arguably exogenous, liquidity shocks. To this end, we make use of Abadie and Imbens
(2006) nearest-neighbor matching approach to explore the liquidity shocks that the fraudulent
scheme and subsequent bankruptcy event of the Swedish cash-in-transit firm Panaxia imposed
on its corporate clients. We can compare the adjustments in cash holdings and trade credit
positions in response to these liquidity shocks for the clients—the treated firms—with the ad-
justments undertaken by a group of control firms. This event thus allows us to establish a plau-
sible exogenous and causal inference for the role of trade credit in firms’ liquidity management.
Moreover, using data on applications for issuance of injunction to settle overdue trade debt,
we can examine the nature of firms’ behavior underlying trade credit adjustments: namely, that
reserve liquidity is extracted upstream by postponement of trade credit payments to suppliers,
and downstream by attempting enforcement of repayment of overdue debt from customers.
   The Panaxia event study provides a slightly different picture, as to the relative importance of
the liquidity sources that we are interested in. Contrary to the previous variance decomposition


                                                3
results, we find that both trade credit margins play important roles and increases in accounts
payable are more pronounced than reductions in accounts receivable, while adjustments in cash-
holdings remain important. Moreover, the compounded adjustment from the two trade credit
margins—the increase in drawn credit, plus the reduction in outstanding credit—is of a similar
magnitude as the adjustment in cash holdings, suggesting that trade credit margins make for
important sources of reserve liquidity.
   We go on to investigate the underlying mechanism of the adjustments in trade credit posi-
tions and find that they in part are due to shifts in trade credit durations—both upstream and
downstream. More specifically, the propensity to default on due trade credit increases for firms
that are hit by the liquidity shock, which is consistent with the documented increase in accounts
payable. Likewise, treated firms also tend to increase efforts to enforce payment of overdue
trade credit from their customers, which is consistent with the observed reductions in receiv-
ables. Moreover, the complexity of the event gives rise to differential treatments, which can
be exploited for identification. Thus, a sub-group of the treated firms were only exposed to
the fraudulent scheme undertaken by Panaxia, but did not suffer losses in its subsequent fail-
ure. By using this variation in treatment, and also the variation in loss-size across the firms in
the sub-group receiving full treatment, we confirm the intuitively appealing notion that larger
adjustments in trade credit positions result, when firms are exposed to more liquidity distress.
   In our final empirical section, we return to measuring firms’ liquidity needs by means of cash
flow shortfalls. We do so by regressing cash flow shortfalls on changes in cash holdings, and on
changes in trade credit positions, while controlling for demand conditions in the supply-chain,
and a host of other potentially important factors. This setup enables a broad characterization of
firms’ usage of liquidity sources and thereby provides an evaluation of the external validity of
our event study results. The conditional model results for both Swedish and U.S. firms align
closely with the previous exogenous liquidity shock results; firms subject to shortfalls in cash
flow reduce their cash holdings, considerably increase their accounts payable, and moderately
reduce their accounts receivable. The compounded adjustments at the trade credit margins are
greater than corresponding adjustments in cash holdings. Thus, these results suggest that the
observed responses in firms’ trade credit margins are general in nature.
   This paper aims to contribute to the vast literature on firms’ choices of cash holdings,


                                                4
and liquidity management in general. Influential papers include Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and
Williamson (1999), Almeida et al. (2004), and Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009), which study
firms’ choices of cash holdings in light of their access to external funding.2 Our paper is also
close to Acharya et al. (2012), who investigate the relationship between firms’ cash holdings
and their default risks, suggesting a positive one. That is, all else equal, higher default risks in-
centivize firms to hold more cash, to safeguard against adverse liquidity shocks. We emphasize
that firms—in addition to cash holdings and external financing—have trade credit assets and li-
abilities that can be transformed into liquidity. To better understand how firms handle liquidity
shocks, it is therefore important to also account for their trade credit positions.
       As noted above, the role of trade credit for firms’ liquidity management has partly been
put forward by Cuñat (2007), who proposes that trade credit links function as a liquidity insur-
ance mechanism by allocating liquidity from unconstrained suppliers to constrained customers
in the form of accounts payable. Cuñat shows empirically that large declines in firms’ cash
holdings are correlated with increases in their accounts payable. Our paper extends this view
by providing causal insights on how liquidity shocks impact on firms’ cash and trade credit
positions—both upstream and downstream—enabling an evaluation of the relative importance
of these liquidity sources.
       Another partly related literature considers the role of liquidity provisioning within busi-
ness groups, see, e.g., Almeida, Kim, and Kim (2015), Gopalan, Nanda, and Seru (2007),
Karaivanov, Ruano, Salas, and Townsend (2010), Samphantharak (2009). Gopalan et al. (2007),
for example, show that firms belonging to business groups engage in risk sharing where inter-
group cash transfers is used to support distressed firms within the group. Furthermore, on the
household side, Kinnan and Townsend (2012) use data on rural Thai households and show that
indirect access to bank financing, through inter-household borrowing, mitigates income risk by
reducing the association between income fluctuations and consumption. In analogy, our results
suggest that firms engage in risk sharing through informal ties with their suppliers and customers
in the supply-chain. However, liquidity provisioning in trade credit networks is nevertheless
also associated with costs. Such costs have been highlighted in the financial network literature,
arguing that counterparty exposures may cause shock propagation and—in extension—potential
   2
       See Almeida, Campello, Cunha and Weisbach (2014) for a comprehensive overview of this literature.



                                                       5
systemic failure, see, e.g., Allen and Gale (2000) and Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi
(2015). Empirically, from a trade credit perspective, Jacobson and von Schedvin (2015) use
Swedish firm data similar to the current data to study firm-failure propagation in trade credit
chains. They show that suppliers who are exposed to credit losses due to failing customers,
are in turn subject to an elevated risk of failure. Hence, the financial networks of suppliers and
customers arising through trade credit have two closely related features; ex-ante risk sharing
through liquidity provisioning, on the one hand, and ex-post failure propagation on the other.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section details our various
data resources, and provides some descriptive statistics. Section 3 presents the variance de-
composition analysis and results. In Section 4 we describe the results from the analyses of the
liquidity shocks from the fraud and failure event of the cash-in-transit firm Panaxia. Section
5 covers modeling of cash flow shortfalls, and an exploration of cross-sectional heterogeneity.
Section 6 concludes.



2    Data and Descriptive Statistics
As described in the previous section, our empirical analysis involves firm-level data from both
Sweden and the U.S.. The two data sets concern firms that are widely different in scope and size,
yet they separately bring onboard distinct features; but nevertheless, as we will subsequently
demonstrate, they often yield strikingly similar results. The Swedish data set covers the entire
corporate sector (currently some 330,000 firms in the stock) and is dominated by small- and
medium-sized enterprises. Importantly, it allows for an evaluation of the exogenous liquidity
shortfalls generated by the Panaxia event. That is, for a small sub-sample of Swedish, mostly
retail, firms we are able to consider effects of an exogenous liquidity shock caused by the fraud
and failure of a large cash-in-transit firm, for which we believe identification is unambiguous.
Furthermore, the U.S. Compustat data cover large public corporations and serve as a useful
benchmark that facilitates interpretations of our results in the light of the empirical literature
hitherto. In what follows, we provide the details of our data sources.




                                                6
2.1     Swedish data

The Swedish firm data set is an unbalanced panel consisting of almost 4.7 million yearly obser-
vations on the stock of (on average over time) roughly 270,000 Swedish aktiebolag, or corporate
firms, as recorded between January 1, 1989, and December 31, 2013, hence covering a period of
25 years. Aktiebolag are by approximation the Swedish equivalent of corporations in the U.S.,
or limited liability businesses in the U.K.. Swedish law requires every aktiebolag to hold in
equity a minimum of SEK 100,000 (approximately USD 15,000) to be eligible for registration
at Bolagsverket, the Swedish Companies Registration Office (SCRO). Swedish corporate firms
are also required to submit an annual financial statement to the SCRO, covering balance-sheet
and income-statement data in accordance with the European Union standards. The financial
statements, provided to us by Upplysningscentralen AB (UC), the leading credit bureau in Swe-
den, constitute the backbone of the panel data set analyzed below. In Sweden, as in many other
countries, firms have considerable discretion in choosing a time period for which their financial
statements will apply. A large fraction of the firm-year observations in our sample concern fiscal
periods starting in the middle of a calendar year. We deal with this by interpolating the financial
statements so that their fiscal periods align with calendar years.3 Firms with total assets and
real sales below SEK 100,000 (deflating by means of consumer prices, using year 2010 prices
as a basis), financial firms, and utilities are omitted. In order to avoid detrimental effects from
outlier observations, all firm-specific variables are winsorized with respect to the 1st and the 99th
percentiles. In addition, in order to ensure that the sample is the same across all specifications,
we drop firm-years that lack necessary data points for one or several of our specifications.
   3
     The data set, or similar versions of it, has been used extensively in previous research, c.f. Jacobson, Lindé, and
Roszbach (2013), Giordani, Jacobson, Villani, and von Schedvin (2014) and Jacobson and von Schedvin (2015)
for more details on the data. In particular, Giordani et al. provides an account of how the financial statements
have been transformed to conform to standardized calendar year fiscal periods. The shares of shorter (less than
12 months) and longer (more than 12 months) statements are both around 5 percent. Whereas shorter than the
stipulated minimum of 6 months happen, statements covering a longer period than the allowed maximum of 18
months are very rare. Over time, the annual shares of shorter/longer statement periods have come down from
about 8 percent to currently around 4 percent. Thus, an overwhelming majority of statements concern a period of
12 months. However, out of the 90 percent of the total number of statements, only 48 percentage points coincide
with a calendar year, and hence 42 percentage points refer to other 12 month periods. In these calculations we
have allowed for a given calendar year to begin in mid-December the previous year, and end in mid-January the
following year.




                                                          7
2.2   The cash-in-transit firm Panaxia, its fraud and failure

The literature to which this paper aims to contribute, is concerned with the effects of liquidity
shocks. Empirical contributions—including the current paper—have to this end often made use
of shortfalls in firms’ cash flows as a proxy measure. Not necessarily because this is an ideal
measure of events whose impact we want to gauge, but rather because shifts in cash flow can
readily be calculated for all firms in the samples employed. However, considerable allowance
for potential endogeneity issues is called for; cash flow shortfalls may well reflect adverse
shifts in demand conditions in the supply-chain, as well as aging and depreciating capital stocks
resulting in declining productivity. In search for a cleaner—or more exogenous, if you will—
measure of shocks to liquidity, we will evaluate the case of the Swedish cash-in transit firm
Panaxia, its fraudulent behavior and subsequent failure in 2012—with dire consequences for its
customers. The triggered losses were non-negligible, taken as shares of customers’ total assets,
and it can be argued that the surprise element was almost complete, suggesting an exogenous
event that is close in nature to the concept of an economic shock. Although it is a matter of
a one-time event affecting a relatively small number of firms, we can nevertheless use it to
establish causality for the mechanisms gearing firms liquidity positions that we wish to unravel.
   Panaxia was one of three leading cash-in-transit firms operating in Sweden. It serviced its
customers—mostly, but not exclusively, in the retail sector—by collecting their daily receipts at
their premises. Collected receipts were then delivered to a bank depot for counting, and within
one to two days, Panaxia credited the firms’ bank accounts for the due funds. That is, according
to the contracts between Panaxia and its customers, the latter would upon handing over the
cash for transportation to the depot hold a claim on the former, until a transfer of funds to the
customers’ bank accounts had been carried out within a maximum of two days.
   In 2009, Panaxia faced financial distress in the form of a drastic contraction in the lending
provided by its creditors. This was a consequence of rising operational losses—in turn, the
result of an aggressive pricing strategy designed to increase Panaxia’s market shares. To coun-
teract the contraction in external financing, Panaxia began to finance its operations by means
of withholding its customers’ funds for additional days. Over time, this scheme of delayed
installments escalated, and in the months prior to the bankruptcy that was finally declared on
September 5, 2012, customers could face waiting times as long as 10 to 12 days before Panaxia

                                               8
had transferred the due funds to their bank accounts. Figure 1 shows the average number of
bank days over time required by Panaxia to transfer the due funds generated in cash collection
to their clients’ bank accounts. There is a distinct initial level shift; the number of bank days
increased from two in the beginning of 2010, to five days towards the end of that year. From the
beginning of 2011 and towards the bankruptcy event, there is a slightly upward-sloping trend
such that the average delivery time reached almost six days in the months prior to the failure.
The sustainability of this Ponzi scheme hinged on Panaxia’s ability to maintain the size of its
customer base through competitive pricing.

                                        [Insert Figure 1 about here.]

    It is a fair question to ask whether the customers did not understand what was going on, or
react to the drastically increased delivery periods. They did, but very few actually ended their
contracts with Panaxia.4 The general credibility of Panaxia can be appreciated by considering
the fact that Sveriges Riksbank (the central bank of Sweden), even in early 2012 signed an
agreement with Panaxia for purchases of coin collection and distribution services. This agree-
ment was in place up until the arrest of the CEO of Panaxia, shortly before the bankruptcy,
although no services were ever purchased by the central bank.
    The consequences of Panaxia’s failure were severe for its customers. We have acquired the
identities of the firms that were exposed to the failure from the bankruptcy trustee and from
four banks that were involved in the bankruptcy. At the time of the failure, our records cover
1,270 customers that had outstanding claims on Panaxia from collections of daily proceeds from
more than 5,000 collection sites. After omitting firms for which we cannot establish an identity
(34); banks and financial firms (12); non-limited liability firms (179) for which we do not have
accounting data; pharmacies (137) which were mostly startups in the period 2009–2010 due to
a deregulation of the pharmacy-market that took place mid-year 2009; and firms with missing
accounting data for the period 2008–2013 (303), we obtained a final sample of 605 firms.5 The
    4
      The bankruptcy trustee describes a setup where the Panaxia’s management instructed the customer-support
staff to inform customers complaining about the prolonged delivery times that the holdups were simply due to
technical problems. Figure A1 shows the number of collected receipts at a monthly frequency for the period 2006–
2011. The figure shows a sharp increase in collected receipts from January 2006 to July 2008, and a stable pattern
hovering around 120,000 collected receipts in the period from July 2008 to December 2013. Thus, this figure
indicates that the number of customers was stable from mid-2008 and onward.
    5
      In the final sample, we have also omitted one treated firm that displayed an abnormally large number of
overdue payments in 2009. For this treated firm, the number of overdue payments was amongst the largest in the
entire population of Swedish firms.

                                                        9
average (median) exposure-to-assets amounted to 3.9 (2.0) percent. Not all of these firms were
affected by the bankruptcy; while 489 firms incurred a loss, 116 firms were fully compensated
by their banks.6 However, all of Panaxia’s customers were potentially exposed to the fraud
leading up to the bankruptcy and suffered from temporary, but recurring liquidity shortfalls.
These exposures—the fraud and the failure—constitute an event period, or shock, which we
make use of to establish a causal impact of liquidity losses on firms liquidity management.
       Furthermore, in the Panaxia analysis, we also make use of a data set provided by UC on
applications for issuance of injunctions for settlement of overdue trade credit claims. These
data were originally collected by the Swedish Enforcement Agency, which provides legal sup-
port to trade creditors (suppliers) for the management of their unsettled trade credit claims. For
the period 2008Q1—2013Q1, we observe, at a daily frequency, the universe of submitted ap-
plications for issuance of injunctions by all Swedish suppliers. Moreover, for a shorter period
2010Q1–2013Q1, we observe all Swedish corporate customers that are subject to applications
for issuance of injunctions, also at a daily frequency. These data enable an evaluation of shifts
in trade credit repayment behavior, both upstream and downstream.


2.3       U.S. data

Our sample of American firms consists of all firms that appear in Compustat at some point be-
tween January 1, 1989, and December 31, 2013, subject to the following restrictions. Firstly,
we exclude all firm-years for which total assets or sales are not strictly positive; cash holdings
are larger than total assets; and annual sales or asset growth is larger than 100 percent. Sec-
ondly, we exclude financial firms (NAICS codes beginning with 52) and utilities (NAICS codes
beginning with 22). Finally, we restrict the sample to firms incorporated in the United States.
       As for the Swedish sample, we avoid detrimental effects from outlier observations by win-
sorizing all firm-specific variables with respect to the 1st and the 99th percentiles. In addition,
   6
      From the bankruptcy trustee we obtained a list of firms with outstanding claims on Panaxia at the time of the
bankruptcy. The list contained the names of the customers and the size of the outstanding claims. To be able to
match these firms with the accounting data, we obtained the organization numbers from name searches in the Re-
triever Business data base (the legal names for Swedish corporate firms are unique, which enables an unambiguous
matching). This matching resulted in a comprehensive coverage. For one particular case, we only observe the sum
of the claims held by a group of 231 franchise firms belonging to the same franchisor (the Reitan Group). For these
franchise firms, we backed out the Panaxia-related losses from their yearly accounting statements. Moreover, the
four banks provided information on names, organization numbers, and outstanding claims for the firms that they
compensated for losses in the Panaxia bankruptcy.


                                                       10
we drop firm-years that lack necessary data points for one or several of our specifications. This
leaves us with a sample of 9,497 firms and a total of 74,235 firm-year observations.


2.4        Descriptive statistics

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the variables of the two main data sets underlying this
paper. It is quite striking how the firm size distributions differ between the sets; Swedish firms
are substantially smaller than the U.S. counterparties. U.S. firms’ cash holdings are smaller, pos-
sibly reflecting an economy of scale effect in firm cash management. Distributions for accounts
payable are similar, with means at 12 and 11 percent for Swedish and U.S. firms, respectively.
Likewise, the accounts receivable variables are also close; although Swedish firms on average
extend marginally more trade credit to sales than do U.S. firms. Finally, despite the huge dif-
ferences in firm size across the two data sets, the percentiles of returns on assets are remarkably
close, with median values around 7 to 8 percent, although on average Swedish firms are slightly
more profitable. Hence, our empirical evaluation will cover the spectrum from small private
Swedish firms to large public U.S. firms, enabling findings that are general and not country-,
nor size-specific.

                                       [Insert Table 1 about here.]



3        Variance Decomposition
As a starting point for the empirical analysis, we will adopt a variance decomposition frame-
work similar to that of Asdrubali, Sorensen, and Yosha (1996) and quantify the contributions
from the components on firms’ balance sheets—with a focus on cash holdings and trade credit
positions—to manage shortfalls in cash flow.7
        The framework is constructed as follows. We split a firm’s balance sheet into six parts. On
the asset side, we consider cash holdings, accounts receivable, and other assets. The component
labeled other assets is defined as total assets minus cash holdings and receivables, thus including
    7
     This variance decomposition approach has been widely used. On the household side, Townsend and Sam-
phantharak (2009) use, based on the household budget identity, a version of the approach to decompose variation
in consumption and investment deficits. On the corporate side, Khanna and Yafeh (2005) provide an application
towards measurement of risk sharing within business groups.


                                                      11
items such as, e.g., fixed assets and inventories. On the liability side, we have accounts payable,
total liabilities (defined as liabilities excluding payables), and equity. According to the inherent
logic of the balance sheet identity, a given cash flow outcome in year t must yield adjustments
in the six balance sheet components such that the asset and liability balance is preserved. To
illustrate this, we will consider the following identity:

(1)                                         S     B1 + B2 + ::: + B6 ;

where S denotes shortfalls and is taken to be negative cash flow; and B1 , B2 ,..., and B6 corre-
spond to changes in the balance sheets components (suppressing subscripts for brevity).8 More
specifically, a positive S—a loss—in year t equals the sum of: decreases in the asset compo-
nents cash holdings, B1 , accounts receivable, B2 , and other assets, B3 ; and increases in the
liability components accounts payable, B4 , liabilities, B5 , and equity, B6 .9
      By demeaning the components—Se = S                      ~i = Bi
                                                        S and B              B i —in Eq. (1), and multiplying
              e we obtain:
both sides by S,

(2)                                   Se2       SeB
                                                  ~1 + SeB
                                                         ~2 + ::: + SeB
                                                                      ~6 :

                                                    e yields:
Taking expectations and dividing both sides by V ar(S)


                                    e B
                               Cov(S;           e B
                                      ~1 ) Cov(S; ~2 )              e B
                                                               Cov(S; ~6 )
(3)                      1                +            + ::: +             :
                                     e
                                 Var(S)          e
                                             Var(S)                  e
                                                                 Var(S)
Hence, the variation in cash flow shortfalls is decomposed into the sum of co-movements be-
tween cash flow shortfalls and each of the six balance sheet components. Our estimate of the
contribution from component Bi is given by the slope coefficients from regressions of Bi on
S, for i = 1; 2; :::; 5. The residual variation not explained by the first five components is as-
signed to the equity component, B6 .10 The balance sheet components are constructed so that a
    8
      The variables are defined as follows: S =           Cash f low; B1 =         (Casht     Casht 1 ); B2 =
  (Receivablest      Receivablest 1 ); B3 = (Other assetst             Other assetst 1 ); B4 = P ayablest
P ayablest 1 ; B5 = Liabilitiest Liabilitiest 1 ; and B6 = Equityt Equityt 1 . The Cash f low-variable is
defined as EBIT DA minus taxes, interest expenses, and depreciations and amortizations; and changes in equity
correspond to the flows of dividend payments, stock issuance and repurchases, shareholder contributions, and other
components in the equity section of the balance sheet.
    9
      Correspondingly, a negative S—positive cash flow—equals the sum of: increases in the asset components
cash holdings B1 , accounts receivable B2 , and other assets B3 ; and of decreases in the liability components
accounts payable B4 , liabilities B5 , and equity B6 .
   10
      Consequently, we can estimate the contribution of the equity component by regressing (S B1 B2 ::: B5 )
on S.


                                                        12
positive coefficient indicates that the component contributes towards the handling of cash flow
shortfalls, and vice versa.


3.1    Results

Our results on decomposition of firm-level cash flow shortfall variation are summarized in Table
2. The table shows estimates for the balance sheet components in Eq. (3), based on the Swedish
and U.S. samples. We have constructed the balance sheet components so that positive coeffi-
cients for the components on the asset side indicate that cash flow shortfalls are associated with
downward adjustments in these variables, e.g., reduced cash holdings; and positive coefficients
for the components on the liability side indicate that declines in cash flow are associated with
upward adjustments, e.g., increased debt.
   Following Townsend and Samphantharak (2009), we start by applying an approach where
the contribution of each component is estimated in time series regressions at the firm-level, thus
yielding firm-individual estimates for each balance sheet component. Columns (I) and (IV)
report quartiles in the empirical distributions of the coefficients for the six balance sheet com-
ponents, for the Swedish and U.S. firms, respectively. For Swedish firms, on the asset side,
the results show that cash flow shortfalls mainly appear to be associated with decreases in cash
holdings and in other assets; the medians show a reduction in cash by 17.7 percent and other
assets by 14.6 percent. On the liability side, Swedish firms primarily increase equity, 18.9 per-
cent at the median. Looking at the upper quartile draws attention on the asset side to decreases
in other assets, while the lower quartile with negative signs reminds us that many balance sheet
movements are codetermined in potentially complicated stratetgies. On the liability side the
upper quartile is also reflecting increasing liabilities. The effects for accounts receivable and
payable are miniscule. Turning to U.S. firms, on the assets side, the estimates show that cash
flow shortfalls are associated with reductions in cash, receivables, and in particular other assets.
Whereas, on the liability side, cash flow shortfalls are associated increases in equity inflows and,
with a negative sign, decreases in payables and liabilities. Judging from the latter, payables and
liabilities are not used for handling of cash flow shortfalls for U.S. firms.

                                   [Insert Table 2 about here.]


                                                13
       We proceed to estimate average—across firms and over time—contributions for the balance
sheet components on the basis of pooled firm- and year-fixed effects regressions. Columns
(II) and (V) report results for the Swedish and the U.S. sample, respectively. For the Swedish
firms, cash flow shortfalls are associated with decreases in other assets and increases in equity.
The estimates for U.S. firms are slightly different from the Swedish ones. Cash flow shortfalls
are associated with decreases in all the asset components; and increases in equity. Counter-
intuitively we note significant reductions in accounts payable and liabilities for positive cash
flow shortfalls, with negative signs.11
       Regressing units of cash flow shortfalls on unit changes in the balance sheet components
may result in estimates that pre-dominantly reflect regularities of the largest firms in the sam-
ple. That is, in terms of units of SEK, or USD, large firms—by simply being large—will tend
to record large amounts of cash flow shortfalls and large changes in their balance sheet compo-
nents, and therefore greatly influence the estimated slope coefficients. One way to control for
heterogeneity in firm size is to the scale the variables by firms’ total assets. To this end, Columns
(III) and (VI) report variance decomposition results where all variables are scaled by assets in
year t      1. The coefficients for Swedish firms show that cash, receivables and liabilities play
more prominent roles, when controlling for the size of the firms. Thus, the cash flow variation
is associated with a 36 percent adjustment in cash holdings, 14 percent in accounts receivable,
and 5.3 percent in liabilities. Accounts payable has a small—but significant—negative coeffi-
cient, suggesting perhaps that, increases in cash flow shortfalls are associated with reductions in
payables, which very well could reflect shifts in demand conditions in the supply chain. That is,
firms facing declines in demand, reduce their input purchases, which yield a reduction in their
account payables. Moreover, the results are overall similar for U.S. firms, with the exceptions
that cash holdings exhibit substantially smaller and equity substantially larger effects.
       Taken together, the coefficients for our three key objects provide slightly mixed results
across the two samples. Swedish firms may rely on cash to manage cash flow shortfalls, or
at least that is an interpretation, whereas U.S. firms, on the other hand, appear to rely less on
cash in response to cash flow shortfalls. For the two trade credit margins, we see that receiv-
  11
     For a sub-sample of the U.S. firms we have access to cash flow statements. Using this data yields very similar
results: the coefficients (t-values) for B1 ; B2 ; : : : ; B6 are 0.081 (1.6), 0.057 (3.9), 0.707 (8.3), -0.034 (-2.2), -0.186
(-2.5), and 0.373 (6.0), respectively.



                                                             14
ables exhibits positive and payables negative associative properties for both the Swedish and
U.S. firms. However, it is important to note that causal interpretations of these results are un-
warranted. That is, cash flow shortfalls may well reflect shifts in demand and supply conditions
in the supply-chain—rather than increased liquidity needs—which could affect the amounts of
drawn and issued trade credit in a fashion unrelated to liquidity management. Suppose a firm
is experiencing a shortfall in cash flow due to a sudden drop in demand for its output. It is
conceivable that in response the firm may want to cut down on input purchases, which will be
reflected as a decrease in accounts payable, to match a lower output level. We therefore pro-
ceed to the second part of the empirical analysis, where we gauge the impact of a plausibly
exogenous liquidity shock on firms’ cash and trade credit positions.



4     The Panaxia Event Study
We will now consider the liquidity losses that the fraudulent scheme and subsequent bankruptcy
event of Panaxia imposed on its corporate clients. The purpose of the analysis in this section
is to quantify the effects from the delays in fund transfers (cf. Figure 1) and from the realized
losses in the subsequent Panaxia failure, on the cash and trade credit positions of Panaxia’s
corporate clients.


4.1    Matching estimators

As noted in our discussion above, cash flow shortfalls are invariably associated with changes in
the demand and supply conditions that prevail for firms’ operations, and will consequentially
contain elements of an endogenous nature. It is therefore warranted to challenge and qualify
results obtained for cash flow shortfalls by replacing these with a liquidity shock that is con-
ceivably exogenous with respect to demand and supply conditions in the supply-chain. To this
end, we will examine the shifts in cash holdings and trade credit positions for firms that suf-
fered liquidity losses—temporary and permanent—in connection with the fraud and subsequent
failure of the Swedish cash-in-transit firm Panaxia in the period 2010–2012.
    Panaxia’s fraudulent scheme and failure is assumed to have negatively affected its corpo-
rate clients—the treated firms. We calculate the average treatment effect for the treated firms

                                               15
(AT T ) on the set of variables of interest, using a nearest-neighbor matching estimator proposed
by Abadie and Imbens (2006). The treatment period is taken to be 2010–2012; since Panaxia
began its practice to postpone payments in early 2010 and then failed about 30 months later in
September 2012. The nearest-neighbor matching ensures that we compare outcomes for treated
firms with outcomes for otherwise similar control firms. Each treated firm is matched with one
control firm, using a set of matching variables comprising firm-specific characteristics and a
five-digit industry classifier.12 We select our matching variables based on covariates that are
commonly used as control variables in the literatures on cash holdings and on trade credit.
The selected set of matching variables is: cash flow-to-assets; log of assets; sales growth;
debt-to-assets; tangible assets-to-assets; inventories-to-assets; log of firm age; cash-to-assets;
payables-to-assets; and receivables-to-assets. The matching is performed with respect to the
2009-outcomes of the matching variables. To ensure parallel pre-treatment event trends, we
also match on 2008-outcomes of cash-to-assets, payables-to-assets, and receivables-to-sales.
      Our aim is to gauge impacts of postponed payments, and subsequent losses, on treated firms.
For this purpose, we consider the following difference-in-difference estimator of yearly adjust-
ments in the treatment and post-treatment periods for the outcome variables Cash=Assets,
P ayables=Assets, and Receivables=Sales:
                             y
(4)                          t   = (ytT reated   ytT reated
                                                      1     )   (ytControl    ytControl
                                                                                  1     );

       T reated                                                                         Control
where yi;t      is the mean of an outcome variable for the treated firms in year t and yi;t     is
the mean of the same outcome variable for the matched control firms in year t.13 We calculate
the yearly adjustments for the treatment period 2010–2012, and for the post-treatment period
2013. In addition to yearly adjustments, we also calculate difference-in-difference estimators
of cumulative adjustments over multiple years for the treatment and post-treatment period:

(5)                        Tty = (ytT reated      T reated
                                                 y2009     )    (ytControl     Control
                                                                              y2009    ):

      The estimators of yearly and cumulative adjustments offer causal insights on how liquidity
shortfalls affect firms’ cash-to-assets, payables-to-assets, and receivables-to-sales. Moreover,
   12
      We apply the following matching model specification. Firstly, the Mahalanobis weighting matrix is selected to
control for the differences in scale between the matching variables. Secondly, we use matching with replacement,
which implies that a given control firm can potentially be matched to multiple treated firms. To ensure correct
inference, standard errors are clustered at the firm-level.
   13
      Relating payables to assets and receivables to sales is a common convention in the trade credit literature, see,
e.g., Petersen and Rajan (1997).

                                                         16
we further explore the underlying mechanisms of adjustments in payables and receivables by
considering outcome variables related to overdue trade credit payments—both upstream and
downstream. To this end, we use data from the Swedish Enforcement Agency on applications
for the issuance of an injunction to settlement of outstanding claims. These data provide an
opportunity to assess whether the treated firms to a larger extent than the control firms delayed
payments to suppliers, i.e., upstream adjustments. In other words, upstream firms submitted an
application for issuance of an injunction to recover late payments. Also, we can assess whether
the treated firms to a greater extent than control firms, submitted applications for injunction
issuance, i.e., downstream adjustments. In other words, if treated firms tried to recover delayed
payments more quickly. Finally, we examine magnitudes in effects, conditional on the size of
the liquidity losses incurred; to be discussed in greater detail below.


4.2    Sample compositions for treated and matched control firms

Descriptive statistics for the matching variables are reported in Table 3. The table shows that the
treated and matched control firms exhibit characteristics that are quite similar, which warrants
the quality of the matching. The only dimension in which the treated and control firms are
significantly different in means is receivables-to-sales, whereas debt-to-asset ratios also differ
significantly according to the median test. To ensure that our results are not influenced by
pre-treatment differences between the treated and control firms, we complement our baseline
estimates using the bias-corrected matching estimators proposed by Abadie and Imbens (2011).

                                   [Insert Table 3 about here.]

   Furthermore, Figure 2 shows differences in means between treated and control firms for the
three key outcome variables in each year during: the pre-treatment period (2007–2009); treat-
ment period (2010–2012); and post-treatment period (2013). The confidence bands in the figure
shows that average cash holdings coincided for treated and control firms in the pre-treatment
period. However, in the treatment period we see a downward shift for the difference in average
cash holdings, i.e., average cash for treated firms is significantly smaller than average cash for
controls. A similar treatment shift, but in the other direction, is observed for accounts payable;
differences in averages are insignificant in the pre-treatment period, followed by an upward

                                                17
shift during the treatment period. Consistent with the descriptive statistics in Table 3, the fig-
ure further shows that treated firms held significantly less accounts receivable on average in all
periods. Nevertheless, the figure displays a distinct downward trend in receivables during the
treatment period, suggesting that treated firms altered their receivables more than control firms
did. Thus, Figure 2 provides initial evidence that treated firms used their cash holdings and trade
credit margins to overcome the Panaxia liquidity shock. Moreover, one potential concern is that
cash holdings for treated firms may display a downward trend in the pre-treatment period, and
thereby compromise identification. We investigate this formally below, and verify that treated
and control firms display trends for the outcome variables in the pre-treatment period that are
not significantly different.

                                        [Insert Figure 2 about here.]


4.3     Baseline results

We now proceed with a presentation of our baseline results. Table 4 reports estimates of the
yearly and cumulative adjustments according to Equations (4) and (5), for our three key outcome
variables. Panel A shows results for cash holdings, Cash=Assets. The estimates of the yearly
adjustments effects,      t,   in Columns (I) to (IV) show statistically significant reductions in cash
holdings in the first two years of the treatment period. The cumulative effect estimates, Tt ,
show that the yearly declines in cash in 2010-2011 result in persistently lower cash holdings
in the final year of the treatment period and in the post-treatment year. Columns (V) to (VIII)
report bias-corrected matching estimators, where differences in the matching variable outcomes
between treated and control firms are accounted for in the estimation, see Abadie and Imbens
(2011). The bias-corrected effects are very similar to the ones reported in Columns (I) to (IV),
suggesting that the latter are not confounded by differences in characteristics between the treated
and control firms. In addition, Column (IX) shows test results indicating that the treated and
control firms have parallel cash holding trends in the pre-treatment period 2007-2009, which is
a sufficient condition for a causal interpretation of the average treatment effect results.14
  14
      We apply the test of parallel pre-trends proposed by Mora and Reggio (2015). More specifically, for the
                                                        P2013                P2013
period 2007–2013, we estimate the model E[yit ] = + t=2008 t It + Di + t=2008 t It Di , where It is time
t year dummies and D is a treatment dummy. The test statistic of pre-treatment trends is a Wald test of the joint
significance of 2008 and 2009 .


                                                       18
                                         [Insert Table 4 about here.]

       Results for accounts payable, P ayables=Assets, are reported in Panel B. The estimates of
the yearly adjustments effects,        t,   reported in Columns (I) to (IV) show an increase in 2011 of
1 percentage point and an enhanced increase of 1.8 percentage points in 2012. These yearly
effects result in a cumulative adjustment effects, Tt , of 2.8 percentage points in 2012 and 2.5
percentage points in the post-treatment year. Columns (V) to (VIII) show that the results persist
for the bias-corrected estimates and Column (IX) indicates that treated and control firms have
parallel pre-treatment trends with respect to accounts payable.
       Panel C reports results for accounts receivable, Receivables=Assets. The estimates of the
yearly adjustment effects point to an initial contraction of 0.2 percentage points in the first
year of the treatment period and an enhanced contraction of 0.6 percentage points in 2012.
Accordingly, the estimates of the cumulative effects, Tt , show that the downward trend in re-
ceivables amounts to an accumulated reduction of 0.9 percentage points in 2012, which persists
in the post-treatment year.15 The bias-corrected estimators reported in Columns (V) to (VIII)
show that treatment effects for receivables are somewhat enhanced, once we account for the
slight differences in the amount of issued trade credit between treated and controls in the pre-
treatment period, cf. Table 3. Finally, the test for parallel pre-trends in Column (IX) shows that
the identifying assumption is fulfilled.
       The point estimates of the cumulative adjustments in 2012, T2012 , suggest that the mag-
nitude of upstream adjustments is larger than that of downstream adjustments. One obvious
concern in a comparison of relative size for the two effects is that payables are scaled with as-
sets, whereas receivables are scaled with sales. Scaling accounts receivable by assets instead,
provides a better ground for such a comparison; and in estimation using receivables-to-assets
we obtain a cumulative effect (t-value) in 2012, T2012 , of              0.010 ( 1.8), which is close to the
estimate for sales-scaled receivables of 0.009 ( 3.2). A statistical test for the difference in ab-
solute adjustment between payables-to-assets and receivables-to-assets, show that adjustments
in payables indeed dominate receivables, with a p-value of 0.058. Furthermore, to gauge the
relative importance of cash versus trade credit margins, we can compare the size of compounded
  15
     The negative effect on receivables is in line with the findings in Bakke and Whited (2012). They explore
the impact of cash shortfalls triggered by mandatory pension contributions on a wide set of firm characteristics.
Consistent with our result, they document that funding violations, causing liquidity shortfalls, are associated with
reductions in receivables-to-assets.


                                                        19
adjustments in net trade credit positions (i.e., (P ayables   Receivables)=Assets) with the size
of adjustments in cash holdings. The estimated cumulative adjustment (t-value) in net trade
credit in 2012 is 0.037 (3.2). Testing for the difference in absolute adjustment between cash and
net trade credit yields a p-value of 0.242, indicating that the adjustments at the two trade credit
margins are jointly of a similar magnitude as the adjustments in cash holdings.
   Although firms clearly make use of both upstream and downstream liquidity extraction—
independently or simultaneously—it is conceivable why operating the accounts payable margin
may provide a more effective measure to raise liquidity and explain why we find that upstream
dominate downstream adjustments. Through upstream adjustments, firms can readily offset
liquidity shocks by immediate postponement of due payments to suppliers, and withhold money
until additional inflows of funds are obtained. If the amount of liquidity extracted upstream
proves insufficient to offset the shock, the firm may continue to roll over its overdue trade credit
debt until the impact of the original liquidity shock is neutralized. Intuitively, the ability for
firms to roll over overdue trade credit debt hinges on their suppliers’ willingness to overlook
late payments, that is, on the absence of obstacles to the functioning of (implicit) risk sharing
networks. In downstream adjustments, firms can extract liquidity by reducing the trade credit
maturities in new contracts to prompt faster future payments from customers. But that will free
up liquidity only with a lag. An alternative measure is to proactively manage outstanding claims,
to avoid late payments from customers. We will shortly study these underlying adjustment
mechanisms closer, both upstream and downstream.
   To sum up, the baseline results show that the retention of customer funds and the subsequent
bankruptcy-related losses caused Panaxia’s customers to reduce their cash holdings, increase the
amount of drawn trade credit from suppliers, and contract the amount of issued trade credit to
customers. In terms of magnitudes, the joint impact for the two trade credit margins is on par
with adjustments in cash holdings; and upstream trade credit adjustments dominate downstream
adjustments. Thus, trade credit is an important source of reserve liquidity for firms.


4.4    Underlying mechanisms

Liquidity shocks cause the observed adjustments in treated firms’ trade credit positions. We will
now explore our key presumption for the nature of firms’ behavior underlying these adjustments:

                                                20
namely, that reserve liquidity is extracted upstream by postponement of trade credit payments to
suppliers, and by enforcing repayment of outstanding debt to customers downstream. Whereas
these two types of actions may well be privately conducted between trade credit parties, they
will ever so often involve a third party, the Swedish Enforcement Agency (Kronofogdemyn-
digheten), and leave behind publicly available records. The Enforcement Agency offers legal
support to Swedish trade creditors (suppliers) for the management of their unsettled trade credit
claims. The creditor can submit an application to the Enforcement Agency for the issuance
of an injunction to settlement of the outstanding claim. If approved, the Enforcement Agency
will then notify the debtor for prompt payment within a fortnight; and take further measures to
enforce payment should the debtor persist in dishonoring the claim after notification. Applying
for an injunction to settlement is normally the creditor’s last resort and typically occurs when a
claim has been overdue for an extended period—several weeks, or longer.
   We have, from the Swedish Enforcement Agency, obtained data on applications for the is-
suance of injunctions to settlement of outstanding claims, submitted by the universe of Swedish
corporate firms. The data include details on the date of submission and the identities of involved
parties so that unambiguous merging with the treated and control firms of the Panaxia event is
straight forward. The merged data set provides an opportunity to assess whether treated firms to
a greater extent than control firms have been subjects to applications for injunction issuance due
to unpaid debts, i.e., the upstream perspective. We can also consider the downstream perspective
and examine whether treated firms to a greater extent than control firms submitted applications
for injunction issuance, i.e., took action to enforce repayment of overdue issued debt. The En-
forcement Agency data are somewhat restricted in that we can observe applications faced by
treated and control firms in the full period 2008Q1–2013Q4; whereas applications submitted
by treated and control firms are observed in the period 2010Q1–2013Q1, nonetheless providing
a full coverage of the treatment period (in which we have aggregated daily observations to a
quarterly level).
   Figure 3 offers graphical illustration of the extensive and intensive margins of applications
for injunction to settle overdue payments faced (upper panels) and issued (lower panels) by
treated and control firms. The upper left panel suggests that the fraction of firms that delayed
trade credit payments increased amongst treated relative to control firms; and the upper right


                                               21
panel shows an even more pronounced divergence, when we account for the number of delayed
payments that resulted in an application. Moreover, the lower left panel shows that the fractions
of treated and control firms that in each quarter acted to enforce payment of overdue debt are
fairly similar over the event period. However, when considering the number of applications—
the intensive margin—displayed in the lower right panel, we find that treated firms consistently
submit more applications in the treatment period, with the exception of one quarter, 2011Q1.

                                   [Insert Figure 3 about here.]

   Table 5 reports estimates of the quarterly changes,    t,   and cumulative effects, Tt , for the four
measures reported in Figure 3. Given that Panaxia began to withhold its customers’ funds in the
second quarter of 2010 (cf. Figure 1), we take the first quarter of 2010 as a pre-treatment quarter,
when calculating cumulative effects on applications for injunction due to overdue trade credit.
Column (II) shows statistically significant larger cumulative fractions for treated firms facing
applications in the quarters 2010Q4, 2011Q1, 2011Q3, 2013Q1 and in 2013Q2. This pattern
is pronounced in Column (IV), where the number of applications due to firms’ overdue debt
is considered; significantly more applications for treated firms now occur in two out of three
quarters in the event period. The tests of parallel pre-trends indicate no significant differences in
trends between treated and control firms in the outcome variables prior to the event. Thus, these
results suggest that late payments are indeed one driver of the increase in payables documented
in Table 4 for treated firms.

                                    [Insert Table 5 about here.]

   Moreover, Columns (V) and (VI) show results for the differences in fractions of treated
and control firms that in a given quarter attempt enforcement of settlement with non-paying
customers. Largely, no significant effects occur at this margin, except a slight increase of 2
percentage points for treated firms in the last quarter of 2011. However, when considering the
intensive margin and the number of applications submitted, according to Column (VIII), we
see that the cumulative measures in quarters 2011Q4 and 2012Q2 are significant, and estimated
effects are substantial—albeit not significant—in several other quarters in the event period.
   To sum up, this sub-section has demonstrated, or shed light, on how firms’ adjustments
of their trade credit positions are played out. Upstream, we find that more treated firms than

                                                 22
control firms are inclined to postpone trade credit payments when we evaluate at the extensive
margin. We find even stronger effects pointing to delinquency behavior for treated firms, when
we measure at the intensive margin. Adjustments of accounts receivable—the downstream
perspective—which was found to be more moderately used in firms’ liquidity management in
Table 4, is also associated with weaker evidence of firms actively trying to enforce payment
from stalling customers. However, at the intensive margin, we find that treated firms in two
quarters submit a significantly larger number of applications for injunction. Hence, adjustments
of trade credit positions in the course of firms dealing with liquidity shocks are associated
with extension and contraction of credit in the time dimension, in the up- and downstream
perspectives, respectively.


4.5    Responses conditional on loss-size

Magnitudes of adjustments in cash and at the trade credit margins should depend positively
on the sizes of firms’ incurred losses in the Panaxia failure. That is, whereas the fraud in
postponing transfers of funds to client accounts is certainly expected to have a negative impact
on firms’ liquidity positions, the point-in-time realization of a large loss when Panaxia finally
went bankrupt should yield a larger negative and more persistent impact. This conceivable
conjecture will be examined next and we will consider two cases: firstly, firms that incurred
losses versus no losses; and secondly, incurring firms’ responses conditional on the size of their
losses. For the first case we divide the treated firms into two groups: firms that were fully
compensated by their bank in 2012; and firms that incurred losses in 2012. Thus, the firms in
the two groups experienced the same fraud treatment in 2010 and 2011—delayed payments—
but a differential treatment in the bankruptcy year 2012. For the second case we will leave out
the compensated firms.
   Table 6 reports results for the two groups; Columns (I) to (V) correspond to the group
of treated firms that were fully compensated in 2012 and Columns (VI) to (X) correspond to
the group of treated firms that incurred losses in 2012. The results for the former show a
downward shift in the firms’ cash holdings in 2011 and a subsequent reversal in 2012, so that
the estimated cumulative cash effect that year is not significantly different from zero. A similar
pattern is observed for accounts payable, where the cumulative adjustments indicate an increase

                                               23
in 2011, followed by an insignificant accumulated effect in 2012. The results for accounts
receivable show that a temporary downward adjustment occurred in 2012; but the estimates
of the cumulative effects are insignificant throughout the treatment and post-treatment periods,
indicating that these firms did not make any significant adjustments in the amount of issued
trade credit as compared with the positions held in 2009. Shifting now to the results for firms
that did incur losses when Panaxia failed in 2012, we find that adjustments in cash holdings and
trade credit positions persist in 2012 and in the post-treatment year. Thus, the results in Table
6 suggest that the postponement fraud underlies the observed adjustments in the first two years
of the treatment period and applies to both groups of firms, whereas the existence of failure
losses caused the adjustments to persist, or even increase, in the last treatment year and in the
post-treatment year.

                                         [Insert Table 6 about here.]

       For the sub-sample of firms that incurred losses in 2012, we can deepen the analysis by
evaluating whether the size of the adjustment depends on the size of the loss.16 We do this by
estimating the cumulative adjustment effect between 2009 and 2012, conditional on the size of
the loss.17 Columns (I) in Table 7 shows an insignificant relationship between the size of a loss
and associated adjustment in cash holdings, whereas Columns (II) and (III) show that larger
losses are associated with significantly larger increases in payables as well as larger decreases
in receivables, in the statistical sense. These results indicate that the trade credit margins indeed
played an important role in absorbing the impact of the incurred losses and the larger the loss,
the larger are resulting adjustments.

                                         [Insert Table 7 about here.]
  16
      In this analysis we omit two treated firms—and their matched control firms—for which we have missing data
on loss sizes, resulting in a sample of 487 treated firms.
   17
       For the years 2009 and 2012, we estimate the model: E[yi;t ] = 0 + 1 Loss=Assetsi                       It +
 2 Loss=Assets    i +     I
                        3 t  +    X
                                 4 i , where  Loss=Assets  i is the size of the loss scaled by assets in 2012, It is
an indicator variable set to unity in 2012 and zero in 2009, and Xi is a vector of 2009-outcomes of the continues
matching variables.




                                                        24
5     Conditional Cash Flow Shortfall Analyses
In the final step of the empirical analysis, we introduce a set of conditional models geared
towards capturing the responses to liquidity distress measured by cash flow shortfalls, and es-
timated on the full Swedish and U.S. samples. The purpose of the analyses in this section is
twofold. Firstly, we structure the empirical evaluation to seek external validity for the results in
the previous section, by quantifying the impacts of cash flow shortfalls on the liquidity positions,
while controlling for a host of factors that may otherwise matter for firms’ cash and trade credit
positions, such as demand fluctuations in the supply-chain, growth prospects, investment and
debt financing. If results for cash flow shortfalls and the Panaxia liquidity shocks come through
in broadly similar ways for Swedish firms, we may then infer that the conditional analysis of
this section gives results which are substantially similar to the Panaxia experiment, i.e., that
endogeneity concerns for cash flow shortfalls here are not overwhelming for our purposes. In
other words, cash flow shortfalls can be taken to reasonably well approximate exogenous liq-
uidity shocks in the current context. As a next step, we can then cautiously interpret differences
and similarities between Sweden and the U.S.. Secondly, this modelling approach—conducted
on large samples—provides a suitable framework for examining cross-sectional heterogeneity
in firm- and industry-characteristics for the impacts of cash flow shortfalls on firms’ liquidity
management. Our model-specifications are on the form:

(6)                  yi;t = Shortf alli;t + Sales growthi;t + Xi;t + I                  i;t   + "i;t ;

where      yi;t    yi;t    yi;t 1 ; Shortf alli;t is declines in cash flow (Shortf all = max( Cash
f lowi;t ; 0)); Sales growthi;t is the log differences in sales between t and t                   1; Xi;t is a vector
of firm-characteristics; and        i;t   is a vector of firm- and time-fixed effects. The vector of firm-
characteristics, Xi;t , includes a set of control variables that is commonly used in the corporate
cash literature.18 Controlling for sales growth is a key feature of the model. That is, the results
for payables and receivables presented in the variance decomposition analysis may very well
reflect shifts in demand conditions in the supply-chain rather than responses due to changing
   18
      The set of firm-characteristics mimic that of Eq. (9) in Almeida et al. (2004), including: the natural logarithm
of total assets (Sizei;t ); capital expenditures (Expendituresi;t ); changes in non-cash and non-trade credit net
working capital ( N W Ci;t ); and changes in non-accounts payable short term debt ( ShortDebti;t ). For the U.S.
data we also include the market value scaled by the book value of assets (Qi;t ); and acquisitions (Acquisitionsi;t ).


                                                         25
liquidity needs. Thus, by controlling for sales growth, our ambition is that the coefficient for
cash flow shortfalls, , should reflect responses to changes in liquidity needs.
   We consider the same set of outcome variables, y, as in the Panaxia analysis: Cash/Assets;
Payables/ Assets; and Receivables/Sales. Since the conditional regressions capture yearly ad-
justments and the Panaxia analysis evaluates adjustments over a three year period, capturing
both delayed payments and subsequent losses, it is not obvious how a comparison of the ef-
fects from the two liquidity shocks should be interpreted. However, we adopt the following
criterion: results showing that firms cash flow shortfalls are associated with drawdowns in cash
holdings ( < 0), increases in payables ( > 0), and contractions in receivables ( < 0)—with
upstream adjustments dominating downstream adjustments; and joint adjustments at the trade
credit margins being roughly of the same magnitude as the ones in cash holdings—would be
deemed consistent with the event study results.


5.1      External validation

Panel A in Table 8 reports the conditional model results for coefficients obtained when estimat-
ing Eq. (6) on the sample of Swedish firms. Column (I) shows results for changes in firms’
cash holdings,    y =     Cash=Assets. The obtained coefficient show that declines in cash
flow is significantly associated with declines in cash holdings. By calculating the average, es-
timated impact of a given reduction in cash flow, we can infer the economic significance of
shortfalls in cash flow on cash holdings. Thus, we find that a one-standard-deviation decline
in the cash flow variable is associated with ( 0:097      0:201=0:232 =) 8.4 percent decline, at
the mean, in cash holdings. In Column (II) we report results for changes in firms’ accounts
payable,    y =    P ayables=Assets. The obtained coefficient is positive and statistically sig-
nificant, and indicates that cash flow shocks are associated with increased amounts of drawn
trade credit. A one-standard-deviation decline in the cash flow variable is associated with
(0:124     0:201=0:115 =) 21.6 percent increase, at the mean, in the amounts of drawn trade
credit. The effects for receivables,   y =     Receivables=Sales, is reported in Column (III).
We find a coefficient that is negative and statistically significant, hence showing that declines
in cash flow are associated with reduced amounts of issued trade credit. The magnitudes of
the coefficient implies that a one-standard-deviation larger cash flow shortfall is associated with

                                                26
( 0:052     0:201=0:161 =) 6.5 percent decline, at the mean, in accounts receivable. Thus, the
estimated cash flow effects have signs that coincide with the Panaxia event study results re-
ported in the previous section; that is, drawdowns in cash holdings, increases in payables, and
reductions in receivables, which concurs with the first part of our validation criterion.

                                    [Insert Table 8 about here.]

    As a further comparison we evaluate the relative magnitudes of upstream and downstream
adjustments. To control for the difference in scaling variables, we calculate the effect for
changes in receivables-to-assets,     y =    Receivables=Assets, which gives a coefficient (t-
value) of   0:033 ( 37:8). A t-test for the difference in the absolute changes between payables-
to-assets and receivables-to-assets shows that the upstream adjustments are significantly larger
in magnitude, with a p-value of 0.000. Moreover, to measure the relative importance of cash
and trade credit, we can compare the compounded adjustments in the net trade credit position
(i.e.,   (P ayables   Receivables)=Assets) with adjustments in cash holdings. The adjust-
ment (t-value) of net trade credit is estimated to 0.157 (136.8). Testing for the difference in
absolute adjustment between cash and net trade credit, shows that the compounded adjustments
at the trade credit margins significantly dominate the ones in cash holdings, with a p-value of
0.000. Thus, the conditional model estimates indicate effects which according to our criterion
are consistent with the effects documented in the event study analysis. However, one excep-
tion is that the conditional model indicates that joint adjustments at the trade credit margins
dominate adjustments in cash holdings, whereas these two are not significantly different in the
Panaxia analysis. This discrepancy could be due to the difference in sample sizes between the
two approaches, where the coefficients in the conditional models are more sharply estimated.
    Table 8, Panel B, reports results for the U.S. firms. The signs of the coefficients for cash
holdings and the two trade credit margins coincide with the ones reported for the Swedish
firms. Comparing the point estimates suggest that the effects are less pronounced for U.S. firms
as compared with Swedish ones; however, the estimates of economic significance are close in
magnitude across the two samples. In particular, adjustment effects at the accounts receivable
margin virtually coincide,    6.5 versus     6.0 percent, for Sweden and the U.S., and adjust-
ment effects at the payables margin upstream, are very close, although somewhat stronger for


                                                27
Swedish firms at 21.6 versus 18.3 percent. But, adjustments of cash-holdings diverge more;
U.S. firms adjust less at        5.4 versus      8.4 percent. A potential explanation for the difference
in economic significance of adjustment in cash-holdings across the two samples is the huge dif-
ference in firm-size between the samples; Swedish firms are considerably smaller than the U.S.
ones (cf. Table 1), and in recognition of the close link between firm-size and firms’ constraints
for raising external funding, see, e.g., Hadlock and Pierce (2010), it is conceivable that Swedish
firms depend more on internal cash than do U.S. firms; the latter with access to the most so-
phisticated financial markets in the world, and for this sample of huge Compustat firms external
funding may well be associated with approximately zero constraints.19 Furthermore, applying
the same tests on the U.S. as for the Swedish sample above, shows that upstream adjustments
are significantly more pronounced than downstream adjustments, and joint adjustments at the
trade credit margins dominate adjustments in cash holdings.
       Overall our results for cash flow shortfalls line up with the previous liquidity shock results,
and thus support the presumption that the found effects are manifestations of increased liquidity
needs; that is cash flow shortfalls can serve as a measure of firms’ liquidity distress. The esti-
mated measures of economic significance of effects are found to be remarkably similar across
the Swedish and U.S. samples, indicating that our results have general bearing.


5.2       Cross-sectional heterogeneity

The conditional models—estimated on large samples—provide a suitable framework for exam-
ining cross-sectional heterogeneity in firm- and industry-characteristics for the impacts of cash
flow shortfalls on firms’ liquidity management. We will firstly explore the notion that firms
with stronger relationship-ties towards suppliers and customers rely more on adjustment capac-
ity at the trade credit margins, and secondly consider whether trade credit adjustments hinges on
firms’ relative exposure to business cycle variation. To this end, we apply a set of sample-splits
and estimate Eq. (6) for sub-samples on the basis of the degree of specialized inputs used by
firms and on firms’ exposures to aggregate risk. More specifically, for each split-variable, we
  19
      This argument was put forward by Rajan and Zingales (1998), for the construction of their empirical industry-
level measure of external financing dependence. That is, given absence of constraints to externally fund operations
across industries, variation in de facto funding can be attributed to the nature of the industry and not to the compo-
sition of firms that belong to it.



                                                         28
sort the firms into empirical distributions for each year and construct two sub-samples related
to the bottom 30 percent and on the top 30 percent of the distributions.
       To study firm-heterogeneity with respect to the degree of specialized input usage, we adopt
a measure of specialized inputs used by Giannetti, Burkart, and Ellingsen (2011) in a simi-
lar context. It is defined at the industry-level and provides the fraction of firm total inputs
that is classified as differentiated goods and services, as opposed to standardized goods and ser-
vices, where the distinction between differentiated and standardized rests on Rauch (1999), who
considered items with clear reference price listings as standardized. The estimates show that
Swedish firms (Panel A) using more specialized inputs, adjust their trade credit margins—both
upstream and downstream—to a larger extent as compared with firms that obtain standardized
inputs. These results are overall consistent with the presumption that rent-seeking from mainte-
nance of long-term relationships incentivize firms to support counterparties in the supply chain.
However, the effects estimated for the U.S. firms (Panel B) indicate no significant differences
with respect to the degree of specialized inputs. Hence, suggesting that relationship-specific
investments may play a more prominent role for small- and medium sized firms, as compared
with large ones.

                                          [Insert Table 9 about here.]

       Finally, the adjustment capacity at the trade credit margins may potentially depend on the
extent to which firms’ suppliers and customers are able to provide support when needed. More
specifically, the suppliers and customers of a firm are less likely to be able to provide support if
they are in distress at the same time as the firm. This logic suggests that adjustment capacity at
the trade credit margins as a source of reserve liquidity increases for firms that are less exposed
to aggregate risk factors facing their suppliers and customers. Along these lines, Acharya,
Almeida, and Campello (2013) show that firms that are more exposed to aggregate risk, favor
cash over credit lines, since cash flow shortfalls are more likely to occur in times when banks
contract their credit supply.
       To explore this presumption, we measure a firm’s exposure to aggregate risk as the cor-
relation over time between its yearly cash flows and the yearly average cash flows across all
firms in the sample.20 A large correlation suggests an enhanced aggregate risk exposure. The
  20
        i   = Corr(Cash f lowi ;t ; Agg Cash f lowt ). Hence, our measure of aggregate risk exposure captures the


                                                         29
coefficients for Swedish firms (Panel A) indicate that firms with low exposure to aggregate risk,
draw less on their cash holdings, and more on their accounts payable. The estimated effects are
very small in magnitude, which may reflect that economy-wide average cash flow is a very im-
precise measure of the aggregate risk faced by firms. Nevertheless, the differences in effects at
the trade credit margins are more pronounced for U.S. firms (Panel B), whereas there is no sta-
tistical difference in the adjustments of cash holdings. Hence, these results are consistent with
the presumption that firms rely more on adjustment capacity at their trade credit margins when
the suppliers and customers are more likely to be able to provide the desired reserve liquidity.
We conclude that these results suggest that firms tend to rely more on trade credit adjustments
if their cash flow shortfalls occur when aggregate cash flow in the economy is sound. In other
words, if their suppliers and customers are more likely to be able to provide reserve liquidity,
and not be liquidity-constrained themselves.



6     Conclusions
Resent research has shown that the buffer motive plays a prominent role for firms’ choices of
cash holdings. Another conceivably important source of reserve liquidity is adjustment capacity
at the trade credit margins—accounts payable and receivable—on firms’ balance sheets. In this
paper, we empirically gauge how trade credit positions, next to cash holdings, are used by firms
to curb the impacts of shortfalls in liquidity. To this end, we evaluate the impact of liquidity
shocks that the fraud and failure of a large Swedish cash-in-transit firm imposed on its clients.
This unique event provides an opportunity to derive causal inference on the roles played by cash
holdings, and trade credit margins to handle liquidity shortfalls.
    Our contribution can be summarized by the following main findings. Firms handle adverse
liquidity shocks by drawing down on their cash holdings, by increasing the amount of drawn
credit from suppliers (payables), and by decreasing the amount of issued credit to suppliers (re-
ceivables). In terms of magnitudes, upstream adjustments dominate downstream adjustments;
and the compounded adjustment at the two trade credit margins is found to be of the same order
degree of firms’ pro-cyclicality. The more pro-cyclical, the more exposed. That is, the approach hinges on an
assumption that the firms’ trading partners collectively converge to the average of all firms. But on all accounts,
the average yearly cash flow for the trading partners—which we cannot observe—should be expected to follow the
business cycle, provided that the number of trading partners is large enough.


                                                       30
as adjustments in cash holdings, suggesting that trade credit positions indeed provide important
sources of reserve liquidity. Moreover, by exploring the underlying mechanism of the trade
credit adjustments, we find evidence suggesting that the observed changes are due to shifts
in the time dimension, where firms in need of liquidity increase durations on the trade credit
contracts upstream and reduce them downstream.
   We further explore the external validity of our event study results by a broad evaluation of
adjustments in cash holdings and trade credit positions following cash flow shortfalls. Consis-
tent with our event study findings—and when controlling for demand conditions in the supply-
chain—we find that cash flow shortfalls are associated with decreases in cash holdings, in-
creases in payables, and reductions in receivables, and again the former dominates the latter;
moreover, the compounded adjustments at the trade credit margins are greater than adjustments
in cash. These results are documented for a sample covering the universe of predominantly
small- and medium-sized Swedish corporate firms, as well as for a sample consisting of large,
publicly traded U.S. firms, which suggests that they are general in nature and not size-, nor
country-specific.




                                              31
References
Abadie, Albert, and Guido W. Imbens, 2006. Large Sample Properties of Matching Estimators
     for Average Treatment Effects. Econometrica, 74, 235–267.
Abadie, Albert, and Guido W. Imbens, 2011. Bias-corrected matching estimators for average
     treatment effects. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29, 1-11.
Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2015. Systemic Risk and
    Stability in Financial Networks. American Economic Review, 105, 564–608.
Acharya, Viral, Sergei Davydenko and Ilya Strebulaev, 2012. Cash Holdings and Credit Risk.
     Review of Financial Studies, 25, 3572–3609.
Acharya, Viral, Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello, 2013. Aggregate Risk and the Choice
     between Cash and Lines of Credit. Journal of Finance, 68, 2059–2116.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000. Financial Contagion. Journal of Political Economy,
      108, 1-33.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Igor Cunha, and Michael Weisbach, 2014. Corporate Liq-
     uidity Management: A Conceptual Framework and Survey. Annual Review of Financial
     Economics, 6, 135-62.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael Weisbach, 2004. The Cash Flow Sensitivity
     of Cash. Journal of Finance, 59, 1777–1804.
Almeida, Heitor, Chang-Soo Kim and Brian Kim, 2015. Internal Capital Markets in Business
     Groups: Evidence from the Asian Financial Crisis. Journal of Finance, 70, 2539-86.
Asdrubali, Pierfederico, Bent Sorensen and Oved Yosha, 1996. Channels of Interest Risk Shar-
     ing: United States 1963–90. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 1081–1110.
Bates, Thomas, Kathleen Kahle, and René Stulz, 2009. Why Do U.S. Firms Hold So Much
      More Cash than They Used To? Journal of Finance, 64,1985-2021.
Bakke, Tor-Erik, and Toni Whited, 2012. Threshold Events and Identification: A Study of Cash
     Shortfalls. Journal of Finance, 67, 1083–1111.
Boissay, Fredric, and Reint Gropp, 2013. Payment Defaults and Interfirm Liquidity Provision.
      Review of Finance, 17, 1853–94.
Cuñat, Vincent, 2007. Trade Credit: Suppliers as Debt Collectors and Insurance Providers.
     Review of Financial Studies, 20, 491–527.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, Burkart, Mike, and Tore Ellingsen, 2011. What You Sell Is What You
     Lend? Explaining Trade Credit Contracts. Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1261–98.
Giordani, Paolo, Tor Jacobson, Erik von Schedvin, and Mattias Villani, 2014. Taking the Twists
     into Account: Predicting Firm Bankruptcy Risk with Splines of Financial Ratios. Journal
     of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 49, 1071–99.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Vikram Nanda, and Amit Seru, 2007. Affiliated firms and financial
     support: Evidence from Indian business groups. Journal of Financial Economics, 86,
     759-795.
Hadlock, Charles and Joshua Pierce, 2010. New Evidence on Measuring Financial Constraints:
     Moving Beyond the KZ Index. Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1909-40.


                                             32
Jacobson, Tor, Kasper Roszbach, and Jesper Lindé, 2013. Firm Default and Aggregate Fluctu-
     ations. Journal of the European Economic Association, 11, 945–72.
Jacobson, Tor and Erik von Schedvin, 2015. Trade Credit and the Propagation of Corporate
     Failure: An Empirical Analysis. Econometrica, 83, 1315–71.
Karaivanov, Alexander, Sonia Ruano, Jesús Saurina, and Robert Townsend, 2012. No Bank,
      One Bank: Does it Matter for Investment. Working Paper 1003, Bank of Spain.
Khanna, Tarun and Yishay Yafeh, 2005. Business Groups and Risk Sharing around the World.
     Journal of Business, 78, 301–40.
Kinnan, Cynthia, and Robert Townsend, 2012. Kinship and Financial Networks, Formal Finan-
     cial Access, and Risk Reduction. American Economic Review 102, 289-93.
Mora, Ricardo and Iliana Reggio, 2015. didq: A command for treatment-effect estimation under
     alternative assumptions. The Stata Journal, 15, 796–808.
Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 1999. The determinants and
      implications of corporate cash holdings. Journal of Financial Economics, 52, 3–46.
Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram Rajan, 1997. Trade Credit: Theory and Evidence. Review of
      Financial Studies, 10, 661–91.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Eco-
     nomic Review, 88, 559–586.
Rauch, James, 1999. Networks versus Markets in International Trade. Journal of International
     Economics, 48, 7–35.
Samphantharak, Krislert, 2009. Internal Capital Markets and Allocation of Resources in Busi-
    ness Groups. Manuscript.
Samphantharak, Krislert, and Robert Townsend, 2009. Households as Corporate Firms: An
    Analysis of Household Finance Using Integrated Household Surveys and Corporate Fi-
    nancial Accounting. Econometric Society Monograph Series No. 46.
Sufi, Amir, 2007. Bank Lines of Credit in Corporate Finance: An Empirical Analysis. Review
      of Financial Studies, 22, 1057–88.
Wilner, Benjamin S., 2000. The exploitation of relationships in financial distress: The case of
     trade credit. Journal of Finance, 55, 153–78.




                                              33
                                                                                  Figure 1
                                                   PANAXIA; TIME FROM COLLECTION TO DELIVERY




34
     This figure illustrates, at a monthly frequency, the number of days Panaxia held on to their customers’ proceeds in the period running up to the bankruptcy. The time
     period spans from January 2010 to August 2012.
                                                  Figure 2
   DIFFERENCES IN MEANS DURING THE PRE-TREATMENT, TREATMENT, AND
                                     POST-TREATMEN PERIODS




This figure shows yearly differences in means between the treated and matched control firms, over the period
2007–2013, for cash holdings, accounts payable, and accounts receivable. The period comprises the pre-treatment
period, 2007–2009, the treatment period, 2010–2012, and the post-treatment period, 2013. The solid lines mark
the differences in means between the two groups and the dotted lines correspond to 90-percent confidence bands.

                                                      35
                                                                                  Figure 3
                     APPLICATION FOR ISSUANCE OF INJUNCTION TO SETTLEMENT OF OVERDUE TRADE CREDIT




36
     This figure shows applications for injunction to settle overdue payments faced by firms (Panels A and B) and issued by firms (Panels C and D), where we have
     normalized by 2010Q1-outcomes throughout. Panel A shows the fractions of treated and control firms, that in a given quarter were subject to one, or several
     applications for injunctions to settle a late trade credit payment, and Panel B shows the average number of applications facing firms, in the period 2008Q1–2013Q4.
     Panel C shows the fractions of treated and control firms that in a given quarter applied for an injunction to enforce late payments from their customers, and Panel D
     shows the average number of submitted applications, in the period 2010Q1–2013Q1.
                                         Table 1 (Panel A)
                      DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS; SWEDISH SAMPLE

       Variables                             Mean        Std.    25th perc. Median    75th perc.
       Cash=Assets                            0.232     0.252      0.022     0.134      0.377
       P ayables=Assets                       0.115     0.144      0.010     0.060      0.167
       Receivables=Sales                      0.161     0.180      0.008     0.099      0.258
       Debt=Assets                            0.245     0.290      0.000     0.123      0.427
       T angible assets=Asset                 0.326     0.304      0.059     0.226      0.554
       Inventories=Assets                     0.138     0.220      0.000     0.006      0.205
       Assets (In M SEK)                     32.300    966.000     0.611     1.581      4.879
       Age                                   14.461    13.711      5.000    10.000     20.000
       Cash f low=Assets                      0.082     0.201      0.012     0.082      0.177
       Sales growth                           0.004     0.426       0.121   0.005       0.148
       Capex=Assets                            0.003    0.148       0.035     0.003     0.024
         N W C=Assets                         0.000     0.140       0.050   0.000       0.055
         ShortT ermDebt=Assets                 0.003    0.120       0.047   0.000       0.039
       Dif f erentiated-inputs                0.724     0.063      0.699     0.720      0.768
       Exposure to aggregate shocks           0.044     0.462       0.220   0.057       0.322
       N. Firms                                                    546,366
       N. Obs                                                     4,691,622


Panel A reports descriptive statistics for the Swedish sample, for the period 1989–2013. Definitions of
the variables are provided in Table A1.




                                                  37
                                         Table 1 (Panel B)
                          DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS; U.S. SAMPLE

        Variables                              Mean      Std.   25th perc. Median     75th perc.
        Cash=Assets                            0.157    0.189     0.022    0.079        0.220
        P ayables=Assets                       0.107    0.123     0.039    0.073        0.128
        Receivables=Sales                      0.148    0.108     0.086    0.139        0.190
        Cash f low=Assets                       0.018   0.385     0.005    0.072        0.119
        Assets (In M USD)                      1,956    8,979       36      182          865
        M arket-to-Book (Q)                    2.121    2.412     1.072    1.437        2.168
        Capex=Assets                           0.056    0.060     0.018    0.037        0.071
        Acquisitions=Assets                    0.019    0.051     0.000    0.000        0.005
          N W C=Assets                          0.020   0.178      0.040    0.002       0.032
          ShortT ermDebt=Assets                0.020    0.173      0.023   0.001        0.031
        Dif f erentiated-inputs                0.488    0.125     0.378    0.446        0.636
        Exposure to aggregate shocks           0.099    0.476      0.265   0.125        0.486
        N. Firms                                                     9,497
        N. Obs                                                      74,235


Panel B reports descriptive statistics for the U.S. sample, for the period 1989–2013. Definitions of the
variables are provided in Table A1.




                                                  38
                                                                               Table 2
                                                                VARIANCE DECOMPOSITION

                                                              Panel A. Swedish sample                            Panel B. U.S sample
                                                            (I)               (II)       (III)              (IV)                 (V)        (VI)
                                                    st nd rd                                         st nd rd
                 Balance sheet components         [1 , 2 , 3 Quartiles]      Coef.       Coef.     [1 , 2 , 3 Quartiles]        Coef.       Coef.
                 A. Assets side
                 Decrease in cash (B1 )           [ 0.012, 0.177, 0.671]     0.079      0.358      [ 0.128, 0.078, 0.478]        0.119     0.032
                                                                             (1.3)       (372.3)                                   (5.1)     (4.1)
                 Decrease in receivables (B2 )    [ 0.039, 0.017, 0.274]     0.003      0.140      [ 0.015, 0.108, 0.397]        0.051     0.073
                                                                             (0.1)       (210.1)                                   (3.3)    (19.3)
                 Decrease in other assets (B3 )   [ 0.250, 0.146, 0.719]   0.531        0.275      [ 0.069, 0.544, 1.473]        0.606     0.192
                                                                             (5.2)       (191.5)                                   (4.3)    (16.2)
                 B. Liability side




39
                 Increase in payables (B4 )       [ 0.107, 0.000, 0.094]       0.009     0.017     [ 0.178,   0.029, 0.070]       0.053       0.001
                                                                             ( 1.4)     ( 36.5)                                   ( 3.4)    ( 0.4)
                 Increase in liabilities (B5 )    [ 0.099, 0.000, 0.280]       0.016    0.053      [ 0.750,   0.075, 0.443]       0.303    0.147
                                                                             ( 0.2)       (60.2)                                  ( 6.4)    (11.4)
                 Increase in equity (B6 )         [ 0.229, 0.189, 0.742] 0.412          0.192      [ 0.449, 0.077, 0.767]        0.580     0.556
                                                                              (3.6)      (128.2)                                   (5.6)    (32.7)
                 Scaled by assets                          No                  No          Yes                No                    No        Yes
                 N. Obs.                                             4,691,622                                          74,235


     This table reports results for estimates of the balance sheet components in Eq. (3), for the period 1989–2013. Panel A reports results for the Swedish
     sample and Panel B for the U.S. sample. Columns (I) and (IV) report quartiles obtained from time series regressions at the firm-level. Columns (II)
     and (V) report estimates obtained from pooled firm- and year-fixed effects regressions. Columns (III) and (VI) reports estimates obtained from pooled
     firm- and year-fixed effects regressions where the variables are scaled by assets in t-1. Variable definitions are provided in Table A1. ***, **,* denote
     statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                                                             Table 3
                                  DESRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR TREATED AND MATCHED CONTROL FIRMS

                                                              Treated firms                  Control firms            Mean test   Median test
                     Variables                           Mean   Median      Std.         Mean Median       Std.       (p-value)    (p-value)
                     Exposure
                     Exposure2012 =Assets2012            0.039      0.020      0.049       –         –         –          –            –
                     Firm characteristics
                     Cash f low=Assets2009                0.082     0.076       0.144    0.087     0.080     0.141      0.610         0.430
                     Assets2009 (In M SEK)              249.228     2.844    3,106.542   68.856    2.808    357.280     0.156         0.192
                     Sales growth2009                     0.046     0.017       0.295    0.025     0.009     0.263      0.191         0.190
                     Debt=Assets2009                      0.170     0.005       0.247    0.176     0.056     0.236      0.662         0.010
                     T angible assets=Assets2009          0.201     0.106       0.234    0.216     0.119     0.242      0.275         0.141




40
                     Inventories=Assets2009               0.274     0.269       0.203    0.277     0.279     0.207      0.810         0.952
                     Age2009                             14.977     9.000      16.848    14.188    9.000     15.065     0.391         0.923
                     Cash=Assets2009                      0.178     0.132       0.173    0.184     0.135     0.183      0.584         0.975
                     P ayables=Assets2009                 0.241     0.223       0.159    0.231     0.207     0.155      0.265         0.287
                     Receivables=Sales2009                0.021     0.001       0.041    0.028     0.006     0.042      0.003         0.000
                     Cash=Assets2008                      0.179     0.139       0.171    0.181     0.127     0.181      0.852         0.621
                     P ayable=Assetss2008                 0.272     0.243       0.192    0.263     0.232     0.184      0.422         0.546
                     Receivables=Sales2008                0.022     0.001       0.046    0.028     0.005     0.045      0.018         0.000
                     N. Obs.                                          605                            605                          –
                     N. Unique firms                                  605                            481                          –


     This table reports descriptive statistics for the set of matching variables. The p-values refer to tests for differences in means and medians between the
     treated and the matched control firms. Variable definitions are provided in Table A1.
                                                                               Table 4
                              BASELINE ESTIMATES; AVERAGE TREATMENT EFFECTS FOR TREATED FIRMS

                                    Average treatment effects for treated firms (AT T )                AT T with bias adjustment
                                                                                  Post-                                               Post-     Test of
                                                                               treatment                                           treatment    parallel
                                           Treatment period                      period             Treatment period                 period    pre-trends
                                     (I)          (II)          (III)             (IV)      (V)           (VI)          (VII)        (VIII)       (IX)
         Variables                  2010         2011           2012              2013     2010          2011           2012          2013      p-value
         Panel A. y   = Cash=Assets
           y
           t                        0.018         0.011         0.007            0.008     0.018          0.009          0.003        0.010      0.617
                                    ( 2.1)       ( 2.0)         (1.1)          ( 0.9)      ( 2.5)       ( 1.4)           (0.5)      ( 1.1)
         Tty                        0.018        0.029         0.022           0.030       0.018        0.026           0.023       0.033
                                    ( 2.1)       ( 3.3)        ( 2.6)          ( 2.8)      ( 2.5)       ( 3.1)          ( 2.6)      ( 3.0)
         Panel B. y   = P ayables=Assets
           y
           t                         0.001      0.010        0.018               0.003      0.001       0.011          0.019          0.003      0.791
                                    ( 0.1)       (2.0)         (3.1)           ( 0.3)      ( 0.2)        (1.9)           (3.1)      ( 0.4)




41
         Tty                         0.001       0.010       0.028             0.025        0.001       0.010          0.029       0.026
                                    ( 0.1)       (1.3)         (3.1)            (2.2)      ( 0.2)        (1.4)           (3.5)       (2.6)
         Panel C. y   = Receivables=Sales
           y
           t                        0.002         0.002        0.006            0.000      0.003          0.002         0.006        0.000       0.407
                                    ( 2.0)       ( 1.0)       ( 2.6)            (0.1)      ( 2.1)       ( 1.4)          ( 2.6)       (0.1)
         Tty                        0.002        0.004        0.009            0.009       0.003        0.005           0.012       0.011
                                    ( 2.0)       ( 2.2)       ( 3.2)           ( 2.9)      ( 2.1)       ( 2.8)          ( 4.2)      ( 3.4)
         N. Treated firms                                  605                                                    605                              –
         N. Control firms                                  605                                                    605                              –
         N. Unique control firms                           481                                                    481                              –


     This table reports estimates of yearly adjustments, Eq. (4), and cumulative adjustments, Eq. (5), in cash holdings, accounts payable, and accounts
     receivable, over the treatment and post-treatment periods. The bias-adjusted estimators in Columns (V) to (VIII) control for differences in outcomes,
     between the treated and matched control firms, in the set of continuous matching-variables (Abadie and Imbens (2011)). The tests of parallel pre-trends
     are conducted using the 2007–2009 period, and follow the approach proposed by Mora and Reggio (2015). Variable definitions are provided in Table
     A1. The standard errors in Columns (I) to (IV) are clustered at the firm-level to account for multiplicity of matched control firms. ***, **,* denote
     statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                            Table 5
APPLICATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF INJUNCTION TO SETTLE OVERDUE PAYMENTS

                         Panel A. Upstream                        Panel B. Downstream
     y=      Application (0/1) Number of applications   Application (0/1) Number of applications
              (I)        (II)     (III)     (IV)         (V)       (VI)     (VII)     (VIII)
                y
   Quarter      t       Tty         y
                                    t        Tty           y
                                                           t       Tty        y
                                                                              t         Tty
   2010Q2     0.021     0.021    0.068     0.068         0.017    0.017     0.226      0.226
              (1.4)     (1.4)     (2.1)     (2.1)        (1.6)     (1.6)    (1.1)      (1.1)
   2010Q3      0.017    0.005      0.023    0.045         0.010   0.007     0.322      0.549
             ( 0.9)     (0.3)    ( 0.7)     (1.2)       ( 1.1)     (0.6)    (0.8)      (1.0)
   2010Q4     0.025    0.030      0.018    0.063         0.008    0.015      0.279     0.269
              (1.4)     (1.9)     (0.5)     (1.9)        (0.8)     (1.4)   ( 1.0)      (0.9)
   2011Q1     0.002    0.031      0.013    0.076          0.005   0.010      0.340      0.071
              (0.1)     (1.8)     (0.5)     (2.2)       ( 0.5)     (0.9)   ( 1.2)     ( 0.6)
   2011Q2      0.008    0.023      0.013   0.063         0.003    0.013     0.264      0.193
             ( 0.5)     (1.5)    ( 0.4)     (1.7)        (0.3)     (1.1)    (1.2)      (0.9)
   2011Q3     0.005    0.028       0.012    0.051         0.012   0.002     0.263      0.456
              (0.4)     (1.8)    ( 0.4)     (1.5)       ( 1.1)     (0.1)    (1.4)      (1.3)
   2011Q4      0.005    0.023      0.003    0.048       0.020     0.021      0.028    0.428
             ( 0.3)     (1.4)    ( 0.1)     (1.1)        (1.9)     (1.8)   ( 0.2)      (1.7)
   2012Q1      0.008    0.015     0.050    0.098          0.017   0.005     0.869      1.298
             ( 0.5)     (0.9)     (1.1)     (2.1)       ( 1.2)     (0.3)    (1.5)      (1.6)
   2012Q2      0.015     0.000     0.036    0.061        0.005    0.010      0.635    0.663
             ( 0.9)    ( 0.0)    ( 0.8)     (1.5)        (0.4)     (0.9)   ( 1.4)      (1.8)
   2012Q3     0.012     0.012     0.030    0.091          0.010   0.000      0.284     0.379
              (0.7)     (0.7)     (0.9)     (2.2)       ( 0.9)     (0.0)   ( 1.5)      (1.1)
   2012Q4      0.008    0.003      0.000   0.091         0.005    0.005     0.015      0.393
             ( 0.5)     (0.2)    ( 0.0)     (2.3)        (0.4)     (0.4)    (0.1)      (1.5)




                                               42
                                           Table 5—Continued
  Quarter                          (I)         (II)       (III)        (IV)    (V)         (VI)   (VII)       (VIII)
  2013Q1                         0.028       0.031       0.007       0.098    0.005       0.010   0.542       0.936
                                 (1.6)        (1.8)      (0.2)        (2.4)   (0.4)       (0.9)   (1.2)        (1.4)
  2013Q2                         0.007      0.038        0.026       0.124      –           –       –            –
                                 (0.4)        (2.1)      (0.5)        (2.3)
  2013Q3                        0.053          0.015     0.089        0.035    –           –       –            –
                                ( 2.0)       ( 0.6)     ( 2.0)        (0.8)
  2013Q4                         0.017        0.002       0.008       0.026    –           –       –            –
                                 (0.6)        (0.1)     ( 0.2)        (0.6)
  Test of pre-trends (p-val.)          0.408                    0.820                 –                   –
  N. Treat./Cont./Un. Cont.                     605/605/481                               605/605/481


This table reports estimates of quarterly adjustments, Eq. (4), and cumulative adjustments, Eq. (5),
in applications for injunction to settle overdue payments faced by firms (Panel A) and issued by firms
(Panel B). The dependent variable, y, in Columns (I) and (II) is the fraction of firms that in a given
quarter were subject to one, or several applications of injunction to settle a late trade credit payment; the
dependent variable, y, in Columns (III) and (IV) is the number of applications faced in a given quarter; the
dependent variable, y, in Columns (V) and (VI) is the fraction of firms that in a given quarter applied for
an injunction to enforce late payments from their customers; and the dependent variable, y, in Columns
(VII) and (VIII) is the number of applications submitted. The tests of parallel pre-trends are conducted
on the 2008Q1–2010Q1 period, and follow the approach proposed by Mora and Reggio (2015). Variable
definitions are provided in Table A1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level to account for the
multiplicity of matched control firms. ***, **,* denote statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5 and 10
percent level, respectively.




                                                      43
                                                                                    Table 6
                                                      NO BANKRUPTCY LOSS VS. BANKRUPTCY LOSS
                                                       No losses in 2012                                           Incurred bankruptcy losses in 2012
                                                                          Post-         Test of                                                  Post-      Test of
                                                                       treatement       parallel                                              treatement    parallel
                                         Treatment period                period        pre-trends            Treatment period                    period    pre-trends
                                 (I)           (II)       (III)           (IV)            (V)       (VI)          (VII)        (VIII)             (IX)        (X)
      Variables                 2010          2011        2012            2013         (p-value)    2010          2011          2012              2013     (p-value)
      Panel A. y   = Cash=Assets
       y
       t                         0.009       0.032      0.025               0.014        0.756      0.020          0.006        0.003           0.007        0.689
                                ( 0.7)       ( 2.4)      (2.0)             ( 1.0)                   ( 2.0)       ( 1.0)         (0.3)          ( 0.6)
      Tty                        0.009       0.040        0.015             0.029                   0.020        0.026         0.023           0.030
                                ( 0.7)       ( 2.3)     ( 0.8)             ( 1.3)                   ( 2.0)       ( 2.6)        ( 2.5)          ( 2.5)
      Panel B. y   = P ayables=Assets
       y
       t                        0.011        0.010         0.000           0.002         0.767       0.004       0.011        0.022              0.004       0.655
                                (1.5)        (1.2)       ( 0.0)            (0.2)                    ( 0.4)        (1.7)         (3.2)          ( 0.3)




44
      Tty                       0.011       0.021         0.021            0.023                     0.004       0.007        0.029            0.025
                                (1.5)        (2.1)        (1.5)            (1.4)                    ( 0.4)        (0.8)         (2.8)           (1.9)
      Panel C. y   = Receivables=Sales
       y
       t                         0.001       0.003       0.010              0.002        0.531      0.003          0.003       0.004            0.001        0.496
                                ( 0.4)       (1.5)       ( 2.5)            ( 0.4)                   ( 2.0)       ( 1.5)       ( 1.8)            (0.3)
      Tty                        0.001       0.002        0.008             0.010                   0.003        0.005        0.010            0.009
                                ( 0.4)       (0.6)       ( 1.5)            ( 1.3)                   ( 2.0)       ( 2.8)       ( 2.9)           ( 2.6)
      N. Treated firms                                       116                                                                 489
      N. Control firms                                       116                                                                 489
      N. Unique control firms                                116                                                                 366


     This table reports estimates of yearly adjustments, Eq. (4), and cumulative adjustments, Eq. (5), in cash holdings, accounts payable, and accounts
     receivable, over the treatment and post-treatment periods. Columns (I) to (V) report results for the sub-sample of treated firms that were fully
     compensated for bankruptcy losses in 2012 and Columns (VI) to (X) report results for the sub-sample of treated firms that incurred losses in 2012. The
     tests of parallel pre-trends are conducted on the 2007–2009 period, and follow the approach proposed by Mora and Reggio (2015). Variable definitions
     are provided in Table A1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level to account for the multiplicity of matched control firms. ***, **,* denote
     statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                                  Table 7
                         RESPONSES CONDITIONAL ON LOSS-SIZE
                                                            Dependent variables:
                                y = Cash=Assets          P ayables=Assets      Receivables=Sales
     Variable                              (I)                   (II)                  (III)
     Loss=Assets2012           I 2012    0.034                 0.215                  0.070
                                         (0.3)                  (1.8)                 ( 2.7)
     Loss=Assets2012                      0.015                0.006                   0.023
                                        ( 0.5)                  (0.1)                 ( 1.8)
     I2012                               0.003                 0.002                 0.006
                                         (0.6)                  (0.4)                  (2.7)

     R2                                  0.721                  0.746                 0.643
     Firm controls                                                  Yes
     N. Obs.                                                       1,948
     N. Treated                                                     487
     N. Control firms                                               487
     N. Unique control firms                                        365


This table reports estimates on the relationships between the cumulative adjustment over the period 2009
to 2012 and the size of the incurred losses, for cash holdings, accounts payable, and accounts receivable.
The model is described in Footnote 17. Variable definitions are provided in Table A1. Standard errors
are clustered at the firm-level to account for the multiplicity of matched control firms. ***, **,* denote
statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.




                                                    45
                                                                                Table 8
                            CASH FLOW SHORTFALL SENSITIVITY OF CASH AND TRADE CREDIT POSITIONS
                                                                                      Dependent variables:
                                                   y=        Cash=Assets             P ayables=Assets         Receivables=Sales
                                                              (I)        (II)       (III)           (IV)       (V)           (VI)
                               Variables                     Coef.       E.S.       Coef.           E.S.      Coef.          E.S.
                               Panel A. Swedish Sample
                               Shortf all                   0.097         0.084    0.124           0.216      0.052          0.065
                                                           ( 92.1)                  (145.8)                  ( 72.7)

                               R2                            0.221                  0.177                     0.122




46
                               N. Obs.                                                        4,691,622
                               Panel B. U.S. Sample
                               Shortf all                   0.022         0.054    0.051           0.183     0.023           0.060
                                                            ( 6.3)                  (16.2)                   ( 9.3)

                               R2                            0.292                  0.306                     0.171
                               N. Obs.                                                         74,235


     This table reports coefficients from the estimation of Eq. (6) on the Swedish (Panel A) and U.S. (Panel B) samples. t-values, calculated using robust
     standard errors, clustered at the firm-level, are reported within parenthesis. The economic significance (E.S.) is calculated as the shortfall-coefficient
     multiplied by the value of a one-standard-deviation in cash flow, divided by the mean of the outcome variable. Variable definitions are provided in
     Table A1. ***, **,* denote statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                                                             Table 9
                                                         CROSS-SECTIONAL HETEROGENEITY

                                              Panel A. Swedish sample                                                        Panel B. U.S. sample
             y=         Cash=Assets            P ayables=Assets         Receivables=Sales            Cash=Assets           P ayables=Assets          Receivables=Sales
                           (I)       (II)     (III)        (IV)           (V)         (VI)          (VII)       (VIII)     (IX)          (X)          (XI)         (XII)
      Variables          Coef.     p-value    Coef.       p-value        Coef.       p-value        Coef.      p-value     Coef.       p-value        Coef.       p-value
      1. Differentiated goods
      Bottom 30%         0.106      0.180    0.132         0.000         0.049         0.000        0.025       0.155    0.055          0.962        0.018        0.540
                        ( 60.0)               (95.2)                    ( 42.2)                     ( 3.3)                 (8.3)                     ( 3.6)
      Top 30%            0.102               0.143                       0.067                      0.040                0.054                       0.023




47
                        ( 45.2)               (74.4)                    ( 41.5)                     ( 5.9)                 (9.8)                     ( 4.3)
      2. Exposure to aggregate shocks
      Bottom 30%         0.081      0.022    0.114         0.070         0.052         0.127        0.020       0.514    0.066          0.006        0.031        0.006
                        ( 42.2)               (73.6)                    ( 38.5)                     ( 2.9)                (11.1)                     ( 6.2)
      Top 30%            0.087               0.110                       0.049                       0.014               0.044                       0.014
                        ( 47.6)               (73.7)                    ( 38.4)                     ( 2.4)                 (8.3)                     ( 3.5)


     This table reports coefficients from the estimation of Eq. (6) on the Swedish and U.S. samples. The model is estimated on sub-samples classified with
     respect to a set of firm- and industry-characteristics. t-values calculated using robust standard errors, clustered at the firm-level, are reported within
     parenthesis. p-values refer to tests of difference in coefficients between the Top and Bottom 30 percent sub-samples. Variable definitions are provided
     in Table A1. ***, **,* denote statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                                                   Figure A1
                       THE NUMBER OF COLLECTED RECEIPTS DURING THE 2006-2011 PERIOD




48
     This figure is obtained from Panaxia’s bankruptcy report. It shows the number of collected receipts in each month in the period 2006–2011.
                                                                Table A1
                                                      VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
     Variable names                 Definitions
     Cash                           Cash and short-term investments (CHE).
     P ayables                      Accounts payable (AP).
     Receivables                    Accounts receivable (RECTR).
     Exposure                       Bankruptcy claims held on Panaxia in 2012.
     Loss                           Incurred losses due to Panaxia Bankruptcy in 2012
     Debt                           Total liabilities excluding payables. Panaxia analysis only.
     T angible assets               Property, plant, and equipment. Panaxia analysis only.
     Inventories                    Inventories. Panaxia analysis only.
     Cash f low                     Earnings after interest expenses and taxes, but before depreciation and amortization (EBITDA-XINT-TXT).




49
     Assets                         Total assets (AT) in millions of 2010 USD/SEK.
     Age                            Years since registration as a corporate. Swedish sample only.
     M arket-to-Book (Q)            Market value of assets divided by total assets ([AT+CSHO*PRCC_F-CEQ]/AT). U.S. sample only.
     Sales growth                   The log difference between sales in periods t-1 and t. Swedish sample only.
     Capex                          Capital expenditures (CAPX).
     Acquisitions                   Acquisitions (ACQ).
     NW C                           Working capital (WCAP) minus cash holdings (CHE) plus accounts payable (AP) minus accounts receivable (AR).
     ShortT ermDebt                 Short-term debt excluding accounts payable (DLC-AP).
     Dif f erentiated goods         Share of differentiated inputs, obtained from Giannetti et al. (2011).
     Exposure to aggregate shocks   Correlation between a firm’s cash flow and the average cash flow of all firms in the sample.


                                                  This table reports variable definitions.
