                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       ADOPTION WITH SOCIAL LEARNING AND NETWORK EXTERNALITIES

                                    Marcel Fafchamps
                                      Mans Soderbom
                                  Monique vanden Boogaart

                                      Working Paper 22282
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22282


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2016




We benefitted from comments from Joshua Blumenstock, Jeremy Folz, Paul Frijters, Simon
Quinn and seminar participants at Oxford University, Monash University, the University of
Nottingham and the University of Gothenburg, as well as conference participants at the 2016
CSAE Conference, Oxford and at the 2015 UNU-WIDER Nordic Conference in Development
Economics, Helsinki. We thank Nathan Eagle for making the data available for this study.
Monique vanden Boogaart’s work was carried out while she was a graduate student in the
Economics Department of Oxford University. She is now employed at Uber. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Uber or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marcel Fafchamps, Mans Soderbom, and Monique vanden Boogaart. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Adoption with Social Learning and Network Externalities
Marcel Fafchamps, Mans Soderbom, and Monique vanden Boogaart
NBER Working Paper No. 22282
May 2016
JEL No. D12,D83,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a large administrate dataset covering the universe of phone calls and airtime transfers in a
country over a four year period, we examine the pattern of adoption of airtime transfers over
time. We start by documenting strong network effects: increased usage of the new airtime transfer
service by social neighbors predicts a higher adoption probability. We then seek to narrow down
the possible sources of these network effects by distinguishing between network externalities and
social learning. Within social learning, we also seek to differentiate between learning about
existence of the new product from learning about its quality or usefulness. We find robust
evidence suggestive of social learning both for the existence and the quality of the product. In
contrast, we find that network effects turn negative after first adoption, suggesting that airtime
transfers are strategic substitutes among network neighbors.

Marcel Fafchamps                                Monique vanden Boogaart
Freeman Spogli Institute                        Amsterdam
Stanford University                             moniquevandenboogaart@gmail.com
616 Serra Street
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fafchamp@stanford.edu

Mans Soderbom
Department of Economics
University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweeden
mans.soderbom@economics.gu.se
1. Introduction


The introduction of IT technology has revolutionized the way many products and services are

distributed. This is also true in less developed countries where of mobile phones have opened

new avenues for the di¤usion of information and the adoption of new technologies and services.

Examples include: market price information (e.g., Jensen 2009, Aker and Fafchamps 2015,

Fafchamps and Minten 2012); agricultural extension services (e.g., Cole and Fernando 2016.);

health information; mobile banking (e.g., Jack and Suri 2014); and political elections (e.g.,

Aker, Collier and Vicente 2013). The fact that all these applications are based on a platform

–the mobile phone –originally designed for social communication leaves much room for social

networks to a¤ect adoption and usage.

      In this paper we examine the adoption of an airtime transfer service in Rwanda using a large

administrative dataset from the telecommunication operator. Peer-to-peer transfers of airtime

between phone users is a predecessor to the introduction of mobile banking. The main di¤erence

is that, when mobile banking is in place, users can redeem airtime for cash from participating

agents. The pattern of di¤usion of airtime transfers across phone users can therefore be taken

as indicative of the likely di¤usion of mobile money and other phone-based services. It is also

potentially informative about other di¤usion processes on social networks, particularly those

pertaining to IT technology.

      It has often been observed that the adoption of new products and services, and other be-

havioral changes, di¤use along social networks (Young 1999, 2009; Jackson and Yariv 2005;

Bjorkegren 2015). What is less clear is why. This paper aims to throw some light on this issue.

      There are many possible reasons why adoption may spread along social networks. One is that

some individuals get to know of a new product.1 People talk about new products with others

  1
      To keep things straightforward, we speak throughout of the adoption of a new product, but the same principles


                                                         2
in their network of acquaintances, so that information about the existence of the new product

spreads through social learning (Mobius and Rosenblat 2014). A proportion of those informed of

the new product adopt it, and since adoption requires knowing about the new product, adoption

is observed to di¤use by social contact, in a way similar to the way an epidemic spreads in a

population.

    Other forms of social learning are possible as well. For instance, people may learn about the

hidden qualities of a new product through usage. The decision to adopt may depend on what

people know of these hidden qualities, such as how useful or reliable the new product really

is (e.g., Li and Tan 2016). If too little information is available, risk averse individuals refrain

from adopting. It follows that, as people share information about hidden characteristics of the

new product along social networks, adoption spreads. The main di¤erence with the …rst type of

social learning is that here more usage by social neighbors provides cumulative information that

is valuable for the adoption decision, over and above simply knowing that the product exists.

    Di¤usion along social networks may also occur for reasons having nothing to do with social

learning. One particular case is network externalities or, more precisely, strategic complementar-

ities in adoption decisions (Saloner and Shepard 1995, Jackson and Yariv 2005; Vega-Redondo

2007). If adoption by my social neighbors increases my incentive to adopt, I am more likely to

adopt following adoption by my neighbors. This mechanism may arise even when all agents have

full information about the existence and qualities of the product, although it may be combined

with social learning. The main di¤erence with social learning is that network externalities do

not wear o¤: they continue to reinforce adoption long after any hidden information about the

new product would have been learned. Strategic complementarities may arise for many di¤erent

reasons, some good – the usefulness of the product increases with more widespread usage –

generally apply to the adoption of a new service.




                                                    3
some bad –adoption protects me against some of the negative externalities generated by wide-

spread usage. The canonical example of a strategic complementarity that arises from a negative

externality is the installation of a burglar alarm: when I install an alarm, I initially displace

crime towards neighbors, which raises their incentive to install a burglar alarm; in equilibrium,

everyone incurs the cost of having a burglar alarm but it no longer serves as deterrent (Jackson

2009).

   In this paper we seek to identify the respective roles of network externalities and social

learning in the adoption of a new service o¤ered to mobile phone users. We also seek to identify

the relative importance of social learning about product existence vs. its hidden qualities. To

do this, we rely on a large dataset that includes all phone calls made by mobile phone users

of a large monopolistic provider in an entire country for a period of four years. While the

dataset includes many observations, each observation contains a limited amount of information.

We compensate for this to the best of what the data allows by including di¤erent types of …xed

e¤ects to capture unobserved heterogeneity. We …nd robust evidence suggestive of social learning

both for the existence and the quality of the product. In contrast, we …nd that network e¤ects

turn negative after …rst adoption, suggesting that airtime transfers are strategic substitutes

among network neighbors.

   This paper complement a large literature documenting the di¤usion of new products and

behaviors on social networks (e.g., Krystakis and Fowler 2007, Centola 2010, Ryan and Tucker

2012, Jack and Suri 2014). Our contribution to this literature is to decompose network e¤ects

into di¤erent components and to measuring the sign and magnitude of these components. We

…nd that network e¤ects need not be strategic complements, as is commonly assumed in the

literature (e.g., Jackson and Yariv 2005, Vega-Redondo 2007). In contrast, we …nd evidence

that networks play a role in the circulation of information. The information e¤ects of social



                                               4
networks have been documented before (e.g., Granovetter 1995, Jensen 2007, Aker 2010, Aker

and Fafchamps 2015), but the emphasis has been on the continued informational bene…ts that

networks provide – a form of network externality. We …nd that, in the case of the di¤usion

of a new product, the e¤ect of social networks on product adoption and usage are limited in

time. These results suggest that network e¤ects in di¤usion are driven primarily by the spread

of information about the existence and the characteristics of the new product.

      The paper is organized as follows. We start in Section 2 by presenting the conceptual

framework and testing strategy. The information available in the raw data is discussed in

Section 3, together with a description of how we use the raw data to construct the variables

used in our analysis. Empirical results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.



2. Conceptual framework


The focus of our attention is adoption, that is, the …rst usage of a new product or service by

someone who has not used it before. We are interested in how social networks in‡uence adoption.

To formalize this process, let yit = f0; 1g be a dichotomous variable equal to 1 if individual i uses

the product at time t, and 0 otherwise. We think of time as a sequence of time intervals, i.e.,

our model is in discrete time. Adoption describes the …rst time at which yit > 0 for individual i.

Let ti denote the time at which individual i becomes ‘at risk’of adopting the product.2 Further

let Ti denote the time at which individual i …rst uses the product. Finally, let T denote the last

data period for which we have information. By de…nition, Ti > T for an individual who, by time

T , has not yet used the product.

      As we will argue below, usage after adoption provides useful information as well. Usage yit

can therefore be divided into two vectors or periods: the time until …rst usage fyiti ; :::yiTi g; and

  2
    This can be the time at which the new product is introduced, or the time at which i acquires a device for
which product is useful.


                                                     5
usage after that fyiTi +1 ; :::yiT g. By construction, fyiti ; :::yiTi g is either a sequence of 0’s ending

with a single 1, or a string of 0’s (for someone who never adopts). The length of each of the two

i vectors varies across individuals.

   We are interested in identifying predictors of yit that depend on the adoption and usage

behavior of the social neighbors of i. To do so e¤ectively, we present a few simple concepts

before articulating our testing strategy. We …rst discuss social learning, before introducing

network externalities. We assume throughout that the researcher has information about yit .


2.1. Social learning about product existence


There is much to learn from simple models of social learning. Let us …rst focus on information

about the existence of the product. We then turn to information about the qualities of the

product. We end with a short discussion of experimentation, which is adoption purely for the

purpose of eliciting information about product quality. The focus of this section is to use simple

models to develop intuition about social learning that we can then take to the data.

   Learning about the existence of the new product closely resembles a contagion process.

Without information about the existence of the product, the agent simply cannot adopt. Hence

having been exposed to information about the product is a necessary condition for adoption.

This information can come from two sources: (1) information received from various sources

outside the social network (e.g., ads on billboard, radio, TV, junk mail, or newspaper); and (2)

information received from the social network (e.g., friends, relatives, co-workers).

   Let    vt   denote the probability of receiving information from outside the social network in

location v at time t. We take this probability as given and we do not seek to model its deter-

minants. But we think of it as having a strong local component, capturing the local nature of

advertisement coverage.



                                                    6
    A simple model for the probability of receiving information from a social source at time t

can be formulated as:



                                                                                                   Ait
                Pr(i receives information from network at t + 1) = 1                     (1   q)



where     Ait is the number of neighbors of i who have started using the product in period t –

and thus have become aware of its existence and can relay this information to i, something each

of them does with probability q. We assume that the researcher observes                       Ait , or a close proxy.

The cumulative probability that i has received information about the existence of the product

is thus an increasing and convex function of the cumulative number of i’s neighbors who have

adopted at t –and thus could have passed information about the product to i with probability

q during that time period.

    Let us now combine the two sources of information. If we assume independence between                           vt


and the signal received from each neighbor, the probability of not being informed within period

t is (1                  Ait .
           vt )(1   q)           Now let us assume that, once i is informed that the product exists, i

adopts with probability pi . This is the probability of usage in any given period, conditional on

knowing about the product. For some individuals this probability is low; for others it is high.

    Over time the likelihood of having heard of the product increases. Formally, the probability

of not having heard of the product between time ti and t is:


                                               t
                                               Y
                                                                                   Ais
                                       Pr =           (1         vs )(1      q)
                                               s=ti
                                                                 t
                                                                 Y
                                                           Ait
                                           = (1        q)               (1        vs )
                                                                 s=ti




                                                            7
where Ait is the cumulative number of adopting neighbors between ti and t, that is:


                                                         s=t
                                                         X
                                                 Ait            Ais
                                                        s=ti



If   vt   is constant over time for location v, the formula simpli…es to:



                                           Pr = (1     q)Ait (1       v)
                                                                        Sit




where Sit is the time elapsed between ti and t, that is:



                                                    Sit = t    ti



where ti is the time at which i starts being at risk of being exposed to information about the

product’s existence.

     The probability that agent i adopts the product at time t is the probability that he has been

informed times pi :



                  Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g) = [1    (1   q)Ait (1      Sit
                                                                                         v ) ]pi   (2.1)



Adoption can take place even for someone who has no social neighbors, or whose neighbors

have not adopted. The model predicts that the likelihood of adoption increases in a systematic

fashion over time, without or without adopting neighbors. This is a mechanical e¤ect: as time

passes, the agent has more and more chances of hearing about the product. The probability of

…rst adoption increases with time since inception Sit and with Ait , although in both cases the

e¤ect is concave: the derivative of the probability of adoption with respect to Sit and Ait falls

with Sit and with Ait . This is because having heard about the product once is enough to know


                                                          8
of its existence.

   Once the product has been used once, i may continue using it with a certain probability.

But if the only source of network e¤ects is social learning about the existence of the product,

the probability of usage after …rst adoption is no longer a function of the number of adopting

neighbors. Formally we have:



                      Pr(yit+1 = 1jyis = 1 for some s < t)    = pi;t+1

                                                              = pi + "it+1                    (2.2)



   Thus once i has learned about the existence of the product, the data generating process

shifts from (2.1) to (2.2). An identical prediction is made if the researcher observes a signal Mit

that is equal to 1 when individual i has unambiguously been made aware of the existence of the

new product, and 0 otherwise:



                       Pr(yit+1 = 1jMis = 1 for some s < t) = pi + "it+1                      (2.3)



   To recap, when network neighbors circulate information about product existence and nothing

more, the probability of adoption increases in the number of adopting neighbors, but at a

decreasing rate. After …rst adoption or after becoming aware of the product, subsequent usage

does not depend on the number of adopting neighbors.


2.2. Social learning about product quality


We get di¤erent predictions if social learning is about product quality. In this case, the decision

to adopt at time t depends not on the probability of receiving a signal within a given time

interval, but rather on the cumulative information about the product received up to time t.


                                                9
    To keep the same notation, let       vt   now denote the probability that individual i receives an

independent signal about the quality of the product at time t. This probability can vary over

time t and across locations v. To keep things simple, let us assume that this signal takes only

two values, 0 and 1, i.e., a bad signal or a good signal. Let           denote the true probability that

the product performs: a high         good always performs well, while a low          good often performs

poorly. Individuals di¤er in how much they value unobserved quality              –more about this later.

    We assume that the posterior belief hit of individual i at time t is simply the sample estimate

of the unknown Bernoulli parameter            based on the information available to i at time t.3 Let

Nit be the number of signals received by i at up to t and let Nit1 be the number of signals with

value 1, i.e., the number of good signals. We have:



                                                          Nit1
                                                  hit =                                                (2.4)
                                                          Nit

The variance of this belief is approximately given by:



                                         2         1 Nit1 Nit Nit1
                                        vit =
                                                  Nit Nit    Nit
                                                   1
                                              =       hit (1 hit )                                     (2.5)
                                                  Nit


As sample size increases, hit tends to              2 tends to 0.4
                                               and vit

    Since we do not observe what signal people observe, we never know what Nit1 is. But we can

write:

                                hit =    + eit with eit ~(0; (1      )=Nit )


In other words, the information people have is, on average, unbiased and the variance of their

   3
     This is simpli…ed Bayesian approach – see Mood, Graybill and Boes (1974) p. 342 for the correct Bayesian
estimator of a Bernouilli parameter. But this simple approach su¢ ces for our purpose.
   4
     The above formula for the variance is obtained by combining Mood et al. (1974) p. 236 with p. 89.


                                                     10
beliefs shrinks over time.

       If we allow agents to hold a prior belief hi0 , this belief can be regarded as coming from a

sample of observations Ni0 that we do not observe. The point estimate of this belief marks how

biased the prior belief is, and the size of the sample determines how con…dent the agent is in his

prior belief. This can be formalized as follows:


                                             1
                                           Ni0
                                  hi0 =
                                           Ni0
                                             1 + N1
                                           Ni0
                                  hbit   =          it
                                           Ni0 + Nit
                                                  Ni0               Nit
                                         = hi0             + hit
                                               Ni0 + Nit         Ni0 + Nit
                                    2           1
                                   vit   =             hb (1 hbit )
                                           Ni0 + Nit it


where hbit now denotes the posterior belief of agent i at t.

       We do not observe hi0 and Ni0 . If we let the number of signals received be denoted nit ,

beliefs can be written as following a model of the form:



                    b                           nit
                   qit =                 +            + ebit with ebit ~(0; 2it )
                                + nit           + nit
                    2           1                       nit                            nit
                    it   =           (             +           )(1                           )
                               + nit         + nit      + nit              + nit       + nit


As with uninformed priors, beliefs hbit tend to               over time, but they show some persistence

around initial priors.5

       Having modelled learning, we now turn to adoption. We start without prior beliefs. We

assume that individuals di¤er in the threshold value of                  that they require before adopting.

   5
    The variance 2it is not monotonic over time, however. Intuition is as follows. Imagine the agent starts with
a strong prior far from (a strong prior means Ni0 is large). Initially 2it is quite small because it is dominated
by the strong prior. As more information is revealed, posterior beliefs are progressively pulled away from prior
hi0 and 2it increases. Eventually posterior beliefs settle on and the variance falls, dominated now by Nit .




                                                         11
At …rst glance, it seems that we could simply assume that people adopt if their estimate of

is larger than some value              i   with 0 <   i   < 1. This decision rule, however, is too crude. It

predicts that people adopt after a single good signal since, in that case, their posterior belief

is hi1 = 1          i   for any   i.       This is clearly an unappealing decision rule because an estimate

of    based on a single observation is very imprecise. To capture this intuition in the simplest

possible way, we posit that the expected utility of adoption E[Uit (yit = 1)j! it ] can be written

as a mean-variance form. We have:



                                                                        2
                                               yit+1 = 1 i¤ hit       Rvit        i




where R is a risk aversion parameter and                  i   is now a threshold value of expected utility. Since

                           2 directly, we replace them by formulas (2.4) and (2.5) above and
we do not observe hit and vit

we get:


                                                                                          (1    )
       Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g) = Pr (                 i)       R                eit+1              (2.6)
                                                                                            nit


Equation (2.6) shows that the probability of adoption increases with nit . The intuition is

straightforward: the variance term shrinks and vanishes at the limit, and this raises the ex-

pected utility of adoption for some people. Not everybody adopts, however, because                                       is not

higher than     i   for everyone.

     We can now generalize the above to the case where people hold prior beliefs. We now have:



     Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g) =                                                                               (2.7)

                              nit       1                                    nit                               nit
     Pr                  +          +R       (                        +            )(1                               )       it   ebit+1
              + nit           + nit    + nit                  + nit          + nit             + nit           + nit




                                                               12
         To close the model, we need to stipulate the data generating process of nit , the number

of signals received. In practice, we do not observe nit but, by analogy with the previous sub-

section, we expect it to be an increasing function of time since inception Sit and of the number

of adopting neighbors Ait . To show this formally, let us assume that in each period individual i

receives a signal from outside his network with a constant location-speci…c probability                         6
                                                                                                           v,       and

with probability q individual i receive a signal from any newly adopting neighbor. The expected

number of signals received at time t is a sum of two binomial processes. The average number of

signals received outside the network up to time is given by a binomial process with parameter

 v   and Sit , and is simply     v Sit .   The average number of signals from the networks is qAit . Thus

we have:7



                                   nit =     v Sit   + qAit + uit with uit ~(0; v 2 )                           (2.8)


         Without prior beliefs, the probability of adoption can thus be written:


                                                                                    (1    )
     Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g) = Pr (           i)   R                        eit+1        (2.9)
                                                                              v Sit + qAit + uit




Equation (2.9) shows that the probability of …rst adoption is monotonically increasing in Sit

and Ait .

         The probability of adoption with prior beliefs is similarly obtained by replacing nit in equation

(2.7) by its value given by (2.8). Our earlier observation remains valid: with strong prior beliefs,

the variance term that multiplies R in equation (2.7) can initially be quite small. If the prior

                                     2 is small, individual i will adopt immediately. The social
belief hi0 is high and its variance vi0

     6
     To keep the algebra simple and derive the intuition clearly, we ignore here the possibility of a time-varying
signal probability.
   7
     Where, given our assumptions, v 2 can in principle be calculated from the variance formula for binomial
distributions.


                                                             13
learning model therefore predict that individuals with strong optimistic priors adopt early. So

doing, they receive information about the quality of the product, information that they may

circulate among their social circle. If the information is su¢ ciently bad, i.e., if revealed quality

is less than   i,   early adopters will abandon the new product, and the information that di¤uses

among the social network will discourage adoption by others. If the information is su¢ ciently

good, its di¤usion in the network will progressively raise posterior beliefs according to equation

(2.7) and adoption will spread among individuals with a su¢ ciently high valuation          i    for the

product. Because the accumulation of information eventually reduces the variance of posterior

beliefs, adoption is an increasing function of the information received, and thus of the number

of adopting neighbors.

   What happens after an individual has adopted the product once? In the context of our

empirical application, it is natural to assume that usage reveals a lot of relevant information

about the product. To capture this idea in a stylized way, let us imagine that using the product

once perfectly reveals the quality of the product. It follows that usage is now driven by       i;   social

learning no longer matters. Formally we have:



                     Pr(yit+1 = 1jyis = 1 for some s   t) = Pr ((     i)     eit+1 )                 (2.10)



which does not depend on time or adopting neighbors.

   What happens if individual i is observed to receive an unambiguous signal revealing the

existence of the product? In this case, this signal does not, by itself, dispel uncertainty about

the quality of the product and thus should not eliminate the role of social learning in reducing

uncertainty about the net bene…t of adoption. In other words, adoption continues to follow

equation (2.7) after Mit = 1. This is di¤erent from what happens when social learning only

a¤ects knowledge about the existence of the product, and thus provides a way of identifying

                                                  14
which type of social learning is present in the data.

   To summarize, when social learning is purely about product quality, the likelihood of adop-

tion is predicted to increase over time as the number of adopting neighbors rises, irrespective of

whether the individual received a signal about product existence or not, that is, whether Mis = 1

or not. After …rst adoption, however, the role of social learning essentially disappears and the

probability of continued usage is no longer a function of the number of adopting neighbors. In

contrast, if social learning is solely about product existence, the data generating process switches

to (2.3) after Mis = 1. This makes it possible to test the two learning models against each other

even in a reduced form. If social learning combines both elements, then we expect the coe¢ cient

of Ait to be signi…cantly lower after Mis = 1, but to remain positive until …rst adoption.


2.3. Network externalities and strategic complementarities


Social learning can be seen as a network externality: individuals bene…t from the information

accumulated and shared by others. We have shown that social learning generates a correlation

between neighbors’adoption and own adoption by individual i. There are many other network

externalities that do not involve learning. Since we do not have any information to further

disentangle di¤erent types of strategic complementarities, we need not discuss them in more

detail. The main distinction between strategic complementarities and social learning is that the

e¤ect of social learning disappears after i has used the product at least once, while the e¤ect

of other strategic complementarities does not. This simple observation forms the basis of our

identi…cation strategy between social learning and other network externalities.


2.4. Testing strategy


We are now ready to put all these predictions together in the form of a regression model. To

recap, if network e¤ects are purely due to social learning, then they disappear after …rst usage.

                                                15
If they are purely due to other strategic complementarities, the data generating process should

be the same before and after …rst adoption. To distinguish between the two types of social

learning, we need to observe a signal Mit which equal 1 when i is unambiguously informed

of the product’s existence – even though i has not adopted it. If such signal is observed by

the researcher, identi…cation between the two comes from the following observation: when social

learning is purely about product existence, once i has learned about the existence of the product,

the data generating process immediately shifts from (2.1) to (2.2). In contrast, if social learning

is about product quality, the data generating process remains (2.7) until …rst adoption. This

makes it possible to test the two learning models against each other in reduced form.

         The reduced form for models (2.1) and (2.7) is similar and can be written as:



Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g) =     i   +       1 Sit   +   2 Ait   + "it+1                                    (2.11)

                                                                                            2             2
Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g) =     i   +       1 Sit   +   2 Ait   +   3 Sit   +     4 Ait   +   5 Sit Ait   +(2.12)
                                                                                                                                 "it+1



Model (2.11) is a simple linear approximation of the two structural models (2.1) and (2.7). Pa-

rameter        i   captures variation in product usefulness across individuals. With any social learning

                                                                                                     d Pr
we expect the marginal e¤ect adopting neighbors to be positive, i.e.,                                dAit   > 0. In equation

(2.11) this means           2   > 0. We also the marginal e¤ect of Sit to be positive – which implies

 1   > 0 in equation (2.11). This is because the likelihood of adoption should increase over time

as more information about the product becomes available from within and outside the social

network. In regression model (2.12) we have included extra terms to test the concavity of the

relationship with respect to Sit and Ait as predicted by social learning about product existence.

This concavity can be investigated by testing                3    < 0;       4   < 0 and         5   < 0.8 We have include

     8
    The sign prediction on the cross term Sit Ait arises because information from the network is less valuable if
the person has already received many signals from non-network sources.



                                                         16
error terms to re‡ect the possibility that adoption probabilities may vary across individuals over

time –more about this in the empirical section.

   In contrast, the reduced form model for (2.2) is of the form:



            Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g; Mis = 1 for some s                     t) =         i   + "it+1



It is therefore easy to test one model against the other by estimating a regression model of the

form:



                                                                                                    2             2
   Pr(yit+1 = 1jfyiti ; :::; yit g = f0; :::; 0g) =             i   +    1 Sit   +   2 Ait   +   3 Sit   +     4 Ait   +     5 Sit Ait


                                                                           2                2
                   +   0 mit   +   1 Sit mit   +    2 Ait mit   +       3 Sit mit    +   4 Ait mit   +       5 Sit Ait mit   + "it+1
                                                                                                                                 (2.13)



with mit = 1 if Mis = 1 for some s                 t, and = 0 otherwise. As before                       i   captures variation in

product usefulness across individuals. If the true model is social learning only about existence,

then all ’s should be equal to minus the corresponding ’s, so that the sum of the two equals

0. If the true model is only social learning about quality, then all ’s should be equal to 0. If we

reject both hypotheses –and the total marginal e¤ect of Sit and Ait on the dependent variable

is smaller when mit = 1 – it means that the true model is a hybrid of the two forms of social

learning.

   A similar approach can be used to test the presence of network externalities and strategic

complementarities driven by factors other than social learning. Identi…cation is achieved simply

by noting that social learning stops once i has adopted, while other network externalities continue

having an in‡uence on usage even after i is familiar with the product and its characteristics.

   Formally, let zit = 1 if yis = 1 for some s < t, and 0 otherwise. In other words, zit = 1 if i




                                                           17
has already used the product prior to period t. The estimated model is of the form:



                                                                           2               2
          Pr(yit+1 = 1) =          i   +       1 Sit   +   2 Ait   +    3 Sit   +       4 Ait     +   5 Sit Ait   +   0 zit

                                                                      2                2
                         +    1 Sit zit    +     2 Ait zit   +     3 Sit zit    +   4 Ait zit     +   5 Sit Ait zit   + "it+1   (2.14)



Unlike models (2.12) and (2.13), regression model (2.14) includes observations before and after

…rst adoption. If there is no social learning, network e¤ects should be the same before and after

…rst adoption, i.e., we should observe that                  2     =    3   =       4   =     5   = 0. If there are no network

e¤ects other than social learning, then we should observe that whatever network e¤ects were

present before …rst adoption should cancel out after …rst adoption, i.e., that:


                       @ Pr(yit+1 = 1jzit = 0)     @ Pr(yit+1 = 1jzit = 1)
                                               >0=
                                @Ait                        @Ait


which is guaranteed if    2   =           2,     4   =       4   and        5   =        5.       If the data generating process

is characterized by a combination of social learning and strategic complementarities, then we

should observe that:


                       @ Pr(yit+1 = 1jzit = 0)   @ Pr(yit+1 = 1jzit = 1)
                                               >                         >0
                                @Ait                      @Ait


Estimating model (2.14) allows us to test this as well.



3. The data


The data we use to test our conceptual framework is administrative data on the usage and

di¤usion of a mobile phone service entitled ME2U. The service was introduced in Rwanda

in September 2006 by the dominant mobile phone operator at the time. This service allows



                                                                 18
subscribers to transfer airtime to another subscriber at no cost. In February 2010 the operator

added the possibility for subscribers to redeem airtime into cash, thereby formally introducing

Mobile Money to the country. Over the period of our study, airtime could only be transferred

to another subscriber.9

       Our outcome of interest is the action of sending airtime to another subscriber. From the

moment ME2U was introduced in the country, no action was required (e.g., registration or fee)

for a subscriber to receive airtime. Hence observing that a subscriber receives airtime at a given

point in time does not imply a voluntary decision to use the service. Nonetheless, it does unam-

biguously inform the recipient that peer-to-peer airtime transfers are in existence. Knowing that

it is possible to transfer airtime to someone else does not, by itself, confer full information about

the usefulness of the service to a particular user. There are many attributes that subscribers

may care about, such as easy-of-use, reliability, speed of execution, and protection against abuse

or theft. Talking to other users about their experience sending airtime to others may therefore

confer useful information to prospective users.

       Network externalities may arise once the practice of transferring airtime across subscribers

is su¢ ciently widespread in a particular social or geographical grouping. For instance, it would

become easier to solicit small airtime transfers from friends and relatives in order to make a call

or send a message, since they would be familiar with how to send airtime. It may also become

possible to purchase or otherwise obtain airtime from strangers, e.g., on the bus home. Hence

network e¤ects may continue to manifest themselves even after a subscriber is fully acquainted

with the service.

       In the remainder of this section we begin by describing the source and structure of the data

used in the analysis. Next we de…ne all the variables used in this study and we explain how they

   9
   There is some evidence that a small number of subscribers used airtime transfers to retail airtime that they
bought in bulk at a discount. We discuss below how we deal with this possibility in our analysis.


                                                      19
are constructed. Last we present descriptive statistics on the variables used in the empirical

section.


3.1. Data source


The data come from a large telecommunications operator. During the period of investigation,

this operator enjoyed a quasi-monopoly on mobile phones in Rwanda. Access to the data was

granted by Nathan Eagle through remote access to a Northeastern University computer server

under conditions of strict con…dentiality.10 This is a large dataset comprising multiple computer-

generated administrative …les. We use two main bodies of data for our analysis: data on airtime

transfers; and data on phone calls. The former are used to study adoption and di¤usion; the

latter is used to de…ne social networks. The data identi…es subscribers through an anonymized

identi…er based on their phone number/SIM card. The same identi…er is used throughout the

data. We do not have information on the name or personal characteristics of individual users.11

      The call data consist of an exhaustive log of all phone-based activity that occurred from the

start of 2005 until the end of 2008. It provides information on the time, date, duration, receiver

id and sender id for all phone calls made between 2005 and 2008. In total this dataset includes

50 billion transactions relative to approximately 1.5 million subscribers.

      Data on calls is matched with a second dataset, from the same source, on usage of the airtime

transfer service ME2U. This dataset consists of a log of all mobile-based airtime transfers that

occurred between the introduction of the service in September 2006, and December 2008. For

each transaction we observe the sender and receiver, the amount sent, and the time stamp (i.e.,

time and date).

      After its introduction in September 2006, ME2U usage increased steadily until the 1st of

 10
    If one wishes to use this dataset, please contact Nathan Eagle at nathan@mit.edu.
 11
    We cannot rule out that an individual may have multiple phone numbers, or that phone numbers may be
transferred across users. We come back to this issue in the empirical section.


                                                  20
July 2008 when there is a break in the administrative data (see Figure 1). To avoid spurious

inference, our analysis is based solely on airtime transfer data between September 2006 and

July 2008. During this period, transferring airtime was free, and the number and amount of

transfers that a user could send per day was not limited. Receiving or sending airtime could be

done without the need to subscribe to the service – ME2U became available to all subscribers

immediately after its introduction. The only requirement a user needed to ful…l to use the service

is to have su¢ cient credit on his phone. When a user sends an airtime transfer, the amount

sent is deducted from the user’s airtime balance, the same balance that is used to make calls

or send text messages. Topping up one’s balance can be done by buying airtime vouchers from

local shops and street vendors.

       Since all phone usage in Rwanda is prepaid, topping up by purchasing a voucher is a reg-

ular task for all subscribers, irrespective of whether they use ME2U or not. When a transfer

is received, the amount is immediately added to the recipient’s balance. This airtime can im-

mediately be used to make calls, send airtime to other subscribers, or resell airtime to others.

In February 2010 the operator introduced a system by which subscribers could redeem airtime

against cash with dedicated agents. During the period covered by our data, such a system had

not yet been introduced. For information, we give in Appendix Figure A1 the location of all cell

towers in Rwanda during our period of analysis.


3.2. Variable de…nition


Because the number of unique subscribers in the data is extremely large, we only use a randomly

selected subset of 5,000 subscribers for our analysis of ME2U adoption and usage.12 For these

subscribers, we observe all their ME2U transfers between the introduction of the service in

  12
    Limiting our analysis to 5,000 subscribers o¤ers the added advantage that it is extremely unlikely that the
dataset used for analysis includes subscribers who belong to the neighborhood of the 5,000 selected subscribers.
This further minimizes the risk of reverse causation – see below.


                                                      21
September 2006, and June 30th 2008. The end-date T is thus the end of June 2008.

   For the purpose of our analysis, we aggregate all phone usage information at the weekly level.

This ensures that we take advantage of the detailed time information available in the data while

keeping the size of the dataset manageable. For instance, ME2U usage by network neighbors is

measured as the total number of neighbors who start using ME2U in a given week –more below.

As indicated in the conceptual section, all regressors are lagged –by one week. This eliminates

the risk of simultaneity bias since actual usage of ME2U by individual i in week t could not have

caused usage by network neighbors in the previous week. This issue is discussed more in detail

in the empirical section.

   We start by de…ning the dependent variable yi;t , which is a dummy that takes value 1 if i

has used ME2U in period t, and 0 otherwise. We consider a subscriber to be active from the

week he receives or makes his …rst transaction – e.g., phone call, SMS, or ME2U transaction.

This de…nes ti , that is, the week from which i is at risk of adopting ME2U. The adoption date

Ti for individual i is de…ned as the week at which the subscriber sends his …rst ME2U transfer.

The reason for de…ning adoption in this way is that sending airtime requires an active decision

while receiving a transfer is passive. In order to send a transfer, the subscriber may also need

to invest time and e¤ort, e.g., to top up his airtime balance or to learn how to make a transfer.

In contrast, the only requirement for a subscriber to receive a ME2U transfer is to have an

activated phone number.

   We construct the neighborhood of each subscriber as follows. We look in the data for all

subscribers who, at some point between January 2005 and June 2008, have a phone contact

with i. To be clear, this includes all subscribers in the data, not just those 5,000 subscribers

randomly selected for the empirical analysis. We only use call data with a positive duration

and from mobile to mobile phone – ME2U cannot be sent to a landline or to an international



                                               22
number.13 We start from the dataset of all phone calls made between January 2005 and July

2008, and we identify the week in which i and j had their …rst phone-based contact. When i

and j make the …rst phone call to each other, the network tie gi;j;t switches from 0 to 1. For

the purpose of the econometric analysis we assume that, once connected, i an j stay connected

during the span of our analysis. The network ties are thus de…ned as:

             8
             >
             >
             >
             >
             <1 if i and j had their …rst phone-based contact in period s with s = ti ; :::; t
  gi;j;t =                                                                                             (3.1)
             >
             >
             >
             >
             :0 otherwise




The neighborhood of subscriber i in period t is the union of all the subscribers for which gijt = 1.

That is:

                                          Nit (g) = fj : gijt = 1g                                     (3.2)




Next, for each neighbor j of i we collate information on whether j made a ME2U transfer in

week t, that is, whether yjt = 1. We then construct a variable             Ait de…ned as the number of

neighbors of i who started sending airtime in week t. Accumulating               Ait over time yields the

cumulative number of adopting neighbors Ait of i at week t.

    In the conceptual section we introduced a variable Mit de…ned as a signal that i receives at

time t that the new service exists. In the empirical implementation of the model, we set Mit = 1

in the …rst week that i receives a ME2U transfer. Variable mit permanently switches to 1 once

Mit has taken value 1. Finally, variable Sit is de…ned as the number of weeks since i started

using his SIM-ID –that is, Sit        t   ti .

  13
     In addition, call data is missing for October 2006. This means that all variables derived from call data
information are missing for that month.



                                                     23
3.3. Descriptive statistics


We now provide summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. Remember that

these variables relate to the 5,000 subscribers randomly selected for analysis. Table 1 provides

descriptive statistics for all the variables; Tables 2 and 3 provide the same information, but split

between before and after i receives his …rst airtime transfer.

   The total number of observations is quite large, even when we limit our attention to 5,000

subscribers. We see that the neighborhood of each subscriber is large, as could be expected

given our generous de…nition of social links. There is ample variation in        Ait and Ait , both

before and after i receives his …rst airtime transfer, to hope achieving identi…cation.

                                 Table 3.1: Summary statistics
             Variable    Mean Std. Dev. Number of zero value                     N
             Nit         507.376     466.274               859                 395507
               Ait        1.678        1.945             13114                 390515
             Ait         71.053       75.857             16347                 395507
             Sit         41.843       25.819              5000                 400507



                    Table 3.2: Summary statistics before signal (mit =0)
             Variable Mean Std. Dev. Number of zero value                        N
             Nit       475.151    457.827                793                   282004
               Ait      1.553       1.883              101701                  277140
             Ait       61.164      71.366               15790                  282004
             Sit       38.617      26.165                4936                  286940



                     Table 3.3: Summary statistics after signal (mit =1)
             Variable Mean Std. Dev. Number of zero value                        N
             Ni;t      587.441     477.304                 66                  113503
               Ait       1.983       2.058               29413                 113375
             Ai;t       95.624      80.933                557                  113503
             Si;t       49.993       22.99                 64                  113567




                                                24
4. Empirical results


The …rst regression model we estimate is (2.12), using only observations until …rst adoption. To

eliminate the individual …xed e¤ect                  i,      we …rst di¤erence the data. The estimated model is a

linear probability model of the form:



                 yit+1 =         1   +   2   Ait +       3    (Sit2 ) +   4   (A2it ) +   5       (Sit Ait ) +   "it+1       (4.1)



where       xt   xt     xt   1   by de…nition of notation and observations up to the …rst adoption are

used.14 We have           Sit = 1 by construction. Coe¢ cient estimates are presented in Table 4.

Standard errors are clustered at the district level. We see that                              2   and    3   are both signi…cantly

positive while     4   is signi…cantly negative. Remember that, when social learning is about product

existence, the relationship between adoption and network e¤ects should be strongly concave with

respect to Ait . In contrast, when social learning is about product quality, this concavity need

not be present and may even be reversed.

       To investigate this, we report in Table 5 the marginal e¤ect @ Pr =@Ait evaluated at various

values of Ait . We …nd that marginal e¤ects are positive throughout, consistent with the presence

of network e¤ects. We observe a gradual fall in @ Pr =@Ait as Ait increases, as suggested by

the negative quadratic term coe¢ cient                       4.   This evidence is prima facie consistent with social

learning about product existence, although the observed concavity is much weaker than that

predicted by equation (2.1).

       In Table 6 we present coe¢ cient estimates for regression model (2.13). Once again, we

eliminate the individual …xed e¤ect                  i   by …rst-di¤erencing the data. The estimated model is a

  14
    This is similar to a duration model with time-varying regressors estimated in discrete form. Instead of using a
maximum likelihood estimator, we opt for a linear probability model so as to be able to remove the individual …xed
e¤ect by …rst-di¤erencing the data. Given the long time series and likely persistence in errors, …rst di¤erencing is
to be preferred to …xed e¤ects.



                                                                    25
LPM of the form:



          yit+1 =       1   +   2       Ait +     3   (Sit2 ) +      4   (A2it ) +       5     (Sit Ait ) +          0    mit

      +     1    (Sit mit ) +       2       (Ait mit ) +     3    (Sit2 mit ) +      4       (A2it mit ) +       5       (Sit Ait mit ) +     "it+1
                                                                                                                                                (4.2)



where, as in (4.1), we only include observations up to the …rst adoption. In Table 7 we present

estimates of marginal e¤ects @ Pr =@Ait evaluated for mit = 0 and mit = 1. Network e¤ects

remain signi…cant throughout, although they are signi…cantly smaller when mit = 1 than when

mit = 0. This is suggestive of a hybrid model in which social learning serves two purposes:

circulating information about product existence, and about product quality. Given that network

e¤ects remain large even after mit = 1 suggests that, of the two, di¤using information about

quality accounts for a large share of social learning e¤ects.

   We now seek to rule out that observed network e¤ects on adoption are purely due to network

externalities, not to social learning. To this e¤ect, we estimate model (2.14) in the same data.

The model is estimated in …rst di¤erence to eliminate unobserved heterogeneity                                                      i,   i.e., it is of

the form:



                yit+1 =     1   +   2       Ait +     3     (Sit2 ) +    4    (A2it ) +       5   (Sit Ait ) +            0   zit

          +      1   (Sit zit ) +       2    (Ait zit ) +     3    (Sit2 zit ) +   4     (A2it zit ) +       5       (Sit Ait zit ) +      "it+1(4.3)



where all observations are used and zit = 1 if subscriber i has used ME2U before time t.

Regression results are presented in Table 8. Marginal e¤ects estimated at the sample mean are

presented in Table 9. As should be, the                           coe¢ cient estimates are very similar to those reported

in Table 4, and the average marginal e¤ect is similar as well. We …nd that the marginal e¤ect

estimated at the sample mean is much lower after …rst adoption, which con…rms that social


                                                                         26
learning matters. What is less anticipated is that, after …rst adoption, network e¤ects are on

average negative, implying that, if anything, airtime transfers are strategic substitutes across

network neighbors.

   To check the robustness of this …nding, we re-estimate (4.3) in two alternative ways. Results

are presented in columns 2 and 3 of Tables 8 and 9. We start in column 2 by adding a time

trend to the regression. The concern is that the usage of airtime transfers by network neighbors

may be varying over time in a way that is correlated with a time trend. Omitting this trend

may result in a spurious negative correlation between neighbor usage and own usage that varies

systematically before and after …rst adoption. We do …nd evidence of a time trend in airtime

transfer usage –the trend coe¢ cient is strongly statistically signi…cant. But this has little e¤ect
                                                                                @ Pr(yit+1 =1jzit =1)
on coe¢ cient estimates and on marginal e¤ects estimated at the mean:                   @Ait            goes

up a bit, but remains signi…cantly negative. Similar results are obtained if we use time dummies

instead of a linear time trend in the …rst di¤erence regression (4.3).

   In column 3 we add controls for the transfers received by i. The logic is as follows. We begin

by noting that    Ait captures airtime transfers made by i’s network neighbors at time t                   1.

Some of these transfers may have been made to i. If i feels an obligation to reciprocate or pass

on the transfers received, we expect to observe a mechanical positive correlation between               yit+1

and   Ait . If, on the other hand, i receives transfers because he or she is at the receiving end of

an altruistic relationship (e.g., a migrant sending remittances to his family, a husband sending

airtime to his wife or children) and an airtime transfer is made when the recipient is in need

of assistance,   yit+1 and   Ait may be negatively correlated in the sense that the more i needs

assistance, the more he or she receives airtime transfers, hence the larger           Ait . At the same

time, the more i needs assistance, the less i can help others and hence the lower           yit+1 is.
                                                             @ Pr(yit+1 =1jzit =1)
   To investigate whether this is what drives the negative           @Ait            after …rst adoption,



                                                27
we reestimate (4.3) with four additional regressors: a time trend, as in column 2; the number

of transfers received at t, the amount of airtime transfers received at t, and the number of

neighbors from whom i received a transfer at t. Coe¢ cient estimates are signi…cant but their

interpretation is somewhat confusing. Two of the coe¢ cients are negative, in agreement with

our conjecture above, indicating that when i receives more transfers from more people, he or she

is less likely to transfer airtime to others during the next period. The third coe¢ cient, however,

(amount received) is positive, indicating the opposite e¤ect. More importantly, the estimate
                 @ Pr(yit+1 =1jzit =1)
marginal e¤ect           @Ait            remains negative and signi…cant –and the change in magnitude

relative to column 2 is relatively small (e.g., from -0.0030 to -0.0028). From this we conclude

that the strategic substitution e¤ect of network neighbors is not simply due to transfers received

by i from these network neighbors –and either reciprocated or not in the subsequent period.

   Network externalities are typically believed to generate strategic complement e¤ects. How

could airtime transfers be strategy substitutes after …rst adoption? It is di¢ cult to say for sure

from the data at our disposal. But strategic substitution e¤ects have been discussed in the

theoretical literature on networks (e.g., Jackson 2008, Bramoulle, Kranton and d’Amours 2014)

and evidence of network strategic substitutes has been provided in the case of the adoption of

business practices (e.g., Fafchamps and Soderbom 2014). In our context, strategic substitutes

may arise from free-riding. To illustrate, suppose i has two network neighbors j and k. If j has

given airtime to k at time t, there is less pressure on i to give at time t + 1. Individual i may

feel exonerated even if k is not a direct neighbor of i. This may be what explains why neighbors

of individuals who send transfers send fewer transfers themselves. Another possibility is when

individuals i and j (e.g., spouses, friends, or relatives) team up to purchase airtime in bulk to

get a quantity discount –and subsequently transfer airtime to each other. In this case too, if i

does purchase the airtime on her phone before transferring it to network neighbors, observing



                                                      28
that i transfers airtime is negatively correlated with j transferring airtime.

       Whatever the reason for strategic substitution e¤ects, the main lesson we draw from our

analysis is that, prior to …rst adoption, networks serve an important social learning role. More-

over, given the presence of negative externalities, the importance of social learning may be

underestimated by regressions (4.1) and (4.2). For instance, if we combine the two estimates
                                                                      @ Pr(yit+1 =1jzit =0)
from the column 1 of Table 9, we would conclude that                          @Ait            underestimates the net-

work e¤ect of social learning by 74% (i.e., -0.00356/0.00483). Comparisons made using the other

two columns are slightly lower, but continue to suggest a signi…cant underestimation of social

learning from models (4.1) and (4.2)



5. Robustness analysis


Fafchamps, Goyal and Vander Leij (2010) estimate a model similar to regression (4.1) in …xed

e¤ect instead of …rst di¤erence. They point out that the time structure of the dependent

variable – a sequence of 0’s ending with a single 1 – generates a spurious correlation between

any trending regressor and the dependent variable. They recommend detrending all regressors

prior to estimation in order to eliminate this bias. The time structure of the dependent variable in

regression (4.1) is similar to theirs, but estimation in …rst di¤erence de facto eliminates any linear

trend in Ait and Sit . It remains that our …ndings could be a¤ected by the presence of a quadratic

time trend in Ait , which would translate in to a linear trend in                     Ait . To investigate whether

our results are a¤ected, we re-estimate regression (4.1) after detrending all …rst-di¤erenced

regressors. Results show absolutely no change in coe¢ cient estimates and standard errors.15

       There remains the perennial issue of possible endogeneity of Ait . Since our analysis is based

on complete administrative data obtained directly from the phone provider, it is less susceptible

  15                                2
       Except for the fact that   (Sit ) drops out of the estimation since, by construction, it is linear in time because
Sit   is linear in time.


                                                            29
to measurement error, which is arguably the most common source of endogeneity a¤ecting

survey data. This notwithstanding, there remain other potential sources of endogeneity that

we discuss in turn. The …rst potential source is re‡ection bias: i in‡uences j and j in‡uences

i. To eliminate this type of simultaneity bias, in our analysis we have used the lagged value of

Ait instead of its contemporaneous value. Experimentation with di¤erent lag lengths leaves the

results una¤ected. The second potential source of endogeneity is network self-selection: I create

new links to adopters when I am considering adopting myself. To obviate this possibility, we

have de…ned i’s network as including the phone numbers with which i had a phone contact at

any time during the entire study period, that is, between January 2005 and June 2008. This

rules out any time variation in network neighborhood that is correlated with i’s time-varying

propensity to adopt.

     A third potential source of endogeneity is correlated e¤ects: an aggregate shock occurs that

makes others and myself more likely to adopt at approximately the same time. An obvious

example is a national marketing campaign targeting the entire country in a given month. To

investigate this possibility, we reestimate model (4.1) with separate dummies for each month

in the study period. The results are presented in Table 10. For comparison purposes, the …rst

column reproduces the results from Tables 4 (…rst panel) and 5 (lower panel). Comparable results

with month dummies are presented in column (2). The month dummies are often signi…cant,

suggesting the presence of aggregate shocks, but we …nd little change in the estimated coe¢ cients

of    Ait and ( Ait )2 . We similar …nd little change in marginal e¤ects, reported in the lower

panel of the Table.

     Correlated shocks could also happen at the district level, e.g., because of a location-speci…c

marketing campaign, or because the usefulness of ME2U increases in a district as a result of an

exogenous shock such as ‡ood or an earthquake (e.g., Blumenstock, Eagle and Fafchamps 2016).



                                                 30
To address this concern, we reestimate (4.1) with district-speci…c dummies for each month of

the study. The results are shown in Table 10, column (3). Again we …nd little change in the

estimated coe¢ cients of   Ait and ( Ait )2 , and hardly any change in estimated marginal e¤ects.

   In Tables 11 and 12 we do the same thing for the results reported in Tables 6 to 9. Here too

we …nd little if any change in estimated coe¢ cients and marginal e¤ects. From this we conclude

that our main results of interest are robust to correcting for possible endogeneity to the extent

allowed by the data.



6. Conclusion


In this study we use a large administrate dataset covering the universe of phone calls and airtime

transfers in an entire country over a four year period. We examine the pattern of adoption of a

new phone service over time. This phone service, called ME2U, allows a phone user to transfer

airtime from their phone to someone else’s. This early form of mobile money was introduced in

Rwanda in 2005 by the then de facto monopolist in cell phone services. As a result, we observe

the entire universe of peer-to-peer airtime transfers that took place in Rwanda over a four year

period.

   We start by documenting strong network e¤ects on adoption of the new service: increased us-

age of ME2U by social neighbors predicts a higher probability of transferring airtime to another

user. We then seek to narrow down the possible sources of these network e¤ects by distinguish-

ing between network externalities and social learning. Within social learning, we also seek to

di¤erentiate between learning about existence of the new product from learning about its quality

or usefulness. We …nd robust evidence suggestive of social learning both for the existence and

the reliability or usefulness of the new service. In contrast, we …nd that network e¤ects turn

negative after …rst adoption, suggesting that airtime transfers are strategic substitutes among



                                               31
network neighbors. All results are robust to the inclusion of district-speci…c month dummies.

   Our results provide useful insights in the process by which products and services di¤use on

social networks, particularly those involving IT technology. Observing correlated patterns of

adoption and usage is typically interpreted as symptomatic of network externalities, without

specifying what these externalities may be. We unpack this black box to distinguish social

learning from strategic complementarity in usage. We …nd strong evidence of the former, but no

evidence of latter –if anything, usage is a strategic substitute between network neighbors. This

leads to two …nal observations. First, we should stop assuming, as we often do when considering

network e¤ects, that interactions on networks are synonymous with strategic complements. In

our application, strategic substitutes are a more natural alternative. Secondly, the presence of

strategic substitution e¤ects does not rule out positive welfare e¤ects from social interaction.

Given how rapidly airtime transfer services spread across Rwanda –and given that usage peaked

after national disasters (e.g., Blumenstock, Eagle and Fafchamps 2016) – we strongly suspect

that the introduction of the service generated large welfare gains, irrespective of usage.



7. References


Aker, J. C. (2010). “Information from Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural

Markets in Niger,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2: 46–59.

   Aker, Jenny C. and Marcel Fafchamps (2015). "Mobile Phone Coverage and Producer Mar-

kets: Evidence from West Africa", World Bank Economic Review, 29(2): 262-92

   Aker, Jenny C., Paul Collier and Pedro Vicente (2013). "Is Information Power? Using

Mobile Phones and Free Newspapers during an Election in Mozambique", IGC Working Paper

   Bjorkegren, Daniel (2015). "The Adoption of Network Goods: Evidence from the Spread of

Mobile Phones in Rwanda", Department of Economics, Brown University (mimeograph)



                                               32
   Blumenstock, J. and N. Eagle (2012). "Divided We Call: Disparities in Access and Use of

Mobile Phones in Rwanda", Information Technology and International Development, 8(2): 1-16

   Blumenstock, Joshua, Nathan Eagle and Marcel Fafchamps (2016). "Airtime Transfers and

Mobile Communications: Evidence in the Aftermath of a Natural Disaster", Journal of Devel-

opment Economics (forthcoming)

   Bramoulle, Yann, Rachel Kranton and Martin D’Amours (2014). "Strategic Interaction and

Networks," American Economic Review, 104(3): 898-930, March

   Centola, Damon (2010). "The Spread of Behavior in an Online Social Network", Science,

329: 1194-7

   Christakis, Nicholas A. and James H. Fowler (2007). "The Spread of Obesity in a Large

Social Network over 32 Years", New England Journal of Medecine, 357:370-379, July 26

   Cole, Shawn A. and A. Nilesh Fernando (2016). "The Value of Advice: Evidence from the

Adoption of Agricultural Practices", Harvard University (mimeograph)

   Economides, Nicholas and Przemyslaw Jeziorski (2016). "Mobile Money in Tanzania", Stern

School of Business, New York University (mimeo)

   Fafchamps, Marcel, Sanjeev Goyal and Marco van der Leij (2010). "Matching and Network

E¤ects", Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(1): 203-31, January

   Fafchamps, Marcel and Måns Söderbom (2014). "Network Proximity and Business Practices

in African Manufacturing," World Bank Economic Review, 28(1): 99-129

   Fafchamps, Marcel and Bart Minten (2012). "Impact of SMS-Based Agricultural Information

on Indian Farmers", World Bank Economic Review, 26(3): 383-414

   Foster, Andrew D and Mark R. Rosenzweig (1996). "Technical Change and Human-Capital

Returns and Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolution," American Economic Review,

86(4): 931-53, September



                                            33
   Granovetter, Mark (1995). Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers, University of

Chicago Press, Chicago

   Jack, W. and T. Suri (2014). “Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence from Kenya’s

Mobile Money Revolution,” American Economic Review, 104: 183–223

   Jackson, Matthew O. (2009). Social and Economic Networks, Princeton University Press,

Princeton, 2008

   Jackson, Matthew O. and Leeat Yariv (2005) "Di¤usion on Social Networks", Economie

Publique, 16(1): 3-16

   Jensen, R. (2007). “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance,

and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 879–

924.

   Li, Wei and Xu Tan (206). "Boundedly Rational Learning in Social Networks", University

of Washington (mimeo).

   Mobius, Markus and Tanya Rosenblat (2014). "Social Learning in Economics", Annual

Review of Economics, 6: 827-847, August

   Mood, Alexander M., Franklin A. Graybill and Duane C. Boes (1974). Introduction to the

Theory of Statistics, Third edition, McGraw-Hill, New York

   Ryan, S. P. and C. Tucker (2012). “Heterogeneity and the dynamics of technology adoption,”

Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 10: 63–109.

   Saloner, G. and A. Shepard (1995): “Adoption of Technologies with Network E¤ects: An

Empirical Examination of the Adoption of Automated Teller Machines,” RAND Journal of

Economics, 26: 479–501.

   Suri, Tavneet and William Jack (2014). "Risk Sharing and Transaction Costs: Evidence from

Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution", American Economic Review, 104 (1): 183-223, January



                                            34
   van den Boogaart, Monique (2013). "Social Networks and Technology Adoption: Evidence

from a mobile money service in Rwanda", Department of Economics, Oxford University (un-

published PhD thesis)

   Vega-Redondo, Fernando (2007). Complex Social Networks, Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge

   Young, H. Peyton (1999). "Di¤usion in Social Networks," Papers 2, Brookings Institution -

Working Papers.

   Young, H. Peyton (2009). "Innovation Di¤usion in Heterogeneous Populations: Contagion,

Social In‡uence, and Social Learning," American Economic Review, 99(5): 1899-1924, Decem-

ber.




                                            35
Table 4
First Adoption: First Difference Estimates
                    Coef.        s.e.      Coef/s.e.
ΔA(it)                0.0049613 0.000714         6.95
ΔS(it)^2              0.0005408 3.04E‐05        17.81
ΔA(it)^2             ‐0.0000126 2.95E‐06        ‐4.27
Δ[A(it)S(it)]         0.0000402 2.36E‐05         1.71

Observations            92,700
Note: Standard error are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Table 5
First Adoption: Marginal effect of A(it), for different A(it)*
A(it)         m.eff. s.e.         Coef/s.e.
         0 0.005731 0.00055          10.42
        20 0.005227 0.000484         10.81
        40 0.004722 0.00044          10.74
        60 0.004217 0.000425          9.92
        80 0.003713 0.000443          8.39
       100 0.003208 0.000489          6.56
* Based on results in Table 2.
Evaluated at sample means of regressors.
Note: Standard error are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Table 6
Generalized First Adoption Model: First Difference Estimates
                         Coef.     s.e.         Coef/s.e.
ΔA(it)                    0.005118 0.000709           7.22
ΔS(it)^2                  0.000532 3.13E‐05         17.01
ΔA(it)^2                   ‐1.3E‐05 3.92E‐06         ‐3.28
Δ[A(it) x S(it)]          3.55E‐05 2.46E‐05           1.44
Δm(it)                    0.018369 0.021977           0.84
Δ[m(it) x S(it)]          0.002727 0.002179           1.25
Δ[m(it) x A(it)]          ‐0.00115 0.000425          ‐2.72
Δ[m(it) x S(it)^2]         ‐2.7E‐05 4.07E‐05         ‐0.67
Δ[m(it) x A(it)^2]        9.93E‐07 2.82E‐06           0.35
Δ[m(it) x A(it) x S(it)]  1.93E‐05 2.14E‐05            0.9

Observations                 92,700
Note: Standard error are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Table 7
First Adoption: Marginal effect of A(it)*
              m.eff. s.e.          Coef/s.e.
    m(it)=0 0.005       0.0005        10.8
    m(it)=1 0.004       0.0005         8.7

* Based on results in Table 4
Evaluated at sample means of regressors.
Note: Standard error are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Table 8
Adoption & subsequent usage: First Difference Estimates
                                            Specification (1)                     Specification (2)                    Specification (3)
                                  Coef.        s.e.        Coef/s.e.     Coef.      s.e.         Coef/s.e.    Coef.      s.e.         Coef/s.e.
ΔA(it)                             0.004961 0.000714              6.95    0.005047 0.000695            7.26    0.005075 0.000706            7.19
ΔS(it)^2                           0.000541 3.04E‐05             17.81    0.000373 3.14E‐05           11.87    0.000352 3.18E‐05           11.08
ΔA(it)^2                             ‐1.3E‐05 2.95E‐06           ‐4.27     ‐1.3E‐05 2.99E‐06          ‐4.33     ‐1.3E‐05 2.98E‐06          ‐4.47
Δ[A(it) x S(it)]                    4.02E‐05 2.36E‐05             1.71    4.45E‐05 2.35E‐05             1.9    4.75E‐05 2.36E‐05            2.02
Δ[z(it) x S(it)]                    ‐0.01854 0.001507          ‐12.31     ‐0.02594 0.001834          ‐14.15    ‐0.02731 0.001877          ‐14.54
Δ[z(it) x A(it)]                    ‐0.00949 0.001291            ‐7.35    ‐0.00897 0.001232           ‐7.29    ‐0.00887 0.001252           ‐7.09
Δ[z(it) x S(it)^2]                  ‐0.00052 3.04E‐05          ‐17.11     ‐0.00049 3.04E‐05          ‐16.11    ‐0.00048 3.13E‐05          ‐15.29
Δ[z(it) x A(it)^2]                  1.42E‐05 2.90E‐06             4.89    1.42E‐05 2.92E‐06            4.85    1.38E‐05 2.89E‐06            4.76
Δ[z(it) x A(it) x S(it)]             ‐2.3E‐05 2.39E‐05           ‐0.94     ‐2.8E‐05 2.36E‐05          ‐1.17     ‐2.6E‐05 2.41E‐05          ‐1.08
Time (week number)                                                        0.000408 1.99E‐05           20.57    0.000447 1.99E‐05            22.5
log(amount received + 1)                                                                                       0.002777 0.000641            4.34
Number of transfers received                                                                                   ‐0.00498 0.001963           ‐2.54
Number of neighbors from                                                                                       ‐0.01283 0.003589           ‐3.58
  whom i received a transfer
Observations                         371,785                               371,785                              361,616
Note: Standard error are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Table 9
First Adoption: Marginal effect of A(it), before & after first adoption
                       Specification (1)                       Specification (2)                Specification (3)
                m.eff.  s.e.           Coef/s.e.       m.eff. s.e.            Coef/s.e.   m.eff. s.e.          Coef/s.e.
     z(it)=0 0.0048358 0.0004096              11.81 0.00506 0.000416              12.18 0.005161 0.000418          12.34
     z(it)=1 ‐0.0035638 0.0006329              ‐5.63 ‐0.00303 0.000622             ‐4.87 ‐0.00282 0.000652          ‐4.33

* Based on results in Table 6
Evaluated at sample means of regressors.
Note: Standard error are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Table 10
First Adoption: First Difference Estimates and Marginal Effects
                                              (1)                      (2)                      (3)
FD estimates                            Coef.     Coef/s.e.      Coef.     Coef/s.e.     Coef.    Coef/s.e.
ΔA(it)                                 0.0049613      6.95      0.0043119      6.23     0.0042423     6.38
ΔS(it)^2                               0.0005408     17.81    -0.0003368      -8.09    -0.0003276    -7.88
ΔA(it)^2                              -0.0000126     -4.27    -0.0000111      -3.13    -0.0000110    -3.05
Δ[A(it)S(it)]                          0.0000402      1.71      0.0000653      2.28     0.0000647     2.15

Marginal effects of A(it), at different levels of A(it)
A(it) = 0                                0.0057           10.42     0.0056    10.13        0.0055     10.36
A(it) = 20                               0.0052           10.81     0.0051    10.93        0.0050     11.32
A(it) = 40                               0.0047           10.74     0.0047    11.07        0.0046     11.57
A(it) = 60                               0.0042            9.92     0.0042    10.03        0.0042     10.43
A(it) = 80                               0.0037            8.39     0.0038     8.11        0.0037       8.3
A(it) = 100                              0.0032            6.56     0.0033     6.11        0.0033      6.16

year x month dummies                        N                      Y                      N
year x month x district dummies             N                      N                      Y

Observations                          92,700                      92,700               92,700
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Marginal effects are evaluated at sample means of regressors.
Table 11
Generalized First Adoption Model: First Difference Estimates and Marginal Effects
                                (1)                     (2)                    (3)
FD estimates             Coef.      Coef/s.e.    Coef.      Coef/s.e.  Coef.       Coef/s.e.
ΔA(it)                     0.0051        7.22     0.0044         6.66      0.0043       6.82
ΔS(it)^2                   0.0005       17.01    -0.0003        -7.68    -0.0003       -7.34
ΔA(it)^2                 -1.3E-05       -3.28 -1.1E-05          -2.81   -1.1E-05       -2.61
Δ[A(it)S(it)]             3.6E-05        1.44     0.0001         2.24      0.0001       2.02
Δm(it)                     0.0184        0.84    -0.0167        -0.79    -0.0163       -0.77
Δ[m(it) x S(it)]           0.0027        1.25     0.0058         2.88      0.0059       2.87
Δ[m(it) x A(it)]          -0.0012       -2.72    -0.0009        -2.12    -0.0010       -2.29
Δ[m(it) x S(it)^2]       -2.7E-05       -0.67    -0.0001        -2.34    -0.0001         -2.4
Δ[m(it) x A(it)^2]        9.9E-07        0.35    3.9E-07         0.14   -2.1E-07       -0.08
Δ[m(it) x A(it) x S(it)]  1.9E-05         0.9    1.9E-05         0.84     2.5E-05       1.09

Marginal effects of A(it)
m(it)=0                     0.0051       10.75      0.0050          10.95     0.0049   11.34
m(it)=1                     0.0044        8.72      0.0044           8.85     0.0043    9.17

year x month dummies       N                         Y                        N
year x month x district dummies
                           N                         N                        Y

Observations              92,700                   92,700                   92,700
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Marginal effects are evaluated at sample means of regressors.
Table 12
Adoption & subsequent usage, with additional controls
                                         (1)                       (2)                    (3)                     (4)
FD estimates                      Coef.      Coef/s.e.       Coef.     Coef/s.e.    Coef.     Coef/s.e.     Coef.     Coef/s.e.
ΔA(it)                            0.00334         4.77       0.00346        4.87    0.00326        4.75     0.00339        4.86
ΔS(it)^2                          0.00011         2.95       0.00008        2.17    0.00011        2.82     0.00008        2.07
ΔA(it)^2                         -0.00001          -4.5     -0.00001       -4.64   -0.00001       -4.59    -0.00001       -4.75
Δ[A(it) x S(it)]                  0.00009         3.74       0.00009        3.78    0.00009        3.77     0.00009        3.81
Δ[z(it) x S(it)]                 -0.04424        -19.7      -0.04628      -20.45   -0.04493      -18.38    -0.04692      -19.25
Δ[z(it) x A(it)]                 -0.00742        -6.07      -0.00742       -5.97   -0.00736       -6.08    -0.00738       -5.97
Δ[z(it) x S(it)^2]               -0.00017          -4.7     -0.00015       -3.94   -0.00017         -4.5   -0.00014         -3.8
Δ[z(it) x A(it)^2]                0.00001         4.95       0.00001        4.88    0.00002        5.06     0.00001        4.99
Δ[z(it) x A(it) x S(it)]         -0.00007        -2.94      -0.00007       -2.76   -0.00007       -2.97    -0.00007       -2.79
log(amount received + 1)                                     0.00247        3.88                            0.00246        3.86
Number of transfers received                                -0.00483       -2.52                           -0.00486       -2.53
Number of neighbors from                                    -0.01167       -3.25                           -0.01173       -3.28
  whom i received a transfer

Marginal effects of A(it)
z(it)=0                              0.00515       11.92     0.00527      12.09     0.00508       12.16     0.00520       12.36
z(it)=1                             -0.00312       -4.99    -0.00294      -4.48    -0.00313       -4.91    -0.00295       -4.41

year x month dummies                   Y                      Y                      N                       N
year x month x district dummies        N                      N                      Y                       Y

Observations                             371,785              371,785              361,616                 361,616
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the district level (M=27).
Marginal effects are evaluated at sample means of regressors.
z(it)=0 prior to adoption, z(it)=1 after adoption
