NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GAINFULLY EMPLOYED? ASSESSING THE EMPLOYMENT AND EARNINGS
OF FOR-PROFIT COLLEGE STUDENTS USING ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
Stephanie Riegg Cellini
Nicholas Turner
Working Paper 22287
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22287

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016, Revised January 2018

Stephanie Riegg Cellini is an associate professor of public policy and economics at George
Washington University and a research associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Nicholas Turner is a senior economist at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. He previously
worked in the Office of Tax Analysis at the U.S. Treasury, where this work was completed. We
would like to thank Leah Brooks, Latika Chaudhary, Dylan Conger, John Earle, Brent Evans,
Sarena Goodman, Ted Joyce, Janet McCubbin, and seminar participants at AEFP, APPAM,
CAPSEE, the City University of New York, the DC Education Economics Working Group, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, George Mason
University, George Washington University, Temple University, the University of Virginia, the
U.S. Department of Labor, the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, and the U.S. Treasury for
helpful comments. We thank Jerry Wei and Rachel Schwartz for excellent research assistance.
Stephanie Cellini gratefully acknowledges support from the Smith Richardson Foundation. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve Board, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We were granted a waiver of JHR’s data availability policy due to the
confidential nature of individual enrollment and tax records.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Stephanie Riegg Cellini and Nicholas Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gainfully Employed? Assessing the Employment and Earnings of For-Profit College Students
Using Administrative Data
Stephanie Riegg Cellini and Nicholas Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 22287
May 2016, Revised January 2018
JEL No. I2,I23,I26,J01,J24
ABSTRACT
We draw on population-level administrative data from the U.S. Department of Education and the
Internal Revenue Service to quantify the impact of for-profit college attendance on the
employment and earnings of over one million students. Using a matched comparison group
difference-in-differences design, we find that certificate-seeking students in for-profit institutions
are 1.5 percentage points less likely to be employed and, conditional on employment, have 11
percent lower earnings after attendance than students in public institutions. These results hold for
both men and women and for seven of the top ten fields of study. We find that earnings and
employment outcomes are particularly poor for students attending for-profit colleges that offer
the majority of their courses online and for multicampus chains. We find that for-profit students
experience small, statistically insignificant gains in annual earnings after attendance compared to
a matched control group of young individuals who do not attend college. A back-of-the-envelope
comparison of these earnings gains to average debt burdens suggests that for-profit certificate
programs do not pay off for the average student.

Stephanie Riegg Cellini
Trachtenberg School of Public Policy
and Public Administration
George Washington University
805 21st Street NW, #601M
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
scellini@gwu.edu
Nicholas Turner
Federal Reserve Board
Nick.Turner@frb.gov

I. Introduction
For-profit postsecondary institutions have changed the landscape of higher education in the
United States. Since 2000, enrollment in federally aided for-profit colleges has more than tripled,
fueled by growing numbers of students seeking postsecondary credentials, the availability of
federal student aid, and the low cost of providing online education. Today, for-profit colleges
serve about 1.6 million students and comprise about eight percent of all postsecondary
enrollment (National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) 2017, Table 303.20).1
The rapid growth of the for-profit sector brought with it increased attention from
policymakers, the media, the education community, and students themselves. In recent years,
investigations into unscrupulous recruiting practices, fraud in federal financial aid programs, low
graduation rates, and high student loan default rates have led to declining enrollments, highprofile bankruptcies, school closures, and loss of federal aid for some for-profit institutions (e.g.,
GAO 2010; Lewin 2010; Goodman 2010; U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions 2012, Federal Student Aid 2015). In 2014, the Obama Administration implemented
new regulations designed to hold for-profit colleges accountable for student outcomes. The
“Gainful Employment” (GE) regulations will for the first time link federal student aid eligibility
to program-level measures of student debt and earnings (Federal Register 2010, 2014). The
debate over the merits of GE and the future of the for-profit industry depend crucially on the
quality and cost of a for-profit college education.
In this paper, we use population-level administrative data on the enrollment, earnings, and
debt of for-profit college students to assess the quality of education in the sector. Our data come
from the U.S. Department of Education (DoED) and include nearly all federally-aided students
1

These figures count students in federally-aided institutions. Cellini and Goldin (2014) estimate that about 670,000
additional students are served by non-federally-aided for-profit institution in the U.S. and not included in the
Department of Education’s counts.

1

who exited a for-profit postsecondary institution between 2006 and 2008. We merge these data
with tax data from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for the years 1999-2014 to assess the labor
market outcomes of students.
We focus on estimating the earnings impacts of students in for-profit certificate programs.
We implement a difference-in-difference design using two different matched comparison groups.
Our preferred estimates compare the earnings before and after attendance of students attending
for-profit vs. public institutions, after matching by demographics, prior earnings, field of study,
geography, and age group. We also generate a control group of young individuals who do not
attend college in the time period we study to measure employment and earnings relative to no
college.
The tax data allow for more accurate measures of employment and earnings than the selfreported survey data used in most previous studies of the sector. The DoED data allow us to
examine the outcomes of the full set of for-profit students, including older (non-traditional)
students, who have been missing from previous studies. With over 840,000 for-profit certificate
students, our data allows for sufficient power to explore heterogeneity of returns by gender and
field of study. We further compare the distribution of earnings effects to measures of average
student debt to provide what we believe to be the most comprehensive picture of for-profit
student outcomes in the literature.
We find that for-profit certificate students experience lower earnings and employment postcollege than their public sector counterparts, a result that holds even after accounting for
differences in student demographics and fields of study. Relative to their matched public sector
counterparts, for-profit students are 1.5 percentage points less likely to be employed and,
conditional on employment, have 11 percent lower earnings after attendance than students in

2

public institutions. Combining employment and earnings effects in measures of unconditional
annual earnings, we find that for-profit students earn about $2,100 less per year post-college than
public sector students. Separate analyses of the ten most popular fields of study reveal that forprofit students experience similar or lower returns than public students in all fields except
cosmetology. We also find evidence of lower returns for students pursuing certificates in online
institutions and those that are part of multi-campus chains, suggesting that the types of
institutions with the most enrollment growth in the last twenty years (Deming et al. 2012) have
relatively weak outcomes.
The negative earnings differentials we find are troubling given the much higher debt incurred
by for-profit students relative to students in the public sector. Examining the distribution of
average annual earnings effects and average annual debt payments reveals that the vast majority
of for-profit students experience both higher debt and lower earnings after attendance, relative to
the years before attendance. We also find that despite differences in public support for higher
education across states, in all 50 states and Washington, DC students in public institutions have
higher earnings and lower debt that their counterparts in for-profit institutions.
Our results reveal that most certificate students would be better off in public institutions.
However, a separate question is whether students attending for-profit institutions would be better
off attending no college at all. To address this issue, we generate a plausible comparison group of
young individuals who do not appear to have enrolled in any college over the time period we
study. Relative to these individuals, for-profit certificate students are 2.8 percentage points more
likely to be employed, but conditional on employment, their earnings are 4.5 percent lower than
individuals with no college. Unconditional annual earnings differentials, although small and
positive, cannot be shown to be different from zero for the full sample, but effects are larger and

3

significant for men. Comparing average earnings gains to average debt in a back-of-the-envelope
calculation, suggests that gains are not enough to offset debt and interest payments, leaving the
average for-profit certificate student with a net loss of about $1,200 over her lifetime.
Despite the advantages of using population-level administrative data, there are key
limitations to our study. Notably, even with our matched control groups and individual fixed
effects, our results require some assumptions about the dynamics of college choice for causal
interpretation. Second, the data we analyze are limited to students who leave college from 2006
to 2008 at the start of the Great Recession. Therefore, although our control groups also
experience the effects of a weak labor market, we consider our findings lower bounds and may
not be representative of student experiences in other years. Fourth, our estimates include just 5-6
years of post-college earnings and may not reflect earnings effects over the lifetime. Despite
these limitations, we believe that our analysis represents the most comprehensive examination of
for-profit student outcomes to date.
Section II provides background on the for-profit sector and describes estimates of earnings
effects in the literature. Section III describes the data. Section IV outlines our empirical
methods. Section V reports summary statistics and tests the identifying assumptions of our
model. Section VI presents the results of our analyses. Section VII concludes.

II. Background
A. For-Profit Colleges
The academic literature on for-profit colleges is relatively thin compared to the large body of
research on more traditional public and non-profit institutions. Data on the for-profit sector has

4

been scarce and the dramatic growth of the sector is a relatively recent phenomenon.2
Descriptive studies of the sector have shown that for-profit postsecondary institutions enroll
disproportionate shares of students who are low-income, over age 25, women, minority, GED
recipients, and single-parents (Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012). Given these student
demographics and the high costs of attendance, it is not surprising that for-profit students are
more likely to borrow and borrow more than students in other sectors (Cellini and Darolia 2015).
Further, Looney and Yannelis (2015) find that the increase in student loan defaults in recent
years is associated with rising numbers of borrowers in for-profit colleges.
There is some evidence that for-profit colleges can be more responsive to student and
employer demands. Rosenbaum, Person, and Del-Amien (2006) find that for-profit schools may
have better counseling compared to community colleges. Deming, Goldin, Katz and Yuchtman
(2015) show that the for-profit sector has been quicker to adopt online learning technologies for
undergraduate education compared to less selective public colleges and Gilpin, Stoddard, and
Saunders (2015) document that for-profits respond to local labor market demand. Yet, for-profit
colleges need to be concerned for their bottom line and the interests of shareholders, and this
may create an incentive to increase the net price for students. Tuition at a two-year for-profit
college is nearly five times that of the average public community college: $14,472 per year vs.
$3,038 (NCES 2017, Table 330.10). Cellini and Goldin (2014) show that for-profits that
participate in federal student aid programs charge a tuition premium that is roughly equal to the

2

Until the late 1990s, surveys done by the U.S. Department of Education did not require for-profit institutions to
respond and most student surveys did not collect information on the control of the institution that a student attended.
What we do know from the existing data sources is that vocational proprietary schools have existed in the United
States for at least a century (Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012) and they have experienced several cycles of scandal
and regulation over the years (Darolia 2013, Whitman 2017). In the early 2000s, enrollments for-profit colleges
surged, possibly due to new technology and easy access to federal student aid, with fastest enrollment growth in
large multi-campus chains and online institutions (Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012). Since 2010, enrollment in forprofit colleges has declined, but enrollment remains around 1.6 million students (NCES 2017).
5

average per-student value of federal student aid. Title IV federal student aid3 accounts for a large
share of revenue at for-profit institutions (on average 70 percent) with some schools approaching
the maximum allowable level of 90 percent.4
The high costs of for-profit institutions, coupled with questions over their use and abuse of
federal aid, have raised concerns about the sector and contributed to efforts to regulate them. In
recent years, two large for-profits chains, ITT Tech and Corinthian Colleges, faced federal
investigations and ultimately closed. Under the Obama Administration’s Gainful Employment
(GE) regulations, nearly every for-profit college program will be held accountable for student
outcomes, 5 along with most community college certificate programs6 —about 8,000 programs in
total. If the regulations are enforced under the new administration, programs will lose eligibility
for federal grants and student loans if graduates’ loan payment-to-earnings ratios are above 12
percent of annual income or 30 percent of discretionary income for two out of three years (Fain
2014).7 The Department of Education’s first GE data release indicated that more than 800
programs would not meet the new standards--98 percent of them in for-profit institutions (U.S.
Department of Education 2017).
College closings and restrictions on federal aid bring with them concerns over the fate of
current and future for-profit students. Whether students will switch to other institutions or forego
3

Title IV refers to Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965. Title IV includes the Pell Grant, Academic
Competitiveness Grant, SMART Grant, Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant, Direct Loans, Federal
Family Education Loans, Perkins Loans, and Federal Work-Study. Revenues generated through the GI Bill and
other programs for military students are not counted under 90-10.
4
Authors’ tabulation of 2013-14 data from U.S. Department of Education (2016).
5
The only two types of programs in for-profits that are not counted as gainful employment are: 1) preparatory
coursework needed prior to enrolling in a program, and 2) bachelor’s degrees in liberal arts that have been offered
since 2007 and regionally accredited since 2009 (U.S. Department of Education, Gainful Employment Operations
Manual 2014).
6
The only non-degree programs in public and non-profit institutions that are not counted as gainful employment are:
1) preparatory coursework needed prior to enrolling in a program, 2) programs of two or more years that are
designed to be fully transferrable to a bachelor’s degree, and 3) teacher’s certification coursework that does not lead
to a certificate from the institution (U.S. Department of Education, Gainful Employment Operations Manual 2014).
7
To the extent schools lose Title IV eligibility overall, students will not be able to claim education tax credits for
their otherwise eligible expenses.
6

their college education has important welfare implications. New research sheds light on this
issue, finding that when enrollment declined in for-profit institutions facing DoED sanctions in
the 1990s, enrollment in local public institutions increased by about the same amount (Cellini,
Darolia, and Turner 2016). The results suggest that public and for-profit two-year institutions are
substitutes and suggest that public sector students may be appropriate comparisons for for-profit
students.
B. Assessing the Returns to a For-Profit Education
A vast literature estimating the returns to college education has generally focused on four-year
public and non-profit institutions. These studies typically find that the earnings effects generated
by four-year college attendance averages about 10 to 15 percent per year (e.g., Card 2001;
Goldin and Katz 2008; Oreopolous and Petronijevic 2013).8 Returns appear to be similar for
community college associate’s degree programs—generally between 7 and 15 percent per year
(e.g., Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan 2005; Marcotte, Bailey, Borkoski, and Kienzl 2005;
Jepsen, Troske, and Coomes 2014). Evidence on certificate programs is more limited. Focusing
on Career Technical Education (CTE) certificates and associate’s degrees in California’s
community college system Stevens, Kurlaneder, and Grosz (2015) estimate returns ranging from
zero to roughly 16 percent per year depending on the field of study.9
In contrast to the large literature on returns to public and non-profit colleges, there are
relatively few papers that estimate the returns to for-profit college attendance. Most rely on small

8

In the late 1990s, reviews of the high school and four-year college returns literature by Card (1999) and
Ashenfelter, Harmon, and Oosterbeek (1999) reported that one additional year of education (at any level) resulted in
earnings gains in the range of 6 to 9 percent. Focusing on the literature on community colleges, Kane and Rouse
(1995a, 1999) found that a year of community college attendance generated returns between 4 and 8 percent, just
marginally below the average return to a four-year college attendance.
9
For example, they find that graduates of health certificate programs generate returns as high as 31 percent total (or
16 percent annually) for a certificate requiring 30-60 credits (or 1-2 years of coursework). Non-health fields tend to
have lower, but still positive, annual returns roughly in the range of 5-15 percent, with one exception: information
technology certificates appear to have returns very close to zero (Stevens, Kurlaender, and Grosz 2015, Table 2).
7

samples of young workers and survey data.10 Cellini and Chaudhary (2012) find that for-profit
associate’s degree students experience earnings gains of about 4 percent per year of education or
about 10 percent relative to high school graduates—lower than similar estimates for community
colleges. Deming, Goldin, and Katz (2012) look at beginning postsecondary students and find
that for-profit students (in all types of degree programs) earn about 8 percent less than
observationally similar students in other sectors, but differences are smaller and not significant
when conditioning on employment. Lang and Weinstein (2013) also look at traditional-aged
students and report non-trivially negative estimates of the returns to certificate programs in forprofit colleges.11 Associate’s degree students in for-profit colleges appear to experience larger
earnings gains than their public sector counterparts, a finding which the authors attribute to
greater transfer and eventual bachelor’s degree attainment by community college students.
Mueser and Jepsen (2015) lack a comparison group and report a decline in the probability of
employment, but very high earnings gains relative to students’ own prior earnings.12
Some recent work exploits experimental settings to estimate the effects of for-profit
attendance. Darolia, Koedel Martorell, Wilson, and Perez-Arce (2015) and Deming, Yuchtman,
Abulafi, Goldin, and Katz (2016) submit fictitious resumes to real job openings and track call
backs. These results suggest that employers do not have a perception that for-profit institutions
are of higher quality, relative to comparable public institutions, or in some cases, to no college
10

Grubb (1993) and Chung (2008) draw on very small samples of for-profit students of an earlier generation in the
National Longitudinal Surveys of 1972 and the National Educational Longitudinal Survey of 1988, respectively.
Both find limited evidence of positive effects of for-profit training, particularly for women and certificate programs,
but generally show no significant differences in returns to the for-profit students relative to students in other sectors.
Note also that another related paper by Grubb (1993b), using the same data and methods to estimate returns to
community colleges was found to be severely flawed by Kane and Rouse (1995b).
11
Lang and Weinstein (2013) also report large differences in earnings gains by field of study, with business and
health (except nursing) having lower than average returns and vocational fields (e.g., computers and construction)
with higher returns, but no results can be distinguished from zero at conventional levels.
12
Hoxby (2015) does not focus specifically on for-profit students, but reports that among traditional-aged students
who take college entrance exams, value-added earnings measures are lower for the for-profit sector relative to the
public and non-profit sectors.
8

attendance at all. While suggestive that the returns to for-profit education will not be higher than
that of comparable public education, these studies are unable to quantify earnings effects.
This study builds on the literature that examines the for-profit sector in several ways. First,
we bring a much larger data set to bear on the question compared to most of the earlier work in
the area. Our data include about 1.4 million individuals in total—the universe of federally-aided
for-profit students who drop-out or complete their program between 2006 and 2008. Second, we
use administrative data on earnings from the IRS, which should be less susceptible to
measurement error relative to the survey data used in most prior studies of for-profit education.
Our data are also more complete than other administrative sources, such as unemployment
insurance (UI) records that are typically collected for a single state and may not include
information on the self-employed and federal employees, among others (U.S. Department of
Labor 2016). Third, the large number of students in our data allows us to estimate separate and
more precise effects by gender, state, and field of study than any previous work. Fourth, rather
than focusing solely on young workers, traditional-aged students, or first-time college-goers, our
data include individuals of all ages who attend for-profit institutions. Finally, we can observe
student borrowing and can therefore compare earnings gains relative to student debt burdens.

III. Data
Our data include all students receiving federal student aid and participating in programs that are
deemed “Gainful Employment” (GE) programs. All programs in for-profit institutions are
considered GE programs, with only one exception: bachelor’s degree programs in liberal arts that

9

have been in existence since 2007 and regionally accredited since 2009.13 Degree programs in
public institutions are exempt from GE making it difficult to construct a comparison group of
public sector students for our degree-seeking sample of for-profit students.14 However, nondegree programs (i.e., certificate programs) in public institutions are subject to GE, so we can
use community college students as controls for our for-profit certificate students to implement a
difference-in-difference design for this group of students.
We observe almost all students who completed or dropped out of GE programs in fiscal years
2006 (Oct. 1, 2006-Sept. 30, 2007) and 2007 (Oct. 1, 2007-Sept. 30, 2008). Importantly, the data
exclude students who re-enroll in GE programs in the following three fiscal years, since these
students are not counted in official GE calculations.15
Also missing from our data are students who do not participate in federal student aid
programs under Title IV of the Higher Education Act.16 This restriction has little effect on forprofit certificate students, since 85 percent receive federal aid, but it is more problematic for
public sector students, since only about 20 percent of community college certificate students

13

The DoED data also include information on post-baccalaureate certificates, first professional degrees, and doctoral
programs, but these all comprise very small shares of for-profit enrollment (0.2%, 0.1%, and 1.1%, respectively), so
we exclude them from the analysis.
14
Although we lack a reasonable control group for for-profit students seeking bachelors, associate’s degrees, and
master’s degrees, we present descriptive evidence on returns to these degrees in Appendix Table A1 using a singledifference design. These estimates cannot control for the effects of the Great Recession, we therefore consider them
to be merely suggestive. Further, master’s degree students were likely enrolled in bachelor’s degree programs in the
years prior to their master’s program enrollment, potentially biasing results upward. Details of the degree-seeking
student sample, methods, and results are available on request.
15
We do not have access to data on students who re-enroll within three years. A student is counted as “withdrawn”
if he or she stopped attending the program for more than a regularly scheduled vacation period without completing
the program or if he/she is on a leave of absence (Federal Student Aid 2011, p. 126). Further, the DoED data do not
allow us to observe enrollment in other non-GE institutions. In analyses not reported (available on request) we
identify and drop years of other enrollment based on data from the 1098-T form. Results are similar for certificate
students.
16
Both of these limitations result from how DoED implements the GE rules, which apply only to persons who do
not re-enroll and who receive Title IV aid.
10

receive federal aid.17 However, given the characteristics of aided- and non-aided students across
sectors, we find that the set of Title IV participating public sector students are a fairly close
comparison to federally-aided for-profit students.18
Despite these potential drawbacks, the data provide a wealth of other information about
students’ educational experiences. We have access to each student’s exact program start and end
dates, the 6-digit Classification of Instructional Program (CIP) code for the program they
enrolled in (e.g., cosmetology), the type of credential they were working toward (e.g., associate’s
degree or certificate), date of birth, and gender. We also have information on listed tuition and
student loan debt taken on while enrolled in a GE program. Debt is measured at the date of exit
regardless of repayment status.
We merge the DoED data with tax data from the IRS to obtain our measures of employment
and earnings. We observe wages from W2 forms, self-employment income from Schedule SE,
and use the F1040 form for information on marital status and number of dependents. We also use
information from the 1098-T—a form sent to any student who pays tuition at an institution of
higher education—in an attempt to identify a comparison group of individuals who do not attend
any postsecondary education.19 Our tax data are available for the years 1999-2014, so we observe
about five or six years of earnings post-graduation (or dropout) and about six years preenrollment for most students.

17

Authors tabulations of the 2008 National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey NPSAS using Powerstats.
In Appendix Table A2, we report statistics from the 2008 National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey (NPSAS) to
assess the comparability of Title IV participants and non-participants across sectors. We find much narrower
differences in demographics (e.g., age, marital status, gender, parental education, race), work behavior, and income
between sectors when considering only Title IV students.
19
Unlike the detailed DoED data, the 1098-T does not indicate the program of study, but can be used to assess
college enrollment in the available years.
18

11

To create the analysis samples, we drop any individuals who die during the sample period
and those who enroll before age 18 or after age 50. We also drop person-year observations of
earnings below age 18 and above age 55 to avoid informal earnings of teenagers and potential
retirees. Finally, we drop all person-year observations during enrollment in order to generate a
clean comparisons of outcomes across pre- vs. post-enrollment years.20
Our dependent variables include the likelihood of any employment (defined as wages plus
positive self-employment income), the level of annual earnings in dollars (defined as W2 wage
income plus positive self-employment income), and the natural log of annual earnings
(conditional on positive earnings). Our dollar measure of earnings includes observations with
zero earnings and therefore captures both employment and earnings effects, while the log
specification captures only earnings for those who work.

IV. Estimation
To assess the causal impact of attending a for-profit institution on subsequent outcomes, we
would ideally like students to be randomly assigned to programs and schools across sectors.
Lacking random assignment, we implement an individual fixed effects approach to control for
time-invariant individual characteristics in conjunction with a matching strategy to generate a
comparison group of similar students. We compare the pre-post enrollment earnings differential
of for-profit students with the pre-post earnings differential of three different comparison groups.

20

Appendix Table A3 documents the impact of the sample restrictions on the number of certificate students in each
sector.
12

We begin with the comparison group of all Title IV-eligible public sector certificate
students. We then implement our difference-in-difference strategy on a more restricted matched
sample of public and for-profit students in our preferred estimates. Finally, we generate a control
group of young workers who never attended any college. We describe the construction of these
samples in detail below. For each, we estimate the following general difference-in-difference
model:
∗ For-Profit

(1)

We estimate labor market outcomes (working, earnings levels, and log earnings),

, for student

identifies the post-education time period for each student. It

i in year t. The variable

switches from zero to one in the year after an individual completes or withdraws from a gainful
employment program. It remains one in all subsequent years. For-profit is an indicator for
whether a student enrolled in a for-profit college and zero if the student enrolled in a public
college.21 The coefficient

measures the differential effect of for-profit attendance on earnings,

relative to community college students, after attendance relative to before. The total (or absolute)
effect of for-profit attendance relative to not attending, is given by

, although we caution

that this single-difference effect should not be interpreted causally.
We add age fixed effects,
We include year fixed effects,

, to capture differences in work experience across the lifecycle.22
, to capture changes in macroeconomic conditions from year-to-

year. Importantly, we also include individual fixed effects,

, that control for time-invariant

unobservable characteristics that are correlated both with earnings and the decision to attend a

21

We drop about 2,600 students who exit from both a for-profit and community college certificate program in our
sample years. See Appendix Table A3 for a full list of sample restrictions.
22
Because the age distribution is thin over age 45, we aggregate the fixed effects for ages 46-50 and 51-55.
13

for-profit institution. To the extent that these factors do not change over time, our fixed effects
will provide adequate controls for these potentially confounding omitted variables.
We run our difference-in-difference model on three samples. First we include the full sample
of public and for-profit certificate students. This approach compares the within-person earnings
gains of students in each sector. However, selection into college type, field of study, and local
labor market conditions may still confound causal estimation. In our preferred specification, we
go a step further to generate propensity scores based on up to seven years of prior earnings and
demographic characteristics (e.g., married, number of children, male, married, years prior to
enrollment). We identify a matched control for each for-profit student within gender-age-CIP-zip
cells. That is, each for-profit student is matched with one public sector student with similar prior
earnings and demographics in the same cell.23 We restrict our analysis to gender-age-CIP-zip
cells with at least one student in each sector. Zipcode is defined at the 3-digit level (i.e., roughly
equivalent to a county), CIP is at the 4-digit level, 24 and age is in ten-year bins based on the age
at the time of first enrollment. For example, our matched public sample compares women who
enrolled in their 30s in Washington, DC health administration programs across the two sectors
and compares those that are most closely matched on prior earnings and demographics.25
We extend our analysis to explore the reduced form effect of attendance over time by adding
interactions for each year post-exit. The large number of students in our data set allows us to
further assess heterogeneity in returns by splitting the sample by gender, prior employment,
institutional characteristics, and for the top ten for-profit fields of study.

23

We use nearest-neighbor matching with replacement. We also remove observations above the 99-percentile score
among for-profits and below the 1-percentile score among public students.
24
We collapse the 6-digit CIP codes to the 4-digit level for ease of interpretation and to maintain sample size.
25
Appendix Table A4 explores the robustness of different matching methods. Omitting the CIP code in the match in
Panel B results in larger negative for-profit earnings differentials, while omitting zip codes in Panel D yields lower
differentials.
14

Our matched sample will come close to generating causal estimates the differential earnings
effects relative to public sector attendance. However, they are less informative in assessing
earnings effects relative to no college attendance. To do this, we rely on a third—but even more
restricted—sample. In this case, we drop all public sector students and generate a comparison
group of individuals who never attend college in the period we observe. To identify these
students, we first use the tax data to identify students who were 18 years old between 1999 and
2014, since we cannot observe complete enrollment histories for older individuals. We then drop
students who were issued a 1098-T form indicating any college tuition paid, as our primary
proxy for college attendance. Our analysis is complicated by the fact that students who pay no
tuition but nonetheless attend college will be included in our control group. To mitigate this
possibility, we further drop any students that we observe receiving Title IV aid. However, we
note that students attending college on a “full-ride” scholarship (e.g., athletic, institutional, or
private scholarships) and pay no tuition remain in our control group and may bias our estimates.
We further eliminate any individuals who are incarcerated or receiving disability income. Since
we cannot observe high school completion, we caution that our final “no college” control group
includes high school dropouts as well as students who finished high school.
We generate a falsified date of “enrollment” and “exit” for our no-college comparison group
that matches the distribution of for-profit students. We further restrict our analysis to students
who enter college (or falsely “enter”) at age 22 or later to retain ample years of pre-period
earnings for this young group and to more closely match the age distribution of our full sample
of for-profit students. We employ a matching strategy similar to that used for the public students
based on prior earnings and demographics, matched within gender-age-zip cells. We omit 4-digit

15

CIP fields, since CIP is not relevant for the no-college group and we match on exact age since
these students are all very young.

V. Summary Statistics and Tests of Identifying Assumptions
Table 1 shows the sample means of our three samples. Prior to weighting, we find
important differences in student characteristics in the full sample in columns (1) and (2). Public
sector students are slightly older and more likely to be married than for-profit students, but other
demographics are quite similar. The two groups differ more when measuring earnings and debt.
Average earnings in the pre-enrollment years are about $12,500 for for-profit students and about
$16,300 for community college students (all dollar amounts in $2014). Where public and forprofit students differ most strikingly is in student loan take-up. Eighty-three percent of for-profit
students take out loans compared to less than a quarter of Title IV-eligible community college
certificate students. Average debt amounts are more than four times higher in the for-profit
sector ($5,300 vs. $1,300). Differences in the costs of attendance likely drive much of the
difference in debt. Average tuition for certificate programs in for-profit institutions is just over
$8,100 compared to $720 at public institutions. Finally, as found in previous studies (e.g.,
Deming, Goldin, Katz 2012), completion rates are higher in the for-profit sector than in the
public sector, at 59 percent compared to 38 percent. Enrollment duration is also slightly shorter
in the for-profit sector (1.08 years vs. 1.31 years).26
One potential driver of the differences in demographics, enrollment duration, and
completion between the sectors is the mix of programs offered in each. In Table 2, we document
26

Certificate programs can vary in length from a few months to two years. We do not have information on the
number of credit hours needed for the certificates in our data, but we assume that much of the variation in certificate
length is determined by the field of study, so estimates by field should reduce differences certificate duration across
sectors.
16

the ten fields of study (based on the 4-digit CIP codes) with the highest enrollment in the forprofit and public sectors. In the for-profit sector, health and medical assisting services,
cosmetology, and health administration programs have the largest enrollment shares and
together, the top ten for-profit fields account for more than 83 percent of for-profit certificate
enrollment. Six of the top ten for-profit fields also rank in the top ten in the public sector. There
are also some notable differences in the composition of the top ten fields. Therapeutic services
(i.e., massage); dental support services; culinary arts; and heating, ventilation, air conditioning
(HVAC) services are all in the top ten of for-profit college programs, but do not make the list in
the public sector, although there are still sizable numbers of public sector students in each these
fields.27
Given these differences in programs and students across sectors, as noted above, we
generate a matched sample of public sector students to get a closer comparison. We adopt this
approach to guard against the possibility that our estimated returns are driven by differences in
returns that arise from these demographic and programmatic patterns and not from differences in
the type of institution attended. Further, we restrict matches to cells defined by age at entry,
gender, 3-digit zip code, and 4-digit CIP code to ensure that the matches are made in similar
fields of study in the same geographic areas. Summary statistics for the matched sample are
included in columns (3) and (4) of Table 1. Not surprisingly, the matched sample of public sector
students looks nearly identical to the for-profit sample on many dimensions including age (24),
and proportion male (.24), married (.18), number of children (1.75), as well as pre-enrollment
earnings (about $10,500) and employment (.77).

27

Complete descriptions for each CIP code can be found at: https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/cipcode/. See Table 2 for the
number of students in each field. Of the four for-profit fields that do not make the public top ten list, dental support
has the most public sectors students in our sample (5,199) and therapeutic the least (1,745).
17

Columns (5) and (6) show the means of our younger sample of matched for-profit and
“no college” students. The means for age and male are identical, but there are notable differences
in the likelihood of marriage and children, with the most sizable difference being in the number
of children (1.75 for the for-profit students vs. 3 for the no college comparison group). Earnings
and employment are also slightly different with for-profit students having higher earnings
($8,200 vs. $7,000) and a greater likelihood of employment (.75 vs. .64). Given these
differences, we focus more closely on the matched public comparison throughout.
The key identifying assumption of the difference-in-difference approach is that for-profit
students and the relevant comparison group experience similar pre-enrollment earnings trends.
We examine these trends visually in Figure 1 for our main samples. Figures 1A and 1B show
the mean earnings and probability of employment, respectively, for the full sample. Public
students have higher levels of pre-enrollment earnings, but earnings trends appear fairly similar
in Figure 1A. Employment trends in Figure 1B are more concerning, with a notable upward trend
for for-profit students that does not mirror the trend in the public sector. Importantly, this
difference disappears when considering the matched sample in Figures 1C and 1D: pre-period
trends for both employment and earnings for the matched sample in Figures 1C and 1D are
nearly identical.28

VI. Results
A. Returns Relative to Public College

28

We formally test for differential pre-trends for the matched public sample in Appendix Table A5. We find a
significant but very small difference in pre-trends in annual earnings of $95 for for-profit students (but we find no
difference in trends for employment or log earnings). Nonetheless, the direction of the trend suggests a bias in favor
of for-profit students, which is the opposite of our findings below. We show pre-trends for the matched no-college
sample in Appendix Table A6. Here, trends are significantly different for for-profit students for both employment
and log earnings, but both are in the opposite direction of our findings.
18

We present the results of our difference-in-differences model for the full sample and matched
sample of public certificate students in Table 3. The top row reports the community college
effect (

), while the second row reports the differential effect of for-profit attendance relative to

the public sector

.

For the full sample in Panel A, we first note that public community college certificate
students see no effect on employment, but sizable positive annual earnings effects of about
$3,900. Among individuals who are working, the results for public sector log earnings suggest a
meaningful increase of about 18 percent.29 For public students in our matched sample in Panel
B, annual earnings gains are reduced to $1,069. In general, our results for public sector students
fall in the mid-range of estimates of the returns to certificates in California community colleges
reported by Stevens, Kurlaender, and Grosz (2015, Table 5).
In the second row, we assess our outcome of interest, the differential returns experienced
by for-profit certificate students. For the full sample, we find no difference in the probability of
employment for for-profit students in Panel A, column (1) relative to public sector students. In
contrast, both of our earnings outcomes reveal large negative differentials relative to public
sector students ($5,555 less and 21 percent lower in columns (2) and (3), respectively).
We report our preferred estimates that match students on prior earnings and
demographics within gender-age-CIP-zip cells in Panel B. Here, for-profit students appear to fare
worse than their public sector counterparts on all three outcomes. For-profit students are about
1.5 percentage points less likely to be employed than students in the public sector (col. 1) and
their annual earnings are $2,144 lower (col. 2). Conditional on working, for-profit students see
29

Note that our results for Ln(Annual Earnings) are technically in log points, however, they closely approximate
percentages for small values (as we find here), so we refer to them as percentages for simplicity.
19

earnings that are about 11 percent lower than their public counterparts (col. 3). Adding the
coefficients on annual earnings for a descriptive estimate of total effects, reveals in a net decline
in earnings after attendance of about $1,075 for for-profit students, relative to their own prior
earnings. We caution that this total effect includes the impact of the Great Recession, which is
netted out in our estimates of differential effects.
Exploring earnings effects over time in the post-education period, Figures 2A-2C show
the coefficients of interactions of Post*For-Profit with indicators for the number of years postexit for the matched sample. Across all outcomes, the differential effects appear to decline over
time. If we believe that the first year post-exit represents the most direct or immediate impact of
the institution, we see slightly better outcomes in that year than in others. However, even the
most promising outcome, employment (Figure 2A) reveals differential employment effects very
close to zero and a large confidence interval.
B. Heterogeneity in Returns
To unpack the reduced form effects and gain additional insight into our baseline results,
we first examine heterogeneity in returns by gender for the matched public sample. In Table 4,
we find that women enrolled in for-profits see more negative employment and earnings
outcomes than men. For example, for-profit women’s earnings are about $2,200 lower than their
public sector counterparts’ in the same field of study, age group, and zip code, while men see
only a $1,800 for-profit penalty (col. 2).30,31,32

30

It is possible that the low earnings effects that we find for for-profit students could be driven by very low
completion rates. However, because completion rates are higher in for-profits than in public institutions (see Table
1), our results thus far, not conditioning on program completion, should be biased in favor of for-profit students.
Although completion is an endogenous outcome, we explore completion as a mediator in Appendix Table A7,
adding an interaction term for graduates of certificate programs in a triple difference design. Notably, for-profit
20

We next examine heterogeneous earnings effects by institutional characteristics in Table
5. In Panel A, we split for-profit institutions into those that indicate in the 2012 IPEDS that 50
percent or more of their students attend courses exclusively online and those that do not. We
match each student with their nearest neighbor in the full set of community colleges. Although
we have relatively few students in online institutions, we find that the public-private differential
increases for online students. Students in these “mostly online” institutions have markedly worse
outcomes than students attending brick and mortar colleges.
In Panel B, we do the same exercise, but split for-profit institutions according to whether
they report being part of multi-campus governing structures in the IPEDS, as a proxy for chain
institutions. Here we observe worse performance among the chain for-profits: annual earnings
declines are nearly double in magnitude for chains (about -$2,400 vs. -$1,200). Employment
outcomes are negative for chains (-2.5 percentage points), but show a positive differential for
independent institutions (2.0 percentage points).
Our main matched estimates control for differences in the distribution of field of study
across sectors to generate average effects, but we further explore heterogeneity across the top ten
for-profit fields of study in Figure 3. In seven of the ten fields (including all health-related
fields), for-profit students fare significantly worse than their public sector counterparts. Two
fields (culinary arts and vehicle maintenance) have similar returns across sectors. Only
cosmetology programs appear to generate higher returns in the for-profit sector. An explanation
dropouts see much worse outcomes than public sector dropouts, with earnings that are $3,400 less. Graduates of
for-profit programs have earnings that are about $2,500 lower than public graduates.
31
Students in both sectors may receive employer support for their training and it could be that raises or promotions
are tied to educational attainment. In results not reported (available on request), we explore differences in returns for
students who were working in the year prior to attendance and those who were not to explore differences by
(possible) employer support. Across both groups and all outcomes, for-profit students fare worse than public sector
students with only small and inconsistent differences by prior employment.
32
Appendix Table A8 reports considers differences in self-employment across sectors. We find no significant
differences in the likelihood of being self-employed or in self-employment earnings across sectors.
21

may be that several for-profit schools are directly linked to high-end salons and enjoy namebrand recognition. On the other hand, summing coefficients in these models yields negative total
returns for for-profit cosmetology programs, perhaps due to tip income that goes unreported in
the tax data.
Despite relatively weak returns in the for-profit sector on average, it is possible that some
for-profit certificate institutions help students realize meaningful earnings effects or,
alternatively, that a few low-performing institutions are pulling down average estimates. We
explore this possibility using estimated effects from a single difference regression at the schoollevel. Figure 4 presents the distribution of the institution-level estimated returns for the for-profit
and matched public certificate students for schools that enroll at least 20 students. The
distribution of institution-level for-profit returns shows a smaller variance and a much thinner
and shorter right-hand tail than the public sector, with a high peak at roughly zero return. The
figure also suggests that there are some for-profit institutions where students receive positive
earnings effects after attendance, but public institutions clearly have much more mass in the
right-hand tail while for-profits have more mass below zero. Nonetheless, the left-hand tail of the
for-profit sector is fairly thin, suggesting that “bad apple” schools are not driving the earnings
differentials we observe.
In Figure 5 we compare the school-level earnings gains from Figure 4 to estimates of
annual debt payment by sector. Annual debt estimates are based on students’ debt load at exit
annualized over a standard ten year repayment assuming an interest rate of 5.24 percent.33 We
construct this figure by plotting mean returns and mean annualized debt payments, estimated at
33

The interest rate represents the six-year average interest rate of Federal Direct Unsubsidized loans between 2004
and 2009 and is the same one used to calculate median annual loan payment for bachelor’s degree students under the
Gainful Employment regulation (Federal Register 2014, p. 65038).
22

the school level, in 50 equally sized groups for each sector. Relative to public institutions, debt is
higher at for-profit institutions at every point in the distribution and the average return is
typically lower.
The lower returns and higher debt of for-profit students relative to public sector students
is more extreme when we perform the analysis at the state level, as show in Figure 6. Given the
heterogeneity in tuition and public support for higher education across states, we might expect
some differences in returns or debt, particularly if for-profit tuition is relatively stable across
states. Rather, we find that every single state has lower returns and higher debt in for-profits
relative to the public sector. Notably, we find that Arizona has the largest public‐private
earnings differential and Virginia the smallest, while California has the largest debt
differential and North Dakota the smallest.34
C. Returns Relative to No College
Thus far we have considered primarily the relative impacts of for-profit education against a
counterfactual of public sector attendance. To address the returns relative to not attending any
college, we compare for-profit students to our young “no college” comparison group described
above. Results are reported in Table 6.
Relative to the group of high school students and dropouts, for-profit certificate students
are 2.8 percentage points more likely to be employed. Annual earnings differentials, though
small and positive ($356), cannot be shown to be significantly different for for-profit students

34

In results not shown (available on request), we test for differential effects in 3-digit zip codes that suffered higher
unemployment during the Great Recession using on average unemployment rates from 2007-2011 from the
American Community Survey (ACS). We find that for-profit students saw similar differentials in the 2nd-5th quintiles
of recession severity (similar in magnitude to our baseline results, about -$2,000 in annual earnings) and slightly less
negative differentials in the first quintile ($-979).
23

relative to the no college group. Conditional on working, for-profit students fare worse than
students who remained in the labor force with no college: for-profit students experience a
negative differential effect of about 4.5 log points. Taken together, our results suggest that
relative to no college, for-profit certificate programs modestly increase the likelihood of
employment, but appear to do little to raise earnings.
Table 7 explores heterogeneity in returns relative to the no college group by sex. In
columns (1), (3), and (5), women generally appear to fare slightly worse on all outcomes than the
sample average in Table 6, while males do better than the average in columns (2), (4), and (6).
Notably, men see a 5 percentage point increase in the likelihood of employment, which appears
to drive a positive annual earnings differential of $1,356, relative to the matched no college
group. Log earnings for men remain lower than the high school group, suggesting that even for
males, for-profit attendance impacts earnings primarily through the employment margin. The
difference in results by gender may be driven by differences across fields of study chosen by
men and women, as we are unable to match on fields for the no college group.
Considering the results of the no-college comparison in relation to debt can shed light on
whether for-profit attendance passes a back-of-the-envelope benefit-cost test from the average
student’s perspective. Although we cannot rule out zero earnings gains in our main specification
in Table 6, if we assume average earnings gain (including employment effects) of $356 annually,
we can calculate lifetime earnings gains and compare this estimate to student debt to assess the
benefits versus costs of for-profit attendance. Assuming 35 years of earnings for the average
student35 and a five percent discount rate, the average student’s lifetime earnings gain from

35

Average age in the year prior to enrollment is 24 (see Table 1), so we assume students start working upon exit at
about age 25 and work until age 60 for a total of 35 years.
24

attendance would be $5,829. Comparing this to the average student loan balance $5,489 (from
Table 1) paid off at an interest rate of 5.24% over ten years,36 yields a total of about $7,000 in
debt and interest paid.37 Based on these assumptions, for-profit attendance does not pass a
benefit-cost test and leaves the average student with a loss of about $1,200 over her lifetime.
Looking at these figures another way, the break-even debt load at the time of exit would be about
$4,600 under the same assumptions. Of course, these estimates are extremely sensitive to our
assumptions, and we ignore other important costs and benefits of education (e.g., foregone
earnings while enrolled). We therefore caution that despite this average, we cannot rule out
sizable negative or positive net private benefits of attendance.
Nonetheless, for men, a for-profit certificate is much more likely to be worthwhile as the
$1,300 annual earnings gain would be more than enough to offset their total debt and interest,
under the assumptions used above.38 In contrast, for the 70 percent of for-profit students that are
women, it is unclear that taking on any amount of debt for a for-profit certificate is likely to pay
off due to the small negative point estimates in Table 7. However, we again suggest that these
results be interpreted with caution given the limitations of this young sample, the quality of the
match, our insignificant results, and the assumptions required for our benefit-cost calculations.
VII. Conclusion
Drawing on population-level administrative data on for-profit college students, we assess the
employment and earnings outcomes of these students relative to both public community college
students and a comparison group of young individuals who do not attend college. We attempt to
36

As noted previously, 5.24 is the six-year average interest rate of Federal Direct Unsubsidized loans between 2004
and 2009.
37
Author’s calculation using the Federal Student Aid repayment calculator:
https://studentloans.gov/myDirectLoan/mobile/repayment/repaymentEstimator.action.
38
Debt at exit for male for-profit students in the matched no college sample is $6,246 (and $5,162 for women).
25

control for the impact of the Great Recession and other confounding factors with a matched
control group difference-in-differences research design.
Across the board, our results show that despite the much higher costs of attending a for-profit
institution, the average for-profit certificate student experiences lower earnings effects relative to
public sector students. For-profit colleges outperform public institutions in only one of the top
ten for-profit fields—cosmetology. Further, students in online and chain for-profit institutions
and appear to fare worse than students in more traditional campus-based and independent
institutions. Our institution-level regressions reveal that the weak performance of the for-profit
sector is not limited to a few poor-performing institutions, rather the majority of schools appear
to have negligible average earnings effects.
Our findings suggest that the average for-profit student would be better served in a public
institution, but our results relative to no college attendance are more mixed. Comparisons of forprofit students to a matched comparison group of young individuals who report no college
attendance suggest no gain in earnings, but a slight increase in the likelihood of employment, on
average. Men see positive earnings gains relative to non-attendance, while the 70 percent of forprofit students who are women see virtually no gain relative to their no-college counterparts.
Back-of-the-envelope benefit-cost calculations suggest that for the average student, the earnings
gains to for-profit certificate programs are not high enough to offset the cost of student debt. We
suggest that future studies on for-profit returns focus on addressing the endogeneity of program
completion, generating causal impacts of attendance for degree-seeking students, and exploring
differences in quality within the for-profit sector.

26

References
Ashenfelter, Orley. 1978. “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings.” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 60(1): 47-57.
Ashenfelter, Orley, Colm Harmon, and Hessel Oosterbeek. 1999. “A Review of Estimates of the
Schooling/Earnings Relationship, with Tests for Publication Bias” Labour Economics, 6(4): 453470.
Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” Chapter 30 of the Handbook
of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. North-Holland:
Amsterdam.
Card, David. 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
Econometric Problems.” Econometrica, 69(5): 1127-1160.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2009. “Crowded Colleges and College Crowd-Out: The Impact of
Public Subsidies on the Two-Year College Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 1(2): 1-30.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Latika Chaudhary. 2014. “The Labor Market Returns to a ForProfit College Education.” Economics of Education Review, 43: 125-140.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Rajeev Darolia. 2015. “College Costs and Financial Constraints:
Student Borrowing at For-Profit Institutions,” Chapter 6 of Student Loans and the Dynamics of
Debt, Eds. B.J. Hersbein & K. Hollenbeck. UpJohn Institute Press: Kalamazoo, MI.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Claudia Goldin. 2014. “Does Federal Student Aid Raise Tuition?
New Evidence on For-Profit Colleges.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4):133.
Chung, Anna S. 2008. “Effects of For-Profit Training on Earnings.” Unpublished manuscript,
University of Michigan.
Darolia, Rajeev. 2013. “Integrity versus Access? The Effect of Federal Financial Aid
Availability on Postsecondary Enrollment.” Journal of Public Economics, 106, October: 101114.
Darolia, Rajeev, Corey Koedel, Paco Martorell, Katie Wilson, & Francisco Perez-Arce. 2015.
“Do Employers Prefer Workers who Attended For-Profit Colleges? Evidence from a Field
Experiment.” Journal of Policy Analysis & Management, 34(4): 881-903.
Deming, David. J., Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2012. “The For-Profit Postsecondary
School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(1):
139–164.

27

Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, Lawrence F. Katz, and Noam Yuchtman. 2015. “Can Online
Learning Bend the Higher Education Cost Curve?” American Economic Review, 105(5): 496501.
Deming, David J., Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin, Lawrence F. Katz. 2016.
“The Value of Postsecondary Credentials in the Labor Market: An Experimental Study.”
American Economic Review, 106(3): 778-806.
Federal Register. July 26, 2010. “Program Integrity: Gainful Employment.” Retrieved September
6, 2010 from <http://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2010/07/26/2010-17845/programintegrity-gainful-employment#p-67>.
Federal Register. October 31, 2014. “Program Integrity: Gainful Employment Final Rule,”
79(211). Retrieved May 10, 2016 from
<https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2014/10/31/2014-25594/program-integrity-gainfulemployment>.
Federal Student Aid. 2015. “Frequently Asked Questions About Corinthian Colleges.” U.S.
Department of Education website. Accessed February 23, 2015.
<https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/about/announcements/corinthian/faq>
Federal Student Aid. 2011. “Gainful Employment Operations Manual.” Accessed March 20,
2017.
http://ifap.ed.gov/GainfulEmploymentOperationsManual/attachments/GainfulEmploymentOpera
tionsManualMasterFile.pdf
Gilpin, Gregory A., Joseph Saunders, Christina Stoddard. 2015. “Why has for-profit colleges’
share of higher education expanded so rapidly? Estimating the responsiveness to labor market
changes.” Economics of Education Review, 45: 53-63.
(GAO) United States Government Accountability Office. 2010. For profit colleges: Undercover
testing finds colleges encouraged fraud and engaged in deceptive and questionable marketing
practices. Washington, D.C. Retrieved August 5, 2010 from
<http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10-948T>.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race Between Education and Technology.
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Goodman, P.S. March 13, 2010. In hard times, lured into trade schools and debt. New York
Times. Retrieved August 6, 2010, from
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/14/business/14schools.html>.
Grubb, W. Norton. 1993a. “The Varied Economic Returns to Postsecondary Education: New
Evidence from the Class of 1972.” Journal of Human Resources, 28(3): 365–382.
Grubb, W. Norton. 1993b. “The Varied Economic Returns to Postsecondary Education: New
Evidence from the Class of 1972.” Journal of Human Resources 28 (2), 365–382.
28

Guryan, Jonathan and Matthew Thompson. 2010. “Comment on the Proposed Rule regarding
Gainful Employment Described in the NPRM released by the Department of Education on July
26, 2010.” Document ID: ED‐2010‐OPE‐0012‐13610.1. Department of Education, Washington,
DC. www.regulations.gov.
Hoxby, Caroline. 2015. “Computing the Value Added of American Postsecondary Institutions,” U.S.
Treasury Report <https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/15rpcompvalueaddpostsecondary.pdf>.

Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel G. Sullivan. 2005. “Estimating the Returns to
Community College Schooling for Displaced Workers.” Journal of Econometrics. 125: 271-304.
Jepsen, Christopher, Kenneth Troske, and Paul Coomes. 2014. “The Labor Market Returns to
Community College Degrees, Diplomas, and Certificates,” Journal of Labor Economics.
Jepsen, Christopher and Peter Mueser. 2015. “The Benefits of Alternatives to Conventional
College: Labor-Market Returns to Proprietary Schooling.” Manuscript, University College,
Dublin.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1995a. “The Labor Market Returns to Two- and FourYear College.” American Economic Review. 85(3): 600-614.
Kane, Thomas J., and Cecilia E. Rouse. 1995b. “Comment on W. Norton Grubb: “The Varied
Economic Returns to Postsecondary Education: New Evidence from the Class of 1972.” Journal
of Human Resources, 30 (1), 205–221.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1999. “The Community College: Educating Students
at the Margin between College and Work.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives. 13(1): 63-84.
Lewin, Tamar. August 3, 2010. “For-Profit Colleges Mislead Students, Report Finds.” New York
Times, A13. Retreived August 4, 2010 from
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/04/education/04education.html?hp>.
Lang, Kevin and Russell Weinstein. 2012. “Evaluating Student Outcomes at For-Profit
Colleges.” NBER Working Paper #18201, Cambridge, MA.
Lang, Kevin and Russell Weinstein. 2013. “The Wage Effects of Not-for-Profit and For-Profit
Certifications: Better Data, Somewhat Different Results.” NBER Working Paper, #19135.
Cambridge, MA.
Looney, Adam and Constantine Yannelis. 2015. “A Crisis in Student Loans? How Changes in
the Characteristics of Borrowers and the Institutions they Attended Contributed to Rising Loan
Defaults.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Conference Draft, September 10-11.
Marcotte, Dave E., Thomas Bailey, Carey Borkoski, and Greg S. Kienzl. 2005. “The Returns of
a Community College Education: Evidence from the National Educational Longitudinal Survey.”
Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 27(2): 157-175.
29

National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). 2017. Digest of Education Statistics 2016.
Retrieved from: <https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2016menu_tables.asp>. Accessed July 14, 2017.
Oreopolous, Philip and Uros Petronijevic. 2013. “Making College Worth It: A Review of
Research on the Returns to Higher Education.” NBER Working Paper #19053, Cambridge, MA.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. "The Short- and Long-Term
Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
4(1): 1-29.
Rosenbaum, James E., Regina Deil-Amen, and Ann E. Person. 2006. After Admission: from
College Access to College Success. Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Stevens, Ann Huff, Michal Kurlaender, and Michel Grosz. 2015. “Career Technical Education
and Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from California Community Colleges.” NBER Working
Paper #21137, Cambridge, MA.
U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. July 30, 2021. “For Profit
Education: The Failure to Safeguard the Federal Investment and Ensure Student Success.” S.
Print 112-37. 112th Congress, Second Session.
U.S. Department of Education. 2016. Office of Federal Student Aid. “Proprietary School 90-10
Revenue Percentages 2013-2014.” <https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/about/datacenter/school/proprietary> Accessed on March 21, 2016.
U.S. Department of Education. 2014. “Fact Sheet on Final Gainful Employment Regulations.”
<https://www2.ed.gov/policy/highered/reg/hearulemaking/2012/gainful-employment-fact-sheet10302014.pdf> Accessed March 22, 2016.
U.S. Department of Education. 2017. “Education Department Releases Final Debt-to-Earnings
Rates for Gainful Employment Programs.” < https://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/educationdepartment-releases-final-debt-earnings-rates-gainful-employment-programs> Accessed June 16,
2017.
U.S. Department of Labor. 2016. “Comparison of State Unemployment Laws.”
<http://www.unemploymentinsurance.doleta.gov/unemploy/comparison2016.asp> Accessed on
July 19, 2016.
Whitman, David. 2017. “Truman, Eisenhower, and the First GI Bill Scandal,” The Century
Foundation <https://tcf.org/content/report/truman-eisenhower-first-gi-bill-scandal/>.

30

Table 1. Summary Statistics, Certificate Students

Full Sample

Variable means (st. dev)
Age
Male
Married
Has children
Number of children (if >0)
Pre-enrollment earnings ($)
Pre-enrollment employment
Tuition charged
Has student loan debt
Total debt amount ($)
Program completion
Years enrolled

Observations
Individuals
Institutions

Matched with Public

Matched with "No
College"
No
For-Profit
College
(5)
(6)

For-Profit
(1)

Public
(2)

For-Profit
(3)

Public
(4)

27.7
(7.78)
0.29
(0.46)
0.20
(0.45)
0.62
(0.48)
1.75
(0.67)
12,546
(14,514)
0.80
(0.40)
8,118
(16,238)
0.83
(0.38)
5,339
(4,895)
0.59
(0.49)
1.08
(0.28)

29.2
(8.45)
0.37
(0.48)
0.29
(0.45)
0.57
(0.49)
1.79
(0.88)
16,293
(17,779)
0.85
(0.35)
719
(7,169)
0.24
(0.43)
1,259
(3,011)
0.38
(0.48)
1.31
(0.82)

24.2
(6.42)
0.24
(0.43)
0.18
(0.39)
0.56
(0.50)
1.74
(0.86)
10,619
(12,669)
0.77
(0.42)
8,522
(14,929)
0.83
(0.37)
6,091
(5,769)
0.59
(0.49)
1.67
(0.61)

24.1
(6.46)
0.24
(0.43)
0.19
(0.39)
0.60
(0.49)
1.75
(0.89)
10,441
(12,482)
0.76
(0.43)
656
(5,549)
0.23
(0.42)
1,205
(3,075)
0.40
(0.49)
1.94
(1.07)

24.2
(1.69)
0.30
(0.46)
0.15
(0.36)
0.43
(0.50)
1.56
(0.73)
8,229
(9,975)
0.75
(0.43)
8,595
(15,526)
0.85
(0.36)
5,489
(4,693)
0.40
(0.49)
1.69
(0.66)

24.2
(1.71)
0.30
(0.46)
0.22
(0.41)
0.73
(0.45)
3.02
(1.45)
7,017
(9,566)
0.64
(0.48)

6,595,978
566,671
1,666

3,299,399
278,044
1,283

3,158,623
274,084
1,596

3,117,506
274,084
1,124

849,099
88,476
1,503

748,733
88,301

0
0
0
0
0

Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Demographics are measured in the first year of enrollment, earnings/work are averaged across all years prior to
enrollment, debt is measured in the year of exit. Number of institutions is at the 6-digit OPEID level. All dollars are in $2014.

Table 2. Percentage of Certificate Students Top 10 Fields of Study, by Sector
For‐Profit
Field

Public
N

%

Field

Health & Medical Assisting
Cosmetology
Health Administration
Vehicle Maintenance
Therapeutic Services
Dental Support
Practical Nursing
Health Diagnostics
Culinary Arts
HVAC Repair

148,881 26.2
105,947 18.6
58,304 10.3
46,706 8.2
42,284 7.4
20,871 3.7
20,245 3.6
13,551 2.4
10,287 1.8
8,413 1.5

Practical Nursing
Criminal Justice
Health & Medical Assisting
Vehicle Maintenance
Cosmetology
Health Diagnostics
Health Administration
Business Support
Precision Metal Working
Human Development

Total in Top 10 Fields

475,489 83.7

Total in Top 10 Fields

N

%

52,970
14,122
14,099
13,645
12,526
12,108
11,898
11,751
9,521
9,415

20.0
5.3
5.3
5.2
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
3.6
3.6

162,055

61.3

Notes: Fields listed in rank order of total enrollment for each sector based on 4‐digit CIP codes. Fields in italics
appear in the top ten in both sectors. 4‐digit CIP codes for top ten for‐profit fields are as follows: Health &
Medical Assisting = 5108, Cosmetology = 1204, Health Administration = 5107, Vehicle Maintenance = 4706,
Therapeutic Services = 5135, Nursing = 5139/5116, Dental Support = 5106, Health Diagnostics = 5109, Culinary
Arts = 1205, HVAC Repair = 4702. Complete descriptions for each CIP code can be found at:
https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/cipcode/.

Table 3. Employment and Earnings Outcomes of For-Profit Certificate Students Relative to Public
Students

A. Full Sample
Post-Education
Post-Education*For-Profit

Mean
Observations
Individuals

B. Matched Public Sample
Post-Education
Post-Education*For-Profit

Mean
Observations
Individuals

Employment
(1)

Annual Earnings ($)
(2)

Ln Annual Earnings
(3)

0.004

3,926**

0.179**

[0.003]

[371]

[0.018]

0.002

-5,555**

-0.205**

[0.003]

[276]

[0.009]

0.86

16,923

9.34

9,895,377

9,895,377

8,195,795

844,715

844,715

838,196

Employment
(1)

Annual Earnings ($)
(2)

Ln Annual Earnings
(3)

-0.002
[0.018]
-0.015*
[0.006]

1,069*
[445]
-2,144**
[183]

0.168*
[0.068]
-0.113**
[0.011]

0.76
6,276,129
548,168

10,441
6,276,129
548,168

8.96
5,020,672
543,560

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state-year level in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regressions include age, year, and
individual fixed effects, as described in equation (1). Full sample incldues all public and for-profit certificate students. Matched
sample includes public and for-profit students matched on propensity scores within sex-age-3-digit zipcode-4-digit CIP code
bins. All years enrolled in a Gainful Employment program are dropped. Annual Earnings in column (2) include individuals who
are not employed and have zero earnings, while Ln(Annual Earnings) in column (3) drop individuals with zero earnings. Mean is
the pre-enrollment mean of public sector students.

Table 4. Employment and Earnings Outcomes of For-Profit Certificate Students Relative to
Matched Public Students, by Sex

Post-Education
Post-Education*For-Profit

Mean
Observations
Individuals

Employment
Females
Males
(1)
(2)

Annual Earnings ($)
Females
Males
(3)
(4)

Ln Annual Earnings
Females
Males
(5)
(6)

0.004
[0.022]
-0.021**
[0.006]

-0.022
[0.017]
0.006
[0.011]

1,395**
[515]
-2,234**
[161]

74
[740]
-1,807**
[348]

0.209*
[0.084]
-0.119**
[0.013]

0.006
[0.056]
-0.089**
[0.017]

0.77
4,865,348
237,082

0.73
1,410,781
77,848

10,230
4,865,348
237,082

11,252
1,410,781
77,848

8.9
3,899,276
234,727

9
1,121,396
77,112

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state-year level in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regressions include age, year, and
individual fixed effects, as described in equation (1). Matched sample includes public and for-profit students matched on
propensity scores within sex-age-3-digit zipcode-4-digit CIP code bins. All years enrolled in a Gainful Employment program are
dropped. Annual Earnings in columns (3) and (4) include individuals who are not employed and have zero earnings, while
Ln(Annual Earnings) in columns (5) and (6) drop individuals with zero earnings. Mean is the pre-enrollment mean of public sector
students. Mean is the pre-enrollment mean of public sector students.

Table 5. Employment and Earnings Outcomes of Certificate Students Relative to Matched
Public Students, by Institutional Characteristics

A. Online
Post-Education
Post-Education*For-Profit

Mean
Observations
Individuals

B. Chains
Post-Education
Post-Education*For-Profit

Mean
Observations
Individuals

Employment
Online
Campus
(1)
(2)

Annual Earnings ($)
Online
Campus
(3)
(4)

Ln Annual Earnings
Online
Campus
(5)
(6)

0.036
[0.020]
-0.071**
[0.011]

0.000
[0.018]
-0.014*
[0.006]

1,229
[1,408]
-5,083**
[418]

1,422**
[500]
-2,138**
[188]

0.117
[0.072]
-0.230**
[0.033]

0.179*
[0.084]
-0.105**
[0.013]

0.81
94,767
5,635

0.77
4,328,651
221,699

11,818
94,767
5,635

10,179
4,328,651
221,699

9
78,181
5,597

8.9
3,476,734
219,839

Employment
Chain
Non-Chain
(1)
(2)

Annual Earnings ($)
Chain
Non-Chain
(3)
(4)

Ln Annual Earnings
Chain
Non-Chain
(5)
(6)

0.005
[0.022]
-0.025**
[0.006]

0.074*
[0.032]
0.020*
[0.010]

898
[509]
-2,398**
[205]

1,258**
[318]
-1,200**
[213]

0.172*
[0.077]
-0.121**
[0.012]

0.116**
[0.041]
-0.072**
[0.014]

0.77
4,983,487
253,492

0.74
1,049,337
59,032

10,278
4,983,487
253,492

9,656
1,049,337
59,032

8.9
4,035,161
251,371

8.9
791,399
58,092

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state-year level in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regressions include age, year, and
individual fixed effects, as described in equation (1). "Online" and "chain" designations are based on 2012 IPEDS data. "Online" = 1
for for-profit colleges in which 50 percent of more students take courses exclusively online. "Chain"= 1 for institutions that report
being part of a "multi-institution system, governing board, or corporate structure." To avoid splitting matched pairs, we keep all forprofit students in each subsample (online/campus and chain/non-chain) then re-run the match to match with the closest public student.
All years enrolled in a Gainful Employment program are dropped. Annual Earnings in columns (3) and (4) include individuals who are
not employed and have zero earnings, while Ln(Annual Earnings) in columns (5) and (6) drop individuals with zero earnings. Mean is
the pre-enrollment mean of public sector students.

Table 6. Employment and Earnings Effects of For-Profit Certificate Students Relative to
Matched "No College" Group

(2)

Ln Annual
Earnings
(3)

-0.084**
[0.014]
0.028**
[0.008]

511
[303]
356
[257]

0.085**
[0.027]
-0.045*
[0.019]

0.67
1,597,832

6,595
1,597,832

8.58
1,143,559

Employment
(1)
Post-Education
Post-Education*For-Profit

Mean
Observations

Annual Earnings ($)

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state-year level in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regressions include
age, year, and individual fixed effects, as described in equation (1). Sample includes for-profit students and "nocollege" individuals matched on propensity scores within sex-age-3-digit zipcode bins, as described in text. All
years enrolled in a Gainful Employment program are dropped. Mean is the pre-enrollment mean of the "no college"
group.

Table 7. Employment and Earnings Outcomes of For-Profit Certificate Students Relative to
"No College" Group, by Sex
Employment
Females
Males
(1)
(2)

Post-Education
Post-Education*For-Profit

Mean
Observations

Annual Earnings ($)
Females
Males
(3)
(4)

Ln Annual Earnings
Females
Males
(5)
(6)

-0.071**
[0.016]
0.019*
[0.009]

-0.113**
[0.015]
0.049**
[0.012]

480
[349]
-25
[260]

505
[615]
1,356**
[506]

0.081**
[0.031]
-0.047*
[0.021]

0.094
[0.049]
-0.040*
[0.020]

0.67
1,113,733

0.66
484,099

6,121
1,113,733

7,679
484,099

8.5
794,577

8.7
348,982

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state-year level in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regressions include age, year, and
individual fixed effects, as described in equation (1). Sample includes for-profit students and "no-college" individuals matched
on propensity scores within sex-age-3-digit zipcode bins, as described in text. All years enrolled in a Gainful Employment
program are dropped. Mean is the pre-enrollment mean of the "no college" group.

Figure 1. Mean Earnings and Employment Over Time, For‐Profit and Public Certificate Students
B. Probability of Employment, Full Sample

0

.5

.6

.7

Work

.8

Earnings
10000
20000

.9

1

30000

A. Annual Earnings ($), Full Sample

-6

-4

-2
0
2
Years Relative to Enrollment
Public

4

6

-6

-4

For-Profit

-2
0
2
Years Relative to Enrollment
Public

6

For-Profit

D. Probability of Employment, Matched Public Sample

0

.5

.6

.7

Work

.8

Earnings
10000
20000

.9

1

30000

C. Annual Earnings ($), Matched Public Sample

4

-6

-4

-2
0
2
Years Relative to Enrollment
Public

4

6

For-Profit

Notes: All years enrolled in a Gainful Employment program are dropped.

-6

-4

-2
0
2
Years Relative to Enrollment
Public

For-Profit

4

6

Figure 2. Time Pattern of Relative Employment and Earnings
of For‐Profit Certificate Students, Matched Public Sample
A. Employment
Interaction Coefficent
-.04 -.03 -.02 -.01 0 .01 .02 .03

Differential Effects on Working

1

2

3

4
Years Since Exit
95 CI

5

6

7+

Estimate

B. Annual Earnings ($)

-3000

Interaction Coefficent
-1500
0

1500

Differential Effects on Earnings

1

2

3

4
Years Since Exit
95 CI

5

6

7+

6

7+

Estimate

C. Ln(Annual Earnings)

-.15

Interaction Coefficent
-.1
-.05
0
.05

.1

Differential Effects on Ln(Earnings)

1

2

3

4
Years Since Exit
95 CI

5
Estimate

Notes: Figures plot coefficients of interactions of Post*For‐Profit with indicators
for the number of years post‐exit for the matched sample. Shaded areas
represent 95 percent confidence intervals.

Figure 3. Annual Earnings ($) of For‐Profit Certificate Students Relative to Public Students in Top
10 Fields
Post‐Educ*For‐Profit Coefficients
Health Diagnostics -6,021*
Dental Support
Practical Nursing

-3,736*
-2,370*

Health & Medical Assisting

-1,165*

Health Administration

-1,140*

Therapeutic Services

-1,113*

HVAC Repair
Culinary Arts

-961*
-49

Vehicle Maintenance

249

Cosmetology
-7000 -6000 -5000 -4000 -3000 -2000 -1000

271*
0

1000

Notes: * Denotes significance at the 5% level or higher. Estimates are from separate regressions for subsamples of public and forprofit students in each field. All regressions include age, year, and individual fixed effects, as described in equation (1). For a listing
of the number of for-profit and public students in each field, see Table 2.

0

.00005

Density
.0001

.00015

.0002

Figure 4. Institution‐Level Distribution of Earnings for Certificate Students, by Sector

-20000

0
20000
Estimated Change in Earnings

40000

Public
For-Profit

Notes: This figure plots student weighted PDFs of earnings effects (single difference) estimated from
separate regressions for each institution that has at least 20 students. These estimates are winsorized
at the top and bottom 1% by control. The sample includes just over 9 million observations from
roughly 780,000 individuals.

0

Estimated Annual Student Loan Payments
500
1000
1500

Figure 5. Institution‐Level Debt vs. Earnings for Certificate Students, by Sector

-20000

0
20000
Estimated Change in Earnings
Public

40000

For-profit

Notes: This scatter plot shows average student weighted earnings effects (single difference) estimated
from separate regressions for each institution that has at least 20 students and average annual student
loan paymments in 50 equally sized groups defined by control. Earnings estimates are winsorized at the top
and bottom 1% by control prior to averaging. The sample includes just over 9 million observations from
roughly 780,000 individuals.

Figure 6. Relative Debt and Earnings for Certificate Students, by State

CA
VA
AZ

ND

Notes: Differential earnings effects are generated with separate regressions for each state and plotted against the
difference in estimated debt payments between public and for-profit students. The size of the circles reflect for-profit
enrollment in each state.

