                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES EASING MONETARY POLICY INCREASE FINANCIAL INSTABILITY?

                                     Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi
                                      Alessandro Rebucci

                                       Working Paper 22283
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22283


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2016




For useful discussions and helpful comments we thank Jihad Dagher and seminar participants at
the 2013 Macro Banking and Finance Workshop, the 2013 MMF Conference, the Cattolica
University, the Bank of Italy, the EPFL, the Bank of Portugal, the Banque de France, the Bank of
England, the IADB, LACEA 2012 Annual Meetings, and EEA 2012 Annual Meetings, the 2016
Annual Meeting of the International Banking and Finance Association. The information and
opinions presented in this paper are entirely those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the
Bank of England, the IMF, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This Paper was also
published as IMF Working Paper 15/139 and as BoE Staff Working Paper No. 570

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi and Alessandro Rebucci. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Easing Monetary Policy Increase Financial Instability?
Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi and Alessandro Rebucci
NBER Working Paper No. 22283
May 2016
JEL No. E44,E52,E58,E65

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model featuring both a macroeconomic and a financial friction that speaks
to the interaction between monetary and macro-prudential policy and to the role of U.S. monetary
and regulatory policy in the run up to the Great Recession. There are two main results. First, real
interest rate rigidities in a monopolistic banking system increase the probability of a financial
crisis (relative to the case of flexible interest rate) in response to contractionary shocks to the
economy, while they act as automatic macro-prudential stabilizers in response to expansionary
shocks. Second, when the interest rate is the only available policy instrument, a monetary
authority subject to the same constraints as private agents cannot always achieve a (constrained)
efficient allocation and faces a trade-off between macroeconomic and financial stability in
response to contractionary shocks. An implication of our analysis is that the weak link in the U.S.
policy framework in the run up to the Global Recession was not excessively lax monetary policy
after 2002, but rather the absence of an effective second policy instrument aimed at preserving
financial stability.


Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London
EC2R 8AH
ambrogio.cesa-bianchi@bankofengland.co.uk

Alessandro Rebucci
Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
and NBER
arebucci@jhu.edu
1        Introduction
The global financial crisis and ensuing Great Recession of 2007-09 have ignited a debate
on the role of policies for the stability of the financial system or the economy as a whole
(i.e., so called macro-prudential policies). In advanced economies, this debate is revolving
around the role of monetary and regulatory policies in causing the global crisis and how
the conduct of monetary policy and the supervision of financial intermediaries should be
altered in the future to avoid the recurrence of such a catastrophic event.

        In this paper we develop a simple model featuring both a macroeconomic and a finan-
cial friction —i.e., an interest rate rigidity that give rise to a traditional macroeconomic
stabilization objective and a pecuniary externality that give rise to a more novel financial
stability objective— which speaks to the necessity to complement monetary policy with
macro-prudential policies in response to contractionary shocks.

        Some observers have assigned to monetary policy a key role in exacerbating the severity
of the global financial crisis of 2007-09. Taylor (2007), in particular, noticed that during
the period from 2002 to 2006 the US federal funds rate was well below what a good rule of
thumb for US monetary policy would have predicted. Figure 1 displays the actual federal
funds rate (solid line) and the counterfactual policy rate that would have prevailed if
monetary policy had followed a standard Taylor rule (dashed line). Indeed, the interest
rate implied by the Taylor rule is well above the actual federal funds rate, starting from
the second quarter of 2002. Taylor (2007) argues that such a counterfactual policy rate
would have contained the housing market bubble. Taylor also supports the idea that
deviating from this rule-based monetary policy framework has been a major factor in
determining the likelihood and the severity of the 2007-09 crisis (Taylor, 2010).


        Despite a somewhat widely shared common sentiment that the Federal Reserve is
partly to blame for the housing bubble, the issue is highly controversial in academia and
the policy community. Besides Taylor (2007, 2010), Borio and White (2003), Gordon
(2005), and Borio (2006) support the idea that monetary policy contributed significantly
to the boom that preceded the global financial crisis. In contrast, Posen (2009), Bean
(2010), and Svensson (2010) argue against this thesis.1

        To address this issue, we develop a simple model of consumption-based asset pricing
with collateralized borrowing and pecuniary externalities, monopolistic banking and real
interest rates rigidities. The presence of real and financial frictions give rise to both
a traditional macroeconomic stabilization role for government policy and a more novel
financial stability objective.
    1
    Bernanke (2010) recently said that “the best response to the housing bubble would have been regu-
latory, rather than monetary”.



                                                 2
                     9

                     8

                     7

                     6
           Percent


                     5

                     4

                     3

                     2

                     1

                     0
                         1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

                                 Actual Fed Funds Rate       Taylor Implied Fed Funds Rate


         Figure 1 A Counterfactual Path for the U.S. Policy Rate. This
         chart replicates the counterfactual federal funds rate reported by Taylor
         (2007). The counterfactual path for the policy rate from 1996 to 2007 is ob-
         tained with a Taylor rule of the type: it = rt + πt + 1.5(πt − π) + 0.5(yt − yt∗ ),
         where rt (the long-run, real value of the federal funds rate) is set to 2 percent,
         πt is CPI inflation, π is target inflation (assumed at 2 percent), yt is real GDP
         growth, and yt∗ is real potential GDP growth.


   The macroeconomic stabilization objective arises from the presence of monopolistic
competition and (real) interest rates rigidities in the banking sector. Due to monopolistic
power, banks apply a markup on their funding cost. When they cannot fully adjust
lending rates in response to macroeconomic shocks, the economy displays distortions
typical of models with staggered price setting, generating an equilibrium that is not
efficient (Hannan and Berger, 1991, Neumark and Sharpe, 1992, Kwapil and Scharler,
2010, Gerali, Neri, Sessa, and Signoretti, 2010, Espinosa-Vega and Rebucci, 2004).

   The financial stability objective stems from the fact that the model endogenously gen-
erates financial crises when a collateral or leverage constraint occasionally binds. When
access to bank credit is subject to an occasionally binding collateral constraint, a pe-
cuniary externality arises. Individual borrowers do not internalize the effect of their
decisions on the market price of collateral, and hence borrow and consume more than
socially efficient, thereby increasing the frequency and the severity of financial crises (see,
between others, Korinek, 2010, Bianchi, 2011, Jeanne and Korinek, 2010a,b, Benigno,
Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young, 2013).

   There are two main results of the analysis. First, the analysis of our model economy
shows that the interest rate rigidity has a different impact on financial stability (measured
by the probability of a financial crisis) depending on the sign of the shock hitting the
economy. In response to expansionary shocks that increase the funding cost of banks
(i.e., a positive shock) aggregate bank lending rates rise too. However, because of interest

                                                         3
rate stickiness, they increase less than in a flexible interest rate equilibrium. This affects
next period net worth through two channels. On the one hand, relatively lower lending
rates prompt consumers to borrow more than in the flexible-rate case, and thus lowering
next period net worth; on the other hand, interest rate repayments are lower relative to
the flexible case, thus increasing next period net worth. As the second effect dominates
the first one in our model for a wide range of parameter values, the probability of a crisis is
lower with interest rate stickiness. Thus, interest rate rigidity acts as an automatic macro-
prudential stabilizer in response to shocks that require bank funding costs to increase.



    In contrast, in the presence of a contractionary shock that lowers the funding cost of
banks (i.e., a negative shock), aggregate lending interest rates fall relatively less than in
the flexible-rate equilibrium. Because of the same mechanisms working in reverse, interest
rate rigidity leads to a higher probability of financial crisis than in the flexible interest
rate equilibrium in response to negative shocks. Thus, in our model, interest rate rigidity
magnifies financial stability concerns (relative to the flexible-rate case) in response to
shocks that push down bank funding costs. Note here that, while the effects of a positive
or a negative shock on the equilibrium allocations of the model are perfectly symmetric,
the implications of interest rate rigidity for financial stability depend on the sign of the
shock and, in this sense, are ’asymmetric’ in the model.

    Second, our analysis shows that, if the government has only one policy instrument (say
the monetary policy interest rate) and faces both the financial and the macroeconomic
friction, efficiency cannot be achieved when a negative shocks hits the economy. However,
when the government has two instruments (such as for instance a tax on debt and the
monetary policy interest rate), efficiency can be achieved in response to both positive and
negative shocks. Specifically, when both set of frictions are at work, achieving efficiency
requires interventions of opposite direction on the same policy tool at the government’s
disposal in response to shocks that lower the funding cost of banks (in our case, the
monetary policy interest rate). The model therefore entails a stark trade off between
macroeconomic and financial stability in response to negative shocks that can be resolved
only with a second policy instrument.2

    Our analysis has an important implication regarding the role of US monetary policy for
the stability of the financial system in the run-up to the Great Recession. In particular,
in the last section of the paper, we use our model to assess Taylor’s argument that
higher interest rates would have reduced both the likelihood and the severity of the Great
Recession in the US. In our model, Taylor’s argument holds only with the auxiliary (but
counterfactual) assumption that the US policy authority had only one instrument (namely
the policy interest rate) in the 2002-2006 period to address both a macroeconomic and
   2
     As we shall see, the second, macro-prudential policy instrument needs not necessarily be a tax on
debt. Other tools can achieve the same results.


                                                  4
financial stability objectives. In this case our model calls for a higher monetary policy rate
than what would be needed to address only macroeconomic stability. However, Taylor’s
argument does not hold if we assume, more realistically, that the US policy authority had
two different instruments at its disposal, the policy rate and other regulatory tools. With
two instruments, in our model, the monetary policy rate is freed to pursue macroeconomic
stability, while the second tool can address financial stability.

   As suggested by Bernanke (2010) and Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010),
this suggests that the same monetary policy stance as the one adopted by the Fed during
the 2002-06 period, accompanied by stronger regulation and supervision of the financial
system than we observed, might have been more effective in reducing the likelihood and the
severity of the crisis, relative to a tighter monetary policy stance with the same financial
supervision and regulation observed during the 2002-06 period that Taylor (2007, 2010)
advocated.

   This paper is related to several strands of literature. The first is the branch of the
New Keynesian literature that considers financial frictions and Taylor-type interest rate
rules (see Angelini, Neri, and Panetta, 2011, Beau, Clerc, and Mojon, 2012, Kannan,
Rabanal, and Scott, 2012, for example). These papers consider either interest rate rules
augmented with macro-prudential arguments —such as credit growth, asset prices, loan-
to-value limits— or a combination of interest and macro-prudential rules in order to allow
monetary policy to “lean against financial winds”. However, in this class of models, macro-
prudential regulation is taken for granted, in the sense that it does not target a clearly
identified market failure giving rise to a well defined financial stability objective. In our
model, there is a well defined pecuniary externality that justify government intervention
for financial stability purposes.

   The second is a growing literature on pecuniary externalities that interprets financial
crises as episodes of financial amplification in environments where credit constraints are
only occasionally binding (see, between others, Korinek, 2010, Bianchi, 2011, Jeanne and
Korinek, 2010a,b, Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young, 2013). In this class of
models the need for macro-prudential policies stems from a well-defined market failure:
a pecuniary externality originating from the presence of the price of collateral in the
aggregate borrowing constraint faced by private agents. However, in all these models, the
financial friction is the only distortion in the economy. The question of how the pursuit
of financial stability may affect and interact with the macroeconomic stability objective
is therefore novel relative to this literature.

   The third and final strand is a small, but growing literature that considers both
macroeconomic and financial frictions at the same time. Kashyap and Stein (2012) use a
modified version of the pecuniary externality framework of Stein (2012) where the central
bank has both a price stability and a financial stability objective. Similar to our findings,

                                                  5
a trade-off emerges between the two objectives when the policy interest rate is the only
instrument and it disappears when there is a second tool (reserve requirements on bank
deposits, which is equivalent to taxing debt in our framework as we shall see). However,
they do not model the price stability objective explicitly. Woodford (2012), in contrast,
sets up a New Keynesian model with credit frictions in which the probability of a financial
crisis is endogenous (i.e., it is a regime-switching process that depends on the model vari-
ables). He then characterizes optimal policy in this environment, showing that —under
certain circumstances— the central bank may face a trade-off between macroeconomic
and financial stability. However, he does not explicitly model financial stability.

        In contrast, in our paper, both the macroeconomic and the financial stability objec-
tive are well defined and each originates from a friction that we model explicitly. The
interaction between the macroeconomic and the financial friction delivers a stark trade-off
between objectives that helps rationalize the role of monetary policy and macro-prudential
policy (or the lack of thereof) in the run-up to the Great Recession in the United States.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model economy.
Sections 3 and 4 characterize the decentralized and the socially planned equilibrium of
the economy, respectively. In Section 5 we discuss the implications of our model for the
debate on the role of US monetary policy for the stability of the financial system in the
run-up to the Great Recession. Section 6 concludes. An Appendix reports additional
results discussed in the text.



2        The Model
We include monopolistic banking and interest rate rigidities in the pecuniary externality
framework of Jeanne and Korinek (2010a). In their set-up, consumers borrow directly
from international capital markets (or foreign banks) at the gross world interest rate R.
In our model, consumers must borrow from a stylized monopolistic banking sector that
intermediates foreign saving.3

        The financial friction is given by the presence of collateralized borrowing. The real
friction, strictly speaking, has two parts: the first is the presence of market power in
the loan market exercised by monopolistically competitive banks; the second is infrequent
adjustment of real lending rates by banks.4
    3
      While this is a stark assumption, it is a simple way to introduce heterogeneity in a model which
features another important source of complexity such as an occasionally binding collateral constraint.
Alternatively, borrowers could be interpreted as entrepreneurs/households in a closed economy enjoying
a comparative advantage in owning the asset. This implies that the lending rate faced by borrowers is
affected by both domestic and external factors in the model, i.e., the behavior of banks and government
policy as well as the supply of foreign saving.
    4
      Note that real and nominal interest rates coincide when expected inflation is zero. So here we are
implicitly assuming that good prices are completely fixed in the short run.


                                                   6
    The economy is populated by two sets of agents: a continuum of monopolistically
competitive banks and a continuum of identical and atomistic consumers. Each set of
agents has a unit mass. There are only three periods, denoted t = 0, 1, 2, representing
the short, medium and long term respectively.

    At the beginning of period 0 consumers own an asset in fixed, unit supply. In order
to consume, they must either sell a fraction (1 − θi,1 ) of the asset or borrow from banks
(bi,1 ). They have a well-defined loan demand that is decreasing in the lending interest
rate (RL1 ). Monopolistic banks collect deposits from foreign savers at the interest rate
(Rt = R) and —given loans demand— optimally set their lending rates. We assume
that, when the cost of funds (R) changes because of shocks or policy interventions, only
a fraction of banks (µ) can reset their lending rates, while the remaining banks (1 − µ)
need to keep their lending rates fixed. The purpose of this key assumption is to introduce
macroeconomic stabilization considerations in a relatively simple manner, but it can be
justified by both theoretical and empirical grounds.5

    At the beginning of period 0, the funding cost of banks is hit by a temporary shock
(R ± υ). While this is a reduced form shock in our model, a drop (increase) in the
funding cost of banks can be triggered by a negative (positive) aggregate demand shock
in a standard New-Keynesian framework. In our model, the source of such shock must
be external, but in a more general (heterogeneous agents) set-up it could be domestic
or external. In terms of a standard, Taylor interest rate rule such as the one plotted
in Figure 1, this shock can be interpreted as a change in the real, long-run value of the
policy rate (the so-called natural interest rate). In the rest of the paper we label an
increase (decrease) in R a positive (negative) shock and will assume that it is driven by
an increase (decrease) in aggregate demand. The loan market clears after the realization
of this shock, which all agents observe. Then households consume (ci,0 ) at the end of
period 0.

    In period 1, consumers have a stochastic endowment (e), they repay their debt (bi,1 RL1 ),
borrow an additional amount from banks (bi,2 ), realize bank profits (πi,1 ), and consume
(ci,1 ). Borrowing in period 1 is subject to a collateral constraint, with (bi,2 ) limited to a
fraction of the market value of the consumers’ assets. This assumption is realistic and its
purpose is to introduce explicit financial stability considerations in the model. If hit by a
shock in period 0, the bank funding cost returns to long term value value (R) in period 1.

    In period 2, consumers receive a deterministic return on the asset that they own (y),
repay their debt (bi,2 RL2 ), realize banks profits (πi,2 ), and consume (ci,2 ).
    5
      Note here that nominal interest rate rigidity translates into real rate rigidity to an extent that depends
on the degree of good price rigidity. As we noted, we implicitly assume that good prices are completely
fixed in the short term. For examples of nominal interest rate rigidities see, between others, Hannan
and Berger (1991), Neumark and Sharpe (1992), Kwapil and Scharler (2010), Gerali, Neri, Sessa, and
Signoretti (2010), Espinosa-Vega and Rebucci (2004).


                                                       7
    We now discuss the consumers’ and banks’ problems in turn.



2.1    Consumers and loan demand
The utility of each consumer, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], is given by:

                                      u(ci,0 ) + u(ci,1 ) + ci,2 ,                              (1)

where, for simplicity, we assume a unitary discount factor. The period utility function,
u(·), is a standard CES function:
                                                       c1−%
                                           u(c) =           .                                   (2)
                                                       1−%
The budget constraint can be written as:
                      
                       ci,0 = bi,1 + (1 − θi,1 )p0 ,
                      
                        ci,1 + bi,1 RL1 = e + bi,2 + (θi,1 − θi,2 )p1 + πi,1 ,                  (3)
                      
                        ci,2 + bi,2 RL2 = θi,2 y + πi,2 .
                      


Consumer enter period 0 endowed with a unit of the asset θi,0 = 1 with price p0 . In order
to consume in period 0, they need to either sell a fraction of their assets (1 − θi,1 ) or
borrow from banks (bi,1 ). And as they are identical, in a symmetric equilibrium, we will
have θi,0 = θi,1 = θi,2 = 1.6

    In period 1, consumers faces a collateral constraint of the form:

                                            bi,2 ≤ θi,1 p1 ,                                    (4)

where θi,1 is the share of the asset held at the beginning of period 1.

    This specification of the collateral constraint follows Mendoza (2010), Jeanne and
Korinek (2010a), and Jeanne and Korinek (2010b). Equation (4) can also be interpreted
as a Loan-to-Value constraint (LTV) of a margin loan or a cash-out refinancing. The
LTV constraint implies that households can borrow up to a fraction (Θ) of the value of
the collateral. Following Jeanne and Korinek (2010a), in our model Θ is set to 1 for
simplicity. Note that the fraction Θ determines households’ maximum leverage:

                                                        1
                                          Lmax =           .                                    (5)
                                                       1−Θ

where L = Lmax when the LTV constraint is binding and L < Lmax otherwise (see
Appendix A). According to equation 5, this implies an unbounded maximum leverage
ratio. In equilibrium, however, leverage is pinned down by preferences, interest rates, the
   6
     As in Jeanne and Korinek (2010b), we assume that consumers derive some benefits from owning the
asset. For instance, this asset can be interpreted as house.



                                                   8
deterministic return on the asset and the shadow price of the constraint. As we discuss
below (and show in Appendix A), therefore, in our model equilibrium leverage is well
defined and bounded.7

       As Mendoza (2010) discusses and illustrates at length, when the collateral or leverage
constraint occasionally binds, it triggers a process of asset price deflation and deleveraging
in which small business cycle shocks are amplified, like in a financial crisis. In this
sense, collateralized borrowing brings into the analysis a stylized set of financial stability
considerations.

       Consumers maximize (1) subject to the budget constraint (3) and the collateral con-
straint (4). Dropping the subscript i, the utility maximization problem of the represen-
tative consumer can be written as:
                                                                                     
                       u b  + (1 − θ  )p   +  0 u e + b2 + (θ1 − θ2 )p1 + π1 −
                                                                                         
                     
                         1          1 0     E                                            
                                                                                          
           max                                                                              .       (6)
          b1 ,b2 ,θ2 
                            −b1 RL1 + θ2 y + π2 − b2 RL2 − λ(b2 − θ1 p1 )
                                                                                         
                                                                                          
                                                                                         

       Because of the occasionally binding constraint, the solution of this problem is non
trivial. Solving the maximization problem backward, the first order conditions are:

                                                 y
                                       p1 =   u0 (c1 ) ,
                                       u0 (c1 ) = RL2 + λ,                                            (7)
                                       u0 (c0 ) = RL1 E0 u0 (c1 ) .
                                                                


The first equation represents the asset pricing condition for the economy. The second and
third equations are the Euler equation for consumption in period 1 and 0, respectively.
The global numerical solution of this problem is derived in the Appendix, where we also
show that the problem has a well behaved closed-form solution when the constraint is not
binding.



Consumers’ demand of loans

In order to allow for market power in the banking sector, we model the loan market a-la
Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) following Gerali, Neri, Sessa, and Signoretti (2010). Thus, we
assume that loan contracts bought by consumers are a constant elasticity of substitution
composite of differentiated financial products, each supplied by a bank j with an elasticity
of substitution ζ. In particular, in order to obtain a loan of size bi,t , the consumer i needs
   7
    Alternatively, we can specify a Debt-To-Income (DTI) constraint, where total expected repayment
(interest + principal) next period cannot be larger than a fraction of income. As we show in the Appendix
B, the qualitative properties of our model are the same in the LTV economy and the DTI economy. The
only difference is a quantitative one, stemming from the fact that the shadow price of the constraint will
always be higher in the DTI economy than in the LTV economy.



                                                           9
to take out a continuum of loans bij,t from all existing banks j, such that:
                                                                           ζ
                                              Z         1    ζ−1
                                                                         ζ−1
                                                               ζ
                                     bi,t ≤                  bij,t dj                            (8)
                                                     0

Demand by consumer i seeking a loan of size bi,t can be derived by minimizing the
total repayment due to the continuum of banks j over bij,t . Aggregating over symmetric
consumers, yields the following downward-sloping loan demand curve:
                                                                −ζ
                                                       RLj,t
                                       bj,t =                            bt .                    (9)
                                                       RLt

with the aggregate lending interest rate given by:
                                                                           1
                                              Z        1                1−ζ
                                                              1−ζ
                                    RLt =                    RLj,t dj           .               (10)
                                                    0




2.2     Banks and loan supply
There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive domestic banks indexed by j ∈
[0, 1] and owned by households.8 In particular, we assume that each bank j supplies a
differentiated financial product, and no other bank produces the same variety. However,
banks competes with each other since costumers perceives each variety as an imperfect
substitute. Because of market power banks can set the lending rate to maximize profits,
taking into account the elasticity of demand for their variety.

      Each bank j collects deposits dj,t from foreign savers at the funding cost Rt = R,
where R is exogenous. We further assume that foreign savers can supply an infinite
amount of deposits, so that banks can satisfy any demand for loans. Finally, banks
use deposits to supply loans to consumers with the following constant return to scale
production function:9
                                                  bj,t = dj,t .                                 (11)

In each period, bank j maximizes its profits by choosing price and quantity for given
funding cost:
                                      max bj,t RLj,t − dj,t Rt ,
                                    RLj,t ,bj,t

  8
     Market power is a standard assumption in banking. It can be justified by the presence of switch-
ing costs that lead to long-term relationships between banks and their costumers (Diamond (1984) for
example). Empirically, the presence of market power in banking and its determinants over the business
cycle are well documented. See, for example, Berger, Demirguc-Kunt, Levine, and Haubrich (2004) and
Degryse and Ongena (2008).
   9
     More realistic balance sheet assumptions with bank reserves and bank capital are discussed below
when we specify government policy.



                                                         10
subject to the demand schedule in (9) and to the production function in (11). The first
order condition for this problem implies that the optimal lending rate is a constant markup
(M) over the marginal cost of funds:

                                              ζ
                                RLt (j) =        Rt = MRt .                            (12)
                                            ζ −1

Together with consumers’ optimality conditions, equation (12) determines the equilibrium
of the economy: once the lending rate is set, households choose consumption (and hence
borrowing), and loan market clearing closes the model.

   As we noted earlier, we also assume interest rate rigidity: banks cannot always adjust
lending rates in response to changes in their funding costs, which in turn can be affected
by various macroeconomic shocks. The presence of interest rate stickiness in the banking
sector can be justified by the presence of adjustment costs and monopolistic power. For
example, Hannan and Berger (1991) show that, in the presence of fixed adjustment costs,
banks reset their lending rates only if the costs of changing the interest rate are lower
than the costs of maintaining a non-equilibrium rate (see also Neumark and Sharpe, 1992).
Empirically, it is a well documented that the adjustment of lending rates to changes in the
funding cost of banks is only partial and heterogeneous, especially in the short run. For
example, Kwapil and Scharler (2010) find that the pass-through of changes in the policy
rate to consumer loan rates in the US can be as low as 0.3, implying that banks smooth
lending rates significantly. Espinosa-Vega and Rebucci (2004) find similar evidence for
small open economies.

   In particular, when the funding cost changes because of the shock (υ) in period 0,
we assume that only a fraction µ of the banks can reset the lending rate, whereas the
remaining 1 − µ banks cannot. This entails that, following a shock to the deposit rate,
the aggregate lending rate will be different from the one desired by banks. Given that
consumers are price takers and that their loan demands depend on the average interest
rate in the economy, this friction leads to a distortion in the competitive equilibrium of
the economy that creates scope for policy intervention to restore efficiency. However,
lending rates are again fully flexible in the long-run (i.e. in period 2).

   Note here that all agents (banks, consumers, and the government) observe the shock
to the deposit rate in period 0 before making their decisions. We consider three states: no
shock (υ = 0), a temporary increase in funding costs (υ > 0), and a temporary reduction
in funding costs (υ < 0). As we noted earlier, these states can be interpreted as the result
of temporary aggregate demand shocks, driven by changes in preferences or fiscal policy
in a closed economy or as a foreign demand shock in a small open economy.




                                              11
2.3      Government
The government is an agent that has two instruments, a macroprudential tool and a
monetary policy tool. It can use either of them or both of them at the same time.
Revenues (or financing) associated with the use of these tools are always rebated in lump-
sum manner to households.10

       Prudential policy is conducted with a Pigouvian tax on credit (bank loans) in our
analysis.11 Prudential policy could also be implemented with other instruments such as
for instance reserve or capital requirements (see Bianchi (2011) and Stein (2012) and
Appendix D for a more detailed discussion).

       Following Kashyap and Stein (2012), monetary policy is conducted with an additive
factor (ψ) on the bank funding cost R. While this is a stylized and reduced form repre-
sentation of monetary policy, given that R is exogenous and the supply of foreign saving
is perfectly elastic in the model, it is simple and intuitive. Indeed, when a central bank
changes its interbank interest rate target, it is raising the banks’ cost of meeting their
daily liquidity needs. In the terminology of Stein (2012), this increases the scarcity value
of bank reserves.

       To see this, Kashyap and Stein (2012) show that the interbank rate, or bank funding
cost (R) in our model, can always be decomposed in the sum of the interest rate on
reserves (IOR, if any is paid) and a scarcity value term (SV ), where R is exogenous
but nominal in their model, and interpreted as following a standard Taylor rule like in
Figure 1. If the IOR is zero (because there are no reserve requirements or they are not
remunerated) then R = SV . So our additive factor (ψ) can be interpreted as monetary
policy intervention affecting SV under the assumption that prices are perfectly fixed.12

       Note finally that, following the New-Keynesian tradition, the government also has the
possibility to use a separate subsidy (η) to remove the distortion due to monopolistic
competition. As we shall see, the main results of the analysis are not affected by this
policy action.



2.4      Shocks and Parameter Values
Table 1 summarizes the assumptions we make on the structural parameters and the
stochastic processes of the shocks in the model. We choose a parametrization to study
  10
     As we discuss below, the use of the two instruments give rise to no coordination problem.
  11
     Alternatively, prudential policy could be conducted with a tax on foreign debt, i.e. with capital
controls. This policy would be needed if the exchange rate were fixed so that monetary policy could not
be conducted independently. But we do not model the exchange rate explicitly.
  12
     In Appendix C we show how, in our model with a system of remunerated required reserves, the effects
of changing the additive factor (ψ) are the same as increasing the coefficient of reserve requirements or
lowering the rate of remuneration of those reserves.



                                                   12
the solution of the model in the case where there are financial stability considerations at
play because of the pecuniary externality. This happens when the borrowing constraint
does not bind today, but can bind tomorrow with positive probability. Given the stylized
nature of the model, we do not use it for quantitative purposes. In the last section of the
paper, however, we use its qualitative predictions to interpret the US experience in the
run-up to the Great Recession.


    Table 1 Calibration of Model’s Parameter and Shocks

    Variable                       Symbol           Value    Source/Target
    Average Endowment              ē                  1.3   Jeanne and Korinek (2010a)
    Asset return                   y                   0.8   Jeanne and Korinek (2010a)
    Risk free rate                 R∗                1.015   Average 3M US T-Bill
    Elasticity of Subst. (Loans)   ζ                  33.3   250 b.p. spread of RL on R∗
    Risk Aversion Coefficient      %                     2   Standard value
    Interest rate stickiness       µ                   0.5   Borio and Fritz (1995)

    Shocks
    Shock to the endowment         ˜             [−, +]
    Shock to the interest rate     υ        [−0.02, +0.02]   St. Deviation 3M US T-Bill

    Note. 3M US T-Bill is the the average 3-Month Treasury Bill deflated with US CPI; RL is
    the 15-Year mortgage fixed rate deflated with US CPI. U.S. monthly data from 1985:M1 to
    2007:M3.



   We assume that endowment e is uniformly distributed over the [ē − ε, ē + ε] interval.
We then analyze the model’s properties for different values of the maximum size of the
endowment shock (ε), which controls the variance of the shock. We consider values for
ε and the expected value ē such that the economy is not constrained in the absence of
disturbances, but it may be constrained for a sufficiently large negative realization of the
shock.

   Following Jeanne and Korinek (2010a), we set the return of the asset (y) and the
expected value of the endowment to ē = 1.3 and y = 0.8. Jeanne and Korinek (2010a)
choose these two parameters jointly with the maximum size of the endowment shock (ε)
to control when the borrowing constraint binds. We take these two parameters as given,
and set the maximum value of the endowment shock following the same strategy.

   We calibrate the remaining parameters using US data from 1985 to 2007, i.e., from the
beginning of the Great Moderation to the beginning of the Great Recession. The gross
rate on deposit, i.e., the cost of bank funds, is set to R = 1.015, matching the average
real yield of the 3-Month Treasury Bill over the period 1985-2007 (deflated nominal yields
with US CPI) . The elasticity of substitution between financial products is set to ζ = 33.3,
implying a gross markup of M ' 1.03. This markup generates a spread between deposit
and lending rates of about 250 basis points, which matches the average spread in the data

                                              13
between the 15-year mortgage fixed rate and the the 3-Month Treasury Bill rate. The
period utility is CES with relative risk aversion coefficient % = 2, which is a conventional
value.13

         As we show in the Appendix, under these assumptions, the model economy is never
constrained when ε ≤ εb = 0.095, and the probability of observing a crisis in period 1 is
zero. In this case, the model has a closed-form solution given by optimality conditions
(7) together with λ = 0. In contrast, when ε > 0.095 the probability that the constraint
will bind in period 1 positive. In this second case, the model must be solved numerically
as shown in the Appendix).

         The calibration of the degree of interest rate stickiness (µ) is more difficult. Although
there is compelling evidence on the imperfect adjustment of retail interest rates rate to
movements in policy rates, the precise degree of such rigidity varies across studies. For
the US, Kwapil and Scharler (2010) estimate a short-run pass-through of changes in the
policy rate to consumer loans of 0.3.14 Based on this evidence we assume that only 50
percent of the banks can adjust their lending rates in response to a change in their funding
costs. Note also that, as long as there is some interest rate stickiness (i.e., µ > 0), the
calibration of this parameter does not affect the qualitative behavior of our model. In the
long-run, in contrast, pass-through is assumed to be complete.

         Finally, we assume that the deposit rate shock υ in period 0,

                                                R1 = R + υ,                                                (13)

can take three values, namely υ = {0, +0.02, −0.02}. The size of the shock matches the
standard deviation of the yield on the US 3-Month Treasury Bill over the 1985-2007
period.



3         Decentralized Equilibrium
We can now analyze the decentralized equilibrium of the economy without any government
intervention. In order to build intuition, we consider first the effects of the financial friction
(which manifests itself conditional on the endowment shock) by comparing the allocation
in our model economy with an economy in which the collateral constraint is never binding.
Second, we will analyze the effect of the macroeconomic friction (which manifests itself
conditional on the bank funding cost shock) by comparing the allocation in our model
    13
      As discussed in more detail below, a coefficient of relative risk aversion (%) larger than 1 is crucial for
some of our results.
   14
      These estimates are in line with older studies on interest rate pass-through in the U.S.. For example,
Cottarelli and Kourelis (1994) estimate a short run pass through of 0.32 and a long run pass through of
1; Moazzami (1999) and Borio and Fritz (1995) report a short run coefficient of 0.4 and 0.34, respectively.



                                                       14
economy with an economy with fully flexible interest rates. Third, and finally, we will
analyze the full model, when both frictions are at work simultaneously.



3.1      Financial Friction
The financial friction affects the economy only when the collateral constraint is not binding
today but can bind tomorrow with a positive probability. We label states in which the
collateral constraint is binding as “crisis states” and interpret the probability that the
constraint will bind in period 1 (i.e., the crisis probability) as our measure of financial
stability.15

       Figure 2 displays the behavior of key endogenous variables for different values of the
maximum size of the shock (ε, displayed on the horizontal axis), which parametrizes the
volatility of the shock. As we discussed earlier, for given parameter values and hence
level of consumption and borrowing in period zero, the threshold for ε that makes the
collateral constraint bind in period one with positive probability is εb ' 0.095.

       The upper-left panel of Figure 2 plots the equilibrium level of borrowing in period 0
(b1 ). Conditional on b1 , it is possible to compute net worth (e − b1 RL1 ), consumption
(c1 ), and the probability of observing a crisis (π) in period 1, which are plotted in the
other three panels.


                            Borrowing (b )                              Net Worth (e−b1RL1)
                                        1
             0.96                                              0.32

                                                               0.31

             0.94                                               0.3

                                                               0.29

             0.92
                 0   0.05        0.1         0.15   0.2           0   0.05       0.1        0.15   0.2

                        Consumption (c1)                                Crisis Probability (π)
             0.98                                               0.2



             0.97                                               0.1



             0.96                                                0
                 0   0.05        0.1         0.15   0.2           0   0.05       0.1        0.15   0.2
                                                     Baseline (υ=0)


            Figure 2 Model Equilibrium with Financial Friction.           On the
            horizontal axis is the maximum size of the endowment shock (), which
            parametrizes its volatility.
  15
    Woodford (2012), Stein (2012), and Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2013) define financial
stability in the same way.




                                                          15
    When ε ≤ εb the economy is never constrained, and households’ decisions are not
affected by the endowment volatility in period one ε: if faced with a larger than expected
shock in period one, households can borrow from banks to smooth consumption. In
contrast, if there is high enough volatility that the constraint can bind in period one with
positive probability, consumers insure against this possibility with precautionary saving.
Thus, they reduce borrowing and consumption in period 0 as well as in period 1 itself.
The probability of a crisis (π) is positive and increasing in the shock variance, but less
than one-for-one as lower consumption and borrowing at time zero, all else equal, make
the collateral constraint less likely to bind in period one.

    The mechanics of the comparative statics in Figure 2 is the following. The Lagrangian
multiplier (λ) in the Euler equation (7) represents the shadow value of the collateral
constraint. When λ is positive, the marginal utility of consumption in period one is
higher and hence consumption will be lower than the case in which (λ) is zero. Higher
marginal utility of period 1 consumption will also drive up marginal utility of consumption
in period zero and will lower the asset price.



3.2    Macroeconomic Friction
Let us now analyze how the macroeconomic friction affects our model economy. We know
from the New Keynesian literature that there are two sources of distortion in models
with monopolistic competition and staggered pricing. As we shall see below, our model
displays a similar behavior.

    First, monopolistic power forces average output below the socially optimal level. In
our model, monopolistic competition in the banking sector implies an inefficiently low
level of consumption, because lending interest rates are, on average, higher than under
perfect competition.

    Second, staggered pricing implies that both the economy’s average markup and the
relative price of different goods will vary over time in response to shocks, violating ef-
ficiency conditions.16 To see how this distortion works in our model, assume for the
moment that interest rates can freely adjust and that lending rates at the beginning of
period 0 are at the desired level, set as a markup over the marginal cost (RL1 = MR). If a
positive shock υ > 0 hits the economy, banks face a new, higher marginal cost and update
their lending interest rates such that RL1 = M(R + υ). Households update their loans
demand accordingly, and the loans market clears at a higher lending rate. In response to
the higher interest rate, consumption and borrowing in period 0 will be lower relative to
the case in which υ = 0.
  16
     Note here that, if no shock pushes the economy away from its steady state equilibrium, the average
markup would be equal to the constant frictionless level and the price of all goods in the economy would
be the same, implying that no efficiency condition would be violated.


                                                  16
   In a sticky-rate environment, not all banks can reset their lending rates so as to be
consistent with the new marginal cost. The fraction µ of banks that can reset lending
rates will set:
                                      µ
                                     RL1 = M(R + υ).

The remaining 1 − µ banks will not be allowed to reset their lending rates, implying that:

                                     1−µ         µ
                                    RL1  = MR < RL1 .

As a consequence, the aggregate lending rate in the economy would differ from its flexible-
rate counterpart. In fact, according to equation 10, the aggregate lending rate in the
sticky-rate economy becomes:
                                     RL1 = M(R + µυ),

which is lower than the lending rate prevailing under flexible rates in the case of a positive
bunk funding shock.

   A similar gap of opposite sign emerges when the υ shock is negative. In general,
interest rates stickiness results in an average interest rate, RL1 , which differs from the
one required to obtain the same allocation obtained under flexible interest rates (hence-
forth “flex-rates” allocation), thus also affecting the aggregate level of borrowing and
consumption. With a positive shock, debt and consumption are higher than in the flex-
rates economy, because interest rates increase by less than they would in a fully flexible
world. But, with a negative shock, debt and consumption are lower than in the flex-rates
economy, because interest rates decrease by less than they would in a flexible world. As
we shall see, this property has crucial implications for the results of our analysis when
the macroeconomic frictions interact with the financial friction.



3.3    The Interaction between the Financial Friction and the Macroeco-
       nomic Friction
In this section we show that the impact of staggered interest rates setting on the crisis
probability depends on the sign of the shock hitting the economy. In response to a positive
shock to the deposit rate, for instance as a consequence of an aggregate demand expansion,
the probability of a crisis in the sticky-rate economy is lower (increases less) than in the
in the flex-rate economy. In contrast, in response to a negative shock to the deposit rate,
for instance as a consequence of an aggregate demand contraction, the crisis probability
is higher (it falls less) than in the flex-rate economy.

   We first analyze the effect of a positive shock to the risk-free interest rate (Figure 3).
The benchmark is the economy with both frictions and no shock (solid line, i.e., the same
allocation as in Figure 2). The thin line with asterisk markers and the thin line with



                                              17
circle markers display the equilibrium after the shock has hit, under flexible and sticky
interest rates respectively.


                              Borrowing (b )                                      Net Worth (e−b1RL1)
                                          1
             0.96                                                     0.32

                                                                      0.31

             0.94                                                      0.3

                                                                      0.29

             0.92
                 0     0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2            0      0.05        0.1       0.15   0.2

                          Consumption (c1)                                        Crisis Probability (π)
             0.98                                                      0.2



             0.97                                                      0.1



             0.96                                                       0
                 0     0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2            0      0.05        0.1       0.15   0.2
                                         Baseline (υ=0)         Flex (υ>0)   Sticky (υ>0)


            Figure 3 Model Equilibrium with Both Frictions: Positive Shock
            to the Deposit Rate. On the horizontal axis is the maximum size of the
            endowment shock (). The thick solid line displays the equilibriums in the
            absence of shocks; the thin line with asterisk markers and the thin line with
            circle markers display the equilibrium after a positive shock under flex-rates
            and sticky-rates, respectively.


       As we showed before, under the assumption of sticky rates, the aggregate lending rate
in the economy does not increase as much as the bank funding cost following a positive
shock. On the one hand, lower lending rates —relative to the flex-rates case— prompt
consumers to borrow more (b1 ) in period 0 and to consume more (c1 ) in period 1, as
shown by the difference between the circles line and the asterisks line. All else equal,
this implies higher expected next-period refinancing needs (b2 ) and, therefore, a higher
expected probability that the constraint will be binding in period 1. On the other hand,
and despite the higher level of borrowing in period 0, expected net worth (e − b1 RL1 ) in
period 1 is larger under sticky rates than under flex rates, because of lower interest rate
repayments. All else equal, this implies a relaxation of the borrowing constraint in period
1. As the effect of the lower interest rates on net worth dominates the effect on borrowing
and consumption, the probability that the constraint will bind in period 1 increases by
less than in the flex-rates case in equilibrium —as we can see from the bottom right-hand
panel of Figure 3.17

       Consider now a negative shock. As we can see from Figure 4, in the case of a negative
shock, sticky interest rates exacerbate the effects of the financial friction rather than
  17
     The effect of the lower interest rates on net worth dominates the effect on borrowing and consumption
as long as the coefficient of relative risk aversion (%) is larger than 1. With log-utility the two effects cancel
out.


                                                                18
dampening it. Under interest rate stickiness (circles line), the average lending rate now
falls by less than the risk-free interest rate. In the sticky rate economy, consumption and
borrowing are lower (or increase less) than in the flex-rate economy (asterisks line) in
response to the shock, but next period interest payments are higher. As a result next-
period net worth in the sticky rates economy is lower than in the flex-rate economy, and
the crisis probability is higher (or it falls less).


                           Borrowing (b1)                                       Net Worth (e−b1RL1)
                                                                   0.34

          0.96
                                                                   0.32
          0.95

          0.94                                                      0.3
              0     0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2             0      0.05        0.1       0.15   0.2

                       Consumption (c1)                                         Crisis Probability (π)
          0.98                                                      0.2



          0.97                                                      0.1



          0.96                                                       0
              0     0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2            0       0.05        0.1       0.15   0.2
                                      Baseline (υ=0)         Flex (υ<0)    Sticky (υ<0)


          Figure 4 Model Equilibrium with Both Frictions: Negative Shock
          to the Deposit Rate. On the horizontal axis is the maximum size of the
          endowment shock (). The thick solid line displays the equilibriums in the
          absence of shocks; the thin line with asterisk markers and the thin line with
          circle markers display the equilibrium after a negative shock under flex-rates
          and sticky-rates, respectively.



   In conclusion, when both the macroeconomic and the financial friction are present in
the model, interest rate stickiness reduces the crisis probability relative to the flex-rate
equilibrium in response to an increase in bank funding costs (such as when aggregate
demand is expanding). However, it increases the probability of a crisis relative to the
flex-rate equilibrium in response to a fall of bank funding costs (such as when aggregate
demand is contracting).

   Thus, in our model, sticky rates act as automatic macro-prudential stabilizer in re-
sponse to positive shocks, while they exacerbate financial stability concerns in response
to a negative shock. In this sense, the interaction of the two frictions has an asymmetric
impact on financial stability in the model, although the allocation is perfectly symmetric
in response to positive and negative shocks.

   These results are robust to assuming different values for all other parameters of the
model, including the size of the shock to the interest rate (υ) and the degree of interest

                                                             19
rate stickiness (µ). Changing these parameters does not affect the mechanisms driving the
result, but only the magnitude of the effects. In other words, for every possible value of
υ and µ the allocation under sticky-rates (circles line) is bounded between the allocation
under flex-rates (asterisks line) and the allocation where no shock hits the economy (solid
line).



4     Restoring Efficiency
In this section we discuss how government intervention, and in particular monetary and
macro-prudential policies, can address the market failures of our model economy.

    To build understanding and intuition for the main results, we first analyze the case in
which there is only the financial friction or the macroeconomic friction. We then consider
the case in which the policy authority faces both frictions with either one or two policy
instruments.

    A key result of this section is that a policy-maker with only a monetary policy in-
strument (say the interest rate) faces a trade-off between macroeconomic and financial
stability when the economy is hit by negative shock to bank funding costs and cannot
achieve efficiency. In contrast, when the policy-maker has two instruments (e.g., a macro-
prudential instrument, such as a tax on bank credit; and a monetary policy instrument,
like for instance the policy interest rate), she/he can address both distortions and achieve
efficiency.


4.1      Addressing the Pecuniary Externality
As it is well known, the occasionally binding constraint that is in our model generates
a pecuniary externality. This pecuniary externality drives a wedge between private and
socially optimal allocations because private agents do not internalize the effect of their de-
cisions on the asset price that enters the specification of the borrowing constraint. Unlike
private agents in a decentralized economy, a social planner internalizes that consumption
decisions affect the asset price —as shown by the asset price equation in (7)— which, in
turn, affects the aggregate collateral constraint in (4).18

    To see this, following Jeanne and Korinek (2010a), we write the planner problem for
this economy as follows:
                                                                               
                                                            
                         u(b  ) +  0 u e + b2 + π1 − b1 RL1 + y − b2 RL2
                                                                                
                       
                           1     E                                              
                                                                                 
                max                                                                 ,
                b1 ,b2             sp
                                  −λ (b2 − p1 (e + b2 − b1 RL1 ))
                                                                                
                                                                                 
                                                                                

  18
     See Bianchi (2011), Jeanne and Korinek (2010a,b), Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2013)
for a more detailed discussion.


                                                 20
where the maximization is subject to the budget constraint (3), the aggregate borrowing
constraint (4), and the pricing rule of the competitive equilibrium allocation:

                                                        y
                                       p1 (c1 ) =             .
                                                     u0 (c1 )

The the asset price, p1 (c1 ), therefore, depends on aggregate consumption in the planner
problem.

   The corresponding first order conditions are:

                            u0 (c0 ) = RL1 E0 u0 (c1 ) + λsp p0 (c1 ) ,
                                                                    
                                                                                        (14)
                            u0 (c1 ) = RL2 + λsp (1 − p0 (c1 )).

By comparing (7) and (14) and noting that p0 (c1 ) > 0, it is clear that there is a wedge
between the decentralized and the planned allocation: the social planner saves more than
private agents in period zero whenever the borrowing constraint is expected to bind in
period 1 with positive probability. She/he internalizes the endogeneity of next period’s
asset price to this period’s aggregate saving. Consumption and borrowing in period zero
are also excessive relative to the planned allocation and the crisis probability will be
higher. So the decentralized equilibrium is (constrained) inefficient relative to the social
planner one. Instead, when the constraint is not expected to bind, the two allocations
coincide (if we ignore the other friction in the model).



Alternative macro-prudential tools

In this set-up, Jeanne and Korinek (2010a) show that efficiency in the economy can be
restored by imposing a state-contingent Pigouvian tax on borrowing in period 0 (namely
b1 (1 − τ )), rebating the proceeds with lump-sum transfers. The optimal tax is given by:

                                           E0 [λsp p0 (c1 )]
                                      τ=                     ,                          (15)
                                            E0 [u0 (c1 )]

This equation states that whenever the borrowing constraint is expected to bind in period
1 with positive probability, the policy-maker imposes a tax on borrowing in period 0.
The tax induces private agents to consume and borrow less in period 0, relative to the
equilibrium without government intervention.

   A Pigouvian tax on debt may be difficult to implement. This tax, however, is not
the only policy instrument that can decentralize the social planner allocation above. For
instance, the same allocation could be implemented by imposing reserve or capital re-
quirements on banks (Bianchi, 2011, Stein, 2012). An alternative way to decentralize this
equilibrium is by increasing directly the banks’ costs of funds, i.e. by using monetary pol-
icy. For instance, the policy-maker (e.g., a central bank in this specific case) can increase


                                                21
the bank funding cost by an additive factor ψ at the beginning of period 0, affecting
banks’ marginal costs and, therefore, consumers’ borrowing and consumption decisions.

       In Appendix D, we show that, if rebated in a lump-sum manner, this policy action
has the same effect of the Pigouvian tax above. Specifically, we prove that the value of ψ
that equates the two margins is given by:

                                              E0 [λsp p0 (c1 )]
                                         ψ=                     R.                       (16)
                                               E0 [u0 (c1 )]

This equation says that, as long as the shadow value of the collateral constraint (λsp ) is
different from zero, ψ is positive and can be interpreted as a prudential component to
interest rate policy. This, in turn, implies that whenever the constraint is binding with
positive probability, the central bank would raise interest rates so that households consume
less and issue less debt in period 0, reducing the probability of hitting the constraint in
case of an adverse shock in period 1.

       So, when the borrowing constraint is the only friction in the economy, a social planner
can achieve constrained efficiency by using a menu of policy instruments: by increasing
interest rates in period 0 (i.e., by introducing reserve requirements, but also by decreasing
the interest rate on remunerated reserves).19 These instruments are substitutes for the
Pigouvian tax on debt.



4.2       Addressing Monopolistic Competition and Interest Rate Stickiness
Our model embeds two macroeconomic distortions. The first is the presence of market
power in loan markets. The second is staggered adjustment of lending rates. Staggered
interest rate setting implies an inefficient level of borrowing and consumption because the
economy’s aggregate lending rate generally differs from the one prevailing under flexible
rates.

       In this section we want to study policies that address interest rate staggering in iso-
lation from the distortions induced by market power. Therefore, following the New-
Keynesian tradition, we remove the effects of market power introducing a subsidy (η)
to interest rate repayments such that M(1 − ηt ) = 1. Note however that removing the
subsidy does not affect our results.

       A simple way to address the consequences of interest rate stickiness is via direct
intervention on bank funding costs. Assume that the central bank can intervene directly
on R by an additive factor ψ. Thus, the marginal cost of funds for banks —conditional
on a shock to the risk free interest rate— would be given by R + υ + ψ. Then, the central
  19
       We show the equivalence of these instruments in Appendix D.



                                                   22
bank could set:
                                        ψ : RL1 = M(R + υ),

which is the flexible level of the lending interest rate. Solving this equality yields:

                                                   1−µ
                                             ψ=        υ.                                            (17)
                                                    µ

    Hence, in response to a positive shock (υ > 0), the central bank would raise interest
rates above the competitive equilibrium level by the factor ψ > 0; while in response
to a negative shock the central bank would lower interest rates below the competitive
equilibrium level by the factor ψ < 0.

    Like in the case of the pecuniary externality, this allocation could be also achieved
with other instruments. For instance, we could achieve it with reserve requirements or
taxes on borrowing. In the rest of the analysis we focus on monetary policy (and, hence,
on the direct intervention on the bank funding cost) as this is more consistent with how
macroeconomic distortions are targeted in practice by policy-makers.


4.3    Addressing Both Frictions with Two Instruments
We now analyze how to achieve efficiency when both frictions are present. We consider
a policy-maker who maximizes the expected utility of consumers (6), subject to their
budget constraints (3), the borrowing constraint (4), and interest rate staggering.20

    The two instruments that address the two distortions in the economy are the interest
rate wedge (ψ) and the prudential tax on debt (τ ). The prudential tax targets the
pecuniary externality. The interest rate wedge targets interest rate staggering.


    Consider first a positive bank funding cost shock. Figure 5 summarizes the results.
The dashed line displays the efficient equilibrium. The line with triangles plots the com-
petitive equilibrium allocation in which interest rates are flexible. The line with squares
plots the competitive equilibrium in which interest rates are sticky. In both allocations
there is the pecuniary externality at work.21

    With two instruments, the policy-maker can address the macroeconomic and financial
friction separately.22
  20
     Again, remember that we remove the effects of the market power distortion introducing a subsidy (η)
to interest rate repayments such that M(1 − ηt ) = 1. Our results in Figure 5 would be the same if we
were not to do this.
  21
     As we are removing the effects of the markup with the subsidy (η), borrowing under flexible interest
rates in Figure 5 (triangles line) is now slightly larger than borrowing in Figure 3 (asterisks line).
  22
     This is regardless of whether a single policy authority is in charge of both monetary and financial-
stability policy (e.g., a central bank) or whether one authority is in charge of monetary policy and the
other is in charge of macroprudential policy. In other words, in our set-up, there are no incentives for a
central bank and a financial stability authority to deviate from a coordinated equilibrium.


                                                   23
                                Borrowing (b1)                                         Net Worth (e−b1RL1)
                                                                       0.32

             0.98                                                      0.31

             0.97                                                       0.3

             0.96                                                      0.29

             0.95
                 0       0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2           0          0.05         0.1       0.15      0.2

                             Consumption (c1)                                          Crisis Probability (π)
               1                                                        0.2

             0.99
                                                                        0.1
             0.98

             0.97                                                        0
                 0       0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2           0          0.05         0.1       0.15      0.2
                Competitive Eq. − Flex (υ>0)        Competitive Eq. − Sticky (υ>0)          Policy − Two Instruments (υ>0)


          Figure 5 Efficient Allocation with Both Frictions: Positive
          Shock.      On the horizontal axis is the maximum size of the endowment
          shock (). The thin lines with triangle and square markers display the equi-
          librium after a positive bank funding cost shock under flexible and sticky
          interest rates, respectively. In both of these two allocations, the pecuniary
          externality is at work. The dashed line displays the efficient allocation. The
          subsidy η is in place to remove the effects of market power.


    The policy-maker can first increase the deposit rate by a factor ψ > 0 restoring the
aggregate lending rate that would prevail under flex rates.23 This moves the economy
from the sticky-rates equilibrium (squares line) to the flex-rates competitive equilibrium
(triangles line) with pecuniary externality. The policy-maker can then impose a distor-
tionary tax on borrowing (τ ) to address the pecuniary externality, moving the economy
to the constrained efficient equilibrium (dashed line).

    Note here that when ε ≤ εb in the flex-rate economy there is no inefficiency due
to the externality (i.e., the line with triangles and the dashed line coincide). This is
because there is no externality when the constraint never binds. However, when ε > εb ,
the efficient level of borrowing in period 0 is lower than in the flexible rates equilibrium
(upper-left panel of Figure 5), while consumption in period 1 is larger (lower-left panel
of Figure 5). This is because whenever the collateral constraint is expected to bind with
a positive probability, the tax on credit forces private agents to borrow less in period 0.
This increases their net worth and consumption in period 1, thereby also reducing the
probability of a financial crisis (upper and lower-right panels of Figure 5, respectively).

    As we saw before, in the sticky-rate equilibrium the net worth (and the crisis proba-
bility) is higher (lower) than in the flex-rate one because of the higher debt repayment in
period 1. With flexible interest rates, borrowing is lower, but it is more costly to service,
so net worth in period 1 is lower, and the probability of a crisis is higher. The tax on
  23
     Note that changing the order of the policy actions, or inverting the assignment of the instruments
would not alter the results.


                                                                  24
credit curtails borrowing without increasing debt service costs. As a result, in the efficient
allocation, the crisis probability is always lower than the flex-rate equilibrium, and can
fall below the sticky-rate when the endowment volatility is high enough.


                               Borrowing (b1)                                         Net Worth (e−b1RL1)
              1                                                       0.33

            0.99                                                      0.32

            0.98                                                      0.31

            0.97                                                       0.3
                0       0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2            0         0.05         0.1       0.15      0.2

                            Consumption (c1)                                          Crisis Probability (π)
              1                                                        0.2



            0.99                                                       0.1



            0.98                                                        0
                0       0.05        0.1         0.15       0.2           0          0.05         0.1       0.15      0.2
               Competitive Eq. − Flex (υ<0)        Competitive Eq. − Sticky (υ<0)          Policy − Two Instruments (υ<0)


         Figure 6 Efficient Allocation with Both Frictions: Positive
         Shock.      On the horizontal axis is the maximum size of the endowment
         shock (). The thin lines with triangle and square markers display the equi-
         librium after a positive bank funding cost shock under flexible and sticky
         interest rates, respectively. In both of these two allocations, the pecuniary
         externality is at work. The dashed line displays the efficient allocation. The
         subsidy η is in place to remove the effects of market power.



   Consider now a negative bank funding cost (Figure 6). To address the pecuniary
externality, the policy-maker can impose the tax on debt whenever there is a positive
probability that the constraint will bind in period 1, regardless of the sign of the funding
cost shock. To address the interest rate rigidity, when a negative shock hits the economy,
the policy-maker can lower interest rates by a factor ψ. Unlike the case of a positive
shock, however, achieving the flex-rate equilibrium already reduces the probability of a
crisis, as the higher borrowing than in the sticky-rate case is more than compensated by
the lower interest payment. So, when the policy-maker also uses the tax on debt, the
probability of a crisis is even lower than in the sticky-rate case, and it is always below it
regardless of the level of endowment volatility.

   In summary, with two instruments such as a tax on borrowing and the monetary
policy interest rate, a policy-maker can address both the financial and the macroeconomic
friction, thereby achieving constrained efficiency, independently of the sign of the shock
hitting the economy.




                                                                 25
4.4      The Trade-off: Addressing Both Frictions with One Instrument
Let us now consider the case in which both frictions are present in the model but the
policy-maker has only one instrument, namely the interest rate. When both macroeco-
nomic and financial frictions are present, if the policy interest rate is the only available
instrument, a policy-maker that aims to achieve both macroeconomic and financial sta-
bility faces a policy trade-off. The trade-off emerges when the economy is hit by negative
shock, because addressing both frictions requires interventions of opposite sign on the
same policy instrument.

       Consider a positive bank funding cost shock. As we showed earlier, both the macroe-
conomic and the financial friction result in higher borrowing in period 0 relative to the
socially efficient allocation. To address the macroeconomic friction, the policy-maker
can raise interest rates by the factor ψ = (1 − µ) υ/µ > 0, as implied by equation (17).
To address the financial friction, she/he can further raise interest rates by the factor
ψ = E0 [R(λsp p0 (c1 ))/u0 (c1 )] > 0, as implied by equation (16). Therefore, when a positive
shock hits the economy, a single instrument can restore efficiency.24

       When a negative shock hits the economy, however, the macroeconomic friction and
the financial friction require opposite actions on the interest rate. The macroeconomic
friction requires a decrease in interest rates: given that interest rates fall by less than
in the flexible rate case, the social planner intervenes to lower interest rates by the fac-
tor ψ = − (1 − µ) υ/µ < 0. In contrast, the financial friction still requires an increase
in interest rates independently of the sign of the shock. Hence, if the interest rate is
the only instrument, the social planner would try to lower interest rates to address the
macroeconomic friction and, at the same time, to raise the interest rate to address the
financial friction. As a result the optimal level of the policy interest rate, and hence of
the aggregate lending rate prevailing in the economy, would be higher than in the case in
which there are two instruments.

       In our model, the financial friction results in more borrowing than socially desirable
in period 0 when the collateral constraint has a positive probability to bind in period
1, regardless of the sign of the shock. In contrast, the macroeconomic friction generates
either more or less borrowing than socially desirable depending on whether the economy
is hit by a positive or a negative shock. It is thus evident that, if the policy-maker has
only one instrument, she/he may face a trade off in the face of negative shocks when the
economy requires interventions in opposite direction.25

  24
      As Kashyap and Stein (2012) note, a second instrument might be needed if the level of the interest
needed to address the pecuniary externality is lower than the one needed to address the interest rate
stickiness. In general, however, the two frictions require movements of the interest rate in the same
direction.
   25
      This case is different than the examples considered by Kashyap and Stein (2012) as it is a general
results that hold for all values of the interest rate needed to restore macroeconomic efficiency.


                                                  26
5         US Monetary Policy and The Great Recession
Under former Chairman Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve lowered its benchmark
rate from 6.5 percent to about 2 percent in 2000-01 as a response to the bursting of the
dot-com bubble. It further lowered interest rates to 1 percent in 2002-03 in response to
a deflationary scare, and finally started a sequence of tightening actions in June 2004,
bringing the Fed funds rate back to 5 percent by 2006 (see Figure 1).

         Against this background, Taylor (2007) put forth the idea that the Federal Reserve
helped inflate US housing prices in the mid-2000s by keeping rates too low for too long
after 2002. His main argument was based on the observation that the policy rate was well
below what implied by a standard Taylor rule, a good approximation to the successful
conduct of monetary policy in the previous several years (Figure 1). As a consequence,
“those low interest rates were not only unusually low but they logically were a factor in
the housing boom and therefore ultimately the bust.”26 Therefore, according to this view,
higher interest rates would have reduced both the probability and the severity of the bust
that led to the Great Recession.

         In this section, we evaluate this claim against the qualitative predictions of our model.
In particular, we will show that Taylor’s argument can be rationalized within the logic
of our model only if we make the auxiliary assumption that the Fed had only one policy
instrument at its disposal to pursue macroeconomic and financial stability. However,
Taylor’s argument is no longer valid within the logic of our model if we assume that
the Fed had two instruments to address the macroeconomic and the financial friction in
the model or, alternatively, that other government agencies were primarily responsible
for financial stability. In the latter case, which is the institutional set-up prevailing in
the United States, in response to a negative aggregate demand shock, the “optimal”
best response of the central bank is to lower interest rates without concern for financial
stability, which should be addressed by the second instrument (or by the another policy
authority with a different instrument).

         In this section, we also briefly review some evidence on what US financial regulation
did during the same period as a way to see whether or not a second policy instrument
was at work alongside the monetary policy interest rate. Albeit only descriptive and
circumstantial, this evidence suggests that the US regulators were at best ineffective in
curbing the continued expansion in subprime mortgage lending, well past the point at
which prime lending had started to respond to the ongoing monetary tightening. We
conclude from this analysis that the claim that US monetary policy is to blame for the
US Great Recession is not justified within the logic of our model, given the regulatory
regime prevailing in the United States and the evidence we report.
    26
    John Taylor, interviewed by Bloomberg at the American Economic Association’s annual meeting,
Atlanta, January 5, 2010, available at:
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=a44P5KTDjWWY


                                                  27
5.1    Model predictions
To assess Taylor’s contention through the lens of our model, consider a negative aggregate
demand shock hitting our model economy, such as the one that occurred in March 2000
when the dot-com bubble burst in the United States. Our simple model of financial
intermediation, with banks that fund loans with foreign deposits, represents this shock
in reduced form like a negative bank funding costs change, or a decline of the deposit
interest rate.27

    Then set the beginning of period 0 in the model as the year 2000, and assume that the
economy comes back to its pre-shock level of economic activity after four years, namely
at the beginning of 2004 (the beginning of period 1 in the model), consistent with the
fact that the policy interest rate was raised for the first time in June 2004.

    Figure 7 summarizes the qualitative behavior of the lending interest rate as implied
by our model when a negative bank funding cost hits the economy, and both frictions are
at work. We consider two policy regimes. In the first one, the policy-maker has just one
instrument at disposal, namely the monetary policy interest rate. In the second one, the
policy-maker has two instruments to address the macroeconomic and the financial friction
separately, namely a macro-prudential tool and the monetary policy interest rate.


    As we saw in the previous section, the policy-maker can achieve the allocation in
which there is no interest rate stickiness and no pecuniary externality in the economy
when she/he uses two instruments, regardless of the sign of the shock. However, if the
interest rate is the only policy instrument, there is a trade-off between macroeconomic
and financial stability in response to negative shocks.

    When there is only one instrument, the two frictions require interventions in opposite
directions on the policy interest rate (not reported) in response to a negative shock. On
the one hand, she/he would have to lower the policy interest rate to restore the aggregate
lending rate that would prevail in the absence of interest rate stickiness. On the other
hand, he/she would have to raise it to contain the excess borrowing generated by the
pecuniary externality. As a result, the lending interest rate in this environment would be
higher than the level prevailing when a macro-prudential tool can address the pecuniary
externality separately.
  27
     While the bursting of the dot.com bubble was a domestic shock, as we discussed earlier, bank funding
costs and deposit rates would be lowered also by en external demand shock. The key difference is that a
negative domestic aggregate demand shock works mostly via consumption and investment. An external
demand shock works via exports. In both cases, we need to assume that good prices are rigid for a change
in nominal interest rates to translate into a real interest rate change. As we noted earlier, our model
assumes that good prices are completely fixed in the short term. For simplicity, the model also abstracts
completely from the aggregate demand channels through which contractionary and expansionary shocks
are propagated to the economy or from exchange rate movements.




                                                   28
                    RL
                                                            Two policy instruments
                                                            One policy instrument
                          Negative shock


                    MR




                M(R+ν)




                            2000           2004             2008


              Figure 7 The Lending Interest Rate with ν < 0 and Differ-
              ent Assumptions on the Number of Policy Instruments.
              Two policy instruments and One Policy Instrument plot the lend-
              ing interest rate that would prevail when the policy maker addresses
              both the macroeconomic and the financial friction with two or one
              instruments, respectively.


   If we assume that the policy-maker has only the interest rate as a policy instrument,
our model supports Taylor’s argument. In fact, it suggests to keep interest rates higher
than the case in which a separate instrument targets financial stability in period 0. This is
to avoid excessive borrowing, an asset price increase, and thereby reducing the probability
of a financial crisis if the economy were to be hit by another negative shock in period 1.

   The implications for the Taylor’s argument are different if we assume that the policy-
maker has two separate policy instruments to address financial and macroeconomic sta-
bility. In this case, the policy-maker can achieve efficiency regardless of the sign of the
shock. If the excess borrowing generated by the pecuniary externality in response to a
negative shock is addressed by the macro-prudential tool, then it is optimal for the cen-
tral bank to lower interest rates in period 0 as much as needed to address interest rate
stickiness. In this second case, therefore, lowering the Fed funds rate as much as needed
to respond to the bursting of the dot.com bubble in 2001 and the deflationary scare in
2002-03 can be rationalized as an optimal policy response within the logic of the model,
while the Taylor’s argument cannot.



5.2   Some Evidence
Did the Fed have one or two policy instruments to respond to the busting of the dot.com
bubble and the subsequent deflationary scare? In the US, prior to the crisis, institutional
responsibility for financial stability was shared among a multiplicity of agencies, includ-
ing but not limited to the Fed. For instance, since the Glass-Steagall Act of 1932, US


                                              29
depository institutions (e.g., banks, thrifts, credit unions, savings and loans, etc.) have
been regulated by different federal agencies: the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
being in charge of nationally chartered banks and their subsidiaries; the Federal Reserve
covering affiliates of nationally chartered banks; the Office of Thrift Supervision oversee-
ing savings institutions; the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insuring deposits of
both state-chartered and nationally chartered banks. The Security and Exchange Com-
mission (SEC) being responsible for capital markets regulation, other agencies cover other
intermediaries and markets. So we can safely assume that a ”second” policy instrument
was available to the US policy-maker to address financial stability.

    The question then becomes whether or not regulatory policy was used to address
financial stability while monetary policy was focusing on macroeconomic stability. In
particular, Taylor’s contention could be justified within the logic of our model, even
assuming that there are two policy instruments, if we were to observe an ineffective
regulatory clampdown on mortgage lending during the period in which monetary policy
was unusually lax by the standard of the Taylor rule. Indeed, as we shall see below,
the regulatory effort to contain mortgage lending during the period 2003-06 was at best
ineffective, if not absent altogether.

    Figure 8 provides a picture of the evolution of the US mortgage market and the
Fed funds rate over the 2000-07 period. The picture also reports the last important
deregulation measure and the first tightening regulatory measures we can identify clearly
(vertical bars). Broadly speaking, the picture shows that as the Federal Reserve started
to tighten its monetary policy stance, the prime segment of the mortgage market turned
around, as one would expect. In contrast, the subprime segment of the market continued
to boom, with increased perceived risk of loans portfolios and declining lending standards.
Despite this, the first restrictive regulatory action we can identify was undertaken only
in late 2006, after almost two years of steady increase in the federal funds rate.


    The upper-left panel of Figure 8 (Panel a) reports the evolution of the federal funds
rate (annual average) together with mortgage originations by category over the period
2001-2007. While prime mortgage originations started to fall in 2003, non-prime mortgage
originations continued to increase in 2004 and 2005.28 The share of non-prime mortgage
over total mortgage originations went from about 20 percent in 2001 to more than 50
percent in 2006, experiencing the largest increase in 2004, while the Federal Reserve was
already tightening its monetary policy stance. A similar pattern emerges by looking at
the issuance of mortgage backed securities (MBS).29 The upper-right panel of Figure 8
  28
     By prime mortgage we refer to loans that conform to Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSE)
guidelines; by non-prime mortgage we refer to Alt-A, Home Equity, FHA/VA, and subprime mortgages.
  29
     MBS which can be issued or guaranteed by a government sponsored enterprise (GSE) such as Fannie
Mae or Freddie Mac and are usually referred to as “’agency MBS’.” Or they can be issued by private
institutions, such as subsidiaries of investment banks, commercial banks, financial institutions, non-bank
mortgage lenders and home builders usually called “private label” MBS.


                                                   30
                         a) Prime and non-prime (Subprime, ALT-A, Home equity                                                           b) Share of private-label Mortgage Backed Securities
                            and FHA/VA) mortgage originations                                                                              (MBS) over total MBS issuance

                         7                                                                          3.0                                 7                                                                            60
                                                                     SEC       FDIC 1    FDIC 2                                                                                       SEC         FDIC 1   FDIC 2

                         6                                                                          2.5                                 6                                                                            50

                         5                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                    2.0                                                                                                              40




                                                                                                          Trillion USD
                         4                                                                                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Percent
               Percent




                                                                                                                              Percent
                                                                                                    1.5                                                                                                              30
                         3                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                    1.0                                                                                                              20
                         2                                                                                                              2

                         1                                                                          0.5                                 1                                                                            10

                         0                                                                          0.0                                 0                                                                            0



                                Fed funds rate            Non Prime (right)              Prime (right)                                                  Fed funds rate             Private-label MBS (right)
                             Source. Inside Mortgage Finance, 2008 Mortgage Market Statistical                                              Source. Bloomberg, Dealogic, Thomson Reuters
                             Annual



 7                       c) Share of mortgage originations with LTV > 90% over                                                          d) Changes in lending standards & perceived level of
                            total mortgage originations                                                                                    credit risk in residential real estate loan portfolios
 6
                         7                                                                          35                                  7                                                                           30
                                                                     SEC        FDIC 1     FDIC 2                                                                                    SEC         FDIC 1    FDIC 2
 5
                         6                                                                          30                                  6                                                                           20
     Percent




 4                       5                                                                          25                                  5
 Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
 3                       4                                                                          20                                  4
                                                                                                          Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
               Percent




                                                                                                                              Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
 2                       3                                                                          15                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                         2                                                                          10                                  2
 1
                         1                                                                          5                                   1                                                                           -20
 0
                         0                                                                          0                                   0                                                                           -30



                                            Fed funds rate            LTV > 90% (right)                                                       Fed funds rate           Lend. Stand. (right)           Credit Risk (right)
                             Source. Inside Mortgage Finance, 2008 Mortgage Market Statistical                                              Source. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Survey of Credit
                             Annual.                                                                                                        Underwriting Practices



Figure 8 U.S. Mortgage Markets, the Federal Funds Rate, and Selected Regu-
latory Measures. The figure reports the Fed funds rate together with prime and sub-prime
mortgage marekt indicators from 2000 to 2008. The figures also reports (vertical lines) the last
important deregulatory measure and the first measures that regulatory measures that we can
clearly identify (see text for more details).


(Panel b) also shows how the share of private label MBS increased sharply in the 2003-06
period.

                    The lower-left panel of Figure 8 (Panel c) reports the federal funds rate together
with the share of mortgage originations with a Loan-to-Value (LTV) ratio greater than
90 percent. While in some countries a countercyclical maximum LTV limit is used as a
macro-prudential policy instrument, here we see that in the United States the share of
high-LTV mortgages spiked in 2005, two years after the beginning of the monetary policy
tightening.

                    Finally, the lower-right panel of Figure 8 (Panel d) reports additional evidence on
the fact that, while loan quality was relatively stable or improving from 2000 to 2003, it
deteriorated sharply from 2004 to 2007. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency

                                                                                                                         31
publishes an annual underwriting survey to identify trends in lending standards and credit
risk for the most common types of commercial and retail credit offered by national banks.
Using data from the 2009 survey, which covered 52 banks engaged in residential real
estate lending, Panel (d) reports the evolution of changes in underwriting standards (dash-
dotted line) and the perceived level of credit risk (dashed line) in residential real estate
loan portfolios.30 The figure shows that, while the level of perceived risk was sharply
increasing starting from 2004, banks started easing their lending standards from 2003
and did even more so in the 2004-05 period.

    Despite this evidence, US regulatory agencies, including the regulatory arm of the
Fed, did not take action while monetary policy was being tightened. On the contrary,
some agencies provided additional deregulatory momentum while monetary policy was
being tightened. For instance, the SEC proposed a system of voluntary regulation under
the Consolidated Supervised Entities Program in 2004 that allowed investment banks to
hold less capital (vertical line in our charts labelled SEC).

    When regulators finally decided to act, it was too late. It was not until September
2006 that they agreed on new guidelines aimed at tightening “non-traditional” mortgage
lending practices (vertical line labelled FDIC 1). However, these new underwriting cri-
teria did not apply to subprime loans, whose standards were modified in a subsequent
regulatory action that was introduced in June 2007 (vertical line under label FDIC 2).
By that time, more than 30 subprime lenders had gone bankrupt and many more followed
suit.

    This evidence, albeit circumstantial, suggests that regulatory function of the US fi-
nancial system was at best ineffective if not completely absent in addressing the financial
imbalances that continued to grow in the subprime mortgage market while monetary pol-
icy was tightened in 2004-05. Even though the variables plotted are equilibrium outcomes,
Figure 8 shows that policy measures aimed at tightening the subprime sector of the US
mortgage market kicked in much later than the tightening of monetary policy enacted by
the Federal Reserve.

    This evidence therefore suggests that, after 2004, US monetary policy was indeed
fighting a battle against an overheated housing and mortgage market with a single in-
strument, the policy interest rate. With no aid from the regulatory arm of the Fed itself
or other agencies, consistent with our model’s qualitative predictions when there is only
one policy instrument, one could argue that the Fed should have raised interest rate more
than it actually did. In this sense, Taylor’s contention that excessively lax monetary pol-
icy contributed to the likelihood and the severity of the great recession can be justified
within the logic of our model. Notice, however, that —given the US institutional context
  30
     Net percentage calculated by subtracting the percent of banks tightening from the percent of banks
easing. Negative values, therefore, indicate easing.


                                                  32
and the evidence we report— it is regulation (or the lack thereof) rather than monetary
policy per se that should be blamed for the subprime mortgage crisis.



6    Conclusions
In this paper, we develop a model with both a macroeconomic and a financial friction
(i.e., a bank lending interest rate rigidity that gives rise to a macroeconomic stabilization
objective and an occasionally and endogenously binding collateral constraint that gives
rise to a pecuniary externality) that speaks to the interaction between macroeconomic
and financial stability, and to the role of US monetary policy and regulatory policy in the
run up to the Great Recession.

    There are two main results. First, we find that real interest rate rigidity has a differ-
ent impact on financial stability (defined as the probability that the collateral constraint
binds) depending on the sign of the shock hitting the economy. In response to expan-
sionary shocks that raise the funding cost of banks (in short, a positive shock), interest
rate rigidity acts as an automatic macro-prudential stabilizer. This is because higher debt
today, induced by lower interest rates (relative to the flexible interest rate equilibrium),
is offset by lower interest repayments tomorrow, resulting in higher net worth and lower
probability of a crisis in the future. In contrast, when the economy is contracting and
bank funding costs decline (in short, in response to a negative shock), real interest rate
rigidity leads to a relatively higher crisis probability through the same mechanisms work-
ing in reverse: borrowing and consumption are relatively lower today, but they are offset
by relatively higher debt service tomorrow, resulting in lower future net-worth and higher
crisis probability. While the allocations in response to positive and negative shocks are
fully symmetric, the implications for financial stability are asymmetric.

    Second, we find that, when the interest rate is the only policy instrument to address
both the macroeconomic and the financial friction, and a negative shock hits the economy,
a policy trade-off emerges. This is because the two frictions require interventions of
opposite direction on the same instrument. Other instruments, however, may be at the
policy-maker’s disposal to pursue financial stability. Our model shows that when two
instruments are available this trade-off disappears and efficiency can be restored.

    Our analysis has implications regarding the role of US monetary policy in the run-up
to the Great Recession. In a series of recent papers Taylor (2007, 2010) suggested that
higher interest rates in the 2002-2006 period would have reduced the likelihood and the
severity of the Great Recession. Our theoretical findings support this argument only if we
make the auxiliary assumption that the US policy authority was seeking to address both
the macroeconomic and the financial distortion in the model with a single instrument,
namely the policy interest rate. In contrast, when the policy authority is endowed with

                                             33
two different instruments, interest rates can be lowered as much as needed in response to
a contractionary shock without concerns for financial stability. This is consistent with the
view of Bernanke (2010) that additional policy tools were needed to prevent the global
financial crisis from happening.




                                            34
References
Angelini, P., S. Neri, and F. Panetta (2011): “Monetary and macroprudential policies,”
 Temi di discussione (Economic working papers) 801, Bank of Italy, Economic Research Depart-
 ment.

Bean, C. (2010): “Joseph Schumpeter Lecture The Great Moderation, The Great Panic, and
  The Great Contraction,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(2-3), 289–325.

Beau, D., L. Clerc, and B. Mojon (2012): “Macro-Prudential Policy and the Conduct of
  Monetary Policy,” Working papers 390, Banque de France.

Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. R. Young (2013): “Financial crises
  and macro-prudential policies,” Journal of International Economics, 89(2), 453–470.

Berger, A., A. Demirguc-Kunt, R. Levine, and J. Haubrich (2004): “Bank Concentration
  and Competition: An Evolution in the Making,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(3),
  433–51.

Bernanke, B. S. (2010): “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” Speech at the Annual
  Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia, January 3, 2010, available
  at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100103a.htm.

Bianchi, J. (2011): “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,” American
  Economic Review, 101(7), 3400–3426.

Blanchard, O., G. Dell’Ariccia, and P. Mauro (2010): “Rethinking Macroeconomic Pol-
  icy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(s1), 199–215.

Borio, C., and W. R. White (2003): “Whither monetary and financial stability : the implica-
  tions of evolving policy regimes,” Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 131–211.

Borio, C. E. V. (2006): “Monetary and prudential policies at a crossroads? New challenges in
  the new century,” BIS Working Papers 216, Bank for International Settlements.

Borio, C. E. V., and W. Fritz (1995): “The response of short-term bank lending rates to
  policy rates: a cross-country perspective,” BIS Working Papers 27, Bank for International
  Settlements.

Cottarelli, C., and A. Kourelis (1994): “Financial Structure, Bank Lending Rates, and the
 Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy,” IMF Staff Papers, 41(4), 587–623.

Degryse, H., and S. Ongena (2008): “Competition and Regulation in the Banking Sector: A
 Review of the Empirical Evidence on the Sources of Bank Rents,” in Handbook of Financial
 Intermediation and Banking, ed. by A. Boot, and A. Thakor. Elsevier.

Diamond, D. W. (1984): “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 51(3), 393–414.

Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
  Diversity,” American Economic Review, 67(3), 297–308.

Espinosa-Vega, M. A., and A. Rebucci (2004): “Retail Bank Interest Rate Pass-through: Is
  Chile Atypical?,” in Banking Market Structure and Monetary Policy, ed. by L. A. Ahumada,
  J. R. Fuentes, N. L. S. Editor), and K. S.-H. (Se, vol. 7 of Central Banking, Analysis, and
  Economic Policies Book Series, chap. 5, pp. 147–182. Central Bank of Chile.

Gerali, A., S. Neri, L. Sessa, and F. M. Signoretti (2010): “Credit and Banking in a
 DSGE Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(s1), 107–141.



                                              35
Gordon, R. J. (2005): “What Caused the Decline in US Business Cycle Volatility?,” in The
 Changing Nature of the Business Cycle, ed. by C. Kent, and D. Norman, RBA Annual Confer-
 ence Volume. Reserve Bank of Australia.

Hannan, T. H., and A. N. Berger (1991): “The Rigidity of Prices: Evidence from the Banking
 Industry,” American Economic Review, 81(4), 938–45.

Jeanne, O., and A. Korinek (2010a): “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian
  Taxation Approach,” American Economic Review, 100(2), 403–07.

       (2010b): “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,” NBER
  Working Papers 16377, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Kannan, P., P. Rabanal, and A. M. Scott (2012): “Monetary and Macroprudential Policy
 Rules in a Model with House Price Booms,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 12(1), 16.

Kashyap, A. K., and J. C. Stein (2012): “The Optimal Conduct of Monetary Policy with
 Interest on Reserves,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1), 266–82.

Korinek, A. (2010): “Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality View,”
 Unpublished manuscript.

Kwapil, C., and J. Scharler (2010): “Interest rate pass-through, monetary policy rules and
 macroeconomic stability,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 29, 236251.

Mendoza, E. G. (2010): “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic
 Review, 100(5), 1941–66.

Moazzami, B. (1999): “Lending rate stickiness and monetary transmission mechanism: the case
 of Canada and the United States,” Applied Financial Economics, 9(6), 533–538.

Neumark, D., and S. A. Sharpe (1992): “Market Structure and the Nature of Price Rigid-
  ity: Evidence from the Market for Consumer Deposits,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  107(2), 657–80.

Posen, A. (2009): “Finding the Right Tool for Dealing with Asset Price Booms,” Speech to
  the MPR Monetary Policy and the Markets Conference, London, 1 December, available at
  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk.

Stein, J. C. (2012): “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 127, 57–95.

Svensson, L. E. (2010): “Inflation Targeting,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by
  B. M. Friedman, and M. Woodford, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics, chap. 22, pp.
  1237–1302. Elsevier.

Taylor, J. B. (2007): “Housing and monetary policy,” Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Kansas City, 463–476.

        (2010): “Getting back on track: macroeconomic policy lessons from the financial crisis,”
  Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis(May), 165–176.

Woodford, M. (2012): “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability,” NBER Working Papers
 17967, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.




                                              36
A     Appendix. Leverage
Consider a loan-to-value (LTV) constraint where one can borrow up to a fraction (Θ) of
the value of the collateral, say a house:

                                          b ≤ Θp.                                     (A.1)



    When the LTV constraint is binding with equality, the balance sheet is:

                          Assets               Liabilities
                        House price, p    Mortgage, b = Θp
                                          Downpayment, (1 − Θ)p


    The LTV constraint implies the following leverage ratio:
                                            p      1
                                Lmax =          =     .                               (A.2)
                                         p − Θp   1−Θ

Here, leverage L is well defined only if Θ < 1 (i.e., for positive levels of “equity”), and
L = Lmax when the LTV constraint is binding and L < Lmax otherwise.

   How does leverage behave in our simple model? In our model Θ = 1. So equation
(A.2) implies a unbounded maximum leverage ratio. In equilibrium, however, leverage is
pinned down by preferences, interest rates, the deterministic return on the asset and the
shadow price of the constraint and is lower than ∞.

    Figure A.1 reports the equilibrium leverage in our baseline model. Consider leverage
in period 1 (the period in which there is the constraint) before the shock to the endowment
realizes. Consistent with the above definition and the notation in the text, we have:
                                                p1
                                      L1 =           .                                (A.3)
                                             p1 − b2


    When the collateral constraint is never binding, equilibrium leverage in our baseline
model is equal to 8, even if for simplicity we set Θ = 1. When the collateral constraint
is binding with positive probability, leverage is lower and decreases with the maximum
value of the shock.

     Why does leverage (L1 ) is lower with more volatile endowment shocks? When the
collateral constraint is binding with positive probability (i.e., when π > 0) the Lagrange
multiplier (λ) becomes positive. As a result, households optimally reduce their desired
consumption and borrowing in both periods (b1 and b2 ). Lower borrowing in period 1
(b2 ) implies lower leverage. Lower consumption implies a lower asset price (p1 ), and a
lower asset price (p1 ) implies higher leverage as we can see from the partial derivative of
L1 with respect to p1 . The former effect dominates in our model.




                                             37
                      Borrowing (b )              Net Worth (e−b R )                 Consumption (c )             Borrowing (b )
                                   1                             1 L1                              1                          2
              0.96                             0.32                          0.98                          0.7

              0.95                             0.31                         0.975
                                                                                                          0.68
              0.94                              0.3                          0.97
                                                                                                          0.66
              0.93                             0.29                         0.965

              0.92                                                           0.96                         0.64
                  0         0.1          0.2      0        0.1        0.2        0         0.1      0.2       0        0.1         0.2

                      Asset price (p1)                Leverage (L1)              Crisis Probability (π)      Lagrange Mult. (λ)
               0.8                              8.5                           0.2                       0.04

                                                                             0.15                         0.03
              0.78                               8
                                                                              0.1                         0.02
              0.76                              7.5
                                                                             0.05                         0.01

              0.74                               7                             0                            0
                  0         0.1          0.2      0        0.1        0.2       0          0.1      0.2      0         0.1         0.2


              Figure A.1 Model Equilibrium with Financial Friction. On
              the horizontal axis is the maximum size of the endowment shock ().


B    Appendix. Debt-To-Income constraint
Consider a debt-to-income constraint rather than a LTV constraint:

                                                             RL2 b2 ≤ χe,

where total expected repayment period 2—interest plus principal, RL2 b2 —cannot be
larger than a fraction (χ) of expected income.

   The problem for the representative household therefore is:
                                                                                 
V1 = max u e + b2 + (θ1 − θ2 )p1 + π1 − b1 RL1 + θ2 y + π2 − b2 RL2 − λ(RL2 b2 − χe) ,
     b2 ,θ2

The first order conditions for the competitive equilibrium (CE) therefore are:

                          F OC(b1 ) : u0 (c0 ) = RL1 E0 u0 (c1 ) ,
                                                               

                            F OC(b2 ) : u0 (c1 ) = RL2 + λRL2 ,
                            F OC(θ2 ) : p1 = y/E0 [u0 (c1 )] .
                         

The only difference relative to the LTV economy is that RL2 now multiplies the Lagrange
multiplier in F OC(b2 ). The shadow price of the constraint will always be higher in the
DTI economy than in the LTV economy.

   This implies that the qualitative properties of the model are the same as in the LTV
economy. The allocations in the competitive equilibrium will be different, as well as the
maximum value of the endowment for which the constraint binds with positive probability,
but the behavior of the model is unchanged.



C    Appendix. Characterizing Monetary Policy
For simplicity, in the model, we represent monetary policy by assuming that the central
bank can affect bank funding costs with an additive factor ψ, so that the marginal cost
of funds for banks becomes R + ψ. In this appendix, we show that the effects of adding

                                                                        38
(subtracting) ψ are the same as those of increasing (decreasing) the coefficient of reserve
requirements or lowering (increasing) the rate of remuneration of those reserves in a
system of remunerated required reserves.

   Suppose that banks must hold a fraction φ of their deposits in the form of unremu-
nerated reserves:
                                   f (j) ≥ φd(j).                                (C.1)
Bank j’s balance sheet will be:

                                     Assets                    Liabilities
                                   Loans b(j)                 Deposits d(j)
                                   Reserves f (j)

In each period, bank j maximizes its profits:

                               max                  bt (j)RLt (j) + ft (j) − dt (j)Rt ,
                     RLt (j),bt (j),ft (j),dt (j)

subject to the demand schedule in (9), the balance sheet constraint bt (j) + ft (j) = dt (j),
and the regulatory constraint ft (j) ≥ φdt (j). Solving banks’ maximization problems
yields the following optimal level of the lending rate:
                                                          ζ Rt − φ
                                        RLt (j) =                  .
                                                        ζ −1 1−φ
This shows that the lending rate charged by banks is increasing in the coefficient of reserve
requirement (i.e., the reserve requirement is a tax on banks). Increasing (decreasing)
reserve requirements, therefore, has the same effect as adding (subtracting) ψ to R.

   Suppose now that banks are required to hold a fraction φ of deposits in the form of
remunerated reserves:
                                  f (j) ≥ φd(j),                                 (C.2)
where Rf is the interest rate at which required reserves are remunerated (i.e., rIOR in the
notation of Kashyap and Stein (2012)).

   Bank j’s balance sheet continues is unchanged. But bank j 0 s maximization problem
becomes:
                        max         bt (j)RLt (j) + ft (j)Rf − dt (j)Rt ,
                   RLt (j),bt (j),ft (j),dt (j)

subject to the demand schedule in (9), the balance sheet constraint bt (j) + ft (j) = dt (j),
and the regulatory constraint ft (j) ≥ φdt (j).

    Solving banks’ maximization problems yields the following optimal level of the lending
rate:
                                          ζ Rt − φRf
                              RLt (j) =                  .
                                        ζ −1 1−φ
We can now see from this expression that the lending rate, for given coefficient of reserve
requirement φ, is decreasing in the rate of remuneration of these reserves, Rf . So remu-
nerating these reserves can partially or completely offset the implicit “reserve requirement
tax”. Indeed, in the limiting case in which Rf =Rt , the lending rate coincides to the case
in which there are no reserve requirements.

                                                         39
D     Appendix. Alternative Policy Instruments
If there is only one friction in the economy, either the pecuniary externality or interest rate
rigidity, all instruments discussed in the paper can be used to address them individually.
And hence they are substitute in the sense that we can use one or the other to achieve
the same allocation.

   For instance, we could use monetary policy represented by the additive factor ψ to
address the pecuniary externality. To see this, note that the consumers’ maximization
problem becomes:
                                                                    
                                                                    
                     u(b1 ) + E0 u e + b2 + π1 − b1 M(R + ψ) + T R + 
                    
                                                                     
             max                                                       .
             b1 ,b2 
                                   +y − b2 RL2 − λ(b2 − p1 )
                                                                     
                                                                      
                                                                     

By equalizing the first order condition with respect to b1 of the decentralized equilibrium
and the social planner equilibrium, we can derive the level of ψ which closes the wedge:
                           0
                             u (c0 ) = RL1 E0 u0 (c1 ) + λsp p0 (c1 ) ,
                                                                    

                             u0 (c0 ) = M(R + ψ)E0 [u0 (c1 )] ,

Solving for ψ yields:
                                         E0 [λsp p0 (c1 )]
                                    ψ=                     R.                            (D.1)
                                          E0 [u0 (c1 )]
   Consider now a system of unremunerated reserve requirements. Reserve requirements
can be used to address the pecuniary externality or interest rate rigidity. With reserve
requirements, the consumers’ maximization problem becomes:
                                                                    
                                                          Rt −φ      
                      u(b1 ) + E0 u e + b2 + π1 − b1 M 1−φ + T R + 
                     
                                                                       
             max                                                          .
              b1 ,b2 
                                    +y − b2 RL2 − λ(b2 − p1 )
                                                                       
                                                                        
                                                                       

By equalizing the first order condition with respect to b1 of the decentralized equilibrium
and the social planner equilibrium, we can derive the level of φ which closes the wedge:
                          ( 0
                             u (c0 ) = RL1E0 u0 (c       sp 0
                                                                 
                                                  1 ) + λ p (c1 ) ,
                                            Rt −φ
                             u0 (c0 ) = M   1−φ     E0 [u0 (c1 )] ,

Solving for φ yields:
                                         E0 λsp p0 (c1 )
                                                        
                           φ=                                 E0 [u0 (c1 )]
                                                                                .        (D.2)
                             E0 u0 (c1 ) + λsp p0 (c1 ) −           Rt

    Similarly, in a system of remunerated reserve requirements, the consumers’ maximiza-
tion problem becomes:
                                                                       
                                                          Rt −φRf        
                      u(b1 ) + E0 u e + b2 + π1 − b1 M             + TR + 
                     
                     
                                                            1−φ            
             max                                                            .
              b1 ,b2 
                                    +y − b2 RL2 − λ(b2 − p1 )
                                                                          
                                                                           
                                                                          



                                              40
By equalizing the first order condition with respect to b1 in the decentralized equilibrium
and the social planner equilibrium, we can derive the level of Rf which closes the wedge:
                          ( 0
                             u (c0 ) = RL1E0 u0 (c1) + λsp p0 (c1 ) ,
                                                                    
                                           Rt −φRf
                            u0 (c0 ) = M     1−φ       E0 [u0 (c1 )] ,

Solving for Rf yields:
                           Rf = Rt − (1 − φ)Rt E0 λsp p0 (c1 ) .
                                                             

    In contrast, if there are both frictions in the economy, the pecuniary externality and
interest rate rigidity, not all pairs of instruments can be used to restore efficiency. In
particular, in our model, only the tax on credit can complement the other instruments
in restoring efficiency, while φ and Rf cannot do so. This is because both these two
instruments act on the same wedge, i.e. banks’ marginal cost of funds, and hence RLt . As
a result, they cannot be used independently of each other. To restore efficiency, we need
an instrument that affects the supply of credit (like all the monetary tools we considered)
and one that affects the demand, like the tax on borrowing.

    In this respect, our results differ from those of Kashyap and Stein (2012). This is
because, in the case studied by Kashyap and Stein (2012) R = IOR + SV , where R is
assumed to follow a posited Taylor rule. The macroeconomic environment is not fully
specified. So for a given level of R and SV derived from the Taylor rule, IOR can
always be adjusted to match the required level of the policy rate. In our model, the
macroeconomic friction, albeit simply, the macroeconomic friction is modeled explicitly.
And as we saw, when both frictions are at work, they require movements in opposite
directions in response to negative shocks. As a result, introducing remunerated reserves
is not sufficient to resolve this trade off.


E    Appendix. Numerical solution
This appendix describes the solution of the model and the solution method for the case
when the collateral constraint is occasionally binding with a positive probability. We
closely follow the approach proposed by Jeanne and Korinek (2010a). First, describe the
first order conditions of the model. Second, we derive the combination of parameter values
that make the collateral constraint binding with a positive probability. Finally, we show
how to solve for the optimal allocations of the decentralized equilibrium and the social
planner equilibrium.

   First order conditions. We solve for the equilibrium backward, as in Jeanne and
Korinek (2010a). As stated in the main text, in period 1 consumers maximize their utility:

                                  u(ci,0 ) + u(ci,1 ) + ci,2 ,

where, for simplicity, we assume a unitary discount factor. The period utility function,
u(·), is a standard CES function:
                                             c1−%
                                     u(c) =       .
                                            1−%




                                              41
Consumers are subject to the following budget constraint:
                 
                  ci,0 = bi,1 + (1 − θi,1 )p0 ,
                     ci,1 + bi,1 RL1 = e + bi,2 + (θi,1 − θi,2 )p1 + πi,1 ,
                     ci,2 + bi,2 RL2 = θi,2 y + πi,2 ,
                 

and the following collateral constraint:

                                             bi,2 ≤ θi,1 p1 .

The problem for the representative consumer therefore is:
                                                                                 
V1 = max u e + b2 + (θ1 − θ2 )p1 + π1 − b1 RL1 + θ2 y + π2 − b2 RL2 − λ(b2 − θ1 p1 ) ,
       b2 ,θ2

where net worth (e − b1 RL1 ) is taken as given. The first order conditions are:

                               F OC(b2 ) : u0 (c1 ) = RL2 + λ,
                           

                               F OC(θ2 ) : p1 = y/u0 (c1 ).

In period 0, consumers solve the following problem:

                                      max {u(b1 ) + E0 [V1 ]} ,
                                        b1

where we make use of the fact that, in equilibrium, θt = 1. The maximization yields:

                                u0 (c0 ) = RL1 E0 u0 (c1 ) .
                                                         


The first order conditions of the competitive equilibrium (CE) therefore are:

                          F OC(b1 ) : u0 (c0 ) = RL1 E0 u0 (c1 ) ,
                                                               

                            F OC(b2 ) : u0 (c1 ) = RL2 + λ,
                            F OC(θ2 ) : p1 = y/u0 (c1 ).
                         

When the economy is not constrained (λ = 0) the model has the following close form
solution:
                                                         −1
             0                             
              u  (c   ) = R                    ∗
                   1      L2                c1 = (RL2 ) %
                                            
              u0 (c0 ) = E0 [RL2 RL1 ] , =⇒
                                                                 1
                                              c∗ = b∗ = (R R )− % ,
                                               0    1     L2 L1
              p1 = RyL2                       p = y .
                                             ∗
                                           
                                                                1   RL2

Moreover, by definition, the collateral constraint must hold when the economy is not
constrained:31
                                       b∗2    ≤ p∗1 ,
                                      |{z}      |{z}
                                         c∗1 +b∗1 RL1 −e    y
                                                           RL2


which we can rewrite as:
                                                                     y
                                  e ≥ eb = c∗1 + b∗1 RL1 −          RL2 .

That is, whenever the endowment is above a certain threshold (e ≥ eb ) the economy is
  31
    Note here that we are assuming that profits are realized at the end of the period so that they have
no effect on the borrowing constraint.



                                                    42
never constrained. When the economy is constrained (e < eb ) consumers borrow up to
the limit and maximize consumption in period 1. In this case, b2 = p1 , so that:
                                                                  y
                                         c1 + b1 RL1 − e =                  .
                                                               u0 (c   1)

And using the fact that the utility function is in CES we have:

                                             c1 + b1 RL1 − e = yc%1 .                       (E.1)

Therefore, depending whether the constraint is binding or not, we can express borrowing
in period 0 as:
                                              −1
                                (
                                   (RL2 RL1 ) %     e ≥ eb
                          b1 =         %
                                     yc1 −c1 +e                                    (E.2)
                                        RL1         e < eb
We finally assume that the endowment is stochastic and follows a uniform distribution
e ∼ U (ē − ε, ē + ε).

Assumption on parameter values. As we discussed in the text, to be able to solve
the model we need to make assumptions on the value of two parameters: y and ē. In par-
ticular, we will consider values such that the economy may be constrained for sufficiently
large negative shocks, but is not constrained in the absence of uncertainty.
    First, we find a condition that is necessary and sufficient for the economy to be con-
strained with positive probability, conditional on e ∼ U (ē − ε, ē + ε). We know that the
economy is always unconstrained in period 1 if and only if:
                                                                       y
                                       e ≥ eb = c∗1 + b∗1 RL1 −           .
                                                                      RL2
When e is stochastic, the economy is unconstrained if and only if the above inequality
holds for all possible realizations of e. So it must be the case that:
                                                              y
                                     e − ε ≥ c∗1 + b∗1 RL1 −     ,
                                                             RL2
                                                              y
                                        ē ≥ c∗1 + b∗1 RL1 −      + ε.
                                                             RL2

Therefore, when ē < c∗1 + b∗1 RL1 − RyL2 + ε there is positive probability that the constraint
binds.
   Second, we need a condition that is necessary and sufficient for the economy to be
unconstrained when there is no uncertainty (i.e., ε = 0 and ē = e). When ε = 0, the
constraint is not binding in period 1 if and only if e = ē ≥ eb ; that is:
                                                                  y
                                          ē ≥ c∗1 + b∗1 RL1 −       .
                                                                 RL2

Therefore, with no uncertainty, when ē ≥ c∗1 + b∗1 RL1 − RyL2 the constraint never binds.
   Summarizing, we choose an ē such that the economy will not be constrained in the
absence of uncertainty, but it may be constrained for sufficiently large negative shocks:
            − %1              − %1            y               −1             −1        y
   (RL2 )          + (RL2 RL1 )      RL1 −       ≤ ē < (RL2 ) % + (RL2 RL1 ) % RL1 −     + ε.
                                             RL2                                      RL2

This implies that there is a threshold for the size of the shock (εb ) above which the
collateral constraint will start to be bind with positive probability. Specifically, the col-

                                                       43
lateral constraint can bind with positive probability for realizations of e in the interval
[ē − ε, ē − εb ]. The level of εb can be easily computed as:
                                                                                         y
                                     εb = ē − eb = ē − c∗1 − b∗1 RL1 +                    .
                                                                                        RL2


Competitive equilibrium. We find numerical values for consumption at time 1 (c1 )
from the Euler equation F OC(b1 ).32 In order to be able to solve this equation we need
to find an expression for borrowing as a function of consumption in both constrained and
unconstrained states, as we already did in equation (E.2), and then to weight those states
with their probability.
    Combining F OC(b1 ), the budget constraint, and the expression for b1 derived earlier
in equation (E.2) we get the following system of equations:
                                         h i
                             −%              −%
                         
                          1
                           b    = RL1 0 c1
                                      E           ,
                                                    −1
                                    (
                                      (RL2 RL1 ) %     e ≥ eb ,
                             b1 =         %
                                         yc1 −c1 +e
                                                       e < eb .
                         
                         
                                            RL1

By plugging the second equation in the first one we can write:
                          h ibinding                  h inon-binding          h i
             Pr(e < eb ) · b−%
                            1        + Pr(e ≥ e b
                                                  ) ·  b−%
                                                        1            = RL1 E0  c−%
                                                                                1  .

Now, by substituting for b1 , the left hand side (LHS) of this equation can be expressed
as follows:33

                                  Z b
                                 ē−ε                         −%                     Zē+ε
                            1            yc%1 − c1 + e                      1
                b−%
                 1     =                                               de +                   RL2 RL1 de =
                            2ε                RL1                           2ε
                                 ē−ε                                              ē−εb
                                 ē−εb                                 −%
                                         yc%1 − c1
                                  Z                                                         ē+ε
                            1                         e                             RL2 RL1
                       =                           +                         de +            e       =
                            2ε             RL1       RL1                              2ε       ē−εb
                                 ē−ε
                                                                  −%+1
                                             yc%1 −c1
                                         
                                                             e            ē−εb
                            1
                                 
                                              RL1       +   RL1                         RL2 RL1
                                                                                                       
                       =       RL1                                                  +            ε + εb
                            2ε                      −% + 1                 ē−ε            2ε
                                  %                                        ē−εb                        
                                 RL1                                   −%+1               RL2 RL1
                       =                         (yc%1 − c1 + e)                        +           ε+ε .b
                            2ε (1 − %)                                         ē−ε          2ε

By equating LHS and RHS numerically, we obtain the competitive equilibrium level of
consumption at time 1, where:
             %                                                                            
           RL1           %               b −%+1
                                                    %               −%+1     RL2 RL1      b
  LHS =                yc1 − c1 + ē − ε        − (yc1 − c1 + ē − ε)       +          ε+ε
        2ε (1 − %)                                                              2ε
  RHS = RL1 E0 c−%
                    
                 1     .
 32
      Rember that c0 = b1 from the budget constraint.
 33
                                                                                                                     Rb
      If X is uniformely distributed with U (a, b), then the nth moment of X is given by E [X n ] =             1
                                                                                                               b−a
                                                                                                                          xn dx.
                                                                                                                     a




                                                                  44
Finally, one can also derive the level of debt at time 0, by using again F OC(b1 ):
                                                   − 1 
                                                  −%    %
                                 b1 = E0 RL1 c1             .


Social planner. The social planner problem is solved with the same strategy. The first
order conditions are:
                                  0                 0          0
                     F OC(b1 ) : u (c0 ) = RL1 E0 [u (c1 ) + λp (c1 )],
                                   0                        0
                      F OC(b2 ) : u (c1 ) = RL2 + λ(1 − p (c1 )),
                                           y
                      F OC(θ2 ) : p1 = u0 (c    .
                    
                                             1)


First we find an expression for p0 (c1 ). From F OC(θ2 ) we get:
                                                  y
                                    p(c1 ) =                = yc%1 ,
                                               u0 (c   1)

and computing the derivative:

                                              ∂ (yc1 )
                                 p0 (c1 ) =            = %yc%−1
                                                            1 .
                                                ∂c1

     Notice here that the p0 (c1 ) is positive and decreasing. By looking at F OC(b1 ) for the
social planner problem, we can see that the she/he borrows less than in the competitive
equilibrium. In fact, given that λ is positive only when the constraint binds, u0 (c1 )SP >
u0 (c1 )CE implying that consumption and, therefore, borrowing at time 1 are lower relative
to the competitive equilibrium. On the other hand, the planner increases consumption in
period 1: given that p0 (c1 ) > 0, from F OC(b2 ) we see that u0 (c1 )SP < u0 (c1 )CE .
     We also need a value of λ. Notice that the Lagrange multiplier of the social planner is
numerically different from the one of the competitive equilibrium problem. In fact, from
F OC(b2 ) we get
                                               c−% − RL2
                                         λ= 1            .
                                                 1+y
Combining these two results we can compute:

                                                                       e ≥ eb ,
                               (
                                 0 
                   λp0 (c1 ) =    %y  −1        %−1
                                                    
                                 1+y c1  − RL2 c1                      e < eb .

We can now solve for the level of c1 . The F OC(b1 ) can be written:
                                            h               i
                             b−%
                              1   =  R   E
                                       L1 0  c−%
                                              1  + λp 0
                                                        (c1 .
                                                           )




                                                 45
The LHS is the same as before. The RHS now is:

                     Z b
                    ē−ε
                                                               Zē+ε
              RL1                   %y  −1                  RL1
                           c−%
                            1    +               %−1
                                        c − RL2 c1      de +           c−%
                                                                        1 de,
              2ε                   1+y 1                     2ε
                    ē−ε                                                   ē−εb
                                                                      
              RL1     −%   %y  −1         %−1             b
                                                             
                                                                    −%
                                                                       
                                                                         b
                     c1 +       c − RL2 c1            ε − ε + c1 ε + ε        ,
              2ε          1+y 1
                                                             
              RL1      %y  −1                        
                                                             −%
                           c1 − RL2 c%−1
                                     1        ε − ε b
                                                        + 2c 1  ε
              2ε     1+y

And by equalizing LHS to RHS numerically, we obtain consumption at time 1, where:
                 %                                                                           
               RL1         %               b −%+1
                                                       %               −%+1     RL2 RL1      b
  LHS   =                yc1 − c1 + ē − ε         − (yc1 − c1 + ē − ε)       +          ε+ε
            2ε (1 − %)                                                             2ε
                                                              
            RL1       %y  −1                
                           c1 − RL2 c%−1         ε − εb + 2c−%
                                                       
  RHS   =                               1                    1 ε .
             2ε     1+y

Finally, we can derive the optimal expression for borrowing at time 1 from the social
planner F OC(b1 ):
                                      h                 i− 1
                           b1 = RL1 E0 c−%       0           %
                                         1  + λp   (c1 )       .


Crisis Probability. The crisis probability is defined as the probability that the con-
straint binds. Therefore:
                                    
                          Pr b2 > p1

                                               Z b
                                              ē−ε
                                         1                  1        
                                     =               de =       ε − εb .
                                         2ε                 2ε
                                              ē−ε

By using the optimality conditions and the budget constraint, this expression can be
written as                                               
                                                     y
                          Pr (c1 − (e − b1 RL1 ) > 0        .
                                                  u (c1 )
Now, knowing that e = ē + ε̃ and that ε̃ ∼ U(−ε, ε), we can write
                                                          
                                                           y 
                                ε̃ < c1 − ē + b1 RL1 − u0 (c1 )  .
                             Pr                                  
                                      |            {z           }
                                                      x

In particular, the probability that the constraint binds is given by:
                            x − (−ε)   c1 − ē + b1 RL1 − y/u0 (c1 ) + ε
             Pr − ε ≤ ε̃ < x =         =                                   .
                                 2ε                     2ε




                                                 46
