NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM
Emmanuel Farhi
Matteo Maggiori
Working Paper 22295
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22295

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

We thank Pol Antras, Julien Bengui, Guillermo Calvo, Dick Cooper, Ana Fostel, Jeffry Frieden,
Mark Gertler, Gita Gopinath, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni,
Arnaud Mehl, Brent Neiman, Jaromir Nosal, Maurice Obstfeld, Jonathan Ostry, Helene Rey,
Kenneth Rogoff, Jesse Schreger, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at the
NBER (IFM, MEFM, EFMB), University of California Berkeley, University of Chicago Booth,
Yale University, Boston College, Boston University, Stanford GSB, MIT Sloan, LSE, LBS,
Oxford University, Imperial College, PSE Conference of Sovereign Risk, Harvard University,
CREI-Pompeu Fabra, Brown University, Yale Cowles Conference on General Equilibrium
Theory, Einaudi Institute, Toulouse School of Economics, University of Virginia, University of
Lausanne, IEES, IMF, ECB, BIS, Boston Fed, ECB-Fed biennial joint conference, Minnesota
workshop in macroeconomic theory, Wharton conference on liquidity, Bank of Italy, Boston Fed,
Bank of Canada annual conference, Hydra conference, SED, Econometric Society, Chicago
Booth junior conference in international macro-finance, CSEF-IGIER Symposium on Economics
and Institutions. We thank Michael Reher for excellent research assistance. Maggiori gratefully
acknowledges the financial support of the NSF (1424690), and Weatherhead Center for
International Affairs at Harvard University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Emmanuel Farhi and Matteo Maggiori. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Model of the International Monetary System
Emmanuel Farhi and Matteo Maggiori
NBER Working Paper No. 22295
May 2016, Revised December 2016
JEL No. E12,E42,E43,E44,E52,E61,F02,F31,F32,F33,F34,F36,F38,F42,F44,F53,F55,G11,G12,
G15,G18,G21,G23,
ABSTRACT
We propose a simple model of the international monetary system. We study the world supply and
demand for reserve assets denominated in different currencies under a variety of scenarios: a
Hegemon vs. a multipolar world; abundant vs. scarce reserve assets; a gold exchange standard vs.
a floating rate system. We rationalize the Triffin dilemma, which posits the fundamental
instability of the system, as well as the common prediction regarding the natural and beneficial
emergence of a multipolar world, the Nurkse warning that a multipolar world is more unstable
than a Hegemon world, and the Keynesian argument that a scarcity of reserve assets under a gold
standard or at the zero lower bound is recessionary. Our analysis is both positive and normative.

Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
emmanuel.farhi@gmail.com
Matteo Maggiori
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer building
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA, 02138
and NBER
maggiori@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Throughout history, the International Monetary System (IMS) has gone through radical transformations
that have shaped global economic outcomes. It has been the constant focus of world powers, has fostered innumerable international policy initiatives, and has captured the imagination of some of the best
economic minds. Yet it remains an elusive topic with little or no intellectual organizing framework. A
manifestation of this fuzziness is that, even among economists, there is no consensus regarding the defining features of the IMS.
We consider the IMS as the collection of three key attributes: (i) the supply of and demand for reserve
assets; (ii) the exchange rate regime; and (iii) international monetary institutions. A major contribution
of our paper is to show how the modern theoretical apparata developed to analyze sovereign debt crises,
oligopolistic competition, and Keynesian macroeconomics, can be combined to build a theoretical equilibrium framework of the IMS.1 Our framework provides a rich set of new insights. It also allows us to
match the historical evidence, to make sense of the leading historical debates, and to demonstrate their
current relevance.
The key ingredients of the model are as follows. World demand for reserve assets arises from the
presence of international investors in the Rest of the World (RoW) with mean-variance preferences. Risky
assets are in elastic supply, but safe (reserve) assets are supplied by either one (monopoly Hegemon
world) or a few (oligopoly multipolar world) risk-neutral reserve countries under Cournot competition.
Reserve countries issue reserve assets that are denominated in their respective currencies and have limited
commitment. Ex-post, in bad states of the world, they face a trade-off between on the one hand devaluing
their currencies and inflating away the debt to limit real repayments, and on the other hand incurring the
resulting “default cost”; ex-ante, they issue debt before interest rates are determined. This allows for the
possibility of self-fulfilling confidence crises à la Calvo (1988).
The model is both flexible and modular. It allows us to incorporate a number of important additional
features: nominal rigidities under either a gold-exchange standard or a system of floating exchange rates,
liquidity preferences and network effects, fiscal capacity, currency of pricing, endogenous reputation, and
private issuance. The model is solvable with pencil and paper and delivers closed-form solutions.
We begin our analysis with the case of a monopoly Hegemon issuer. The IMS consists of three successive zones that correspond to increasing levels of issuance: a Safety zone, an Instability zone, and
a Collapse zone. In the Safety zone, the Hegemon never devalues its currency, irrespective of investor
expectations. In the Instability zone, the Hegemon only devalues its currency when it is confronted with
unfavorable investor expectations. Finally, in the Collapse zone, the Hegemon always devalues its currency, once again irrespective of investor expectations.
In this setting, the Hegemon obtains monopoly rents in the form of a positive endogenous safety premium on reserve assets. The trade-off between maximizing monopoly rents and minimizing risk confronts
1A

non-exhaustive list of the relevant sovereign default literature, following Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), includes contributions to the study of self-fulfilling debt crises (Calvo (1988), Cole and Kehoe (2000), Aguiar et al. (2016)), and of contagion
(Lizarazo (2009), Arellano and Bai (2013), Azzimonti, De Francisco and Quadrini (2014), Azzimonti and Quadrini (2016)).

1

the Hegemon with a stark choice: restrict its issuance or expand it at the cost of risking a confidence crisis.
We show that this dilemma is exacerbated in situations in which the global demand for reserves outstrips
the safe debt capacity of the Hegemon.
In addition to its positive predictions, the model also lends itself to a normative analysis. Contrary to
the intuition that the monopoly distortion present in our model should lead to under-issuance, we show that
the Hegemon may either under- or over-issue from a social welfare perspective. We trace this surprising
result to the fact that the Hegemon’s decisions involve not only the traditional quantity dimension, but also
an additional risk dimension: by issuing more and taking the risk of a confidence crisis, the Hegemon fails
to internalize the risk of destroying the infra-marginal surplus of the rest of the world. This infra-marginal
surplus is higher, and hence over-issuance is more likely to obtain, the more convex the demand curve
for reserve assets. We draw an analogy with the classic monopoly theory of quality developed by Spence
(1975) in a context in which quality is related to quantity via an endogenous equilibrium mapping.
These results rationalize the famous Triffin dilemma (Triffin (1961)). In 1959, Triffin exposed the
fundamental instability of the Bretton Woods system and predicted its collapse; he foresaw that the U.S.,
confronted with a growing foreign demand for reserve assets from the rest of the world, would eventually
stretch itself so much as to become vulnerable to a confidence crisis that would force a devaluation of
the Dollar. Indeed, time proved Triffin right. Faced with a full-blown run on the Dollar, the Nixon administration first devalued the Dollar against gold in 1971 (the “Nixon shock”) and ultimately abandoned
convertibility and let the Dollar float in 1973.
Despres, Kindleberger and Salant (1966) dismissed Triffin’s concerns about the stability of the U.S.
international position by providing a “minority view”, according to which the U.S. acted as a “world
banker” providing financial intermediation services to the rest of the world: the U.S. external balance
sheet was therefore naturally composed of safe liquid liabilities and risky illiquid assets. They considered
this form of intermediation to be natural and stable.
Our model offers a bridge between the Triffin and minority views: while our model shares the latter’s
“world banker” view of the Hegemon, it emphasizes that banking is a fragile activity that is subject to selffulfilling runs during episodes of investor panic. Importantly, the runs in our model pose a much greater
challenge than runs on private banks à la Diamond and Dybvig (1983), as there is no natural Lender of
Last Resort (LoLR) with a sufficient fiscal capacity to support a Hegemon of the size of the U.S.
Our theoretical foundations allow us to be much more precise than this earlier informal literature
was. The model identifies the relevant indicator of the underlying fragility as the gross external debt
position of the Hegemon, and not its net position, as sometimes hinted at by Triffin. It allows us to
clarify how the problem is in part external, as originally emphasized by Triffin, and also in part fiscal
as recently conjectured by Farhi, Gourinchas and Rey (2011) and Obstfeld (2011). It also enables us to
make predictions regarding the factors that are likely to accentuate the dilemma, and to identify possible
remedies.
We show that the deeper logic that underlies the Triffin dilemma extends well beyond this particular
historical episode. Indeed, it can be used to understand how the expansion of Britain’s reserves ultimately
2

led to a confidence crisis on Sterling — partly due to France’s attempts to liquidate its sterling reserves —
which resulted in the devaluation of Sterling in 1931 and forced the U.K. off the gold-exchange standard.
Similarly, the U.S., the other meaningful issuer of reserve assets at the time, faced a confidence shock
following Britain’s devaluation, and ultimately also had to devalue in 1933 (see Figure 1 Panel (c)). Figure
1 Panel (a) illustrates the creation, expansion, and demise of the gold-exchange standard of the 1920s:
monetary reserve assets expanded as a percentage of total reserves from 28% in 1924 to 42% in 1928, but
then shrank to 8% by 1932.
Our model shows that the core of the Triffin logic transcends the particulars of exchange rate regimes.
It does not rely on the gold-exchange standard, and it is relevant to the current system of floating exchange
rates, because reserve assets embed the implicit promise that the corresponding reserve currencies will not
be devalued in times of crisis. The model cautions that the high demand for reserves in the post-Asiancrisis global-imbalances era may activate the Triffin margin. Indeed, Gourinchas and Rey (2007a,b) have
documented that the U.S. activities as a world banker are today performed on a much grander scale than
when originally debated in the 1960s.2 In other words, the “bank” has gotten bigger and so have the
fragility concerns emphasized by our model. The U.S. external debt, which currently stands at 158% of
GDP and of which 85% is denominated in dollars, heightens the possibility of a Triffin-like event. A
number of economists have warned against a possible sudden loss of confidence in the Dollar: perhaps
most prominently, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001, 2007) have argued that the likely future reversal of the U.S.
current account would lead to a 30% depreciation of the Dollar.
Our model uncovers an important interaction between the Triffin logic and the exchange rate regime.
To understand this interaction, we introduce nominal rigidities, gold, and study a gold-exchange standard. We model gold as a reserve asset and the gold-exchange standard as a monetary policy regime that
maintains a constant nominal price of gold in all currencies. The gold parity completely determines the
stance of monetary policy (the interest rate), thus leaving no room for domestic macroeconomic stabilization: a lower price of gold is associated with tight-money (a higher interest rate). Fluctuations in the
demand/supply of reserve assets affect the “natural” interest rate (the real interest rate consistent with full
employment). Since the nominal interest rate cannot adjust, this results in fluctuations in output. Recessions occur when reserve assets are “scarce”, i.e. when there is excess demand for reserve assets at full
employment and at prevailing world interest rates.
The structure of the IMS can therefore catalyze the sort of recessionary forces emphasized by Keynes
(1923). Keynes argued not only that the world should not return to a gold standard, in order to free up
monetary policy for domestic stabilization, but also that, if the world were to return to a gold standard,
it should not do so at pre-WWI parities because the ensuing tight money policy would be recessionary.
These arguments were not successful in the short run, and by the time of the Genoa conference in 1922 the
world was largely back on a tight gold standard. The conference, however, recognized the reserve-scarcity
2A

recent theoretical literature has predominantly focused on the asymmetric risk sharing between the U.S. and RoW
(Bernanke (2005), Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2009),
Mendoza, Quadrini and Rıos-Rull (2009), Gourinchas, Govillot and Rey (2011), Maggiori (2012)).

3

argument and attempted to solve it by expanding the role of monetary assets as reserves in addition to gold
(see Figure 1 Panel (a)), thereby giving rise to a gold-exchange standard.
We show that the Triffin dilemma is particularly acute under a gold-exchange standard. Indeed in
such a regime, the Hegemon faces a perfectly elastic demand curve which increases its incentives to
issue. However, the Hegemon’s issuance capacity might not be sufficient to prevent a world recession. A
confidence shock has particularly severe repercussions in this setting since, by wiping out the effective
stock of reserves, it causes an even more severe recession. Furthermore, for any given level of issuance,
confidence crises are more likely since the Hegemon now faces an extra ex-post incentive to devalue in
order to stimulate its economy. Such domestic output stabilization considerations played an important
role in the U.K.’s decision to devalue Sterling in 1931, and the U.S.’s decision to devalue the Dollar in
1933 and again in 1971-73.
Under a floating exchange rate regime, away from the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB), world central banks
can adjust interest rates and stabilize output. At the ZLB, interest rates are fixed and the economics of the
IMS mimic those of the gold-exchange standard. Hence, our model draws a profound parallel between
the events and debates of the 1920s and 1960s and those of our time.3 It also links two frequentlyopposed views: the Keynesian view that emphasizes the expansionary effect of debt issuance, and the
financial stability view that stresses the associated real economic risks. In our model, at the ZLB, the
Hegemon faces increased incentives to issue and take the risk of a crisis (as in the financial stability view),
its issuance stimulates output as long as no crisis occurs (as in the Keynesian view), but the crisis, if it
occurs, is amplified by Keynesian mechanisms.
Until this point, we have focused on an IMS that is dominated by a Hegemon with a monopoly over
the issuance of reserve assets. Of course, this is a simplification. Historically, the IMS under the goldexchange standard of the 1920s was multipolar with the U.K. and the U.S. as a de facto duopoly: Figure
1 Panel (b) shows that 52% and 47% of the world reserves were held in pounds and dollars, respectively,
in 1928. While the current IMS is dominated by the U.S., it also features other, competing, issuers.
Indeed, Figure 1 Panel (d) shows that the Euro and the Yen already play a reserve-currency role. There
is speculation that the future of the IMS might involve other reserve currencies, such as the Chinese
Renminbi.
We explore the equilibrium consequences of the presence of multiple reserve asset issuers for both the
total quantity of reserve assets and for the stability of the IMS. More precisely, we analyze a multipolar
world with oligopolistic issuers of reserve assets that compete à la Cournot. Under full commitment,
competition increases the total supply of reserves, reduces the safety premium, and is therefore beneficial.
Furthermore, the largest benefits accrue with the first few entrants. This paints a bright picture of a
multipolar world, as extolled by Eichengreen (2011) among others.
Our analysis suggests that limited commitment may significantly alter this picture and render the
3 Our

results in Section 5 when we consider sticky prices at the ZLB are related to Caballero and Farhi (2014), Caballero,
Farhi and Gourinchas (2016), Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), Eggertsson et al. (2016), who also investigate the potential
recessionary effect of the scarcity of (reserve) assets, but do not take into account the oligopolistic nature of reserve issuance
and the limited commitment of the issuers with the associated potential for crises.

4

benefits of competition U-shaped: a lot of competition is good, but a little competition may be of limited
benefit or even detrimental. With a large number of issuers, total issuance is high but individual issuance
is low and each issuer operates in its Safety zone, so that the equilibrium coincides with that under full
commitment. A darker picture may emerge with only a few issuers if, as hypothesized by Nurkse (1944),
the presence of several reserve assets worsens coordination problems and leads to instability as investors
substitute away from one reserve asset and towards another. This warning is important given that, in
practice, most multipolar scenarios only involve a limited number of reserve issuers.
Nurkse famously pointed to the instability of the IMS during the interregnum between Sterling and
the Dollar. The 1920s were dominated by fluctuations in the share of reserves denominated in these two
currencies (Eichengreen and Flandreau (2009)); it was precisely these frequent switches of RoW reserve
holdings between the two currencies that led Nurkse to his skeptical diagnosis.
In our model, this possibility arises because limited commitment gives a central role to coordination
among investors. For example, we show that when moving from a monopoly Hegemon to a duopoly,
worsening coordination problems might not only lead to a less stable IMS but also to a fall in the total
supply of reserve assets. This aspect of our work is complementary to He et al. (2015), who study the
selection of reserve assets among two possible candidates using global games.
We also show that our framework can be generalized to capture a number of key additional aspects
of the IMS. This highlights the versatility of our framework, and the fruitfulness of our approach. In the
interest of space, we only briefly alert the interested reader to these extensions, in which we study: a
micro-foundation of the cost of devaluations as the expected net present value of future monopoly rents
accruing to a particular reserve issuer, highlighting another limit to the benefits of competition through
the erosion of "franchise value"; private issuance of reserve assets; liquidity and network effects; fiscal
capacity; currency of goods pricing; endogenous entry leading to a natural monopoly; the endogenous
emergence of a Hegemon and its characteristics; and LoLR and risk-sharing arrangements to reduce the
world demand for reserves.

2

The Hegemon Model

In this section, we introduce a baseline model that captures the core forces of the IMS. We consider the
defining characteristics of reserve assets to be their safety and liquidity, and think of the world financial
system as being characterized by a scarcity of such reserve assets, which can only be issued by a few
countries. We trace the scarcity of reserve assets to commitment problems, which prevent most countries
from issuing in significant amounts. In this section, we consider the limit case with only a single issuer
(the Hegemon) of reserve assets. We later consider a multipolar model with several issuers in Section 6.

5

2.1

Model Setup

There are two periods (t = 0, 1) and two classes of agents: the Hegemon country and RoW, where the
latter is composed of a competitive fringe of international investors. There is a single good. The Hegemon
and RoW endowments of this good at t = 0 are respectively w and w∗ , where stars indicate RoW variables.
There are two assets: a risky real asset that is in perfectly elastic supply, and a nominal bond that is
issued exclusively by the Hegemon and is denominated in its currency. There are two states of the world
at t = 1, indexed by H and L. The L state, which we refer to for mnemonics as a disaster, occurs with
probability λ ∈ (0, 1). The risky asset’s exogenous real return between time t = 0 and t = 1 is RrH > 1 in
state H and RrL < 1 in state L. We define the short-hand notation σ 2 = Var(Rr ) and R̄r = E[Rr ].4
The RoW representative agent does not consume at t = 0 and has mean-variance preferences over
consumption at time t = 1 with risk aversion γ > 0 given by
U ∗ (C1∗ ) = E[C1∗ ] − γ Var[C1∗ ].
The Hegemon representative agent is risk neutral over consumption in both periods
U(C0 ,C1 ) = C0 + δ E[C1 ],
with a rate of time preference given by δ = 1/R̄r ensuring indifference with respect to the timing of
consumption.
Devaluations. At time t = 1, after uncertainty is resolved, the Hegemon chooses its nominal exchange
rate. We denote the proportional change in the exchange rate by e, with the convention that a decrease in
the exchange rate (e < 1) corresponds to a devaluation. The real ex-post return of Hegemon bonds is Re,
where R = R̃/Π∗ is the ratio of the nominal yield R̃ in the Hegemon currency determined at t = 0, and
the inflation rate Π∗ in RoW, which we assume to be deterministic. For most of the paper, the reader is
encouraged to think of Π∗ = 1 (a simplification without loss of generality except for ZLB considerations).
In this baseline setup, we assume that deviations from some “commonly agreed-upon” path (i.e. a
state-contingent plan) of the exchange rate generate a utility loss for the Hegemon (at t = 1). We focus on
the incentives of the Hegemon to devalue in bad rather than in good times by only allowing the Hegemon
to devalue its currency in a disaster. This is a stylized way of capturing the notion that the temptation
to devalue is higher after a bad shock. This would happen if the Hegemon were also risk averse with a
decreasing marginal utility of consumption, but to a lesser extent than RoW.
For simplicity, we assume that the Hegemon can only choose two values of e = {eH , eL },with eH = 1
and eL < 1. We assume throughout the paper that eL = RrL /RrH . This assumption simplifies the analysis
4 We

take RoW to be composed of many countries and, within each country, many types of reserve buyers (central banks,
private banks, investment managers, etc.). We therefore assume that RoW is competitive and takes world prices of assets as
given. The reader can think of Rr as the return on a risky bond that is not a reserve asset. For simplicity, we introduce a single
risky asset in the model, but one could also think more generally of many gradations of riskiness. We assume that RoW cannot
short the Hegemon bond, i.e. it cannot issue the bond. This clarifies the nature of the monopoly of the Hegemon, but it is not a
binding constraint since RoW is a purchaser of the bond in equilibrium.

6

at little cost to the economics by making the Hegemon debt, when it is risky, a perfect substitute for the
risky asset.5,6
If the Hegemon chooses to devalue in a disaster, it pays a fixed utility cost τ(1 − eL ) > 0. The normalization by 1 − eL is introduced only for notational convenience and is innocuous since eL is a fixed
constant. This cost is exogenous in the present one-period setup and can be interpreted equally as a direct
cost or as a reputation cost; indeed we formally show in Section 7 that it can be rationalized in a dynamic
setting as the probabilistic loss of future monopoly rents (cheaper financing) that the Hegemon suffers
after a devaluation of its currency in a stochastic-punishment equilibrium with grim trigger strategies.
The devaluation acts as a partial default. Indeed, in the baseline model of this section it is isomorphic
to a partial default. In Section 5, in which we introduce nominal rigidities, this isomorphism breaks down
since devaluations lead to changes in relative prices either between goods or between goods and gold,
whereas partial defaults do not. We choose to model devaluations and not defaults because, historically,
lower repayments by reserve issuers have always been achieved via devaluations and not via outright
defaults (e.g. the U.K. in 1931, and the U.S. in 1933 and 1971-73).
Confidence crises. The timing of decisions follows the self-fulfilling crisis model of Calvo (1988).
The timeline is summarized in Figure 2; here we describe the decisions starting from the last one and
proceeding backwards. At t = 1, after observing the realization of the disaster, the Hegemon sets its
exchange rate by taking as given the interest rate on debt R and the amount of outstanding debt b to be
repaid to RoW. At t = 0+ , a sunspot is realized; the interest rate R on the quantity of debt b being sold by
the Hegemon is determined, and RoW forms its portfolio. The sunspot takes realization is s (for safe) with
probability α, and r (for risky) with the complement probability. At time t = 0− , the Hegemon determines
how much debt b to issue and its investment in the risky asset.
The crucial element in this Calvo timing is that the real value of nominal debt to be sold b is set before
the interest rate to be paid on it R is determined, and cannot be adjusted depending on the interest rate.
This timing generates the possibility of multiple equilibria, depending on RoW investors’ expectations
regarding the future exchange rate e in the event of a disaster. Indeed, as we shall see below, it gives
rise to three zones for b: a Safety zone, an Instability zone, and a Collapse zone. In the Safety zone,
e = 1 independently of the realization of the sunspot, so that the Hegemon debt is safe. Conversely, in the
Collapse zone, e = eL independently of the sunspot, so that the Hegemon debt is risky. In the Instability
zone, e = 1 and the Hegemon debt is therefore safe if the sunspot realization is s, and e = eL and the
Hegemon debt is therefore risky if the sunspot realization is r.
Our decision to focus on strategic risk rather than fundamental risk is motivated by the historical
evidence. The different incarnations of the IMS (e.g. the gold-exchange standard of the 1920s, and
the Bretton Woods system of the 1950s-1960s) tend to be stable for considerable periods of time and
5 In

general, the elasticity of the demand for risky Hegemon debt is an increasing function of the covariance between the exchange rate and the return on the risky asset. Monopoly power and monopoly rents are a decreasing function of this covariance.
6 As an extension, one can consider a different configuration with e > 1 and e < 1, which allows for the possibility of the
H
L
reserve asset being a hedge (a negative “beta” asset) instead of a risk-less asset. We consider the risk-less configuration in this
paper, as it provides most of the economics while making the model as simple as possible.

7

then collapse very abruptly in crises that resemble confidence crises both in the data and in the writings
of contemporaries and economic historians. In modern economic theory, one prominent way to model
confidence crises is via self-fulfilling mechanisms of the sort we adopt here. This is not to say that
fundamental risk plays no role, and indeed many of our results would go through with fundamental shocks.
It is useful to define short-hand notation for expectation operators.
Definition 1 We define E+ [x1 ] to denote the expectation taken at time t = 0+ of random variable x1
the realization of which will occur at t = 1. We further define Es [x1 ] to be the expectation taken at
t = 0+ conditional on the safe realization of the sunspot, and Er [x1 ] to be the expectation taken at t = 0+
conditional on the risky realization of the sunspot. We define E− [x1 ] to be the expectation taken at t = 0−
before the sunspot realization.
RoW demand function for debt.

The RoW portfolio optimization problem at t = 0+ is given by
max∗
b,C1

E+ [C1∗ ] − γ Var+ (C1∗ ),

s.t. w∗ = s∗ + b

s∗ ≥ 0

b ≥ 0,

s∗ Rr + bRe = C1∗ ,
where s∗ ≥ 0 and b ≥ 0 denote investment in the world risky asset and in Hegemon debt respectively.
If the Hegemon debt is expected to be safe, then the optimality condition for the portfolio of RoW
leads to a linear demand curve for Hegemon debt
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γ(w∗ − b)σ 2 .

(1)

Interest rates increase with the amount of debt, and decrease with the risk aversion of RoW (γ), the
background riskiness of the economy (σ 2 ), and the savings/endowment of RoW (w∗ ).7
If, instead, the Hegemon debt is expected to be risky, then it is a perfect substitute for the risky asset.
No arbitrage then requires that R = RrH , so that Er [Re] = R̄r and the demand for the Hegemon debt is
infinitely elastic.8
The Hegemon issuance problem.
problem

Issuance by the Hegemon at t = 0− is the solution of the following
max

s,b,C0 ,C1

E− [C0 + δ (C1 − τ(1 − e))],

7 The

demand for safe assets as a macroeconomic force has also been analyzed in different contexts by: Dang, Gorton and
Holmstrom (2015), Gorton and Ordonez (2014), Moreira and Savov (2014), Gorton and Penacchi (1990), Gorton and Ordonez
(2013), Hart and Zingales (2014), Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015), Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2012).
8 Proposition A.1 in the appendix provides more details on the exclusion of the possibility of backward bending demand for
risky debt. We impose the parameter restriction R̄r − 2γw∗ σ 2 > 0 to guarantee that the demand function never violates free
disposal. The restriction ensures that yields on risk-free debt are always greater than −100%: i.e. prices of debt must be strictly
positive. Violation of this condition would result in cases of arbitrage: debt could have negative prices despite having strictly
positive payoffs.

8

s.t. w −C0 = s − b,
sRr − bR(b) e = C1 ,
b≥0

s ≥ 0,

where s ≥ 0 is investment in the risky asset. This problem can be rewritten in the following intuitive form
max
b≥0

b(R̄r − E− [R(b)e]) − E− [τ(1 − e)].

(2)

The Hegemon takes into account the effects of its issuance on the interest rate on its debt as well as on
its future incentives to devalue at t = 1 in case of a disaster depending on the realization of the sunspot at
t = 0+ . Note that the Hegemon is indifferent between investing in the risky asset, to be consumed at time
t = 1, and consuming the proceeds of the debt sale b at time t = 0. The term bR̄r in equation (2) captures
these benefits.9

2.2

Full-Commitment Equilibrium

To build intuition and a reference point for future outcomes, we first solve the baseline model under full
commitment. That is, we assume that the Hegemon can commit to the future exchange rate when deciding
how much debt to issue at time t = 0− or, equivalently, that τ → ∞, so that there is an infinite penalty for
devaluing. In this case, the Hegemon never devalues (e = 1) and its debt is always safe.
The maximization problem for the Hegemon then becomes
max
b≥0

V FC (b) = b(R̄r − Rs (b)),

(3)

which states that utility maximization is the same as maximizing the expected wealth transfer that the
Hegemon receives from RoW. The wealth transfer is the product of two terms: the amount of debt issued,
b, and the safety premium on that debt, R̄r − Rs (b).
The Hegemon trades off a larger debt issuance against a lower safety premium, leading to the optimality condition
R̄r − Rs (b) − b R0s (b) = 0.
(4)
This optimality condition is a type of Lerner formula; the monopolist issues debt at a mark-up over
marginal cost that depends on the elasticity of the demand function
R̄r − Rs (b) bR0s (b)
= s
.
Rs (b)
R (b)
9 For

example, our model is consistent with but does not require the Hegemon to issue debt and concurrently hold a large
portfolio of risky assets against it. The model is equally consistent with a setup where the Hegemon borrows to finance
immediate spending.

9

From the demand function for safe debt in equation (1), the slope of the demand curve is: R0s (b) = 2γσ 2 .
Substituting this into Equation (4), we get
b=

1 R̄r − Rs (b)
≥ 0.
2γ
σ2

(5)

Equilibrium issuance depends positively on the Sharpe ratio of the risky asset, and negatively on the
coefficient of risk aversion. It can be obtained in closed form by solving equation (5), yielding
1
bFC = w∗ .
2
Equilibrium debt issuance under full commitment only depends on foreign wealth, because the parameters
γ and σ increase the level and decrease the elasticity of the demand curve with offsetting effects on
equilibrium issuance. Plugging back into equation (5), we obtain the interest rate Rs (b) on reserve assets
Rs (bFC ) = R̄r − γσ 2 w∗ .
The safety premium on reserve assets is γσ 2 w∗ , which is increasing in RoW risk aversion (γ), the riskiness
of the risky asset (σ ), and the wealth of RoW (w∗ ).
From the Hegemon budget constraints, we have: C0 + δ E[C1 ] = w + δ bFC (R̄r − Rs (bFC )). On average,
the Hegemon consumes more than the average proceeds that would result from entirely investing its wealth
in the risky asset. This extra positive (on average) transfer from RoW is the monopoly rent given by
1
bFC (R̄r − Rs (bFC )) = γσ 2 w∗2 .
2

(6)

For reasons that will later become clear, we term these monopoly rents the “exorbitant privilege”. Like
the safety premium, the exorbitant privilege is increasing in risk aversion (γ), the pool of savings (w∗ ) of
RoW, and the background risk (σ ). We collect all results under commitment in the proposition below.10
Proposition 1 (Full-Commitment Equilibrium). Under full commitment, the Hegemon chooses to issue
risk-free debt and commits not to devalue in a disaster. The equilibrium interest rate, issuance, and
exorbitant privilege (monopoly rent) are given by
Rs (bFC ) = R̄r − γσ 2 w∗ ,

1
bFC = w∗ ,
2

and

1
bFC (R̄r − Rs (bFC )) = γσ 2 w∗2 .
2

It is illuminating to contrast the Hegemon monopoly equilibrium with that of perfect competition,
which obtains when the Hegemon, instead of taking into account the increase in the interest resulting
from an increase in its issuance, takes the interest rate as given.
Lemma 1 (Perfect-Competition Equilibrium). Under perfect competition and full commitment, the equi10 Proposition

A.2 in the Online Appendix provides mild conditions under which equilibrium prices are arbitrage free.

10

librium is characterized by
Rs (b) = R̄r ,

and

b = w∗ .

RoW is fully insured and there is no safety premium.
Proof. Optimal portfolio choice given risk neutrality of the Hegemon implies that expected returns on all
assets have to be equalized, hence R̄r − Rs (b) = 0. Imposing zero excess returns in the demand function
of RoW for safe debt (equation (1)) pins down equilibrium debt supply b = w∗ .
In the 1960s, French Finance Minister and future President Valery Giscard d’Estaing famously accused
the U.S. of enjoying an exorbitant privilege due to its reserve status and its ensuing ability to finance itself
at cheaper rates than RoW. In our model, this expected transfer of wealth to the Hegemon is a compensation for risk — a feature shared with Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas
(2008), Mendoza, Quadrini and Rıos-Rull (2009), Gourinchas, Govillot and Rey (2011), Maggiori (2012)
— but, crucially, the Hegemon is able to influence the terms of the compensation via its supply of reserves.
There is a sense in our model in which the privilege is truly exorbitant, since it is a pure monopoly rent.
The size of the exorbitant privilege depends both on the size of the safety premium and on the amount
of reserves (b). It is therefore important to discuss different interpretations of what this stock of assets
corresponds to in reality. In all cases, b is not to be interpreted as the total stock of reserve assets being
issued, but as the part of the stock that is held by foreigners, i.e. an external liability of the Hegemon.
A narrow interpretation would include only the fraction of the Hegemon short-term government debt that
is held by RoW, while a broad interpretation would include any safe asset — including those issued by
the private sector — that are denominated in the reserve currency and held by RoW. Under the latter
broader interpretation, which we favor, the data counterpart to b is the gross safe external liabilities of
the Hegemon country denominated in the reserve currency. We refer the reader to Section 7 for a formal
extension of the model to account for private issuance.

3

Limited Commitment and the Triffin Dilemma

We now turn to limited commitment. We first analyze the equilibria that occur for a given quantity of debt
b, and then study the optimal issuance of b from the perspective of the Hegemon.
If a disaster has occurred at t = 1, the Hegemon decides whether to devalue its currency by solving
max

C1 ,e∈{1,eL }

C1 − τ(1 − e),

s.t. sRrL − b R e = C1 .
The Hegemon chooses to devalue if and only if bR(1 − eL ) > τ(1 − eL ). Intuitively, the Hegemon devalues
and chooses eL < 1 instead of eH = 1 if the gains from lower real debt repayment to RoW investors are
greater than the associated penalty τ(1 − eL ). The condition for a devaluation can be simplified into the
11

following threshold rule:
b R > τ.

(7)

If bR > τ, then the Hegemon chooses to devalue in bad times at t = 1. At time t = 0+ , RoW agents
anticipate that the Hegemon will devalue and therefore treat Hegemon debt as a perfect substitute for the
risky asset; they require R = RrH and are then willing to absorb any quantity of debt. This outcome is
possible for all b > b, where b = τ/RrH .
If bR ≤ τ, then the Hegemon does not devalue in bad times at t = 1 and its debt is therefore safe. The
interest rate is then R = Rs (b). This outcome is possible for all b < b̄,11 where
b̄ =

−R̄r + 2w∗ γσ 2 +

p

(R̄r − 2w∗ γσ 2 )2 + 8γσ 2 τ
.
4γσ 2

(8)

Both outcomes are possible if b ∈ [b, b̄]. We collect these results in the lemma below.
Lemma 2 (The Three Zones of the IMS). For a given level of issuance b at t = 0− , the structure of
continuation equilibria for t = 0+ onwards is as follows:
1. If b ∈ [0, b] (Safety zone) there is a unique equilibrium, the safe equilibrium, under which the
Hegemon does not devalue in the disaster state at t = 1. The interest rate on its debt is given
by Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γ(w∗ − b)σ 2 and is increasing in b, and there is a safety premium R̄r − Rs (b) =
2γ(w∗ − b)σ 2 > 0.
2. If b ∈ (b, b̄] (Instability zone) there are two equilibria: the safe equilibrium described above; and the
collapse equilibrium under which the Hegemon devalues in the disaster state at t = 1, the interest
rate on its debt is R = RrH , and there is no safety premium.
3. If b ∈ (b̄, w∗ ] (Collapse zone) there is a unique equilibrium, the collapse equilibrium described
above.
As is well understood, monetary and fiscal decisions interact in a profound way. In our model, monetary and fiscal decisions are made by a single decision maker navigating two conflicting objectives ex post:
maintaining the value of the currency and easing the fiscal burden by inflating away the debt. Depending
on which objective prevails, one can think of the economy as operating either in a regime of “monetary” or
“fiscal” dominance. Historical examples of abrupt shifts from monetary to fiscal dominance abound. They
are the subject of an important literature in monetary economics, starting with the celebrated unpleasant
monetarist arithmetic result of Sargent and Wallace (1981) and more closely related to the mechanism
in our model with the literature on the fiscal theory of the price level starting with Leeper (1991), Sims
(1994) and Woodford (1994). Such shifts arise endogenously in our model as the equilibrium outcomes
11 b̄ is the only positive root of the quadratic equation that corresponds to the inequality b(R̄r −2γ(w∗ −b)σ 2 ) ≤ τ.

In this paper,
we focus on the interesting case b̄ ≤ w∗ , which requires the parameter restriction τ ≤ R̄r w∗ so that commitment is sufficiently
limited that the Hegemon cannot provide RoW with full insurance. Imposing this condition results in the following ordering:
b ≤ b̄ ≤ w∗ . The first inequality holds because Rs (b) < R̄r ∀b ∈ [0, b̄], conditional on the debt being safe. Therefore, b̄R̄r > τ.

12

of a fully-specified policy game, the ex-post and ex-ante stages of which are summarized above in Lemma
2 and below in Proposition 2.
3.0.1

Hegemon Optimal Issuance of Debt

Multiple equilibria are possible at t = 0+ when issuance is in the Instability zone. Our focus is on strategic
issuance rather than on equilibrium selection, and so we adopt the simplest possible selection device in
the form of a sunspot: we select the safe equilibrium if the realization of the sunspot is s, and the collapse
equilibrium otherwise. Accordingly, we define a function α(b) ∈ [0, 1] to denote the t = 0− probability
that the continuation equilibrium for t = 0+ onward is the collapse equilibrium



α(b) = 0,


α(b) = α(b) = α,



α(b) = 1,

for

b ∈ [0, b],

for b ∈ (b, b̄],
for

b ∈ (b̄, w∗ ].

This constant-probability formulation has the advantage of simplicity and is a benchmark in the literature
(see Cole and Kehoe (2000), as well as the literature that follows).12
By analogy with the full-commitment problem in equation (3), the Hegemon maximization problem
is
max V (b) = (1 − α(b))V FC (b) − α(b)λ τ(1 − eL ),
(9)
b≥0

where we remind the reader that V FC (b) = b(R̄r − Rs (b)) is the value function under full commitment.
This formulation shows that maximizing utility is equivalent to maximizing the expected wealth transfer
from RoW, net of the expected cost of a possible devaluation. The value function in equation (9) is
discontinuous at b (if α ∈ (0, 1)) and b̄, and is otherwise twice continuously differentiable. Note that
V FC (b) ≥ V (b) with equality only for b ∈ [0, b]. This value function is illustrated in Figure 3, with the
value function under full commitment plotted as a dotted line for comparison. We characterize optimal
issuance in the proposition below, and then describe it intuitively using Figure 3.
Proposition 2 (Limited-Commitment Equilibrium and the Triffin Dilemma). Under limited commitment, equilibrium issuance by the Hegemon can be described as follows:
1. If bFC ∈ (0, b], then the Hegemon issues bFC in the Safety zone.
12 One

could consider many alternative functions α(b) — continuous or discontinuous, monotonically increasing or not. One
alternative would be to consider a function α(b) that jumps in the interior of the Instability zone, in order to capture the notion
of “neglected risk" (Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2012, 2013)), a sudden change in the perception of risk. The economics of
our main results is robust to more general choices of α(b) and, in particular, to an increasing smooth function of the probability
of the bad sunspot. One could also consider refinements, such as for example along the lines of the global games literature.
This would lead to an indicator function for α(b) with an endogenous cutoff in the Instability zone. To capture the crucial risk
component at the heart of the Triffin argument in such a setup, one could add a publicly observable shock to the cost of default
τ realized after the issuance decision but before issuance actually takes place.

13

2. If bFC ∈ (b, b̄], then the Hegemon issues b in the Safety zone or bFC in the Instability zone, whichever
generates higher net monopoly rents.
3. If bFC ∈ (b̄, w∗ ], then the Hegemon either issues b in the Safety zone or b̄ in the Instability zone,
whichever generates higher net monopoly rents.
In all equilibria, the Hegemon enjoys an exorbitant privilege in the form of positive net expected monopoly
rents.
Figure 3 illustrates some of the possible equilibrium outcomes from the above proposition. Panel A
corresponds to case 1, in which the Hegemon finds it optimal to issue in the interior of the Safety zone.
More interesting for us are cases 2 and 3, in which the Hegemon faces a meaningful trade-off — or
“dilemma” — between issuing less debt and remaining in the Safety zone (b) or issuing more debt and
entering the Instability zone (either bFC or b̄). For example, Panel B illustrates case 2 for a parametrization
that leads the Hegemon to prefer issuing more debt, at the risk of a confidence crisis.13 This trade-off is
our model’s rationalization of the Triffin dilemma, which Kenen (1963) summarizes as:
Triffin has dramatized the long-run problem as an ugly dilemma: If the present monetary
system is to generate sufficient reserve assets to lubricate payments adjustment, the reserve
currency countries must willingly run payments deficits enduring a deterioration of their net
reserve positions that could erode foreign confidence in the reserve currencies. If, contrarily,
the reserve currency countries are to maintain their net reserve positions, there must someday
be a shortage of reserve assets and this will cause serious frictions in the process of payments
adjustment.14
Whether a Triffin dilemma arises in our model (cases 2 and 3) or not (case 1) depends upon the level
of RoW demand for reserve assets (w∗ ), compared to the safe debt capacity of the Hegemon (τ). More
precisely, it depends upon whether bFC = 1/2w∗ > τ/RrH = b. In cases 2 and 3 (bFC > b), there exists
a threshold αm∗ ∈ (0, 1) such that the Hegemon issues at the boundary of the Safety zone b if and only
if α > αm∗ , and otherwise issues either bFC (case 2) or b̄ (case 3).15 All else equal, an increase in RoW
13 In

our model, interest rates do not signal the possibility of a collapse until it occurs; that is, for a given level of issuance, safe
interest rates are independent of the probability of collapse α(b). However, the Hegemon fully considers the probability of an
increase in interest rates in case of a collapse, and reduces its issuance as this probability increases. Furthermore, if we allowed
for longer (than 1 period) debt maturities, the yields on these longer maturities would increase with the probability of collapse.
14 In our model, the motive for reserve accumulation is risk aversion and/or a desire for liquidity by RoW; this provides a
more general illustration of the demand for reserves than the original balance-of-payments/defense-of-exchange-rates reasons
highlighted by Triffin (1961). This more general motive for reserve accumulation is consistent with the dramatic accumulation
of reserves during the post-Asian-crisis global-imbalances period under floating exchange rates, and with the resurgence of a
Triffin-style dilemma in this environment. Kenen (1960) is an early attempt to assess the logic of the Triffin dilemma, with
related contributions by Kenen and Yudin (1965), Hagemann (1969), Aliber (1964, 1967), Fleming (1966), Cooper (1975,
1987).
15 Indeed, the value function is independent of α at the boundary b of the Safety zone and is continuous and monotonically

decreasing in α in the Instability zone. With α = 1, we always have V (b) > V (min bFC , b̄ ); with α = 0, we always have
V (b) < V (min bFC , b̄ ).

14

demand for safe assets (↑ w∗ ) or a decrease in the safe debt capacity (↓ τ) activates the Triffin margin; the
Hegemon then faces a choice between a safe option with a low level of debt at the boundary of the Safety


zone and a risky option with a high level of debt min bFC , b̄ in the Instability zone.
The reader is reminded of the discussion in Section 2.2 that b is to be interpreted as the gross external
safe liabilities of the Hegemon that are denominated in the Hegemon’s currency irrespective of whether
the issuance is from the government or the private sector (see Section 7 for a formal treatment). For
example, in 2015 U.S. government and agencies debt accounted for $6.2trn out of $10.5trn of total debt
securities held by foreign residents with the rest being accounted for by private issuance (source: Treasury
International Capital System). By contrast, England before 1914 had low government debt to GDP ratios
and a large fraction of safe external debt was issued by the British banking system.
Our model makes specific predictions regarding the fragility of the Hegemon, which are lacking in
Triffin’s writings: it ties its vulnerability to a confidence crisis to the Hegemon gross external-debt position, and not to the net position as hinted at times by Triffin. The origin is partly external, as originally
emphasized by Triffin, and partly fiscal as recently emphasized by Farhi, Gourinchas and Rey (2011) and
Obstfeld (2011). Indeed, in practice, safe external debt of the Hegemon is composed of both public and
private securities. As we make clear in Section 7 where we extend the model to incorporate private issuance, as long as the Hegemon internalizes the welfare of private issuers, the incentives to devalue are
governed by the total (public and private) gross external debt position of the Hegemon. Furthermore, public internalization (perhaps through ex-post bailouts) of private repayments blurs the distinction between
public and private balance sheets in times of stress, so that an external problem can easily morph into a
fiscal problem.
In the early part of the 1920s, central banks realized that the real value of gold, at the chosen parities,
was too low to accommodate a growing world economy and the ensuing demand for liquid/safe assets. At
the Genoa conference in 1922, central banks created a gold-exchange standard by expanding the role of
monetary assets, in particular those considered safest and most liquid, to be used as international reserves.
Of course, the creators of the system understood that the benefits of an increased supply of reserve assets
came with risks. Indeed, in 1931 there was a run on Sterling in part due to the attempt by France, at the
time a large holder of reserves in Sterling, to liquidate some of its reserves into gold. The vulnerability of
Sterling was due to Britain’s fiscal imbalances—a high government debt to GDP ratio (in excess of 150%)
compounded by the need to shore up the banking system, which had suffered large losses following the
1931 financial crisis in Germany (Accominotti (2012)). Ultimately, Britain devalued its currency by 40%
against gold and most foreign currencies; the devaluation was so sudden that the Banque de France, which
still had substantial pound reserves, was technically bankrupt and had to be recapitalized by the French
Treasury. The Sterling crisis caused a global run on monetary reserves, which contributed to the 1933
Dollar devaluation. The model captures both the run element of these collapses of the IMS and the fact
that the fragility is ultimately rooted in fiscal problems.
A similar dynamic played a role in the decision of the U.S. (the Hegemon of the time) to devalue in
1971-1973 and put an end to the Bretton Woods system. Dollar-denominated external liabilities of the U.S.
15

sharply increased from 6% in 1952 to 20% in 1973 and the U.S. official balance of payments significantly
deteriorated.16 At the same time fiscal pressures were accumulating in part as a result of the Vietnam War.
In 1971, the Nixon administration reacted to foreign attempts to liquidate dollar reserves and the ensuing
pressure on the Dollar by first devaluing the Dollar and suspending general convertibility of the Dollar to
gold, while maintaining convertibility for foreign central banks (the “Nixon shock”). Ultimately, the U.S.
administration had to further devalue the Dollar and abandon all convertibility and let the Dollar float.
Immediately after the collapse of Bretton Woods, there were serious concerns that the Dollar would
suffer the fate of Sterling after the 1931 devaluation and ultimately lose its reserve-currency status. Indeed,
Figure 1 Panel (d) shows that Sterling went into a slow decline as a reserve currency (in part slowed down
by WWII and the use of the pound in the former British empire) that quickly accelerated after WWII.
However, Figure 1 Panel (d) also shows that the Dollar did not suffer a similar fate after its devaluations
of 1971-73. This suggests that τ is best interpreted as the expectation of a stochastic punishment, an
interpretation that we develop formally in Section 7 in an infinite-horizon model in which a devaluation
leads to a probabilistic loss of reputation and future monopoly rents.
Our model, while consistent with the dilemma of the “consensus view” put forth by Triffin (1961), is
also consistent with the “minority view”, articulated by Despres, Kindleberger and Salant (1966), of the
U.S. acting as a world banker that collects a safety/liquidity premium on its gross assets/liabilities. However, it shares the perspective of the modern finance literature that banking is a fragile activity (Diamond
and Dybvig (1983)) subject to self-fulfilling panics that can have macroeconomic consequences (Gertler
and Kiyotaki (2015)). The problem is exacerbated in our context by the absence of a plausible LoLR with
sufficient fiscal capacity to support the Hegemon world banker.
Understanding the fragility of the world banker is even more relevant today since, as documented by
Gourinchas and Rey (2007a,b), the U.S. activities as a world banker are today being performed on a much
grander scale than when originally debated, or, in other words, the “bank” has gotten bigger.
Indeed, Triffin-like concerns have arisen again recently even though the current IMS is no longer under
the gold-exchange standard. This is not surprising in light of our model. The model makes it clear that
Triffin’s dilemma is present both under a fixed and a floating exchange rate regime. Furthermore, the
dilemma is exacerbated in periods when the global demand for reserves outstrips the safe debt capacity of
the Hegemon, a situation that characterized both the last part of the Bretton Woods era and, more recently,
the post-Asian-crisis global-imbalances era, as emphasized in the global savings glut/safe asset shortage
literature (e.g. Bernanke (2005), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008)). Our model stresses that the
current situation, with the U.S. external debt at 158% of its GDP, 85% of which is denominated in dollars,
raises the possibility of a Triffin-like event.17 Most prominently, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001, 2007) have
argued that the U.S. current account would one day have to reverse and that this would come with a 30%
depreciation of the Dollar.
16 See

Branson (1971), Bach (1972), Gourinchas and Rey (2007a).
U.S. external liabilities (excluding financial derivatives) were $28.28trn against a GDP of $17.94trn (source: Bureau
of Economic Analysis). U.S. external liabilities are mostly denominated in U.S. dollar, 85% on average. Source: Bénétrix,
Lane and Shambaugh (2015), average for the period 1990-2012.
17 In 2015,

16

4

Welfare Consequences of the Triffin Dilemma

In the previous section, we formalized the Triffin dilemma as the choice of a monopolistic Hegemon issuer
of reserve assets between issuing fewer assets that are certain to be safe and issuing more assets that may
turn out to be risky. The Hegemon maximizes expected net monopoly rents (producer surplus) without
taking into account RoW expected utility (consumer surplus). In this section, we consider social welfare
(social surplus) that adds expected net monopoly rents and RoW expected utility. We always evaluate
welfare from the perspective of expected utility at time t = 0− , before the sunspot is selected.
One might naively conjecture that, because of a standard monopoly distortion, there would be underissuance of reserve assets from a social welfare perspective. While this can certainly occur in our model,
we also show that there can be over-issuance. We trace this surprising result to the fact that the options
faced by the Hegemon involve two dimensions which are endogenously interrelated in the model: the
traditional quantity dimension and a novel risk dimension.
Our normative analysis features an interesting analogy with that of the standard monopoly theory of
quality put forth by Spence (1975). Consider a monopolist supplier of a good. The monopolist can choose
both the quantity q and the quality z of the good, and the equilibrium price P(q, z) of the good depends
on both attributes. In this context, it is well understood that, from a social perspective, at the margin,
a monopolist: (i) always under-supplies quantity by equating the marginal cost of supplying quantity
Cq (q, z) to the marginal revenue P(q, z) + qPq (q, z) instead of the price P(q, z); but (ii) might under- or
over-supply quality by equating the average marginal cost of supplying quality Cz (q, z)/q to the marginal

Rq
valuation for quality of the marginal buyer Pz (q, z) instead of that of the average buyer 0 Ps (q̃, z)d q̃ /q,
depending on which of these two valuations is higher, i.e. on the shape of the demand curve.
Although we are not aware of any paper examining this case, one can imagine that quality z is a
decreasing function Z(q) of quantity q, perhaps because of an inherent trade-off in production. Then
the monopolist might under- or over-supply quantity, depending on the mapping and on the shape of
the demand curve. Indeed, the monopolist equates marginal cost Cq (q, Z(q)) + qZ 0 (q)Cz (q, Z(q))/q to
marginal revenue P(q, Z(q)) + qPq (q, Z(q)) + qZ 0 (q)Pz (q, Z(q)) instead of the sum of marginal revenue

Rq
and marginal consumer surplus P(q, Z(q)) + qZ 0 (q) 0 Pz (q̃, Z(q))d q̃ /q. The difference between the
 Rq


two marginal benefits −qPq (q, Z(q)) + qZ 0 (q) 0 Pz (q̃, Z(q))d q̃ /q − Pz (q, Z(q)) depends both on the
standard quantity monopoly distortion (the first term) and on the quality distortion (the second term). It
can either be positive or negative, depending on the shape of the demand curve and on the semi-elasticity
of quality with respect to quantity.
The analogy with the reduced-form problem of the Hegemon can be described as follows. The good
is the asset supplied by the Hegemon. Quantity q is issuance b. Quality z is a binary variable which is
equal to s if the asset is safe and r otherwise. The mapping Z from quantity to quality is probabilistic
when production is decided but the underlying uncertainty is resolved before consumers buy the product:
quality z is equal to r or s with probabilities α(b) and 1 − α(b) respectively. The price P(q, z) is the risk
premium on the asset, which is equal to R̄r − Rs (b) if the asset is safe (z = s) and 0 if it is risky (z = r).

17

The cost C(q, z), given the realization of quality z, is 0 if z = s and λ τ(1 − eL ) if z = r, so that the expected
cost E− [C(q, Z(q))] when production is decided is α(b)λ τ(1 − eL ). In this analogy, quality, quantity,
and the shapes of the demand and cost curves are jointly and endogenously determined as the result of a
coordination problem. There can be both under- or over-issuance from a social perspective, depending on
the shapes of Rs (b) and of α(b). Given our selection for α(b), the more concave Rs (b), the more convex
the demand curve R̄r − Rs (b), the greater the tendency of the Hegemon to over-issue.
We emphasize that the mapping from quality to quantity (which plays the role of Z in our model) is
an endogenous object determined by the equilibrium of our model. It depends on the coordination of the
investors’ expectations and portfolio choices as a function of the quantity of Hegemon debt issued. This
highlights two sorts of additional externalities that are not internalized by atomistic RoW investors in the
choice of their portfolios: they ignore its impact on the ex-post decision of the Hegemon to devalue as
well as on the ex-ante issuance of the Hegemon. These externalities play a crucial role in our comparison
of the optimal level of issuance from the perspective of the Hegemon and from the perspective of social
welfare.18
We consider the relevant case in which there is a meaningful Triffin dilemma: a trade-off between
issuing in the Safety zone or in the Instability zone (cases 2 and 3 in Proposition 2). In this configuration, the Hegemon faces a choice between a safe option with low issuance b at the upper bound of the
Safety zone and a risky option with higher issuance in the Instability zone min(bFC , b̄) > b (either at the
full-commitment issuance level or at the upper bound of the Instability zone, whichever yields higher
monopoly rents). We compare the rankings of these two options from the perspective of the Hegemon,
RoW, and social welfare. If the Hegemon prefers the high-issuance risky option to the low-issuance safe
option, but RoW would have preferred the opposite option, then we say that there is over-issuance from the
perspective of RoW. Similarly, if the Hegemon prefers the low-issuance safe-option to the high-issuance
risky-option, but RoW would have preferred the opposite option, then we say that there is under-issuance
from the perspective of RoW. Under- and over-issuance from the perspective of social welfare are defined
analogously.
Thus far we have restricted our attention to a linear demand curve in the interest of tractability. Since
the crux of the welfare argument hinges on the shape of the demand curve, we consider a more general
demand function allowing for non-linearities. In particular, we found that a tractable model that still
captures these more general effects can be rendered via a piece-wise linear demand curve with a single
kink, which for simplicity we assume to coincide with the upper bound b of the Safety zone, so that19
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γ(w∗ − b)σ 2 − 2γL (b − b)1{b≤b} ,

(10)

where γL > 0, so that the resulting Rs (b) is concave in b. In the language of the analogy outlined at the
18 Note

that we purposefully refrain from introducing the kind of instruments which could directly influence the portfolio
choices of RoW investors and therefore fully correct these externalities, and which we think are not very realistic in our
context.
19 We impose the parameter restriction R̄r − 2γw∗ σ 2 − 2γ b > 0, by analogy with the previous sections.
L

18

beginning of this section, it is more convenient to think of the demand curve directly in terms of the risk
premium R̄r − Rs (b), which is convex in b.
One way to obtain this type of demand curve is to augment the preferences of RoW to include a “bond
2
in the utility” function component −γL b − min(b, b)1{E+ [e]=1} , where E+ [e] = 1 if and only if the debt
is expected to be safe, as described in Appendix A.1. If the debt is expected to be safe, then R = Rs (b) so
that there is an extra liquidity component for all b ≤ b. If the debt is expected to be risky, then R = RrH ,
so that risky debt is a perfect substitute for the risky asset. This setup lends itself to welfare evaluation as
the “area under the demand curve”, which conveniently allows for intuitive and graphical representation
of welfare. RoW expected utility can be computed as
VRoW (b) = VRoW (0) + (1 − α(b))

Z Rs (b)
Rs (0)

b(R̃s )d R̃s ,

(11)

where b(Rs ) expresses the amount of debt being demanded as a function of the interest rate, as in equation
(10). We refer the reader to Lemma A.1 for details. It should be clear that although liquidity preferences
are a simple and plausible way to obtain a convex demand curve, this is by no means the only way. For
example, we could use alternative specifications of risk aversion by moving away from mean-variance
preferences. Our exact representation of welfare as the area under the demand curve holds as long as
the resulting preferences over portfolios (safe and risky asset holdings) are quasilinear. The convexity of
the demand curve then obtains when the marginal utility of risky assets decreases at a decreasing rate (as
opposed to a constant rate for a linear demand curve) with risky asset holdings. This captures the notion
that for given wealth and asset prices, the first few units of safe assets are much more important than the
last few.
Figure 4 Panel (a) illustrates the piecewise-linear demand function in equation (10) and allows us to
visualize RoW expected utility as the area under the demand curve. For example, RoW expected utility
when the Hegemon issues at the upper bound of the Safety zone b is represented by the green area.
Similarly, RoW expected utility when the Hegemon issues at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄ is
represented by the orange area. This latter area is shrunk compared to the total area under the demand
curve in line with equation (11) to account for the fact that the equilibrium issuance b̄ is safe only with
probability 1 − α.
The Hegemon net expected monopoly rents are given by
V (b) = (1 − α(b))b(R̄r − Rs (b)) − α(b)λ τ(1 − eL ).

(12)

The green rectangle in Figure 4 Panel (b) represents the net expected monopoly rents when issuance is
at the upper bound of the Safety zone b. The orange rectangle represents the net expected monopoly
rents when issuance is at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄. This latter area is shrunk compared
to the total area b̄(R̄r − Rs (b̄)) − [α/(1 − α)] λ τ(1 − eL ) in line with equation (9), to account for the fact
that the equilibrium issuance b̄ is safe only with probability 1 − α. The function [[α/(1 − α)] λ τ(1 −

19

eL )]/b, displayed as the red dotted line in Figure 4 Panel (b), is a renormalized version of the average (not
marginal) cost of the monopolist.
Intuitively, higher convexity of the demand curve (↑ γL ) increases RoW expected utility in the green
area in Figure 4 Panel (a). This increases the (infra-marginal) RoW expected utility loss in case of a
collapse of the IMS when the Hegemon issues at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄ rather than at
the upper bound of the Safety zone b. For a given probability of collapse α, the higher the convexity of
the demand curve, the higher RoW expected utility losses from issuance in the Instability zone. However,
the Hegemon does not internalize this loss when choosing between b̄ and b. Indeed, Figure 4 Panel (b)
illustrates that the comparison the Hegemon makes in choosing optimal issuance is independent of inframarginal demand from RoW for b < b, as long as the Hegemon does not find it optimal to issue in the
interior of the Safety zone. This opens up the possibility of socially excessive issuance of reserve assets.
When the convexity of the demand curve is low, and always in the limit of no convexity and lineardemand for safe debt, there is under-issuance from a social perspective, as in standard monopoly problems.
When the demand curve is sufficiently convex, there is over-issuance from a social perspective. For some
values of the probability of collapse α, the monopolist chooses to issue b̄ but RoW would have been better
off with the safe issuance at b, so much so that social welfare is higher at b.
In order to formalize the above intuition, it is convenient to define the following three thresholds:
∗
∗ , α ∗ . In Section 3.0.1 we have discussed α ∗ , the cutoff probability of the collapse outcome
αm , αRoW
m
T OT
that makes the Hegemon indifferent between issuing at the upper bound of the Safety zone (b) or issuing
∗
at the local maximum in the Instability zone min{bFC , b̄}. We now similarly define αRoW
to be the cutoff
probability that equalizes RoW expected utility at the upper bound of the Safety zone b and at the local
maximum min{bFC , b̄} in the Instability zone. The analogous cutoff for social welfare is αT∗ OT . The proof
∗
of Proposition 3 in the online appendix shows that αRoW
and αT∗ OT are unique and in the interval (0, 1).
These thresholds have intuitive implications for over- and under-issuance of reserve assets. For exam∗ , then for all probabilities α ∈ (α ∗ , α ∗ ), the Hegemon over-issues from the perspective
ple, if αm∗ > αRoW
m
RoW
∗
∗
∗ ), the Hegemon under-issues
of RoW. Similarly, if αm < αRoW , then for all probabilities α ∈ (αm∗ , αRoW
from the perspective of RoW. Similar conclusions can be drawn by comparing αm∗ and αT∗ OT , but now
from the perspective of social welfare.
Proposition 3 (Over-issuance by a Hegemon). If γL = 0, so that the demand curve is linear, then in
equilibrium the cutoff probabilities are ranked as follows:
∗
αm∗ < αT∗ OT < αRoW
,
∗ ) from the perspective of RoW, and for α ∈ (α ∗ , α ∗ )
and the Hegemon under-issues for α ∈ (αm∗ , αRoW
m T OT
under-issues from a social perspective.
There exists γ̄L (τ) > 0, which makes the demand curve sufficiently convex, such that for all η ∈ (0, 1],

20

when τ is sufficiently small, and when γL ∈ [η γ̄L (τ), γ̄L (τ)], the cutoff probabilities are ranked as follows:
∗
αm∗ > αT∗ OT > αRoW
,
∗ , α ∗ ) from the perspective of RoW, and for α ∈ (α ∗ , α ∗ )
and the Hegemon over-issues for α ∈ (αRoW
m
m
T OT
over-issues from a social perspective.

Proof. In the interest of intuition and brevity we provide here the full proof of the first statement: for
linear demand the monopolist under-issues from a social perspective. The online appendix provides the
proof of the second statement, that there can be over-issuance for sufficiently convex demand curves.
Assume γL = 0. Define b∗ = min{bFC , b̄} to be the optimal level of issuance that the Hegemon chooses
conditional on issuing in the Instability zone. RoW expected utility is equalized at issuance levels b and
∗ :
b∗ for a threshold probability of collapse αRoW
∗
(1 − αRoW
)b∗2 = b2 .

Indeed, these are the areas under the demand curve as described in equation (11). Similarly, Hegemon net
expected monopoly rents are equalized at issuance levels b and b∗ for a threshold probability of collapse
αm∗ :
(1 − αm∗ )2γσ 2 (w∗ − b∗ )b∗ − αm∗ λ τ(1 − eL ) = (w∗ − b)2γσ 2 b,
where we recall that Rs (w∗ ) = R̄r . We conclude that:
1 − αm∗

w∗ − b b
b
αm∗ λ τ(1 − eL )
= ∗
> ∗>
+
∗
∗
2
∗
∗
∗
w −b b
2γσ b (w − b ) b



b
b∗

2

∗
= 1 − αRoW
.

∗
Since αT∗ OT is a convex combination of αRoW
and αm∗ with interior non-vanishing weights on each of the
elements, we obtain the result in the Proposition.
Note that in this derivation, the shape of the demand curve only enters through the sufficient statistics
∗
∗
b and τ/(2γσ 2 ). The ranking αRoW
> αm∗ does not depend on the precise choice of b∗ or on the precise
value of τ/(2γσ 2 ). This clarifies why changes in the slope of the demand curve are not sufficient to
overturn this ranking. However, changes in the degree of convexity of the demand curve are sufficient as
proved in the continuation of this proof in the online appendix.

We can relate our notion of over- and under-issuance, as a choice between the safe and the risky
option in the Triffin dilemma, to another connected notion. We define b∗m (α), b∗RoW (α), and b∗T OT (α) as
the levels of issuance that maximize Hegemon net expected monopoly rents, RoW expected utility, and
social welfare, respectively. We say that there is over-issuance from the perspective of RoW if b∗RoW < b∗m ,
and under-issuance from the perspective of RoW if b∗RoW > b∗m . The concept of over- and under-issuance
from the perspective of social welfare is defined analogously.
A consequence of the above proposition is that: if γL = 0, then b∗m (α) < b∗T OT (α) < b∗RoW (α) for every
21

α ∈ [0, 1], so that there is under-issuance from the perspective of RoW and of social welfare; there exists
∗ , α ∗ ), b∗ (α) > b∗
γ̄L (τ) > 0 such that for τ sufficiently small, then for α ∈ (αRoW
m
m
RoW (α), so that there is
∗
∗
∗
over-issuance from the perspective of RoW, and for α ∈ (αT OT , αm ), bm (α) > b∗T OT (α) so that there is
over-issuance from the perspective of social welfare.

5

Gold-Exchange Standard and Floating Exchange Rates

In this section we introduce nominal rigidities and analyze two different exchange rate regimes: a system
of floating exchange rates, and a gold-exchange standard. We draw a parallel between the economics of
the IMS under the gold-exchange standard, and under floating exchange rates at the ZLB. This shows that
the lessons of the 1920s and 1960s are relevant today in the wake of the Great Recession.

5.1

Floating Exchange Rates and ZLB

We augment our baseline model to allow for production and nominal rigidities.
Production and investable wealth. We assume that there is a unit mass of competitive firms at time
t = 0 and at t = 1 in RoW. They can produce goods from labor using a one-for-one linear technology. In
both periods, labor is supplied without disutility up to a level L̄ and with a large disutility for any amount
of labor in excess of this level. We assume that this disutility is sufficiently large that L̄ is the natural
level of output (without nominal rigidities).20 Output is produced instantaneously at t = 0+ and at t = 1.
Importantly, note that the decision to produce at t = 0 takes place after the equilibrium sunspot has been
realized.
Investable wealth originates both from an endowment, as in the previous sections, and from labor
income generated in production. We extend the previous notation and denote endowment wealth by w∗e
and endogenous labor income by w∗` . Therefore, total investable wealth by RoW agents at time t = 0+ is
w∗ = w∗e + w∗` and RoW demand for reserve assets is given by
Rs (b; w∗` ) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗e + w∗` − b).

(13)

In the absence of nominal rigidities, the real wage is equal to one, labor and output are at their natural
level L̄ (a situation we refer to as full employment), and w∗` = L̄. The model is then exactly equivalent
to the baseline model in Section 2.1 with w∗ = w∗e + L̄ and Rs (b) = Rs (b; L̄). Note that without nominal
rigidities, negative safe interest rates Rs (b; L̄) < 1 can be achieved through inflation Π∗ in excess of nominal interest rates R̃∗ in accord with the Fisher equation Rs (b) = R̃∗ /Π∗ . As we shall see, this is no longer
possible once nominal rigidities are introduced.
20 By

analogy with the OLG model that we introduce in Section A.2.1, we assume that the labor in period t = 1 is supplied by
a new generation of RoW households.

22

Nominal rigidities and monetary policy. We assume that while prices are fully flexible, wages w̄∗ are
completely rigid in RoW currency in both periods. Workers supply whatever amount of labor is demanded
by the firms. For simplicity, we take w̄∗ = 1. At the competitive equilibrium price p∗ = 1 in both periods,
inflation is zero Π∗ = 1, real labor income is w∗` = `∗ , and firms make zero profits and are indifferent with
respect to their level of production (output ` is an equilibrium variable which is “demand determined”).
For simplicity, we select an equilibrium in which period 1 output is at full employment. This allows us to
focus on endogenous output determination at t = 0+ . We omit time subscripts from now on.21
We denote the nominal RoW interest rate as R̃∗ . Monetary policy in RoW is determined by a truncated
Taylor rule: R̃∗ = 1 + φ max(−(L̄ − `), 0). We consider the limit of an infinitely reactive Taylor rule with
φ ↑ ∞.22 The result is that the central bank either sets the RoW nominal interest rate at a level consistent
with full employment or at the ZLB: either ` = L̄ and R̃∗ ≥ 1 or ` < L̄ and R̃∗ = 1.
The nominal interest rate in the currency of the Hegemon R̃ depends on whether the currency is
expected to depreciate, and is determined as follows: if the currency is expected to depreciate in a disaster,
then R̃ = R̃∗ ; if the currency is expected to depreciate in a disaster, then R̃ = RrH . Inflation in the Hegemon
currency is zero in the former case, and (1 − eL )/eL in the latter case.
Full-commitment equilibrium. We first consider the case in which the Hegemon has full commitment.
The Hegemon then chooses never to devalue its currency.
Define the ZLB threshold
1 − R̄r + 2γσ 2 (w∗e + L̄)
.
bZLB =
2γσ 2
It is positive if and only if Rs (0; L̄) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗e + L̄) < 1, which we assume from now on. Then for
a given level of issuance b, the ZLB binds if and only if b < bZLB .
We start by analyzing the equilibrium for a given level of issuance b. If the ZLB does not bind
(b ≥ bZLB ), the nominal interest rate is R̃∗ = Rs (b, L̄), which achieves full employment with output at its
natural level L̄. If the ZLB binds (b < bZLB ), monetary policy cannot achieve full employment. In this
case, with R̃∗ = 1 and at full employment, the reserve asset market is in disequilibrium: there is a shortage
of (excess demand for) reserve assets. This disequilibrium cannot be resolved by a reduction in interest
rates. Instead, equilibrium output endogenously drops below potential, reducing investable wealth, the
demand for reserve assets, and bringing the reserve asset market back to equilibrium. The equilibrium
value of utilized labor ` is the solution of the following implicit equation
Rs (b; `) = 1.

(14)

An alternative but equivalent representation of the equilibrium determination of utilized labor can be
obtained by focusing on the goods market rather than on the safe asset market. The demand of and supply
21 One

could have in principle picked a different equilibrium at date t = 1, our results would be unchanged under alternative
selections because all decisions at t = 0 are independent of output at time t = 1.
22 Technically, we consider the limit as φ goes to infinity of a sequence of economies indexed by φ .

23

for goods can be described by a Keynesian cross AS-AD diagram AS(`) = AD(`) with
AS(`) = w∗e + `,

and AD(`) = b +

R̄r − R̃∗
,
2γσ 2

where (R̄r − R̃∗ )/(2γσ 2 ) is investment in the risky technology by RoW agents and b is the sum of consumption and investment in the risky technology by Hegemon agents. Crucially, the supply of reserve
assets acts as a positive AD shifter. Reductions in the supply of reserve assets b that cannot be accommodated by a reduction in interest rate R̃∗ at the ZLB, lead to a reduction in utilized labor ` and output. This
makes clear that at the ZLB, the quantity ` is an equilibrium variable which is determined endogenously
by a fixed point equation, very much in the same way that prices are determined by a fixed point equation
in a standard Walrasian equilibrium.
We now turn to determination of the level of issuance b. A crucial property of the demand curve for
reserve assets is that it is perfectly elastic at Rs = 1 in the region in which the ZLB binds. An immediate
consequence of this property is that a Hegemon with full commitment always optimally chooses to supply
enough safe assets bFC
ZLB > bZLB that the ZLB does not bind and there is full employment. The reason is
that for levels of issuance b < bZLB , the Hegemon can issue more debt without increasing the associated
interest rate, and hence capture higher monopoly rents. For b ≥ bZLB instead, the interest rate increases
with issuance, which reduces monopoly rents and leads to a finite optimal level of issuance.23
Limited-commitment equilibrium. Under limited commitment, the zones of the IMS are analogous
to those of the baseline model in Section 2.1, with the only difference being that the upper bound of the
Instability zone b̄ is now potentially affected by the ZLB, and thus we denote it by b̄ZLB . The upper bound
of the Safety zone b is unchanged at τ/RrH since it is independent of the safe interest rate. The upper bound

of the Instability zone b̄ZLB is now b̄ZLB = min b̄, τ , where b̄ is given by the expression in equation (8)
with w∗ = w∗e + L̄. Intuitively, either the upper bound of the Instability zone is reached at positive interest
rates, in which case the bound is analogous to that in equation (8), or it is reached while still at the ZLB,
in which case b̄ZLB = τ.
We analyze two polar cases in which, compared to safe debt capacity, the ZLB threshold bZLB is either
low in the Safety zone (bZLB < b), or high in the Collapse zone (bZLB > b̄ZLB ). If the ZLB threshold is
in the Safety zone (bZLB < b), then by the same logic as the one outlined in the full-commitment case,
the Hegemon never issues less than the ZLB threshold bZLB since RoW demand is completely inelastic in
that zone. Optimal issuance can then either be in the remaining part of the Safety zone [bZLB , b] or in the
Instability zone (b, b̄ZLB ]. In the former case, the ZLB does not bind and there is full employment. In the
latter case, the ZLB does not bind if the debt is safe since the supply of safe assets is b, in which case the
economy is at full employment; the ZLB binds if the debt is risky since the supply of safe assets is then
zero, in which case there is a recession determined by Rs (0; `) = 1.
If the ZLB threshold is in the Collapse zone (bZLB > b̄ZLB ), then the Hegemon either issues at the
23 This

configuration is illustrated in Figure 5 Panel (a): the Hegemon value function (the dotted line) is linear and increasing
for all b ∈ [0, bZLB ] and concave for b > bZLB .

24

upper bound of the Instability zone b̄ZLB or at the upper bound of the Safety zone b, whichever generates
the higher net expected monopoly rents. In both cases the ZLB binds and there is a recession. If the
Hegemon issues in the Instability zone, then the recession is less severe if the debt is safe, in which case
output is determined by Rs (b; `) = 1, than if it is risky, in which case output is determined by Rs (0; `) = 1
since the supply of reserve assets is then zero.
We collect the above results in the proposition below.24
Proposition 4 (Floating Exchange Rates and ZLB with a Hegemon). If the ZLB threshold is in the
Safety zone (bZLB < b), then if the Hegemon finds it optimal to issue in the Safety zone, it chooses b ∈
[bZLB , b], the ZLB does not bind and the economy is at full employment (` = L̄). If the Hegemon finds it
optimal to issue in the Instability zone, then, either its debt is safe and there is full employment, or its debt
is risky, the ZLB binds, and output is below potential (` < L̄).
If the ZLB threshold is in the Collapse zone (bZLB > b̄ZLB ), then the Hegemon either issues at the upper
bound of the Instability zone b̄ZLB or at the upper bound of the Safety zone b, whichever generates the
higher net expected monopoly rents. In both cases the ZLB binds and output is below potential (` < L̄). If
the Hegemon debt is risky, then there is a more severe recession (lower `).
Figure 5 Panel (a) illustrates a parametrization in which the ZLB binds for all levels of debt up to the
upper bound of the Instability zone b̄ZLB . Under full commitment, the Hegemon issues bFC and achieves
full employment. Under limited commitment, not only is that level of issuance no longer attainable, but
the Hegemon actually finds it optimal (if α is sufficiently high) to issue at the upper bound of the Safety
zone. The result is a binding ZLB and a recession. This configuration helps understand why a scarcity of
reserve assets might be recessionary as emphasized by the safe-asset shortage literature (see e.g. Caballero
and Farhi (2014), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2016), Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), Eggertsson
et al. (2016)), but importantly also why the U.S. may have chosen not to issue a sufficient amount of debt
to emerge from the ZLB during and after the Great Recession, perhaps for fear of a confidence crisis.

5.2

Gold-exchange Standard

The previous section dealt with a system of floating exchange rates. In this section, we consider a different
exchange rate regime in the form of a gold-exchange standard.
We maintain the same production structure and nominal rigidity assumptions as in the previous section.
We introduce gold in the model as an asset that pays a real dividend D for sure at time t = 1. One can think
of the dividend as a liquidity or hedonic service from holding gold that materializes independently from
the state of the economy. We assume that the asset is in infinitesimal supply for tractability. Since gold
24 The

results in Proposition 4 also apply to an extension in which production also takes place in the Hegemon economy in a
setup entirely analogous to that of RoW. The Hegemon production reinforces its incentives to issue as much debt as possible
to avoid a recession. To highlight that this element is not necessary for our result, we have omitted it from the main text, but
include it here for realism.

25

is safe, it is discounted at the same rate as risk-free debt. Because the price level in units of the foreign
currency is 1 in both periods, the nominal price of gold in units of the foreign currency is pG = D/R̃∗ .
The world economy operates under a gold-exchange standard in which the price of gold pG is constant
at p̄G in all currencies. RoW monetary policy is no longer described by a Taylor rule. Instead monetary
policy is dictated by the imperative of maintaining gold parity
R̃∗ = R̄G > 1,

with

R̄G =

D
.
p̄G

(15)

If the Hegemon debt is safe, no arbitrage implies that Rs (b; `) = R̄G .25 If the Hegemon debt is risky, its
rate of return is the same as that of the risky asset R = RrH .
Under a gold-exchange standard, the demand for reserve assets is perfectly elastic at R̄G . Changes in
the supply of reserve assets b are not accommodated by changes in the interest rate Rs and lead to variations
in output according to Rs (b; `) = R̄G if the debt is expected to be safe, and Rs (0; `) = R̄G otherwise. This
determination of output is similar to that obtained at the ZLB, with the difference that the interest rate is
fixed at R̄G > 1 instead of 1. By analogy with the ZLB analysis, we define the full-employment threshold
bG to be the amount of reserve assets that are consistent with both maintaining the gold parity and full
employment
R̄G − R̄r + 2γσ 2 (w∗e + w̄L̄)
bG =
,
2γσ 2
and we assume parameter restrictions such that bG > 0. The upper bound of the Safety zone b is the same
as that in the baseline model. The upper bound of the Instability zone b̄G is the highest safe debt level that
the Hegemon can sustain under the gold-exchange standard

τ 
b̄G = min bG , G .
R̄
As in the previous subsection with the ZLB, we analyze two polar cases in which, compared to safe debt
capacity, the full-employment threshold bG is either low in the Safety zone bG < b or high in the Collapse
zone bG > b̄G .
Proposition 5 (Gold-exchange Standard with a Hegemon). The Hegemon chooses to issue either at the
upper bound of the Safety zone b or at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄G , whichever generates
the higher expected monopoly rents. If the Hegemon issues at the upper bound of the Safety zone b, a
recession (` < L̄) occurs if the full-employment threshold is higher (bG > b), and otherwise there is a
boom (` > L̄). If the Hegemon issues at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄G and the debt is safe, a
recession occurs if the full-employment threshold is higher (bG > b̄G ), and otherwise there is a boom. If
25 In

this section we have assumed gold to be in infinitesimal supply. This is most tractable, but we could easily relax this
assumption and assume that there is a positive supply G > 0 of gold. In this case the demand curve for reserve assets would
be defined implicitly by Rs (b; `) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗e + ` − b − DG/Rs (b; `)). Under the gold standard, Rs (b1{sa f e} ; `) = R̄G
and DG acts like a reduction in w∗e , and our analysis follows similarly. Under a floating exchange rate system at the ZLB,
Rs (b1{sa f e} ; `) = 1 and once again our analysis follows identically by relabelling the endowment to be w∗e − DG. This also
shows that in the presence of nominal rigidities, the ZLB places an upper bound on the real value of gold at DG.

26

the Hegemon issues at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄G and the debt is risky, a recession occurs
independently of the full-employment threshold bG . In all three cases the recession is more severe or the
boom more shallow, the higher is the full-employment threshold bG .
These results allow us to rationalize the concerns voiced by Keynes (1923) who argued against the
return to a gold standard at pre-WWI parities on the grounds that this would lead to a policy of tight money
and trigger recessionary forces. Our model also clarifies that this dire warning rests on the assumption
that the expansion of reserve assets beyond gold to include monetary reserves, as decided at the Genoa
conference in 1922, would be insufficient to absorb the excess demand for reserves.26
Our results are also consistent with the evidence presented in Temin (1991) that the worldwide demise
of the gold-exchange standard in the mid 1930s significantly contributed to ending the Great Depression.
Indeed, in our model, if all countries devalue against gold by the same amount ( p̄0G > p̄G ), the resulting
0
monetary accommodation (R̄G < R̄G ) stimulates the economy at a given level of reserve asset issuance
(b0G < bG ). If all countries decide to float their currencies, then the only potential remaining obstacle to
achieving full employment is the ZLB, as highlighted in the previous section.
The above proposition also highlights that the gold-exchange standard, by making the demand for
reserve assets perfectly elastic, always increases the incentives of the Hegemon to issue more debt both
within and across zones. This helps in understanding why concerns about stability were particularly
severe under the gold-exchange standards of the 1920s and 1960s. Figure 5 Panel (b) illustrates this point
by showing that the Hegemon value function is linear (within zones) and increasing in the amount of debt
b issued. In this configuration with a full-employment threshold in the Collapse zone (bG > b̄G ), and α
sufficiently low, the Hegemon chooses to issue at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄G .

5.3

Expenditure Switching Effects and the Incentives to Devalue

In the model the incentive to devalue is the fiscal benefit of lower real debt repayment by the Hegemon.
We now consider an important additional motive: stimulating domestic (Hegemon) output via expenditure
switching. The analysis below applies both to floating exchange rates and to a gold-exchange standard.
We introduce a non-traded good in the Hegemon country at t = 0 and t = 1. The good is produced
from labor by a unit mass of competitive firms via a linear one-for-one technology. Firms hire local labor
at a rigid wage w̄ in Hegemon currency. Competitive pricing implies that pNT = w̄.
26 We

can also formalize the concerns of Keynes (1923) that gold is an unsuitable asset for a monetary standard since it ties
monetary policy to non-monetary shocks to the demand for and supply of gold:
If we restore the gold standard, are we to return also to the pre-war conceptions of bank-rate, allowing the tides
of gold to play what tricks they like with the internal price-level, and abandoning the attempt to moderate the
disastrous influence of the credit-cycle on the stability of prices and employment? In truth, the gold standard is
already a barbarous relic. Keynes, 1923, A Tract on Monetary Reform
One way to capture non-monetary shocks to the supply and demand for gold is via one-time unexpected shocks to D. Under
the gold-exchange standard these shocks are accommodated one-for-one by changes in RG = D/ p̄G which in turn result in
fluctuations in bG and output.

27

Hegemon agents supply labor with no disutility up to a maximum L̄ and have a large disutility for
any amount beyond that level. We assume that the disutility is sufficiently large that L̄ is the natural level
of output. We extend Hegemon agents preferences by including a (potentially time and state dependent)
separable utility value of non-tradable consumption. The per-period utility function is now Ct + νt (CNT,t ),
where νt is strictly increasing, strictly concave, and smooth.27 The first-order condition governing the
consumption of non-traded goods is: w̄Et = νt0 (CNT,t ), where Et is the level of the exchange rate at time t.
We normalize the exchange rate at time t = 0 to E0 = 1. With this convention, we have E1 = e where e
continues to denote the change in the exchange rate, with e = 1 if no disaster has occurred, and e ∈ {1, eL }
if a disaster occurs, depending on whether or not the Hegemon devalues its currency. We define the
decreasing function CNT,t (E ) = νt0−1 (E w̄). In equilibrium we have YNT,t = CNT,t = CNT,t (Et ).
If output is below potential at t = 1, so much so that CNT,1 (eL ) ≤ L̄, then the Hegemon gets an additional benefit ν(CNT,1 (eL )) − ν(CNT,1 (1)) from devaluing its currency at t = 1 because it stimulates
domestic output. The model is then isomorphic to the baseline one but with an adjusted value of τ now
given by28
ν(CNT,1 (eL )) − ν(CNT,1 (1))
< τ.
τ̃ = τ −
1 − eL
This analysis helps rationalize an important reason behind the collapse of the gold-exchange standard
in the 1930s and of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s. In all these historical episodes, the decision by
the Hegemon(s) to devalue was both the result of external factors (confidence crises) and internal factors
(fiscal pressures and recessions). For example, the British economy in 1931 was severely depressed and
the British unilateral and unexpected decision to devalue and go off gold contributed to alleviating the
U.K. recession.29 Similarly, stimulating the U.S. economy was an important reason behind the U.S.
abandonment of the gold parity in 1933. Analogously, the U.S. decision to go off gold and devalue the
dollar in 1971-73 was in part the result of domestic recessionary pressures (the 1969 recession). Looking
forward, this factor may continue to play an important role in the future.

6

The Multipolar Model

We have so far focused on an IMS dominated by a Hegemon with a monopoly over the issuance of reserve
assets. Of course, this is a simplification and the real world, while currently dominated by the U.S.,
27 For generality,

we allow the function νt to depend on the realization of Rr , which allows us to capture variations in the natural
exchange rate over time and across states.
28 The only difference is that if the domestic recession at t = 1 in case of a disaster is severe enough, the Hegemon might be
better off not trying to commit not to devalue its currency. In this case, the Hegemon issues risky debt, there is no commitment
problem, and the equilibrium is trivial. We place ourselves in the alternative case in which under limited commitment, the
Hegemon chooses to try to commit not to devalue, and only fails to do so in equilibrium when it issues in the Instability zone
and expectations are unfavorable. Note that under flexible wages, then there is no further benefit from devaluing τ̃ = τ. Output
is always at potential YNT,t = CNT,t = L̄ and the condition wt /wt∗ Et = νt0 (L̄) simply pins down the relative wage wt /wt∗ . The
model is then completely isomorphic to the baseline model.
29 Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) and Bemanke and James (1991) document that countries that went off gold earlier recovered
faster than those that stayed on gold longer.

28

features other competing issuers as illustrated in Figure 1 Panel (d). Indeed, the Euro and the Yen already
already play a limited role and there is speculation that other reserve currencies might appear in the future,
such as the Chinese Renminbi. Historically, the IMS has always been very concentrated with at most a few
meaningful issuers of reserve assets, but it has oscillated between almost Hegemonic configurations (e.g.:
the U.S. during and since Bretton Woods (1944 to present); the U.K. during the classical gold standard
(1870-1914)) and more multipolar configurations (e.g.: U.S. and U.K. in the 1920s).30
In this section we explore the equilibrium consequences of the presence of multiple reserve issuers.
We characterize the conditions under which a multipolar world is likely to be beneficial by increasing
the total quantity of reserve assets, as predicted by Eichengreen (2011) among others, or detrimental by
fostering more instability, as warned by Nurkse (1944). All in all, our analysis suggests that the benefits of
a more multipolar world might be U-shaped in the number of reserves issuers: a large number of reserve
currencies is beneficial, but a small number of reserve currencies might be of limited benefit or even be
worse than a single reserve currency.

6.1

The Benefits of a Multipolar World

We introduce n multiple symmetric reserve issuers. Issuers engage in quantity competition à la Cournot
by issuing reserves denominated in their own currency. At t = 1 in a disaster, each issuer must decide
whether or not to devalue its exchange rate by eL < 1. Disasters are global in the sense that disaster states
are the same for all issuers. As a consequence, all the debts of the different issuers that are safe are perfect
substitutes if they are safe, and likewise for the debts that are risky.
Full-commitment equilibrium. We focus first on the case of full commitment. The RoW demand
function for safe debt of country i is
Rs (bi , b−i ) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗ − bi − b−i ),
where bi is the quantity of safe debt issued by country i and b−i is the total quantity of safe debt issued by
all other n − 1 countries. The slope of this demand function is still given by ∂ Rs (bi , b−i )/∂ bi = 2γσ 2 as
in the monopolist case and optimal issuance is still given by bi = [R̄r − Rs (bi , b−i )]/(2γσ 2 ) as in equation
(5). Of course, the safety premium now depends on total issuance by all countries. The best response by
country i given b−i is
1
bi = (w∗ − b−i ) ≥ 0.
2
There exists a unique equilibrium and it is symmetric. Individual and total issuance are given by
bFC
i =

1
w∗ ,
n+1

BFC
n =

30 These classifications are open to debate.

n
w∗ .
n+1

For example, Lindert (1969) shows that the U.K.’s role before 1914, while dominant,
was accompanied by substantial issuance of reserves by France (although largely held by Russia alone) and Germany (although
largely held by the Austro-Hungarian Bank).

29

The equilibrium interest rate on safe debt is


FC
R Bn = R̄r −
s

2
γσ 2 w∗ .
n+1

∗
Perfect competition obtains in the limit of a large number of issuers such that limn→∞ BFC
n = w and

= R̄r . As already previewed in Lemma 1, in this limit, the exorbitant privilege is comlimn→∞ Rs BFC
n
pletely dissipated, there are no monopoly rents, and RoW obtains full insurance. Competition under full
commitment is thus a powerful force: it increases total issuance towards the first best. Furthermore, the
largest benefits of competition come from the first few entrants, since total issuance increases in n/(n + 1).
This provides one possible rationalization of the common support, among academics and policymakers
(Eichengreen (2011)), for a multipolar IMS.

Limited-commitment equilibrium. Under limited commitment, the size of the Safety zone (the interval [0, b̄ = τ/RrH ]) does not depend on the equilibrium interest rate on reserve assets and is therefore
unaffected by competition. With a sufficiently large number of reserve issuers, each issuer finds it optimal
to issue debt within its Safety zone, and the equilibrium is then identical to that which obtains under full
commitment. Therefore, a lot of competition (large n) is beneficial since it increases total issuance of
reserve assets and makes the IMS more stable. However, as we shall see next, the benefits of a little (as
opposed to a lot of) competition (small n) are more uncertain.

6.2

Nurkse Instability under Oligopoly

We formalize the warning by Nurkse (1944) that a potential disadvantage of the presence of multiple
competing reserve issuers is that it introduces coordination problems across a priori substitutable reserve
currencies. Nurkse famously pointed to the instability of the IMS during the interregnum between Dollar
and Sterling in the 1920s. He diagnosed the increased difficulty to coordinate on the ultimate reserve
asset by noticing the frequent switches in the holdings of reserves of these two issuers at other central
banks. Eventually, this instability led to the collapse of this gold-exchange standard with the successive
devaluations of the U.K. and the U.S. in 1931 and 1933, respectively (see Figure 1 Panels (a) and (b)).
To capture the possibility of additional instability arising from worsened coordination problems, we
propose two stylized configurations of the model under a duopoly of issuers of reserve assets indexed
by i ∈ {1, 2}. These configurations correspond to two different equilibrium selections reflecting different
coordinations of investors’ expectations.
In the first configuration one country faces the most favorable expectations regarding the stability of
its currency αi = 0, while the other one faces the least favorable expectations α−i = 1. This configuration
boils down to Cournot competition of firms under heterogenous capacity constraints; here the capacity
constraints refer to the two boundaries b̄i and b−i . To the extent that these capacity constraints are binding,
country i issues more than country −i. We interpret the switches over time in RoW reserve holdings
between Dollar and Sterling as unexpected inversions in the ranking of countries.

30

Nurkse’s conjecture that it is easier to coordinate expectations towards a favorable outcome when there
is a Hegemon issuer compared to a duopoly of issuers can be rendered in our model by assuming that a
Hegemon would have faced α = 0. Under this configuration, coordination problems reduce the benefits
of competition (lower total issuance) compared to an ideal situation in which both duopoly issuers would
have faced favorable expectation αi = α−i = 0.
In the second configuration exactly one country ĩ out of the two is selected at random at t = 0+ to face
the most favorable expectations, while the other country −ĩ faces the least favorable expectations. Each
country i now optimally behaves as a Hegemon with αi = 0.5. As above, we assume that a true Hegemon
would have faced the most favorable expectations α = 0.
For this second configuration, we focus on two interesting subcases. The first case arises when the
demand for reserve assets is so high that a true Hegemon (under monopoly) would have chosen b̄ even
when facing α = 0.5. Under duopoly, there can be multiple equilibria, but we show that it is always an
equilibrium for both issuers to issue b̄, and we focus on that case.31 Then, both under monopoly and under
duopoly, each issuer chooses to issue b̄. Total issuance is therefore twice as high under duopoly as under
monopoly. However, the total supply of safe debt is the same under both configurations, since the debt of
the Hegemon is safe for sure under monopoly, but the debt of each issuer is only safe with probability 0.5
under duopoly.32 In addition, the duopoly world features instability with the collapse of one of the two
currencies occurring for sure, while the monopoly world is stable. Therefore, social welfare is lower under
duopoly than under monopoly since the same effective amount of safe assets is supplied in equilibrium,
but the duopoly incurs devaluation costs.
The second case arises when the demand for reserve assets is intermediate, so that a true Hegemon
issues b̄ when α = 0 but b when α = 0.5. In this case, going from monopoly to duopoly can (but does not
always) reduce the total effective supply of safe assets because under duopoly, individual issuance might
jump to the Safety zone below b, in which case total issuance might go down if 2b < b̄. In this latter case,
social welfare is lower under duopoly than under a monopoly for a different reason from the one analyzed
above: duopoly reduces total issuance of safe assets even though it does not increase instability. In Section
7 we discuss a related mechanism whereby going from monopoly to unstable duopoly erodes the future
monopoly rents of each issuer, thus endogenously lowering commitment, and prove analytically that this
force can be so strong as to reduce effective total issuance.
The analysis above makes clear that a multipolar IMS can be, but does not have to be, more unstable
than a hegemonic system. In the model, many equilibrium outcomes are possible, some of them embed a
worsening of coordination problems with competition and thereby provide a possible formalization of the
type of arguments put forward by Nurkse, but others do not. Our purpose is not to take a stand on which
31 The

only other possible equilibrium in this case is one in which both issuers issue in the Safety zone below b. This may or
may not be an equilibrium. We either focus on cases in which it is not, or, in cases in which it is, we select the other equilibrium.
32 This occurs because going from monopoly to duopoly: the boundaries b̄ and b are unchanged; the (equilibrium) expected
payoff to each issuer from issuing b̄ is unchanged, because when they issue in the Instability zone, the competing issuers under
duopoly do not actually compete since one is safe when the other is risky and vice versa; the (out of equilibrium) expected
payoff to each issuer from issuing b is lower since that issuer competes with the other issuer who issues at b̄ with probability
0.5

31

outcome is more likely, but rather only to characterize the different possibilities.
The historical experience with multipolar systems has been mixed. Lindert (1969) argues that the
IMS between 1870 and 1914 had some features of multipolarity (with France and Germany the other two
significant issuers in addition to the U.K.) and yet was remarkably stable. By contrast, Nurkse stresses the
instability of the IMS in the 1920s.33

7

Generalizing the Framework

In this section we show how our baseline model can be extended to capture a number of key aspects of the
functioning of the IMS. Taken together, these extensions highlight the versatility of our framework, and
the fruitfulness of our approach. In the interest of space, we only provide brief summaries here and refer
the reader to the appendix for a formal treatment. We plan to pursue these ideas in future work.
Loss of reputation in infinite horizon. Our baseline model is static and requires an exogenous devaluation cost τ. In Appendix A.2.1, we develop an infinite-horizon version of the model where reserve
issuers face overlapping generations of RoW investors in a repeated policy game. We study trigger strategies equilibria in which devaluations are followed by a (probabilistic) loss of reputation associated with
adverse expectations in all future periods.
These equilibria can be represented as equilibria of the static game where the devaluation cost τ is
micro-founded as the expected net present value of future monopoly rents accruing to a particular reserve
issuer, which we refer to as its “franchise value”. Crucially, this devaluation cost τ is now an endogenous
equilibrium object.
In particular, the devaluation cost τ is endogenous to entry: it goes down with the number of issuers
because total monopoly rents have to be shared among a larger number of issuers, and so the franchise
value of each issuer is reduced. This force limits the benefits of competition even in the absence of any
coordination problem by eroding the commitment of each individual reserve issuer. In fact, we show that
in certain configurations, this force can be so strong as to completely eliminate the positive effects of entry
on the total amount of reserves and on welfare.
Furthermore, the devaluation cost τ is also endogenous to coordination problems: it decreases with
their intensity because future coordination problems increase the risk of a future devaluation by a given
issuer, and thereby reduce the franchise value of each issuer. As a result, it is not just present coordination
problems that are a source of present instability as in our baseline model, but also future coordination
problems because they endogenously reduce the present commitment of each individual issuer. In the
33 We

emphasize that in mapping the model to Nurkse’s facts about the 1920s gold-exchange standard, the quantity b refers
not to the total stock of debt but to the part of this stock held abroad. The instability, therefore, can manifest itself in debt
switching hands between foreign and domestic residents and not necessarily in the total amount being issued. Similarly, b
could be extended along the lines of Section 2.1 to include private issuance and much of the collapse in total issuance could
take place in the private issuance rather than the public issuance. Accominotti (2012) provides evidence that private safe asset
issuance (via acceptance guarantees) by London merchant banks was substantially curtailed during and after the Sterling crisis
in 1931.

32

model, it is possible for coordination problems to be exacerbated by entry, leading to a bigger reduction
in τ via the two aforementioned mechanisms combined. We show that competition can foster instability,
decrease the total amount of reserves, and reduce welfare.
This line of argument draws an interesting parallel with arguments in the banking literature that competition can lead to financial instability by reducing the franchise value of competing banks and leading them
to adopt riskier strategies (Keeley (1990), Demsetz, Saidenberg and Strahan (1996), Repullo (2004)).34
Private issuance of reserve assets. In our baseline model only governments issue reserve assets. In
practice, reserve assets are composed not only of government securities, but also of highly-rated private
debt securities. In Appendix A.2.4, we extend the model to allow for private issuance. If the government
has access to capital controls, then private issuance is essentially irrelevant since it leads to the exact same
equilibrium allocations. But in the absence of capital controls, a key difference between private and public
issuance becomes consequential: while the latter internalizes its effects on equilibrium interest rates, the
former does not. Private issuance mitigates the monopoly power of the government by confronting it with
a more elastic residual demand curve, but does not eliminate it as long as private issuance is not infinitely
elastic. In the extended model, the proper notion of reserve supply is given by the total external debt: it
is the basis for the monopoly rents of the country, and it also governs the incentives of the government to
devalue.
We also consider an extension that accounts for issuance in the reserve currency by third parties,
private or public, that are based in countries other than the Hegemon. Historically, these external third
parties were issuing predominantly in Sterling and are currently issuing in Dollar (see Appendix Figure
A.1). In our model, issuers that are subject to original sin face a trade off in the choice of foreign currency
for the denomination of their debt: issuing in reserve currency lowers ex-ante yields on debt, but comes
with higher ex-post costs since the real value of debt remains high during global crises.
Fiscal capacity. In our baseline model, taxes are not distortionary. In Appendix A.2.6, we extend the
model to capture the distortionary costs of taxation. We incorporate a social cost of public funds which
proxies for a country’s fiscal capacity. In practice, a country’s fiscal capacity could be influenced by
several factors, such as its size, the development of its tax administration, the strength of its legal system,
and its enforcement capacity, etc.
In general, larger fiscal capacities lead to more reserves issuance. In a multipolar model with heterogenous issuers, the equilibrium is an asymmetric Cournot equilibrium where issuers with larger fiscal
capacities have larger equilibrium market shares.
Currency of goods pricing. Historically, a dominant position as a reserve currency has often been
associated with dominance in the currency denomination of goods and other contracts. In other words,
34 Our

work is also related to the literature on competing monies. Our result that under full commitment in the perfect competition limit, the model delivers the efficient outcome of full insurance and no safety premium for the RoW is consistent with
the Hayek (1976) view that competition in the supply of monies is beneficial, and runs counter to the opposite view articulated
by Friedman (1960). This limit result breaks down under limited commitment even in the absence of coordination problems
among investors. This result is related to arguments by Klein (1974), Tullock (1975), Taub (1990), Marimon, Nicolini and
Teles (2012).

33

prices of tradable goods are disproportionately quoted in the dominant reserve currency, in Dollar at
present and in Sterling in the 1920s, a fact dubbed the International Price System (IPS) by Gopinath
(2015).
In Appendix A.2.6, we investigate the interaction between reserve currency status and currency of
goods pricing and the rationales for their association. The more goods are priced (and sticky) in a given
reserve currency, the safer is the debt denominated in this currency, since a given nominal devaluation
of this currency leads to a smaller erosion of the real value of the debt. In a multipolar model, this
characteristic confers an advantage to the issuer of this currency.
Liquidity, network effects, and the endogenous emergence of a Hegemon. In our baseline model, the
key characteristic of reserve assets is their safety, and their demand arises from the risk aversion of RoW
investors. In practice, reserve assets are distinguished not only by their safety but also by their liquidity.
In Appendix A.2.5, we extend the model to capture the liquidity benefits of reserve assets via a “bond–inthe-utility” formulation. We allow the individual marginal liquidity benefits of holding the reserve asset
to increase with the holdings of other agents, in order to capture the fundamental increasing returns or
network property of liquidity.35
In a multipolar model, the increasing returns or network effects associated with liquidity can amplify
the impact of differences (fiscal capacity, reputation, currency of goods pricing) across issuers and lead
to the endogenous emergence of a Hegemon. This captures the widely-held notion that the depth and
liquidity of U.S. financial markets, and in particular of U.S. Treasuries, is key in consolidating the role of
the U.S. Dollar as the dominant reserve currency.
Endogenous entry and natural monopoly. In our baseline model, entry is exogenous. In Appendix
A.2.7, we extend the model to allow for endogenous entry. We add an ex-ante stage at the beginning of
the game where issuers can incur an entry cost to increase their reputation by increasing their subsequent
devaluation cost τ.
We have in mind the various costs and delays in acquiring a reputation for sound policy. In practice,
this could involve resisting the pressure to devalue in times of crisis at a potentially large economic cost.
Furthermore, the opportunities to demonstrate good behavior to boost reputation might be very infrequent.
The consequence is that the reserve currency market could have the characteristics of a natural monopoly
with large fixed costs and low variable costs. Entry costs must be recouped with a share of future total
monopoly rents, and these might be too small to sustain entry by a large number of issuers. This line
of explanation offers yet another rationale for the historically high concentration of the reserve currency
market and for its limited contestability. It also offers another perspective on the endogenous emergence
of a Hegemon. Indeed, to the extent that the entry cost is sunk, the identity of the Hegemon (say the
U.S. at present) could to some extent be the result of a historical accident through a form of first-mover
advantage. A reserve country that was at some point in the past in a dominant position on fundamental
35 For

a search-theoretic foundation of these increasing returns or network property of liquidity in the context of international
monies see Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui (1993).

34

grounds, preserves its central position simply because it is already present in the market. This might
impart persistence and lock-in effects to reserve currency status.
Risk-sharing and LoLR. One avenue to mitigate the Triffin Dilemma and the associated instability of
the IMS is to introduce policies that reduce the demand for reserve assets. Policies to this effect have
often been proposed by economists looking to reform the IMS (Keynes (1943), Harrod (1961), Machlup
(1963), Meade (1965), Rueff (1963), Farhi, Gourinchas and Rey (2011)). In their most recent incarnation,
they have included swap lines amongst central banks, credit lines by the IMF as a LoLR, and international
reserve sharing agreements such as the Chiang Mai initiative.
In Appendix A.2.8, we augment our framework to make sense of these global financial safety net
proposals. We assume that each of the many countries in RoW faces idiosyncratic shocks. We also
assume that risk aversion increases with the amount of risk faced by individual investors. This captures
a form of precautionary saving motive whereby higher idiosyncratic risk leads to a higher demand for
reserve assets.
A risk-sharing arrangement between RoW countries mitigates the impact of idiosyncratic shocks and
tilts portfolios away from reserve assets. Over and above its immediate idiosyncratic risk-sharing benefits,
such an arrangement is beneficial because it reduces the demand for reserve assets, lowers the pressure for
the Hegemon to stretch itself by issuing in the Instability zone and exposing itself to a confidence crisis,
and mitigates the Triffin dilemma.

8

Conclusions

We have provided a simple and tractable framework for understanding the IMS. The framework helps
rationalize a number of historical episodes, including the emergence and collapse of the gold-exchange
standard in the 1920s, the emergence and collapse of the Bretton Woods system, the recessionary forces
associated with gold-exchange standards, and the role of the U.S. as a Hegemon in the current floating
exchange rate system. The framework provides foundations for and refines prominent conjectures regarding the workings and stability of the IMS, including the Triffin dilemma, the Nurkse instability, and the
beneficial nature of multipolar systems. Novel elements emerge from our analysis: the possibility that a
Hegemon issuer of reserve assets might over- or under- issue from a social welfare perspective, the parallel
between the gold-exchange standard and a system of floating exchange rates at the ZLB, and the potential
perverse effects of competition among reserve issuers.

References
Accominotti, Olivier. 2012. “London merchant banks, the central European panic, and the sterling crisis of 1931.” The Journal
of Economic History, 72(01): 1–43.
Aguiar, Mark, Satyajit Chatterjee, Harold Cole, and Zachary Stangebye. 2016. “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises, Revisited:
The Art of the Desperate Deal.”
Aliber, Robert Z. 1964. “The costs and benefits of the US role as a reserve currency country.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 442–456.

35

Aliber, Robert Z. 1967. “Gresham’s Law, asset preferences, and the demand for international reserves.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 628–638.
Arellano, Cristina, and Yan Bai. 2013. “Linkages across sovereign debt markets.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Azzimonti, Marina, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2016. “The politics of sovereign default under financial integration.”
Azzimonti, Marina, Eva De Francisco, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2014. “Financial globalization, inequality, and the rising
public debt.” The American Economic Review, 104(8): 2267–2302.
Bach, Christopher. 1972. “US balance-of-payments problems and policies in 1971.” Review.
Bemanke, Ben, and Harold James. 1991. “The gold standard, deflation, and financial crisis in the Great Depression: An
international comparison.” In Financial markets and financial crises. 33–68. University of Chicago Press.
Bénétrix, Agustín S, Philip R Lane, and Jay C Shambaugh. 2015. “International currency exposures, valuation effects and
the global financial crisis.” Journal of International Economics, 96(1): S98–S109.
Bernanke, Ben. 2005. “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit.” Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association
of Economists.
Branson, William H. 1971. “The Balance of Payments in 1970.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1971(1): 219–225.
Caballero, Ricardo J, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2009. “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility.” The American Economic Review, 99(2): 584–588.
Caballero, Ricardo J, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2014. “The safety trap.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2008. “An Equilibrium Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates.” The American Economic Review, 98(1): 358–393.
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2016. “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at
the ZLB.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1988. “Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations.” The American Economic Review, 647–661.
Cole, Harold L, and Timothy J Kehoe. 2000. “Self-fulfilling debt crises.” The Review of Economic Studies, 67(1): 91–116.
Cooper, Richard N. 1975. “Prolegomena to the Choice of an International Monetary System.” International Organization,
29(1): 63–97.
Cooper, Richard N. 1987. The international monetary system: essays in world economics. MIT Press Cambridge, Mass.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmstrom. 2015. “The Information Sensitivity of a Security.” MIT MIT mimeo.
Demsetz, Rebecca S, Marc R Saidenberg, and Philip E Strahan. 1996. “Banks with something to lose: The disciplinary
role of franchise value.” Economic Policy Review, 2(2).
Despres, E., C.P. Kindleberger, and W.S. Salant. 1966. The Dollar and World Liquidity: A Minority View. Brookings Institution, Reprint, Brookings Institution.
Diamond, Douglas W, and Philip H Dybvig. 1983. “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity.” The journal of political
economy, 401–419.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Mark Gersovitz. 1981. “Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical analysis.” The
Review of Economic Studies, 48(2): 289–309.
Eggertsson, Gauti B, and Neil R Mehrotra. 2014. “A model of secular stagnation.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Eggertsson, G., N. Mehrotra, S. Singh, and L. Summers. 2016. “A Contagious Malady? Open Economy Dimensions of
Secular Stagnation.” Working Paper.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2011. Exorbitant Privilege: The rise and fall of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary
System. Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey Sachs. 1985. “Exchange rates and economic recovery in the 1930s.” The Journal of Economic History, 45(04): 925–946.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Marc Flandreau. 2009. “The rise and fall of the dollar (or when did the dollar replace sterling as
the leading reserve currency?).” European Review of Economic History, 13(3): 377–411.
Eichengreen, Barry, Arnaud Mehl, and Livia Chitu. 2017. International Currencies: Past, Present and Future: Two Views
from Economic History. Princeton University Press, forthcoming.
Eichengreen, Barry, Livia Chitu, and Arnaud Mehl. 2016. “Stability or upheaval? The currency composition of international
reserves in the long run.” IMF Economic Review, 64(2): 354–380.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Hélène Rey. 2011. Reforming the international monetary system. CEPR.
Fleming, J Marcus. 1966. “Use and Acceptance of Reserve Claims.” IMF Staff Papers, 13(3): 443.
Friedman, Milton. 1960. A program for monetary stability. Vol. 541, Fordham University Press New York.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2012. “Neglected risks, financial innovation, and financial fragility.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3): 452–468.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny. 2013. “A model of shadow banking.” The Journal of Finance,

36

68(4): 1331–1363.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2015. “Banking, Liquidity, and Bank Runs in an Infinite Horizon Economy.” American Economic Review, 105(7): 2011–43.
Gopinath, Gita. 2015. “The international price system.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gorton, Gary, and George Penacchi. 1990. “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation.” Journal of Finance, 45(1): 49–
71.
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2014. “Collateral Crises.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 343–378.
Gorton, Gary B., and Guillermo Ordonez. 2013. “The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets.” National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 18732.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2007a. “From world banker to world venture capitalist: US external adjustment
and the exorbitant privilege.” In G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2007b. “International financial adjustment.” Journal of Political Economy,
115(4): 665–703.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Nicolas Govillot, and Hélène Rey. 2011. “Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty.” Unpublished manuscript, UC Berkeley and LBS.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2015. “A Gap-Filling Theory of Corporate Debt Maturity
Choice.” Journal of Finance, 117(3): 449–469.
Hagemann, Helmut A. 1969. “Reserve Policies of Central Banks and Their Implications for US Balance of Payments Policy.”
The American Economic Review, 62–77.
Harrod, Roy. 1961. “A Plan for Increasing Liquidity: A Critique.” Economica, 28(110): 195–202.
Hart, Oliver, and Luigi Zingales. 2014. “Banks are where the Liquidity is.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hayek, F. 1976. Denationalization of Money.
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Konstantin Milbradt, et al. 2015. “A model of the reserve asset.”
Keeley, Michael C. 1990. “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking.” The American Economic Review,
80(5): 1183–1200.
Kenen, Peter B. 1960. “International liquidity and the balance of payments of a reserve-currency country.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 572–586.
Kenen, Peter B. 1963. Reserve-asset preferences of central banks and stability of the gold-exchange standard. International
Finance Section, Dept. of Economics, Princeton University.
Kenen, Peter B, and Elinor B Yudin. 1965. “The demand for international reserves.” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
242–250.
Keynes, J.M. 1943. Proposal for an International Clearing Union. British Government Publication, Cmd 6437.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1923. A Tract on Monetary Reform. Macmillan.
Klein, Benjamin. 1974. “The competitive supply of money.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 6(4): 423–453.
Leeper, Eric M. 1991. “Equilibria under ’active’ and ’passive’ monetary and fiscal policies.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
27(1): 129–147.
Lindert, Peter H. 1969. Key currencies and gold, 1900-1913. International Finance Section, Princeton University.
Lizarazo, Sandra. 2009. “Contagion of financial crises in sovereign debt markets.”
Machlup, Fritz. 1963. “Reform of the international monetary system.” World Monetary Reform: Plans and Issues,(Stanford
University Press and Oxford University Press, Stanford, CA and London 1963), 253–260.
Maggiori, Matteo. 2012. “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Currencies.” Unpublished
manuscript, Harvard University.
Marimon, Ramon, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2012. “Money is an experience good: Competition and trust in the
private provision of money.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(8): 815–825.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Akihiko Matsui. 1993. “Toward a theory of international currency.” The
Review of Economic Studies, 60(2): 283–307.
Meade, James E. 1965. “The future of international payments.” World Monetary Reform: Plans and Issues.
Mendoza, Enrique G, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Vıctor Rıos-Rull. 2009. “Financial Integration, Financial Development,
and Global Imbalances.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(3).
Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov. 2014. “The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking.” National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc NBER Working Papers 20335.
Nurkse, Ragnar. 1944. International currency experience: lessons of the interwar period. League of Nations.
Obstfeld, M, and K Rogoff. 2001. “Perspectives on OECD Capital Market Integration: Implications for the US current account
adjustment.” In Global Economic Integration: Opportunities and Challenges, 169–208, Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve

37

Bank of Kansas City.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2011. “International liquidity: the fiscal dimension.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2007. “The unsustainable US current account position revisited.” In R.H. Clarida,
ed., G7 current account imbalances: Sustainability and adjustment, 339–376, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Repullo, Rafael. 2004. “Capital requirements, market power, and risk-taking in banking.” Journal of financial Intermediation,
13(2): 156–182.
Rueff, Jacques. 1963. “Gold exchange standard a danger to the West.” reprinted in H. Grubel (ed.) World Monetary Reform,
320–8.
Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace. 1981. “Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic.” Quarterly Review, , (Fall).
Sims, Christopher A. 1994. “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level and the Interaction of
Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” Economic Theory, 4(3): 381–99.
Spence, A Michael. 1975. “Monopoly, quality, and regulation.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 417–429.
Taub, B. 1990. “Private Fiat Money with Many Suppliers.” Milton Friedman: Critical Assessments, 3: 164.
Temin, Peter. 1991. Lessons from the great depression. MIT Press.
Triffin, Robert. 1961. Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The future of convertibility. New Haven, Yale University Press, Connecticut.
Tullock, Gordon. 1975. “Competing monies.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 7(4): 491–497.
Woodford, Michael. 1994. “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-Advance Economy.” Economic Theory, 4(3): 345–80.

38

Figure 1: History of the International Monetary System

(a) Gold-exchange standard 1924-1932

(b) Currency composition of reserves in 1928

(c) Collapse of reserves in Dollar and Sterling in 1931-33 (d) Currency composition of reserves during Bretton Woods
and modern float
Note: Panel (a) illustrates the value in millions of U.S. dollars (right axis) of gold and monetary reserves held by 24
central banks (mostly European, excluding the U.S. and U.K.) during the gold-exchange standard (1924-32). The panel also
illustrates the percentage (left axis) of total reserves (gold + monetary reserves) accounted for by monetary reserves. Source:
Nurkse (1944) Appendix II. Panel (b) illustrates the currency composition of monetary reserves in 1928. Panel (c) illustrates
the value in millions of U.S. dollars of reserves held in pounds and dollars by a balanced panel of 15 central banks (excluding
the U.S. and U.K.). Panel (d) illustrates the currency composition (in percentage) of foreign exchange reserves held by a
panel of central banks over the Bretton Woods period (1948-1973) and the modern float period (1973-2015). Sources for
Panels (b) to (d) are Eichengreen and Flandreau (2009), Eichengreen, Chitu and Mehl (2016), Eichengreen, Mehl and Chitu
(2017) and sources therein.

Figure 2: Timeline

Note: The timeline of decisions for the one-period model.

39

Figure 3: Hegemon Optimal Debt Issuance

(a) Optimal issuance in Safety zone

(b) Optimal issuance in Instability zone
Note: Panel (a) illustrates a parameter configuration in which full-commitment issuance bFC can be achieved in the Safety
zone. Panel (b) illustrates a parameter configuration in which full-commitment issuance bFC can only be achieved in the
Instability zone. Optimal issuance under limited commitment still occurs at the full-commitment level in both panels.

40

Figure 4: Welfare Consequences of the Triffin Dilemma

(a) RoW expected utility

(b) Hegemon net expected monopoly rents
Note: Panel (a) illustrates RoW expected utility resulting from the Hegemon decision to issue either at the upper bound
of the Safety zone b (green) or at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄ (orange). Under the parameter configuration,
RoW would have preferred issuance to be in the Safety zone at b. Panel (b) illustrates net expected monopoly rents for the
Hegemon issuance of either b (green) or b̄ (orange). A parameter configuration is chosen such that the Hegemon finds it
optimal to issue b̄.

41

Figure 5: Gold-Exchange Standard and Floating Exchange Rates at the ZLB

(a) Zero lower bound under floating exchange rates

(b) Gold-exchange standard
Note: Panel (a) illustrates optimal issuance by the Hegemon at the ZLB and under floating exchange rates. A parameter
configuration is chosen such that optimal issuance takes place at the upper bound of the Safety zone b. Panel (b) illustrates
optimal issuance by the Hegemon on a gold-exchange standard. A parameter configuration is chosen such that optimal
issuance takes place at the upper bound of the Instability zone b̄G .

42

Appendix to “A Model of the International Monetary System”
Emmanuel Farhi

Matteo Maggiori

Not for Publication. November 2016

A.1

Proofs and Further Details for the Main Body of the Paper

Here we provide the full details of the derivation of the RoW demand function for Hegemon debt in equation
(1).
Proposition A.1 Focusing only on demand functions for debt that depend positively on its expected return,
we conclude that either RoW agents are expecting debt to be safe and the demand function is
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γ(w∗ − b)σ 2 ,
or, if the agents are expecting the debt to be risky, it is priced identically to the risky asset and demand is
indeterminate.
Proof. We start with the the generic maximization problem
max
∗
b,C1

E+ [C1∗ ] − γVar+ (C1∗ ),

w∗ Rr + b(Re − Rr ) = C1∗ ,

b ≥ 0.

The optimality condition is
Rē − R̄r = γ[2b(R2 σe2 + σ 2 − 2R σ σe ) + 2w∗ R σ σe − 2w∗ σ 2 ],

(A.1)

where ē = E+ [e] and σe = Var+ (e). Suppose agents were expecting debt to be safe, then ē = 1 and σe = 0,
so we have
Rs (b) = R̄r + γ[2bσ 2 − 2w∗ σ 2 ] = R̄r − 2γ(w∗ − b)σ 2 .
This proves the first part of the proposition.
Suppose agents were expecting Hegemon debt to be risky, then ē = R̄r /RrH and σe = σ /RrH since we
assumed eL = RrL /RrH . Substituting these expressions into (A.1) and solving for R as a function of b, we
have two roots


R̄r
∗
−
w
2
2γσ
.
R− = RrH and R+ = RrH 1 +
b
The first root, which we will select, implies that the risky bond is now a perfect substitute for the risky asset
and demand for the bond is therefore indeterminate. We exclude the second root on economic grounds (and
by assumption in this proposition) since it generates a backward bending demand function: higher expected
rates of returns on debt lower the demand for debt.
Here we provide the conditions under which the full-commitment equilibrium prices in Proposition 1
are free of arbitrage.
Proposition A.2 (Absence of Arbitrage under Full Commitment). The full-commitment equilibrium prices
are arbitrage free if and only if RrH > Rs (bFC ) > RrL , i.e. if and only if γw∗ σ 2 < (RrH − RrL )(1 − λ ).

A.1

Proof. Let M be a valid SDF in this economy. We have two states and two linearly independent securities,
so markets are complete, hence M is unique. Absence of arbitrage is equivalent to M being strictly positive.
Requiring that M prices the two assets we have
E[M]Rs (bFC ) = 1,
E[MRr ] = 1.
These are two equations in two unknowns. Solving for M we obtain
MH =

Rs (bFC ) − RrL
1
,
1 − λ Rs (bFC )(RrH − RrL )

ML =

1 RrH − Rs (bFC )
.
λ Rs (bFC )(RrH − RrL )

Therefore ML > 0. We have MH > 0 if and only if Rs (bFC ) > RrL , i.e. if and only if γw∗ σ 2 < (RrH −

RrL )(1 − λ ).

We note that the condition R̄r − 2γw∗ σ 2 > 0, imposed in the main text, is not sufficient to guarantee the
absence of arbitrage, but that the stronger condition R̄r − 2γw∗ σ 2 > 1 is.

Proof of Proposition 2. We proceed by proving some useful claims
Claim 1 The Hegemon never chooses to issue so much debt b > b̄ as to lose the safety premium for sure.
Proof. Note that V (0) = 0 and V (b) = −λ τ(1 − eL ) < 0 ∀b ∈ (b̄, w∗ ].
Claim 2 If the full-commitment equilibrium level of debt bFC lies in the Safety zone, then the Hegemon
issues that level of debt and the only equilibrium is the safe equilibrium.
Proof. Recall bFC = argmax(V FC (b)). If bFC ≤ b then max(V FC (b)) = max(V (b)) since V FC (b) ≥ V (b)
and equality holds only for b ∈ [0, b].
Let us create a pseudo value function Ṽ (b) = (1 − α)V FC (b) − αλ τ(1 − eL ). Notice that Ṽ (b) = V (b)
∀b ∈ (b, b̄]. If bFC > b we could have several cases that are summarized below.
Claim 3 Assume bFC > b, then the Hegemon issues either b = b or min(bFC , b̄), whichever generates
higher expected profits. If the Hegemon issues b there is a unique safe equilibrium. If the Hegemon issues min(bFC , b̄) there are multiple equilibria: the safe and the collapse equilibria.
Proof. In the zone of debt issuance in which only the safe equilibrium is possible (b ∈ [0, b]), the local
maximum of V is achieved at the upper boundary for b = b. To verify this claim recall the assumption
bFC = argmax(V FC (b)) > b, the fact that V (b) = V FC (b) for all b ∈ [0, b], and that V FC (b) is a strictly
concave function.
The Hegemon therefore issues b = b iff this local maximum is also the global maximum, i.e. when
FC
V (b) ≥ maxb∈(b,b̄] V . Note that by claim 1, we can ignore the Collapse zone since argmax(V (b)) ∈ (0, b̄].
Suppose V FC (b) < maxb∈(b,b̄] V , then the Hegemon issues bFC if bFC ∈ (b, b̄] and otherwise issues b̄.
To verify this claim notice that globally argmax(Ṽ (b)) = argmax(V FC (b)), since Ṽ (b) = aV FC (b) + c with
constants a > 0 and c < 0. Furthermore Ṽ (b) is a strictly concave function. Therefore, argmaxb∈(b,b̄]V (b)
takes value bFC if b̄ ≥ bFC or equals the upper bound b̄.

A.2

The claims above prove items 1,2,3 of the Proposition. The presence of an ex-ante safety premium in
all equilibria follows from the expected return on debt
E− [R(b)e] = (1 − α(b))Rs (b) + α(b)R̄r
noticing that the optimal issuance level is always below w∗ , so that at the optimal issuance one has Rs (b) <
R̄r , and α(b) < 1. We conclude that E− [Re] < R̄r and there is an exorbitant privilege. 
The next proposition verifies under which conditions equilibrium prices in the model with limited commitment are arbitrage-free.
Proposition A.3 (Absence of Arbitrage under Limited Commitment). The equilibrium prices at time t =
0+ , conditional on debt being safe, are arbitrage free if and only if RrH > Rs (b∗ ) > RrL , where b∗ is the
equilibrium issuance, i.e. if and only if 2γσ 2 (w∗ − b∗ ) < (RrH − RrL )(1 − λ ). If issuance takes place at
b∗ = bFC then this condition is the same as that of Proposition A.2. If issuance takes place at b∗ = b then
this condition is less stringent than the requirement in Proposition A.2. Conversely, if issuance takes place
at b∗ = b̄ then this condition is more stringent than the requirement in Proposition A.2.
Proof. The proof is entirely analogous to that of Proposition A.2.
Here we provide details for the derivations in Section 4. RoW solves the following maximization problem
max
∗
b,C1

E+ [C1∗ ] − γVar+ (C1∗ ) − γL b̂ − min(b, b̂)1{E+ [e]=1}
s.t. w∗ Rr + b(Re − Rr ) = C1∗ ,

2

,

b ≥ 0,

where γL > 0, b̂ is an exogenous threshold, and 1{E+ [e]=1} is the indicator function that takes value one if its
argument is satisfied. If debt is safe (i.e. E+ [e] = 1), then the extra utility (liquidity) value of owning bonds
is γL (b̂ − b)2 for b < b̂ and zero otherwise. If debt is risky (i.e. E+ [e] < 1), then the extra utility loss γL b̂2 is
the one that would have occurred if the agent had chosen b = 0 in the presence of safe debt.
We assume, for simplicity, that b̂ = b = τ/RH . This implies that if debt is expected to be safe, then the
demand curve is given by36
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γ(w∗ − b)σ 2 − 2γL (b − b)1{b≤b̂} .

(A.2)

The above equation is the demand curve reported in the main body of the paper in equation (10). If debt
is expected to be risky, which can only happen for b > b, then the result from Proposition A.1 applies and
R = RrH , so that risky debt is a perfect substitute for the risky asset. Therefore, if the debt is safe, the demand
function has an extra liquidity component for all b ≤ b and is otherwise identical to the one considered in
the previous sections.
We now introduce a Lemma that proves equation (11).
Lemma A.1 (Welfare as the Area Under the Demand Curve). RoW welfare can be computed according to
VRoW (b) = VRoW (Rs (0)) + (1 − α(b))

Z Rs (b)

b(R̃s )d R̃s ,

Rs (0)

where b(Rs ) is given by
b(Rs ) =
36 We

Rs − R̄r + 2γσ 2 w∗ + 2γL b1{b≤b}
,
2γσ 2 + 2γL b1{b≤b}

impose the parameter restriction R̄r − 2γw∗ σ 2 − 2γL b̂ > 0, by analogy with the previous sections.

A.3

and
VRoW (0) = w∗ R̄r − γσ 2 w∗2 − γL b2 .
Proof. The maximization problem of RoW is
max

b,s∗ ,C1∗

E+ [C1∗ ] − γVar+ (C1∗ ) − γL (b − min(b, b)1{E+ [e]=1} )2 ,

s.t. s∗ Rr + bRe = C1∗ ,

b + s∗ = w∗ ,

b ≥ 0.

Assume the debt is safe, then we can write the problem as
max
∗
b,s

bRs + s∗ R̄r − γs∗2 σ 2 − γL (b − w∗ + s∗ )2 1{w∗ −s∗ ≤b} = bRs + ν(s∗ ) s.t. s∗ + b = w∗ .

This problem leads to optimality conditions that describe demand functions b(Rs ) and s∗ (Rs ). In particular,
optimality requires
Rs = ν 0 (s∗ ).
(A.3)
s (Rs ) = b(Rs )Rs + ν(w∗ − b(Rs )), and take the partial derivative w.r.t. Rs to get
We then write VRoW
0
VRoW
(Rs ) = b(Rs ) + b0 (Rs )Rs + ν 0 (w∗ − b(Rs ))b0 (Rs ).

Substituting in the above equation the optimality condition in equation (A.3), we obtain V 0 (Rs ) = b(Rs ).
Integrating over both sides we obtain
s
(Rs ) = VRoW (Rs0 ) +
VRoW

Z Rs
Rs0

b(R̃s )d R̃s ,

where Rs0 = R̄r − 2γσ 2 w∗ − 2γL b, and VRoW (Rs0 ) = w∗ R̄r − γσ 2 w∗2 − γL b2 .
If instead we assume that debt is risky, then RoW welfare is given by
r
VRoW
= w∗ R̄r − γσ 2 w∗2 − γL b2 .
r
s (Rs ).
Note that VRoW
= VRoW
0
We define RoW welfare from an ex-ante perspective, before the equilibrium sunspot is selected, to be
s
r
VRoW (b) = (1 − α(b))VRoW
(Rs (b)) + α(b)VRoW
,
s (Rs ) as a function of Rs . We
where we have found it convenient to write VRoW (b) as a function of b and VRoW
conclude that
Z s

VRoW (b) = VRoW (Rs (0)) + (1 − α(b))

R (b)

b(R̃s )d R̃s .

Rs (0)

Continuation of the Proof of Proposition 3. We continue the proof initiated in the main text. We
prove the second statement of the proposition: for a demand curve that is sufficiently convex one can have
over-issuance by the Hegemon.
We start by deriving a bound on γ̄L (τ) such that the Hegemon does not want to issue in the interior of the
Safety zone for bFC > b(τ). Recall that the value function within the Safety zone is: V (b) = (R̄r − Rs (b))b
0
for b ∈ [0, b]. Hence, in that zone V 0 (b) = R̄r − Rs (b) − bR s (b). Since V 0 (0) > 0, and V (b) is concave, then

A.4

to have that V 0 (b) > 0 for b ∈ [0, b], it is sufficient to have V 0 (b̄) > 0 which imposes the bound
 ∗

w
2
γL < γσ
−2 .
b(τ)
We define the function γ̄L (τ) to be the highest value (as a function of τ) that γL can take in the above bound

 ∗ r
w RH
−2 .
γ̄L (τ) = γσ 2
τ
In what follows, we assume γL ∈ [η γ̄L (τ), γ̄L (τ)] for η ∈ (0, 1]. We take the limit as τ ↓ 0, so that
bFC = w∗ /2 > b̄(τ) since limτ↓0 b̄(τ) = 0. In this limit, and as described in the text more generally in
Section 3.0.1, there exists αm∗ ∈ (0, 1) s.t. the Hegemon issues b̄(0) for all α ≤ αm∗ and issues b(0) for all
α > αm∗ . Below we prove that in this limit we have
lim αm∗ (τ)
τ↓0

=

2 ∗
2γσ 2 w∗
− 2γσRr w
R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2
H
2γσ 2 w∗
+ λ (1 − eL )
R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2

∈ (0, 1).

(A.4)

∗ (τ) such that RoW investors would have preferred the equiSimilarly, we can compute a threshold αrow
librium issuance b̄(τ) for all lower αs and otherwise would have preferred the lower issuance b(τ).
We change the notation slightly from Lemma A.1 and define the welfare of RoW investors to be the
function VRoW (b, α), to make the dependence on α more explicit. At issuance level b(τ), we have

VRoW (b, 0) = bRs (b) + (w∗ − b)R̄r − γ(w∗ − b)2 σ 2 .
Similarly welfare of RoW at issuance level b̄ is given by

VRoW (b̄, α) = (1 − α) b̄Rs (b̄) + (w∗ − b̄)R̄r − γ(w∗ − b̄)2 σ 2 + α(w∗ R̄r − γw∗2 σ 2 − γL b2 )
= VRoW (b̄, 0) − α(VRoW (b̄, 0) −VRoW (0, 0)).
Notice that VRoW (b, 0) is independent of α and VRoW (b̄, α) is continuous and decreasing in α. Furthermore,
∗ ),
VRoW (b̄, 0) > VRoW (b, 0) and VRoW (b̄, 1) < VRoW (b, 0). So that we conclude VRoW (b, 0) = VRoW (b̄, αRoW
with
VRoW (b̄, 0) −VRoW (b, 0)
∗
=
.
αRoW
VRoW (b̄, 0) −VRoW (0, 0)
Below we prove that in the limit τ ↓ 0, we have
∗
lim αRoW
(τ) = 0.

(A.5)

τ↓0

We conclude that for η ∈ (0, 1] and γL ∈ [η γ̄L (τ), γ̄L (τ)], in the limit at τ ↓ 0 one has
∗
lim αRoW
(τ) = 0 <
τ↓0

2 ∗
2γσ 2 w∗
− 2γσRr w
R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2
H
2γσ 2 w∗
+ λ (1 − eL )
R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2

= lim αm∗ (τ).
τ↓0

∗ (τ) and α ∗ (τ) with interior non-vanishing weights on each
Since αT∗ OT (τ) is a convex combination of αRoW
m
of the elements, we obtain the result in the Proposition.
We now prove the limits in equations (A.4) and (A.5). We prove the results only for η = 1. The

A.5

∗ (τ) = 0. For small τ, we have
generalization is straightforward. We start by proving that limτ↓0 αRoW

γ̄L (τ) =

γσ 2 w∗ RrH
− 2γσ 2 ,
τ

b(τ) =
b̄(τ) =

τ
,
RrH

τ

+ O(τ 2 ),

R̄r − 2w∗ γσ 2

Rs (0) = R̄r − 4γσ 2 w∗ + 4γσ 2

τ
,
RrH

τ
,
RrH


τ
τ
s
s
2
R (b̄(τ)) = R (b(τ)) + 2γσ
+ O(τ 2 ).
−
R̄r − 2γσ 2 w∗ RrH
Rs (b(τ)) = Rs (0) + 2γσ 2 w∗ − 2γσ 2

We can now compute consumer welfare using the area under the demand curve formula
Z Rs (b(τ))

VRoW (b(τ), α) = VRoW (0, α) +

b(Rs )dRs .

Rs (0)

We get
VRoW (b(τ), α) = VRoW (0, α) +

1 (Rs (b(τ)))2 − (Rs (0))2
2γσ 2 w∗ + 2γ̄L (τ)b(τ) − R̄r s
s
(b(τ))
(0)]
+
[R
−
R
,
2γσ 2 + 2γ̄L (τ)
2
2γσ 2 + 2γ̄L (τ)

which yields
VRoW (b(τ), α) = VRoW (0, α) +

γσ 2 w∗
τ + O(τ 2 ).
RrH

We use
VRoW (b̄(τ), α) = VRoW (0, α) + (1 − α)[VRoW (b(τ), α) −VRoW (0, α)] + (1 − α)

Z Rs (b̄(τ))
Rs (b(τ))

We get
VRoW (b̄(τ), α) = VRoW (0, α) + (1 − α)[VRoW (b(τ), α) −VRoW (0, α)] + O(τ 2 ).
This immediately implies that
∗
αRoW
(τ) = O(τ).

We can also compute Hegemon welfare
V (b(τ), α) =
V (b̄(τ), α) = (1 − α)

2γσ 2 w∗
τ,
RrH

RrH
V (b(τ), α) − αλ (1 − eL )τ + O(τ 2 ).
R̄r − 2w∗ γσ 2

This implies that

A.6

b(Rs )dRs .

αm∗ (τ)
where

=

2 ∗
2γσ 2 w∗
− 2γσRr w
R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2
H
2γσ 2 w∗
+ λ (1 − eL )
R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2

2γσ 2 w∗

2 ∗

R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2
2γσ 2 w∗
R̄r −2w∗ γσ 2

+ O(τ),

− 2γσRr w
H

+ λ (1 − eL )

∈ (0, 1).



A.2

Details for Generalizing the Framework

A.2.1

Endogenous Reputation, Coordination, and Competition

In this section, we present an infinite-horizon extension of the baseline model. Time is discrete and the
horizon is infinite. Reserve countries issue one-period bonds in each period. The issuers are infinitely lived,
risk neutral, and have rate of time preference δ ∈ (0, 1). We maintain the assumption that δ −1 = R̄r . RoW
is populated by overlapping generations with each generation alive for 1 period. The young are born at
period t with constant endowment w∗ and invest in the bonds and the risky technology. The young have
mean-variance preferences over consumption at the end of their lives at t + 1 and consume all proceeds of
investment at that time. We dispense entirely with the exogenous fixed costs of devaluation (τ = 0).
The timing of decisions within each date is identical to the one-period model. At each date the issuers
choose the devaluation of the exchange rate et = {1, eL }. Disasters are i.i.d. over time, with per-period
probability λ .
Consider first this model with a Hegemon under full commitment. The Hegemon decides to not devalue
in bad times, the debt is safe, and the equilibrium is characterized by exactly the same equations as in
Proposition 1. Similarly, the equilibrium with n issuers, who compete in quantities à la Cournot under full
commitment, is a repeated version of that in Section 6.1 and also converges to perfect competition as the
number of issuers increases to infinity.
We now turn to limited commitment. We assume that if an issuer chooses to devalue in bad times at
s (b ) < Rr ),
time t when ex-ante facing an interest rate consistent with expectations of no devaluation (Rt−1
i
H
then with some probability η, it is punished forever by a bad continuation equilibrium in which RoW agents
expect a devaluation of the currency conditional on disaster, which indeed occurs in equilibrium.37 In that
bad continuation equilibrium, RoW demand for this issuer’s debt is perfectly elastic at Rsz (bi ) = RrH for
z > t. There is, instead, no punishment going forward for devaluations by an issuer who is currently facing
the interest rate RrH and has not previously devalued as described in the previous case. While we are allowing
for non-Markovian strategies to depend on interest rates for safe debt R and past default, we are not allowing
the strategies to depend on the history of issuances.
37 While for simplicity we have made our trigger strategies very stark,

so that a devaluation in a disaster runs the risk of
losing the privilege forever, one could study more lenient punishments with finite duration. The Nixon shock of 1971
and the float of the U.S. Dollar in 1973 did not cause a major drop in the use of the Dollar as an international reserve
currency (see Figure 1 Panel (d)). This can be rationalized in our model with stochastic punishment as a “lucky draw”
whereby the Hegemon devalues but ends not being punished for this deviation.

A.7

A.2.2

The Hegemon Model with Endogenous Reputation

We first analyze the equilibrium for a given amount of debt issued by a single issuer. Since the trigger
strategies that we consider do not punish a devaluation following a period in which R = RrH , the issuer
always devalues ex-post (if a disaster occurs) when ex-ante facing R = RrH . We assume that this equilibrium
outcome, which can occur for all levels of b, is selected with probability α ∈ (0, 1) for levels of debt when a
safe debt equilibrium also exists, and otherwise with probability 1. By analogy with the main text we abuse
the notation and denote this criterion by a function α(b).
The expected value for the issuer of issuing debt b forever and not devaluing, unless faced with interest
rate RrH , is
R̄r − Rs (b)
V (b) = ∑ δ (z−t) b(1 − α(b))Ets [R̄r − Rz e] = b(1 − α(b))
.
R̄r − 1
z>t
A devaluation at time t, when facing the favorable interest rate (Rs (b) < RrH ), causes this real expected
value to be lost with probability η: in that case the trigger strategy imposes α(b) = 1 in the continuation
equilibrium for all levels of b, and the continuation value is zero. Hence the long-term expected cost of a
devaluation is
R̄r − Rs (b)
.
ηV (b) = ηb(1 − α(b))
R̄r − 1
The one-off short-term benefit of a devaluation is bRs (b)(1 − eL ). The issuer therefore decides not to devalue
if and only if
R̄r − Rs (b)
ηb(1 − α(b))
≥ bRs (b)(1 − eL ).
R̄r − 1
Substituting in the condition above the demand for safe debt Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗ − b), we obtain the
upper bound for the issuance of safe debt
∗
b̄∞
α =w −

R̄r (R̄r − 1)
i.
h
r −1
+
R̄
2γσ 2 η(1−α)
1−eL

(A.6)

We use the superscript ∞ to distinguish the variables in this infinite-horizon model from the analogous
∞
concepts in the one period model. Note that b∞
α=0 > 0 and finite, bα=1 = 0, and the upper boundary decreases
in the probability of the collapse equilibrium selection: ∂ b̄∞
α /∂ α < 0.
The problem of the Hegemon is
max
b∈[0,b̄∞
α]

(1 − α)b

R̄r − Rs (b)
= (1 − α)V FC (b),
R̄r − 1

s.t. Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗ − b).
The Hegemon chooses to issue bFC = w∗ /2, if it is credible, or b̄∞,α , if it is not. Hence Hegemon issuance
can be written as
min(bFC , b̄∞
α ).

A.2.3

The Multipolar Model with Endogenous Reputation

Competition with endogenous reputation and the erosion of franchise value. We now analyze
the multipolar world with n competing issuers. We set α = 0 for simplicity. By analogy with the above
analysis of the Hegemon, issuer i’s best response to total issuance b−i from other issuers is to issue the
minimum between what it would have issued in best response under full commitment and the maximum

A.8

credible amount that it can issue

∞
bi = min bFC
i (b−i ), b̄ (b−i ) .
Crucially the upper bound of credible issuance depends on the other players’ total issuance
b̄∞ (b−i ) = w∗ − b−i −

R̄r (R̄r − 1)
i.
h
η
r − 1)
2γσ 2 1−e
+
(
R̄
L

The upper boundary decreases faster than the full-commitment best response issuance: ∂ b̄∞ (b−i )/∂ b−i =
−1 < −1/2 = ∂ bFC
i (b−i )/∂ b−i .
We construct and analyze a symmetric equilibrium in which all issuers issue at their upper bound.38 We
denote the symmetric issuance at the upper bound by


r
r
R̄ (R̄ − 1)
1 ∗
i,
h
b̄∞
w −
n =
η
n
r
2
+ (R̄ − 1)
2γσ
1−eL

∗
FC so that the Hegemon would have issued the maximum
and restrict parameters such that b̄∞
1 < w /2 = b
∞
∞
∞
credible amount b̄1 . We emphasize that b̄n = b̄1 /n and conclude that as the number of issuers increases
(n → ∞) the total supply of the reserve assets remains constant at the level b̄∞
1 that the Hegemon would have
issued alone. We collect the result in the proposition below.

Proposition A.4 (Competition and the Erosion of Franchise Value). Assume that debt is always safe
(α = 0), then if the Hegemon would have chosen to issue the maximum credible amount of reserve assets
b̄∞
1 , competition never increases the total amount of reserve assets. As the number of competing issuers
increases to infinity, the equilibrium does not converge to perfect competition, and instead total issuance
∞
stays constant at the level optimally chosen by a Hegemon: b̄∞
n = b̄1 /n. All issuers share equally the
equilibrium monopoly rents.
The key intuition for this proposition is that equilibrium issuance and per-period profits of a given issuer
are inversely proportional to the number of issuers. To see why this is indeed an equilibrium, note that the
short-term benefits of devaluing are proportional to equilibrium issuance, and that the long-term costs of
devaluing are proportional to per-period profits. As a result, as the number of issuers increases, both the
benefits and costs of devaluing decrease proportionately along the equilibrium path.39

Nurkse instability and the erosion of franchise value. To highlight the interaction between competition and coordination we extend the modeling of Nurkse instability from Section 6.2 to the repeated model
setup of this section.
38 Asymmetric

equilibria exist but all feature the same amount of total issuance. Since the emphasis of this section is
on total issuance, we focus on symmetric equilibria.
39 Marimon, Nicolini and Teles (2012) analyze monopolistic competition among issuers of differentiated monies in
the presence of limited commitment and find that each issuer’s choice of issuance does not depend on the elasticity
of substitution between different monies. The equilibrium is inefficient and is associated with real balances that are
too low, and both inflation and nominal interest rates that are too high. We model competition as an increase in the
number of issuers of safe assets in a Cournot equilibrium, rather than as an increase in the elasticity of substitution
between monies. In their model, total issuance, individual issuance, the individual short-term benefits of inflating, and
the individual long-term costs in terms of lost future rents, are all independent of the degree of competition. In our
model, total issuance is also independent of the degree of competition, but individual issuance, the individual shortterm benefits of devaluing, and the individual long-term costs in terms of lost future rents, all decrease with the degree
of competition and are exactly inversely proportional to the number of issuers.

A.9

We reintroduce the assumption from Section 6.2 that in a duopoly, exactly one country ĩ out of the two is
selected at random at t = t + to face the most favorable expectations for that period, while the other country
−ĩ faces the least favorable expectations. The selection of which country faces which expectations is i.i.d.
over time. Each country i now optimally behaves as a Hegemon with αi = 0.5. As in Section 6.2, we assume
that a true Hegemon would have faced the most favorable expectations α = 0.
In each period, the issuer that faces unfavorable expectations devalues ex post if a disaster occurs since
there is no punishment in this case. In each period, the issuer that faces favorable expectations does not
devalue ex post, conditional on a disaster, if and only if
1 R̄r − Rs (b)
ηb
≥ bRs (b)(1 − eL ).
2
R̄r − 1
This leads to an upper boundary on the amount of credible debt equivalent to that of a true Hegemon facing
the most favorable investors expectations with 50% probability: b̄∞
α=.5 , as defined in equation (A.6).
In each period, each issuer decides how much debt to issue before knowing which investor expectations
it will face. Each issuer i, therefore, anticipates that either it will face the perfectly elastic demand at RrH and
make no expected profits for that period, or it will face the demand Rs (bi ) = R̄ − 2γσ 2 (w∗ − bi ). Each issuer
solves the problem given below
max
bi ∈[0,b̄∞
α=.5 ]

1 R̄r − Rs (bi ) 1 FC
bi
= V (bi )
2
2
R̄r − 1

where
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗ − b).
The optimal issuance is min(bFC , b̄∞
α=.5 ). We collect the result in the Proposition below.
Proposition A.5 (Nurske Instability and the Erosion of Franchise Value). Assume that a true Hegemon
faces the most favorable investor expectations (α = 0) in every period, but that in a duopoly exactly one
country ĩ out of the two is selected at random at t = t + to face the most favorable expectations for that
period, while the other country −ĩ faces the least favorable expectations. The selection of which country
faces which expectations is i.i.d. over time. Optimal issuance for each issuer in the duopoly is given by
min(bFC , b̄∞
α=.5 ). The effective total stock of reserve assets is lower under a duopoly than under a Hegemon
∞
if b̄α=.5 < bFC .
Coordination undercuts commitment by reducing the expected future monopoly rents for each issuer. In
this case, since each issuer only expects monopoly rents in 50% of the periods, the present value of future
monopoly rents is cut by exactly 50%. Each issuer, therefore, behaves as a true Hegemon who faces the
FC
favorable expectations only half of the time. In a world of high demand for reserves (b̄∞
α=.5 < b ), the
entrance of a second issuer and the emergence of coordination problems then reduces the total effective
supply of reserve assets.

A.2.4

Private issuance of reserve assets

Private issuance within each country. We extend the model to allow for private issuance of reserve
assets from entities located within the Hegemon country. We assume that there is a mass µ of private issuers
within the Hegemon country, each of which can issue one unit of debt denominated in the reserve currency.
Each issuer can issue at cost η; for simplicity, we assume the cost to be uniformly distributed over [0, ξ ]
across issuers. We denote the total issuance as bT . Since the marginal private issuer is defined by a cutoff

A.10

η̄ = R̄r − Rs (bT ), we conclude that
bT = b +

µ r
(R̄ − Rs (bT )),
ξ

for R̄r − Rs (bT ) ∈ [0, ξ ]. Solving this equation, we derive a simple relationship between total issuance bT
and public issuance b in the form of
b + µξ 2γσ 2 w∗
bT =
.
1 + µξ 2γσ 2
We can then rewrite the demand curve for reserve assets as a function of b in the following way
R̂s (b) = R̄r − 2γ̂σ 2 (w∗ − b),
where γ̂ = γ/[1 + 2(µ/ξ )γσ 2 ]. Hence, private issuance decreases the slope of the demand curve Rs (b) for
reserve assets, making it more elastic.
If the Hegemon does not take into consideration the welfare of private issuers, then the Hegemon problem is isomorphic to the one solved in Section 2.1, with γ replaced by γ̂. If, instead, the Hegemon takes into
consideration the welfare of private issuers gross of entry costs, then the Hegemon problem is isomorphic
to the one solved in Section 2.1, with b and γ replaced by bT and γ̂, respectively.40
This model is consistent with the empirical regularity that the consolidated (private and public) external
balance sheet of the Hegemon consists of low return safe and liquid liabilities and high return risky and
illiquid assets, as emphasized by Despres, Kindleberger and Salant (1966), Gourinchas and Rey (2007a). In
particular, the model is consistent with the notion that it is the private sector — not the government — that
holds foreign risky assets, while the government issues safe assets to finance current spending. It is also
consistent with the evidence by Accominotti (2012) that private safe assets issued/guaranteed by London
merchant banks played an important role in the 1920s gold-exchange standard and the Pound collapse in
1931.

Third-party issuance across countries. We now consider the incentives to issue in Hegemon currency for issuers located outside of the Hegemon country. To sharpen the model, we start by considering
an equilibrium in which the Hegemon issues safe debt b and does not devalue its currency in bad times.41
We introduce a small issuer, located outside the Hegemon country, with time 1 utility function U who must
raise real resources κ at date 0 to finance consumption at date 0.
We assume that the small issuer can either denominate its debt in reserve currency (the Hegemon currency) or in a risky currency that depreciates by (1 − eL ) in bad times, and that this issuer is too small to
influence the equilibrium. The small issuer decides to issue in the Reserve currency if and only if
− κRs (b) > CE− [−κRr ],

(A.7)

where we define CE− [−κRr ] = U −1 (E− [U(−κRr )]). This condition makes clear that the small issuer is
more likely to issue in Hegemon currency, the lower Rs (b), the higher and the more volatile Rr , and the
higher the risk aversion embedded in the utility function U of the small issuer.
40 If

the Hegemon takes into consideration the welfare of private issuers net of entry costs, then the objective function
of the Hegemon as a function of bT is different and is given by
V (bT ) = 2γσ 2 bT (w∗ − bT )) −
41 In

µ [2γσ 2 (w∗ − bT )]2
.
ξ
2

this section we assume that equilibrium prices are free of arbitrage as in Proposition A.3.

A.11

This helps rationalize the evidence in Chitu, Eichengreen and Mehl (2014) reproduced in Appendix
Figure A.1 showing that third party issuance was predominantly denominated in pounds during the 1920s,
when the British pound was the main reserve currency, and has subsequently switched to being denominated
in dollars as the U.S. Dollar emerged as the main reserve currency. This also helps understand why countries
that suffer from “original sin”, so that they cannot issue in their own currency, predominately issue in the
reserve currency. Relatedly, Du and Schreger (2015) and Bruno and Shin (2015) show that emerging market
corporations predominantly borrow in U.S. dollar.

A.2.5

Liquidity and Networks Effects

We have derived the linear demand curve for reserve assets in equation (1) on the grounds of risk and risk
aversion (mean-variance preferences). The reader is encouraged to interpret γ not as a deep parameter of
household risk aversion, but as a proxy for features of the world economy that lead RoW to demand reserve
assets (institutional constraints, regulatory requirements, financial frictions, etc., see e.g. Maggiori (2012)).
In this spirit, we now show that our model can also capture elements of liquidity and network effects, while
maintaining the simplicity of the linear demand curve.
We extend the model by adding a “reserve asset in the utility function” component, which captures
the extra utility benefits that accrue from holdings of reserve assets. Importantly, we follow Stein (2012) in
assuming that these liquidity benefits of holding bonds only arise if the bonds are safe, and are hence reserve
assets.42 We further allow for network effects by assuming that the liquidity benefits depend not only on
individual holdings, but also on aggregate holdings (see e.g. Tobin (1980)). This captures in reduced form
the notion that a reserve asset becomes increasingly liquid as more people use it; for example, it is easier to
find a counterparty and to net out currency risk.
Formally, the RoW utility function now takes the form
E+ [C1∗ ] − γVar+ (C1∗ ) + (BT ω + BT ΩB)1{E+ [e]=1} ,
where B = (b, b̃)T is a vector such that b represents individual holdings and b̃ represents aggregate holdings,
ω and Ω are a 2 × 1 vector and a 2 × 2 matrix, respectively, and 1{E+ [e]=1} is an indicator function that takes
value 1 if the debt is safe, i.e. E + [e] = E s [e] = 1, and zero otherwise. We assume that ω1 ≥ 0 and Ω11 ≤ 0,
capturing the positive but decreasing marginal liquidity benefits that arise from individual bond holdings.
We also assume that Ω12 = Ω21 ≥ 0, capturing the increase in the marginal liquidity benefits from individual
bond holdings with aggregate bond holdings, and that Ω11 + Ω12 < γσ 2 , so that this effect is not too strong
and the demand curve is upward sloping.
If the debt is expected to be safe, then the optimality condition for individual portfolios is
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗ − b) − ω1 − 2Ω11 b − (Ω12 + Ω21 )b̃.
Imposing the equilibrium condition b = b̃, we obtain the demand curve for reserve assets
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 w∗ − ω1 + 2(γσ 2 − Ω11 − Ω12 )b,
which can be rewritten as
Rs (b) = R̄r − 2γ̂σ 2 (ŵ∗ − b),

(A.8)

where γ̂ = γ − (Ω11 + Ω12 )/σ 2 and ŵ∗ = w∗ γ/γ̂ + ω1 /(2γ̂σ 2 ). Therefore, under this formulation, the liquidity benefits and network effects that arise from bond holdings modify the level and the slope of the demand
42 Similarly,

a linear demand function could have also been originated by limits to arbitrage theories (Shleifer and
Vishny (1997), Gabaix and Maggiori (2015)).

A.12

curve Rs (b). They are isomorphic to a renormalized version of the baseline model with different values of
w∗ and γ. Larger marginal liquidity benefits (↑ ω1 ) decrease the level of Rs (b), while stronger decreasing returns in liquidity benefits (↓ Ω11 ) increase the level and the slope of Rs (b). Similarly, larger network effects
(↑ Ω12 ) decrease the level and the slope of Rs (b).43 If the debt is expected to be risky, then the demand curve
is the same as the one in the basic mean-variance case (R = RrH ). We put this extension to use in Section
A.2.6, in which we analyze the endogenous emergence of a Hegemon in the presence of network effects.
Recalling from equation (A.8) that liquidity and network effects are isomorphic to changes in γ and w∗ ,
we conclude that higher liquidity benefits (↑ ω1 ) and stronger network effects (↑ Ω12 ) increase both the level
of issuance and the size of the exorbitant privilege.

A.2.6

Endogenous Emergence of a Hegemon in a Multipolar World

In this section, we analyze whether the IMS has a natural tendency towards a Hegemon and, in this case,
what the key determinants of Hegemon status are. We emphasize three characteristics: fiscal capacity,
reputation, and currency of pricing in the goods market. We study configurations of the multipolar model
in which differences in these characteristics lead to asymmetric equilibria with a large and a small issuer
of reserve assets. Such asymmetric equilibria can be interpreted as leading to the natural emergence of a
Hegemon. We emphasize how networks effects and the interactions of limited commitment and coordination
can amplify small differences in characteristics.

Fiscal capacity. We consider a scenario in which in a duopoly i ∈ {1, 2} issuers differ in their fiscal
capacity. We model fiscal capacity as the social cost of public funds whereby repaying bR actually requires
resources bRφ with φ > 1. We consider a small difference between the two issuers: φ1 < φ2 , with φ2 −φ1 < ε
and ε arbitrarily small. For simplicity, we assume that αi = 0 for both countries i ∈ {1, 2} so that there are
no coordination problems. Furthermore, we assume that τ is sufficiently large that the full-commitment
outcome is outside of the Collapse zone for each country. We introduce liquidity and network effects along
the lines of the extension presented in Section 2.1 and we use the corresponding notation. We assume
that each RoW household receives marginal liquidity benefits from holding reserve currency i given by
ω1 + 2Ω11 (bi + b−i ) + (Ω12 + Ω21 )b̃i . In other words, marginal liquidity benefits excluding network effects
ω1 + 2Ω11 (bi + b−i ) depend only on total holdings bi + b−i while network effects (Ω12 + Ω21 )b̃i are specific
to each reserve currency. The aggregate demand curves for each reserve currency are therefore given by
Rsi (bi ; b−i ) = R̄r − 2γσ 2 (w∗ − (bi + b−i )) − ω1 − 2Ω11 (bi + b−i ) − (Ω12 + Ω21 )bi ,
where we have substituted in the aggregation condition bi = b̃i . The difference in equilibrium issuance is
given by:
R̄r ( φ11 − φ12 )
b1 − b2 =
,
(A.9)
2(γσ 2 − Ω11 − Ω12 − Ω21 )
where by analogy with the extension in Section 2.1 we assume that γσ 2 − Ω11 − Ω12 − Ω21 > 0. Note
that not only is the issuer with the greater fiscal capacity issuing more (b1 > b2 ), but also the difference
in fiscal capacities is amplified by network effects Ω12 + Ω21 > 0 through a multiplier (the denominator
in equation (A.9)). This captures the notion that the depth and liquidity of U.S. financial markets is an
equilibrium outcome that amplifies a fiscal capacity advantage and consolidates the role of the U.S. Dollar
as the dominant reserve currency.
43

For a liquidity/safety assessment of the demand for US treasuries, see Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012).
For risk based empirical assessments of Dollar currency premia, see Hassan (2013), Hassan and Mano (2014), Verdelhan (2016).

A.13

Reputation. We analyze the role of differences in reputation by studying a duopoly i ∈ {1, 2} with differences in the ability to commit τ1 > τ2 . For simplicity, we assume that αi = 1 for both countries i ∈ {1, 2},
capturing severe coordination problems. In this case, both issuers decide to issue inside their respective
Safety zones, but issuer 1 has a larger Safety zone b1 = τ1 /RrH > τ2 /RrH = b2 . This corresponds to a standard Cournot duopoly with heterogenous capacity constraints given here by b1 and b2 . In equilibrium, the
issuer with the higher capacity constraint (issuer 1) issues more. These differences in the ability to commit
can arise from institutional and historical factors. In the next paragraph we show that they can also arise
endogenously from goods pricing.

IMS meets IPS. We consider a duopoly i ∈ {1, 2} and assume that prices are fully rigid in one of the
two reserve currencies, say i = 1, rather than in RoW currency as assumed in Section 5. This captures
the empirical regularity that prices are disproportionately quoted in the dominant reserve currency, in U.S.
dollars at present and in British sterling in the 1920s, a fact dubbed the International Price System (IPS) by
Gopinath (2015).
In this case, the real return of debt denominated in reserve currency 1, in which the goods are priced,
is always safe. The crucial consequence is that country 1 endogenously acquires de facto full commitment,
while country 2 still faces limited commitment as in our analysis so far.44 We solve for an illustrative
equilibrium by assuming that country 2 faces the least favorable expectations with α2 = 1. This is isomorphic
to a standard Cournot model with two firms, one of which has a fixed capacity constraint while the other
is unconstrained, where b plays the role of the fixed capacity constraint. In equilibrium, country 1 issues
more, potentially much more, than country 2. This offers one rationalization for the association in the data
between currency of pricing in the goods market and currency denomination of reserve assets.

A.2.7

Endogenous Entry and Natural Monopoly

To model endogenous entry, we add an ex-ante state to the model, where potential reserve issuers choose
whether to incur a fixed cost K to increase their reputation from 0 to τ. This entry cost K could proxy for the
various costly steps that must be taken over time by countries who desire to play a significant international
role, for example by slowly building a reputation for currency stability in times of crisis at the cost of
domestic welfare. Not only could these costs be large, but the opportunities to demonstrate good behavior
and boost reputation might be very infrequent.
A potential reserve issuer who incurs K faces no cost of devaluing his currency, and hence cannot issue
any positive amount of reserve assets since RoW investors rationally expect its debt to be risky. By contrast,
a potential reserve issuer who incurs K faces a cost τ of devaluing his currency and can therefore issue some
reserve assets and earn some monopoly rents.
Monopoly rents per issuer depend on the number of entrants and on the extent of coordination problems
via a particular equilibrium selection. A natural monopoly arises when with large fixed costs and small
variable costs, total monopoly rents are too small to sustain entry by a large number of reserve issuers. This
tendency to a small number of reserve issuers is accentuated when coordination problems in the post-entry
equilibrium worsen with entry.
44 In

practice debt reductions could be engineered either through an exchange rate devaluation or through an outright
default. The pricing of goods in the reserve currency reduces the ex-post incentives to devalue. While the incentives to
default are unchanged, such defaults are rarer in practice perhaps because of higher true or perceived associated costs.

A.14

A.2.8

Risk-sharing, LoLR Arrangements and the Triffin Dilemma

One approach to mitigating the Triffin dilemma and the associated instability of the IMS is to introduce
policies that reduce the demand for reserve assets at all levels of global savings w∗ . Such policies have
often been proposed by economists looking to reform the IMS (Keynes (1943), Harrod (1961), Machlup
(1963), Meade (1965), Rueff (1963), Farhi, Gourinchas and Rey (2011)). Their most recent incarnations
have included swap lines amongst central banks, credit lines by the IMF as LoLR, and international reserve
sharing agreements such as the Chiang Mai initiative.
Our framework can capture the rationale behind these policies with a simple extension of the demand
curve for reserve assets in equation (1). We assume that each of the many countries in RoW is saddled with
an idiosyncratic background endowment risk ωi . We also assume that if variance (C1∗ ) is above a variance
threshold in equilibrium, then international investors penalize variance at the margin with “risk aversion”
γ̄, rather than γ < γ̄. This is a simple reduced-form way of capturing a form of precautionary savings. We
assume that the variance of ωi is so large that the variance of future consumption remains above the variance
threshold even when the country invests all its savings in reserve assets; however, the variance of future
consumption falls below the variance threshold in the absence of idiosyncratic background risk, even when
there are no reserve assets. In that case, a sufficiently good idiosyncratic risk-sharing arrangement among
RoW countries reduces the equilibrium demand for reserve assets by lowering marginal “risk aversion” to
the lower level γ.
In a world with more idiosyncratic risk-sharing and lower “risk aversion”, the Hegemon finds issuing
in the Safety zone relatively more attractive than issuing in the Instability zone. Indeed, assuming that
b < bFC < b̄(γ) for both values of γ, the profits from issuing bFC are equal to (1 − α)bFC 2γσ 2 (w∗ − bFC ) −
αλ τ(1 − eL ) and the profits from issuing b are equal to b2γσ 2 (w∗ − b). Hence, the profits from issuing bFC
decrease more than the profits from issuing b when γ drops from γ̄ to γ.

A.15

Appendix Figures
Figure A.1: Third Party Issuance in Reserve Currencies

Note: Source: Chitu, Eichengreen and Mehl (2014). The figure plots the percentage of sovereign debt issued in
pounds or dollars as a fraction of all sovereign debt issued in foreign currency by the rest of the world. See original
source for details.

Appendix References
Accominotti, Olivier. 2012. “London merchant banks, the central European panic, and the sterling crisis of
1931.” The Journal of Economic History, 72(01): 1–43.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015. “Global dollar credit and carry trades: a firm-level analysis.” BIS working paper.
Chitu, Livia, Barry Eichengreen, and Arnaud Mehl. 2014. “When did the dollar overtake sterling as the
leading international currency? Evidence from the bond markets.” Journal of Development Economics,
111: 225–245.
Despres, E., C.P. Kindleberger, and W.S. Salant. 1966. The Dollar and World Liquidity: A Minority View.
Brookings Institution, Reprint, Brookings Institution.
Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger. 2015. “Sovereign Risk, Currency Risk, and Corporate Balance Sheets.”
Harvard, Department of Economics Working Paper.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Hélène Rey. 2011. Reforming the international monetary system. CEPR.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori. 2015. “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3): 1369–1420.
Gopinath, Gita. 2015. “The international price system.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2007. “From world banker to world venture capitalist: US
external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege.” In G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and
Adjustment.
Harrod, Roy. 1961. “A Plan for Increasing Liquidity: A Critique.” Economica, 28(110): 195–202.
Hassan, Tarek A. 2013. “Country Size, Currency Unions, and International Asset Returns.” Journal of
Finance, 68(6): 2269–2308.

A.16

Hassan, Tarek A, and Rui C Mano. 2014. “Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-currency world.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Keynes, J.M. 1943. Proposal for an International Clearing Union. British Government Publication, Cmd
6437.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. “The aggregate demand for treasury
debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 120(2): 233–267.
Machlup, Fritz. 1963. “Reform of the international monetary system.” World Monetary Reform: Plans
and Issues,(Stanford University Press and Oxford University Press, Stanford, CA and London 1963),
253–260.
Maggiori, Matteo. 2012. “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Currencies.”
Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Meade, James E. 1965. “The future of international payments.” World Monetary Reform: Plans and Issues.
Rueff, Jacques. 1963. “Gold exchange standard a danger to the West.” reprinted in H. Grubel (ed.) World
Monetary Reform, 320–8.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. “The limits of arbitrage.” Journal of Finance, 52(1): 35–55.
Stein, Jeremy C. 2012. “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 127: 57–95.
Tobin, James. 1980. “Discussion.” In Models of monetary economies: proceedings and contributions from
participants of a December 1978 conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. ,
ed. John H Kareken and Neil Wallace. Federal reserve bank of Minneapolis.
Verdelhan, Adrien. 2016. “The share of systematic variation in bilateral exchange rates.” Forthcoming in
the Journal of Finance.

A.17

