                                                                              -l




                        NOER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          STOCHASTIC TRENDS AND
                          ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS




                               Robert King

                             Charles Plosser

                               James Stock

                              Mark Watson



                         Working Paper No. 2229




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                               April 1987




The authors thank Ben Bernanke, Larry Christiano, C.W.J. Granger, Robert
Hall, Thomas Sargent, and James Wilcox for helpful discussions and comments
on earlier drafts of this paper. This research was supported in part by
the National Science Foundation. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper #2229
                                                           April 1987




                        Stochastic Trends and Economic Fluctuations



                                         ABSTRACT


          Recent developments in macroeconomic theory emphasize that transient

     economic fluctuations can arise as responses to changes in long run factors
     --   in   particular, technological improvements --   rather   than short run

     factors. This contrasts with the view that short run fluctuations and

     shifts in long run trends are largely unrelated. We examine empirically the

     effect of shifts in stochastic trends that are common to several

     macroeconomic series. Using a linear time series model related to a VAR, we

     consider first a system with ONP, consumption and investment with a single

     common stochstic trend; we then examine this system augmented by money and

     prices and an additional stochastic trend. Our results suggest that

     movements in the "real" stochastic trend account for one-half to two-thirds

     of the variation in postwar U.S. GNP.




     Robert King                                           Charles Plosser
     Department of Economics                               William E. Simon Graduate
     University of Rochester                                 School of Management
     Rochester, NY 14627                                   University of Rochester
                                                           Rochester, NY 14627

     James Stock                                        Mark Watson
     Hoover Institution                                 Department of Economics
     Stanford, CA 94305                                 Northwestern University
                                                        2003 Sheridan Road
                                                        Evanston, IL 60201




-a
                                1. Introduction



   The dichotomy between trend and cycle has played an important role in both

classical and Keynesian analyses of economic fluctuations. The prevailing

view seems to be that fluctuations arise from temporary disturbances that are

sometimes associated with variations in monetary and fiscal policies. These

shocks are then propagated by the economic system in ways that result in

systematic patterns of persistence and co-movements among key economic series.

Secular trends, while also related across series, are viewed as evolving

slowly through time and having little influence on the quarter-to-quarter or

year-to-year variations in economic conditions. This view, compounded by a

lack of statistical techniques for investigating stochastically trending

variables, has dominated macroeconomic research.

   Empirical evidence presented by Nelson and Plosser (1982) and others

questions the validity of this traditional dichotomy. They find that the

long-run character of many economic time series is well described as a

stochastic trend or a random walk (typically with drift). Moreover, they

present some evidence that innovations in the stochastic trend may account for

a significant portion of the short-run, as well as the long-run, variation in

such key series as real CNP. A shortcoming of the Nelson and Plosser (1982)

and related analyses is the reliance on univariate time series methods. In

particular, as we shall argue below, both empirical and theoretical findings

point to the existence of a reduced number of stochastic trends that are

common to many key economic variables. The earlier research into the

univariate properties of macroeconomic variables cannot address questions


                                    /




                                    -1-
concerning the interrelation among stochastic trends or whether innovations in

the stochastic trends induce short-run "business cycle" behavior.

   The purpose of this paper is to develop the concept of common stochastic

trends in the context of a simple equilibrium model and to present a

statistical analysis of the importance of these common trends. In Section 2,

we provide an economic model that exhibits a single common stochastic trend.

This common trend has the interpretation of a permanent productivity

disturbance that alters the steady state equilibrium of the economy. This

disturbance also accounts for nontrivial dynamics of individual series as they

adjust towards the new steady state.

   In Section 3, we describe an empirical methodology for analyzing

multivariate time series that possess common trends. This approach is

designed to answer two questions. First, is there evidence that aggregate

time series variables are characterized by a reduced number of common

stochastic trends? Second, towhat extent do innovations in these permanent

trends account for short-run as well as long-run movements in key aggregate

variables? Our techniques are VAR methods - -   modified   for use with

cointegrated variables as outlined by Engle and Granger (1987) --     that
explicitly incorporate common stochastic trends. While this analysis is

motivated by the equilibrium model of Section 2, the time series techniques

are quite general and permit short run dynamic behavior that could in

principle be consistent with a wide variety of economic mechanisms.

   Section 4 presents a simple three-variable empirical model focusing on

measures of output, consumption, and inyestment. In Section 5, we extend this

analysis to include money and prices, identifying one real and one nominal

permanent shock to the economy. In Section 6, we examine more closely the




                                       -2-
permanent components of GNP predicted by our five-variable model, along with

the estimated real and nominal permanent shocks. In particular, we compare

the innovations in the real permanent component in our five-variable model to

two variants of Solow's (1957) measure of changes in total factor

productivity. Our conclusions are summarized in Section 7.




                   2.   Growth and Fluctuations:   A Stylized Model



   An important recent line of macroeconomic research involves the modeling of

economic fluctuations as competitive equilibrium outcomes, frequently those of

a large number of representative agents. It remains an open question whether

this paradigm and, more particularly, the versions of it that stress that the

principal disturbances to the economy are real in nature (e.g. Kydland and

Prescott [19821 and Long and Plosser [1983]) are reasonably accurate empirical

descriptions of actual aggregate time series. However, from the standpoint of

this paper, the key feature of this approach is that it provides a unified

framework for examining long run growth, short run fluctuations, and the

interactions between these two phenomena.

   Within the general real business cycle approach, we identify two distinct

hypotheses. The first is that economic fluctuations --       serially   correlated

variations in the level of economic activity - -   arise   from transitory shocks

to production possibilities, with observed fluctuations being persistent

because the internal mechanisms of the economy "propagate" the disturbances

over time (see Long and Plosser [1983]). This corresponds to a conventional

view of economic fluctuations that is embedded in many other theories,




                                     -3-
including natural rate models of both Keynesian and neoclassical varieties

that emphasize the role of nominal impulses (e.g. Fischer [1977] and Phelps

and Taylor [1977] or Lucas [1973] and Barro [1976]).

  A second hypothesis in real business cycle models is that economic

fluctuations are the response of the economy to permanent changes in

underlying technology (as in Long and Plosser [1983], Hansen [1986] or

Christiano [1986]). In a certainty equivalence presentation of this view,

permanent shifts in technology occasion changes in the "steady-state" levels

of capital stocks, and economic fluctuations are essentially movements along

the adjustment path to the new steady-state. It is this second hypothesis --

that   persistent random changes in technology account for a dominant component

of short-run changes in economic activity --   that   we investigate here.



  A Neoclassical Model with Permanent Technology Shocks

  We motivate our empirical investigation by considering a neoclassical

macroeconomic model that incorporates permanent shocks to the level of total

factor productivity. Suppose that there are many identical agents in this

economy. Since no trade will be possible in equilibrium, and in the absence

of taxes or productive externalities, we may compute competitive quantities by

the device of solving the problem for a representative agent who directly

operates the production technology. Decentralization to individual decis ion-

making is direct since equilibrium prices can be found from the relevant

marginal rates of substitution for the representative agent at optimal

quantities.

  Preferences and endowments. Agents value sequences of consumption (Ct) and

leisure (Lt) according to a time-separable utility function of the form,




                                      -4-
   (2.1)          Ut —
                         X1tfrdh1(Ct÷j,Lt+j)

where O<<l. The representative individual begins period t with the capital

stock        and possesses an endowment of time, normalized to one in each

period.

   Production possibilities. There are standard neoclassical specifications

for the point-in-time and intertemporal production possibilities. Date t

commodity output is produced according to a Cobb-Douglas production function

with constant returns to scale,



   (2.2)                   Yt =



where Nt is the units of labor effort employed and At is an exogenous

stochastic process for total factor productivity that we will discuss further

below. Capital accumulation takes place according to the simple evolution

equation,



   (2.3)                          (l-6)Kt + I



The representative agent faces two resource constraints, one on goods,

            and one on time, Nt+Lt1.

  Technology shocks. The exogenous process for total factor productivity At

is given by a logarithmic random walk,



   (2.4)         log(A) p + log(A1) +



                                       -5-
where the innovation    is taken to be independently and identically

distributed with mean zero and variance 2. Thus the average growth rate of

total factor productivity is p, although in any period the actual growth rate

will deviate from p by some unpredictable amount

   Restrictions. We are interested in studying the outcomes of this model

under restrictions which imply that there is steady-state growth under

certainty. As discussed by King, Plosser and Rebelo (1986), these imply that,

if it is separable in its arguments, then the utility function u(s) has the

form



   (2.5)        u(C,L) = log(C)    +   v(L)

This specification, which we henceforth assume, implies that the income and

substitution effects of the trend growth in At (through the drift i') are

exactly offsetting on leisure. This is a necessary condition for a stochastic

steady state, since total hours are bounded

   Analysis of Dynamics. Following King and Rebelo's (1986) approach to the

analysis of economies with stochastic steady states, it is most direct to

transform the model to one that possesses a stationary distribution. The

transformations are analogous to those employed in the theory of growth under

certainty. Specifically? let



   (2.6)                               it =                  =



Technically, these transformations permit us to restate the problem as a




                                       -6-
stationary one. Their form.can best be understood by considering the

conditions for a certainty steady state growth path. In this situation, the

capital stock must adjust so that the net rate of return equals the pure rate

of time preference, which implies that fl[At(l-e)K°N°+(15)]=l in steady

state. Thus, with effort invariant in the long run, a 1% rise in A must

eventually induce a 1/9 percent increase in K to restore this equality. That

is, these transformations entail removing the long run effects of the

stochastic disturbances.

   With these definitions, it follows that this economy is related to one with

a stochastic depreciation rate on capital, for which the choice problem for

the individual is to maximize



        E    PJ-t[log(c        )   + v(L1)    +
                                                  (l/O)lo(A)]
   subject to: c +
                   +
                       i
                       Lt      1

                kt+i —      [(l-&)k   +
                                          i]exp[(p.In÷1)/9]

The optimal decision rules for this transformed environment have the general

form,




                i —    i(kt)
               c — c(kt)
   (2.7)       Nt N(k)
                       k
               y — 1-9N(lct) 9
               kt+l —       [(1-6)k   +   i(k)]expf-(p-4-q1)/91



                                           -7-
Under mild conditions on t, then transformed capital stock kt possesses a

stationary distribution (see Brock and Mirman [1972]), so that all of the

variables ct, i, Nt, and         are stationary as well.

   Although the transformed variables are stationary, in log levels they are

not. Transforming to logarithms, the economy evolves according to




                   log(K1) r + log[(l-6)k+i(k)]
                   log(Y)
                          —  + ((l-9)1og(k) + 91og(N(k))}
                             =
   (2.8)           log(C)        ft + log(c(k))
                   log(I)           + log(i(k))

                   1og(N)            log(N(k))



where r=(l/9)log(A). Thus the levels of consumption, investment and output

are nonstationary in levels in this economy --    due   to persistent technological

change --   but   certain transformations of these variables are stationary when a

stochastic steady state exists. This structure means that conventional

econometric techniques of time series analysis, such as log-linearly

detrending the data and treating the residuals as a stationary stochastic

process, will not be appropriate for data generated by this economy because

the time series contain random walk components due to their common dependence

on technology. In the sections below, we consider some econometric techniques

that are appropriate for data generated by such economies, exploiting the

natural linkages between stationarity of transformations of variables in the

theoretical structure (2.8) and recent developments in methods for analyzing

cointegrated processes.




                                        -8-
   Two general properties of this framework deserve emphasis. First, there is

a single source of nonstationarity - -   a   common "stochastic trend" -   - implied
by this model. The logarithm of each of the non-stationary time series (Y, C,

I and K) can be represented as the sum of a random walk           and a serially

correlated, but stationary series. For example, in addition to its random

walk component, consumption includes a stationary component, log(c(k))).

Second, the permanent and stationary components are both functions of the

single technology shock        Third,    the stationary components will generally

be serially correlated because transformed capital is Markov, i.e.

                                                  As in the standard neoclassical

growth model of Brock and Mirman (1972), a Markovian law of motion for capital

arises from the desire of individuals to smooth the influence of transitory

shocks to production opportunities. This smoothing behavior also implies that

the stationary component of consumption (log[c(k)]) is also Markov.

   The economic mechanisms at work in generating these key features are

readily developed by considering how the model economy responds to a positive

change in technology under certainty equivalence. Since the level of the

production function is permanently higher after the productivity improvement,

there will be a new, higher steady-state capital stock and associated

increased flows of consumption, investment and output. However, capital does

not immediately jump to the new higher level, since that would entail too

large a burden on current consumption. Rather, as we know from the

neoclassical model with fixed labor, there is a transition perio& during which

capital is built up (since transformed capital k is low relative to its

steady-state value).

   The addition of labor permits society to vary this input along the




                                     -9-
transition path. Simulations by King, Plosser and Rebelo (1986, Section 6)

indicate that, for commonly employed specifications of preferences, hours will

rise in response to a permanent technology shock --          yielding   additional

production along the transition path - -        before   settling back to the invariant

long-run level. One might think that the intertemporal substitution response

would act in the opposite direction (since the marginal product of labor is

now low), but this neglects the fact that a permanent technology shock raises

the real rate of return on investment opportunitiesj



Takinz the Model to the Data

   This stylized model is clearly too simple to describe the data from any

actual economy. For example, the aggregate time series in (2.8) are driven by

a single shock, so that the matrix of one-step ahead forecast errors would be

singular for data generated by this economy. Thus, prior to econometric

implementation, it is necessary to introduce additional disturbances. In

addition, since it encompasses only real variables, the model economy

developed above is not well suited for studying time series data from any

actual economy, since exchanges in modern economies are undertaken in nominal

terms.2 Nevertheless, in Section 4 we study a small multivariate system of

real aggregates. Then, in Section 5, we consider a system augmented to

include money and prices. To rationalize this exclusion of nominal variables

in Section 4, it is useful to think of appending a money demand function and

"Fisher equation" to the preceding model economy. Thus, monetary developments

will be neutral by construction. However, additional stochastic trends may

enter through a variety of channels:       (a) through the money supply, which is

difference stationary in the univariate analysis of Nelson and Plosser (1982);




                                       -   10    -
or (b) through the demand for money (or, equivalently, its velocity of

circulation), which could reflect more fundamental trends in currency usage or

technological changes in the banking sector.




                              3. Empirical Framework



   This section presents our statistical procedures for assessing empirically

the number and quantitative importance of permanent disturbances. One

approach to investigating these issues is to pursue explicit formulations of

theoretical models and to test the implied restrictions. We do not follow

this strategy since those models that are analytically tractable are very

restrictive. Instead, we propose a general statistical model, which is likely

to be useful in a variety of circumstances, that involves a linear

decomposition of a vector of time series into nonstationary and stationary

components.



The Common Trends Model

   We consider a general factor model representation of an n-dimensional

vector X, where the common factors are random walks. This "common trends"

model is written as



   (3.1)           — y + Ar + D(L)et,             rt — p +   +


where -y is a nxl vector of constants, r is a kxl vector of random walks with

drift p and innovations
                          ij (where kn), L is the lag operator, D(L) is a nxn




                                     -   11   -
matrix of lag polynomials, and        is a nxl vector of serially uncorrelated,

mean zero transitory innovations with covariance matrix E. The lag polynomial

D(L) is assumed to decay sufficiently rapidly that '_0ID is finite, from

which it follows that the elements of                 have finite variances and are

stationary. The "factor loading" matrix A has dimension nxk, and is assumed

to have full column rank.

   The formulation (3.1) decomposes the vector X into permanent and

transitory components. While D(L)ct is stationary, Art is not: in the long

run,..X will track this stochastic trend, up to the transient deviation

D(L)c. Thus      —
                     Ar   can be thought of as the permanent component of

while 4 — D(L)ct can be thought of as a stationary or transient component.
That is,



                                  5
   (3.2)                    p




Moreover, if the number of stochastic trends (k) is less than the number of

variables but each element of X individually contains a stochastic trend,

then, in the long run, some elements of             will move together. More

precisely, if k<n, then there is a nx(n-k) matrix a with rows such that a'A—O.

From this observation and (3.2), it follows that a'X &-y.i-a'4, i.e. there

are n-k linear combinations of contemporaneous values of             that are

stationary, even though each element of             itself is dominated by a unit root.

But this is just Engle and Granger's (1987) definition of cointegration: in

the common trends model with k common trends, X will be cointegrated with n-k

cointegrating vectors given by the columns of a.

   Factor models typically require additional restrictions on the relation




                                       -   12   -
between the innovations in the two components. Nevertheless, the fact that

one of the components in (3.1) is nonstationary while the other is stationary

means that certain features of (3.1) can be investigated without imposing

additional restrictions. First, because           is nonstationary and   is

stationary, the optimal estimate of X using current and lagged values of

    does not depend (asymptotically) on the relation between the permanent and

transitory innovations (see Watson [l986]). In particular, as noted by

Beveridge and Nelson (1981) for the univariate case, optimal estimates of

4   can be obtained from the long run forecast of X adjusted for

deterministic growth. Since      is a stationary, mean zero process, it can

have no influence asymptotically on the long-run level of a nonstationary

series. Thus the optimal estimates of Art are invariant to the correlation

between the permanent and transitory innovations.

    Second, in addition to the behavior of Art, we are also interested in

knowing the number of common stochastic trends, i.e. the dimensionality of
                                                                              r.
For the same intuitive reason that the long run forecasts are independent of

the relation between the short run and long run innovations, it is possible to

address this issue statistically without further restrictions on the

correlation between the permanent and transitory innovations. This has two

immediate consequences for our investigation. First, the cointegrating

vectors a can be estimated consistently under weak assumptions on fl(L)c,

without imposing additional restrictions or identifying assumptions on (3.1)

(Stock [1984]); a simple way to estimate the cointegrating vectors is to run a

series of contemporaneous ordinary least squares regressions. Second, testing

for the number of cointegrating vectors is equivalent to testing for the

number of common stochastic trends. These tests are valid under the same weak




                                     -   13   -
conditions that ensure consistent estimation of the cointegrating vectors.

The specific tests we use, developed in Stock and Watson (1986), are discussed

in more detail below. Summarizing, statistical procedures can be used to

ascertain the dimensionality of r and to estimate a and X.=Art without

restricting the correlation structure between      and

   Estimation of other statistics of interest requires additional identifying

assumptions. First, consider the problem of estimating the factor loading

matrix A. Since a'A=O, then either estimated or theoretical cointegrating

vectors can be used to construct some estimate of A. However, this estimate

will not be unique: if a'A=O, then a'AR=O, where R is any kxk matrix. Another

way to see this problem is to recall from the discussions above that we are

only able to identify Art and k. Thus, A and       are only identified up to an

arbitrary transformation by a kxk matrix R, since Art             s   A*r.   If

k=l, R is a scalar, and this choice simply amounts to suitably normalizing the

variance of        However, if lol, the choice of a (nonsingular) transformation

R that decomposes X into A and r cannot be made purely on statistical

grounds, since all such transformations are observationally equivalent.

Rather, the choice must be based on some a-priori considerations that

generally involve economic theory. The second empirical model presented below

contains two common trends, and our choice of normalization is discussed

extensively at that point.

   A second set of statistics of interest describe the dynamic properties of

(3.1), such as the response of      to a unit innovation in the permanent

component ,   or   the fraction of the variation in the forecast errors of

attributable to the individual permanent components. Interpreting these

statistics requires additional identification assumptions that are central to




                                      -   14   -
 assessing the implications of the permanent innovations for short run

 fluctuations. For example, if it is assumed (as often it is in unobserved

 component models) that the permanent and transitory disturbances
                                                                    are mutually
 uncorrelated (Ec5I7=O for all s), then a permanent disturbance would have

 no dynamic implications beyond a one-time shift in X as captured by A. The

 permanent shocks would then have no affect on the
                                                     stationary component of
 thereby excluding the sorts of dynamic responses to permanent technology

 shocks present in the theoretical models of Section 2.

    An alternative approach to imposing additional restrictions on (3.1) would

be to take a more specific structure,
                                         explicitly derived from economic theory,
and to impose the implied restrictions. This presents different problems. For

example, in the model of Section 2, there is only one disturbance, so the

process is singular and the innovations in the permanent and
                                                                stationary
components are perfectly correlated. To implement such a model would require

either including additional sources of noise to the structural model or, as in

Altug (1984), recognizing that the aggregate time series variables are

measured with error. The first approach amounts to
                                                      working with fully
specified structural models which, for reasons discussed above, is not a

particularly attractive alternative at the current stage of research. On the

other hand, the second approach requires taking an explicit stand on the

sources and character of the measurement errors.4

   We adopt a third approach that results in a
                                                 computationally simpler
estimation technique and permits the permanent and transitory innovations to

be correlated. This formulation has its roots in the
                                                        stationary/nonstationary
decomposition of univariate time series by Beveridge and Nelson (1981) and the

cointegrated models of Engle and Granger (1987). It was argued above that if




                                    -   15   -
X has a common trends representation, then it is cointegrated. In the

Appendix, it is shown that if        is cointegrated, then it has a common trends

representation of the form (3.1), where               =          where F is a lcxn matrix, and
                                                          Fct,
where c corresponds to the innovations in the Wold moving average

representation of Xt(lL)Xt,



   (3.3)        AXt —   8 + C(L)ct


where a'C(l)=O. Our specific common trends model is derived from (3.3), just

as the Beveridge-Nelson (1981) decomposition of a univariate series into

permanent and transitory components can be derived from a univariate version

of (3.3). The correlation between any permanent innovation                    and the

transitory innovations      is not restricted a-priori, but rather depends on F.

However, in this formulation the vector of permanent innovations is completely

determined by the vector of transitory innovations.

   It is well known that the interpretation of impulse responses to linear

combinations of errors in stationary multivariate time series models such as

conventional vector autoregressions (VAR's) depends on additional

identification assumptions on the underlying innovations, say that they are

orthogonal and ordered according to a specific Wold causal structure. Similar

issues arise here, except that the identification requirements are reduced by

the assumption that      is cointegrated. Specifically, suppose that

where Ft is some nonsingular nxn matrix, 4=(ii               ñ)' is    a nxl vector of

transformed innovations with         the kxl vector of permanent innovations, and

where x' denotes the transpose of x. Similarly letting Ct(L)=C(L)Ft, (3.3)

can be rewritten,




                                         -   16   -
   (3.4)        t —   6   + C(L)(FtylFtct      & + Ct(L)4



   Computation of impulse response functions or variance decompositions

requires making sufficient assumptions to estimate Ft. In the common trends

model, the first k rows of 0, F, are determined from the long-run properties

of the model (essentially by the cointegrating vectors); the identification

conditions needed to estimate A suffice for the estimation of F. However, the

first k columns of Ct(L), and thus the impulse responses and variance

decompositions with respect to the permanent innovations        will depend in

part on the final n-k rows of Ft. Thus, in computing the impulse responses we

make the additional assumption that the permanent innovations       are

uncorrelated with the remaining elements       of the transformed innovations

vector.5

   Summarizing, the common trends model (3.3) has three desirable features.

First, the model itself imposes no overidentifyinjirestrictions beyond the

testable restrictions imposed by cointegration, although additional

assumptions are necessary to examine dynamic features of the model. Second,

it permits rather general correlations between specific permanent and

transitory shocks. Third, as is described below, the model is easily

estimated using a modified version of a VAR, a vector error correction model

(VECK).




Estimation Strategy

  The estimation of the common trends model consists of three parts, each

employing the additonal identification restrictions discussed above.




                                    -   17 -
     1. Test   for cointegration. Stock-Watson (1986) tests are performed for

the order of cointegration (or, equivalently, for the number    of common trends)
in   X. The tests entail examining the real part of the k'-th root of the

first order autoregressive matrix of X under the null hypothesis that this

matrix has k roots equal to one and n-k roots with modulus (and therefore real

parts) less than one, where k'<k. The cointegrating vectors of the system are

also estimated and reported.6

     2. Estimate A, C(L). The key to estimating C(L) in (3.3) is the one-to-one

correspondence (derived in the Appendix) between the common trends model (3.1)

and Engle and Cranger's (1987) model of cointegrated processes. A popular

procedure for estimating the moving average representation of a stationary

multivariate time series model is to estimate a finite order VAR and then to

invert the VAR. Granger's Representation Theorem (Engle and Granger [1987])

implies that a similar procedure can be used for cointegrated systems, except

that the cointegrating conditions are imposed by estimating a VECM rather than

a VAR. Specifically, it shows that all VECM models have a cointegrated

representation of the form (3.3), and that all cointegrated models of the form

(3.3) have a VECM representation (perhaps with a moving average error); that

is, X have the representation,



     (3.5)         AX a + B(L)AXti      -
                                            d(a'Xt1)   +



where        are the same innovations as in (3.3), a is nxl, d is nx(n-k), B(L) is

a nxn matrix lag polynomial, and where we assume that there is no moving

average component to the error term. The n-k stationary variables a'X are

called the "error-correction" terms. Thus C(L) and         are computed by




                                        -   18   -
estimating (3.5), given a, for some specific lag order and inverting the

resulting VECM. In our empirical implementations, the theoretical (rather

than the estimated) cointegrating vectors are used to construct a'X in (3.5),

making it possible to give the A matrix a simple interpretation.

   The next step is the estimation of A. As discussed above, if k—i then

a'A—O identifies A up to scale. For 101, suppose that A can be written as

A—A011, where A0 is some rixk matrix satisfying a'A0—0, where A0 is known (or

depends only on the cointegrating vector) and II is a lower triangular matrix

of unknown parameters. (A motivation for this parameterization is provided in

Section 5.) Then estimates of II and A can be constructed from estimates of

C(l) and E_E(EtCL); in addition, as discussed in the Appendix, F can be

computed from estimates of C(l) and E.7 As discussed above, the long-run

forecasts of X from the VECM (3.5) provide estimates of X, although it is

simpler numerically to compute them as Ar after estimating A and
                                                                    r.
   3. Compute innovations statistics. Two measures of the relative importance

of the permanent and transitory components are computed using the estimates of

C(L) and     and the additional identification restriction that     and     are

uncorrelated. This permits estimation of Ft and thus of Ct(L).     Using these

statistics, we calculate the implied changes in X brought about by one unit

innovation in the trend component. This impulse response function shows the

shape of the dynamic response of the variables to an innovation in the

permanent component. Second, the relative importance of the response to a

typical innovation in determining the short run evolution of variables is

estimated by decomposing the variance of the k-step ahead forecast of each

element of    into parts associated with the transitory and permanent

innovations. This permits estimating the fraction of unforeseen movements in




                                    -   19   -
   that can be attributed to innovations in the permanent component.




          4. An Empirical Model   of   Consumption, Investment, and Income



  We now turn to an empirical common trends model of the form (3.1) using

output, consumption and investment, as suggested by the theoretical

development of Section 2. The data, obtained from the Citibase data base, are

quarterly from 1952:1 through 1985:IV for the U.S. All variables are

transformed by taking logarithms. The measures of output, consumption, and

investment are the per capita values of GNP, personal consumption expenditures

and gross private domestic investment from the National Income and Product

Accounts, deflated by the CNP deflator.

   Selected unit root and cointegration features of the data are investigated

in Table 1, which presents tests of the null hypothesis that the series

contains a stochastic trend (i.e. a unit root). For reference developing the

mixed real/monetary model in the next section, the table also includes

statistics for money, m (the logarithm of nominal Ff2 per capita) and price, p

(the log of the GNP price deflator).8

   The test statistics reported in Table 1 involve making various adjustments

for the possible presence of time trends as an alternative to the unit roots

hypothesis. In addition, both the Dickey-Fuller (1979)        statistics and the

Stock-Watson (1986) qf statistics involve an autoregressive approximation to

the short run correlations in the series. The first column in panel A

presents a test of the hypothesis that the series contain a unit root against

the alternative that it is stationary, perhaps around a time trend of up to




                                        -   20   -
                                          Table 1

                                  Univariate Series

                                 Unit Root Statistics


                            A. Log Levels of Series

               2
   Series                                                         Time Trend
             q- (z)    q(Az)         r(AZ)                          in
                                                  q(z)
     y       -13.1     91.4** 5.42**             -11.3   -2.53      0.44
     c       -12.3    l16.l**      475**         -12.7   -2.85      0.89
     i       -29.l 111.5** 6.37** 28.7*                  4.l7**     0.29
     m        -7.1    53•7** 3•5g*               -5.2    -2.89      2.61**
     p        -2.7    56.9**      -1.95          -4.2    -2.26      1.09




                          B. Error Correction Terms


                                    Time Trend
  Series                              in z
              q.(z)
                                                          q(z)          4(z)
  y - c       -15.1      -2.21        -0.64              14.8*        -2.16
  y -    i    -34.1      4.62**       -l.6C              31.0**       4.29**
y + p - m     -15.9      -2.87            0.66           l5.2*        -2.87




Notes: Significant at the *?1% *5% +10% level. All statisti5s are based
                                                                          on
regressions with 4 lags. q [z] denotes the
                                             Stock-Watson q (1,0)
statistic computed using the level of each variable; q[Az] denotes the
q(l,0) statistic computed using the first difference of each variable;
Tr[4Z1 denotes the Dickey-Fuller (1979) t-statistic computed using the first
difference of x; and similarly for q[zJ and ; [z]. Critical values for
the , statistic
                 are from Fuller (1976, p. 373; or the q.(l,l) statistic
are from Stock and Watson (l986a); and for the
                                               q (k,k-l) statistics are
from Appendix A of Stock and Watson (1987). The "time trend" entries denote
the t-statistic on time in a regression of the variable on a constant, time,
and four of its lags.
                                                                           5%
quadratic order. For all series, this test fails to reject the null at the

level, although the evidence of a unit root is weakest for investment. The

second and third columns test for a second unit root against the alternative
                                                      possibly with a time trend;
that the the process is stationary in differences,

the Stock-Watson tests reject the null for all series, while the Dickey-Fuller

test rejects for all series except inflation.      The final column presents the

t-statistic on time in a regression of the first difference of each series on

a constant time, and four of its lags.    As found in Stock and Watson (1987)

using monthly Ml data, money growth appears to be stationary around a time

trend. Since the time trends on the other series are insignificant, the unit

roots tests in the fourth and fifth columns are also reported; the unit root

hypothesis is rejected by investment at the five but not the one percent

 level, while the other series fail to reject.

    The economic model of Section 2 suggests that while consumption, income,

 and investment will contain unit roots, y-c and y-i will not. The

 stationarity of these "error correction" terms, along with log M2 velocity, is

 examined in panel B using the same procedures. There is strong evidence that

 y-i does not contain a unit root, although this result conflicts with the

 implications of panel A that y has a unit root but that i does not. The

 evidence that y-c and M2 velocity are stationary is weaker, resting on.the 10%

 rejections based on the q statistic (which tests against the alternative

 that the series is stationary with nonzero mean). Summarizing, we interpret

 these unit root tests as being broadly consistent with the hypothesis that

  there is one common trend among y, c and i, although the apparent

  inconsistencies in these results stress the importance of performing joint

  unit root tests on the trivariate system.9




                                      -   21   -
   A test of the hypothesis of three common trends (i.e. no cointegration) vs.

the alternative of one common trend (i.e. two cointegrating vectors) is

presented in Table 2. The test is based on the roots of the adjusted first

order autocorrelation matrix    defined     in Stock and Watson (1986), computed

using detrended data. The real parts of these estimated roots are .948, .858,

and .810. The statistic tests the null hypothesis that the second of these

roots is one, against the alternative that it has a real part that is less

than one. The p-value of the corresponding q(3,l) statistic is 11%,

providing evidence against the hypothesis of three unit roots. The projection

of the estimated cointegrating vectors on the theoretical cointegrating

vectors of (1,-l,0)' and (l,O,-l)' indicates a reasonable correspondence to

the theoretical predictions; a formal test of the equivalence of these

estimated cointegrating vectors and the theoretical values would entail

nonstandard distribution theory (see Stock [1984] and Sims, Stock and Watson

[1986]), and we do not perform such a test here.

   A VECM was estimated using four lags of the first difference of y, c and i,

an intercept, and the two theoretical error correction terms y-c and

Since the theoretical model constrains A to be a 3xl vector with equal

elements, the permanent component has the same long run effect on each of the

variables. The scale of the innovation to the trend is fixed by setting

A—(1 1 1)', so that a unit shock to the permanent component will eventually

increase y, c and i by one.

   The impulse responses of       ct÷k, and tt+k to a unit innovation in

are plotted in Figure 1, along with their 90% confidence intervals.11 The

responses share a common "hump" shape. The point estimates suggest that an

innovation which will eventually lead to a 1% increase in GNP results in a




                                   -   22   -
F—---




                                                        Table 2
                                           Counuon Trend Tests and
                                  Estimated Cointegrating Vectors




                                                        yl c, i

                     y          1.00

                          =     1.00        r    + D(L)ct            = p +        +

                     1          1.00


              Standard deviation                = .80%


              Conunon Trend test: 4(3,1)                 -19.0    p-value — .11




              Estimated cointegrating vectors:

                           y           c            i

                         1.12      0.08           -0.83

                         0.90     -1.06           -0.13




        Notes: The common trend tests are discussed in the text. The estimated
        cointegrating vectors have been rotated to provide a least squares fit to (1 -
        1 0) and (1 0 -1).
 monotonic increase in y over the first
                                             year. This response peaks at
 approximately 1.3% and then oscillates while
                                                  returning to its long run value
 of 1%. The response of consumption
                                        over the short horizon is more damped than
 the response of GNP. Interestingly,
                                        however, the consumption path fluctuates
 substantially in response to the permanent innovation, dipping to .8% at the

 three year horizon before returning to its 1% long-run value. The
                                                                   response of
 investment is much more dramatic than either income
                                                         or consumption: a 1%
permanent innovation leads to a 2.3% increase in investment after one year,

followed by a decline to .4% at the three year horizon before slowly returning

to its new permanent level. Thus innovations in the
                                                         permanent component
result in substantial transitory movements in all series - -    particularly
investment, The duration of these responses (one to four years) is consistent

with "business cycle" horizons. However, the wide 90% confidence intervals

caution against interpreting the point estimates too closely.

   Are these responses large enough to explain a substantial fraction of the

short run variation in the data? This question is addressed in Table 3, which

presents the variance decompositions of the data for various forecast

horizons. The table shows the fraction of the variance of the forecast error

in the series that is attributable to innovations in the permanent component

at various forecast horizons. These innovations
                                                     play an important role in the
variation in GNP and consumption. At the 1-4 quarter horizon, the point

estimates suggest that 30% to 50% of the fluctuations in GNP can be attributed

to the permanent component. This increases to 70% at the two year horizon and

to 80% at four years. The importance of the permanent component to

consumption is even greater.12 Interestingly, the permanent component

explains a much smaller fraction of the movements in investment --    less   than




                                    -   23   -
            Figure Ia. Response of y to an innovation in the permanent component


P1
p
LI
L
S
E
R
E
S
p
U
H
 S
 E
                 0123456789111111111122222
                           01234567890 1234
                                                                   HORIZOtI




             Figure lb. Response of c to an innovation in the permanent component

     i 1.4
     P1
                                   —           —
           1.2                ——

     L
     S     1.8
     E
     R
           0.8
     E
     S 0.6
     p
     0 0.4
     II
     S
     E     8.2                     I   I   I       I       I   I   t
                 0        12345678911111111112222
                      —T-I—-——L

                                   81234567090123
                                                                        I   I   I   I

                                                                                                a
                                                                                                4
                                                                   HORI ZOtI




            Figure ic Response of i to an innovation in the permanent component


      II
      p
      U
      L
      El
      S

      R
      E —1
      S
      p
                     II
           —3
      S
                                                   I   I       I    I                   I   I

                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 18 Il 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                                   HORIZON




                                                   Figure 1
                          Impulse responses to a unit innovation in the permanent component,
                                    three variable common trends model

                          Impulse response
          - - - - 90% confidence band
                                    Table 3

                Fraction of Variance Attributed to Innovation
                     in Permanent Component - - Real Model

                               Variables: y, c, i




                                              Series

Horizon                                       c                   i

     1                0.304                0.637                0.012
                  (.002 .703)          (.141 .870)         (.001 .477)

     4                0.516                0.734                0.073
                  (.030 .807)          (.234 .882)         (.029 .356)

     8                0.688               0.780                 0.152
                  (.155 .847)          (.298 .910)         (.051 .408)

 12                  0.752                0.783                 0.155
                  (.272 .865)          (.342 .930)         (.056 .422)

 16                 0.789                 0.796                 0.155
                 (.369 .883)           (.399 .942)         (.059 .435)

20                  0.818                 0.817                0.161
                 (.440 .901)           (.468 .952)         (.065 .441)




                    1.00                  1.00                  1.00


Notes: 90% confidence intervals are given in parentheses. The confidence
intervals were computed using 500 bootstrap replications based on the
estimated VECM(4) representation of the Common Trends model. The bootstrapped
estimates were obtained using the procedure described by Runkle (1987).
20% at horizons up to five years.13




                      5. A Mixed Real-Monetary Empirical Model



   In   this section we extend our analysis to include money and prices, so that

shocks to money and prices can play a role in our empirical explanation of

economic fluctuations. The unit roots tests reported in Tables 1 and 2 are

generally consistent with the hypothesis that the three-variable system

contains one common trend; to the extent that the results of Table 1 suggest

that velocity is stationary, the five-variable system should contain three

cointegrating vectors and two common trends. The roots of the adjusted first

order autocorrelation matrix described in the preceding section are

qualitatively consistent with this conjecture, with real parts of .958, .958,

.869, .869, and .851. However, the qf (5,3) statistic (which allows for a

possible quadratic trend, necessary because of the evident time trend in money

growth), based on the third smallest of these real parts, has a p-value of

.54. While the various tests, taken literally, yield mixed information about

the number of unit roots in the five variable system, a possible resolution of

the conflicting results comes from recognizing that the power of the

multivariate unit root tests can be substantially less than the power of the

corresponding univariate tests, particularly when the series have been

linearly or quadratically detrended. Indeed, since the 5% critical value of

the qf (5,3) Is approximately -27.9, more than fifty years of quarterly data

would be necessary to reject the hypothesis at the 5% level using the observed

value of the third largest root, .869.14 Although the evidence is mixed, we




                                      -   24   -
conclude that the five-variable system contains two common trends.

   Since the five variable system contains two common trends, there are three

linearly independent cointegrating vectors. Including the cointegrating

vector defined by N2 velocity and ordering the variables as (y,c,i,m,p), these

are (l,-l,O,O,O)', (l,O,-l,O,O)', and (l,O,O,-l,l)'. The estimated

cointegrating vectors based on the quadratically detrended data are reported

in Table 4. These point estimates are generally consistent with the

theoretical values of that were used in the estimation of the VECM.

   Because this model has more than one common trend, additional identifying

assumptions must be made to estimate A and       We adopt a specification in

which the trends have a natural interpretation and have uncorrelated

innovations. The preceding discussion suggests that the five-variable model

will inherit one stochastic trend common to the real variables. This will be

augmented by a "nominal" stochastic trend relating the long-run movements of

money and prices. There are two obvious parameterizations with this

characteristic. Both involve one "real" and one "nominal" trend, in the sense

that the long run effect on the real variables of a unit impulse to the real

permanent component is normalized to be one, while the long run effect on the

nominal variables of a unit impulse in the nominal component is similarly set

to one. In both parameterizations, the innovations in the nominal and real

components are uncorrelated by assumption.

   In the first parameterization, the long run effect on the price level of an

innovation to the real permanent component is constrained to be zero. In

contrast, an innovation in the nominal component is permitted to have a

possibly nonzero long run effect w on output. Thus:




                                    -   25   -
                               It   I
                               it   1

(5.1)              =   +       it   1                  + D(L)ct
                                            72t
                           l+ir 1

                           •1       0


If it   is   zero, then only        (the real permanent component) has a long run

effect on the real variables. To maintain the velocity cointegration

relation, if ,r=O in (5.1) a unit increase in the real permanent component

corresponds to a long run increase in output and money by one percent, with

prices remaining unchanged by assumption. If ir is nonzero, the permanent

effect of a unit increase in the nominal component is a long run rise of the

real variables by ir%.

   An alternative parameterization would reverse the zero restriction in

(5.1): the nominal component is normalized to have no permanent effect on the

real variables, while the real component is permitted to have a permanent

effect on the price level. Accordingly,


                               1        0

                               1    0
                                            Tlt
(5.2)           X=-y+          1    0
                                                       +D(L)et
                                            r2t
                           l+p          1

                                    1


where p is an unknown parameter. In (5.2), r1 is the real component, while

r2t is the nominal component. Here, the long run effect of a unit increase in

the real component is to increase prices by p%.




                                                  -   26   -
    The representations (5.1). and (5.2) are identical if the correlations
                                                                           in
 Ax are such that t=0 (or equivalently p=O). For our data this is
                                                                    very
 nearly the case, so that the interpretations that
                                                   follows from the two
 normalizations are essentially identical.        Henceforth the estimation and
 discussion will be based solely on the formulation
                                                          (5.1).
    The model (5.1) was estimated
                                    using a VECM(4) with y-c, y-i, and v as the
 "error correction" terms. Noting that A can be written as A=A011, where
                                                                         A0 is
 a 5x2 matrix of constants (given the
                                      cointegrating vectors) and where the 2*2
 matrix II is lower triangular with ones on the diagonal and with
                                                                       1121—,r unknown,
 the algorithm discussed in Section 3 was used to estimate ii and
                                                                  thus A.15
 Some summary statistics for the estimated model are shown in Table 4. The

 estimated value of A implies that an innovation
                                                       leading to a long-run increase
 in prices by 1% leads a long-run reduction
                                                  in y, c, and i by .01%. However,
this effect is estimated imprecisely, with
                                                  a 90% (bootstrapped) confidence
interval ranging from -.74% to +.2S%J6

   The estimated impulse response functions for this model are presented in

Figure 2. The point estimates suggest that an innovation in the nominal

permanent component is initially associated with a sharp growth of M2, a

slower growth of prices, and a jump in investment activity. After several

quarters, money supply growth remains positive but slows, prices continue to

rise, and investment drops, fluctuating around zero as it returns to its long

run value. Although the nominal permanent innovation has a modest transient

effect on GNP, peaking at the two to three quarter horizon, the effect on

consumption is slight at all horizons.

   The estimated responses of GNP and consumption to the innovation in the

second, "real" permanent component are broadly similar to those reported for




                                     -   27   -
                                            Table 4

                          Common Trend Tests and
        Estimated Cointegrating Vectors -- Mixed Real-Monetary Model


                                          y,c,i,m,p


                   It        l.00•
       C           it        1.00
       i            iv       1.00
       m           1+w       1.00

               1.00           0



       =   -0.01    [90% Confidence Interval (-.74,.25)]
     Standard deviation (1) = 2.01%
     Standard deviation     = 0.81%


     Common Trend test: qf (5,2) = -17.9                  p-value =   .54

      Estimated cointegrating vectors:

                         y          C      i          m      p

                   0.98           -0.01   -1.01   0.01       0.05

                   0.98           -1.01   -0.01   0.01       0.04

                   1.10            0.08   0.08    -1.08      0.72




Notes: The common trend tests are discussed in the text. The estimated
cointegrating vectors have been rotated to provide a least squares fit to
(1 -1 0 0 0), (1 0 -1 0 0) and (1 0 0 -1 1).    was estimated using a VECM(4)
as discussed in the text.
                                                   Figure 2a. Response of y



                       I
                      Fl
                      p
                      Ii
                      L
                      S
                      E
                      R
                      E
                      S
                      P
                      0
                      N
                      S
                      E


                              -0
                                     0123456789111111111122222
                                               012345678901234
                                                           HORIZON


- — - - Response to first (nominal) permanent innovation
       Response to second (real) permanent innovation

                                                    Figure 2b. Response of c
                                1.4
                                1 .2
                          I
                          P
                          U
                          L    0.8
                          s
                          E
                       R 0.6
                       E
                               0.4
                       0
                               0.2
                       E
                               8.0

                              —0.2
                                       0123 4567891012345678901234
                                                    11111111122222
                                                   Figure 2c. Response of i
                               1


                      I
                      N
                      P
                      U
                      L
                      S
                      E

                      p
                      E
                      S
                      p
                      g —8.2
                      S
                      E




                                   0123456789111111111122222
                                             012345678901234
                                                           HORIZON
                                      Figure 2d. Response of m

     1 .0




A    0.8
P
U
1.
$ 0.6
E
P
     0.4
P
0
N
     0.2



     0.0
            0123456789111111111122222
                      012345676901234
                                                  HORIZOH




                                      Figure 2e. Response of p

      1.0-
      0.8
      0.6

      0.4
L
S     0.2
E
     —0.0
     —0.2




             123456789111111111122222
             I     r   I    I     I

                      612345678901234
                                      I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I



                                                  HORIZON




                                              Figure 2
                 Impulse   responses to a unit innovation in the permanent components,
                               five variable common trends model
    - - - - Response to first (nominal) permanent innovation
             Response to second (real) permanent innovation
                                        Table Sa
                      Fraction of Variance Attributed to Innovation
        in First (Nominal) Permanent Component - - Mixed Real-Monetary Model



Horizon                       _c_         _1           .JL

    1         0.083        0.111       0.123        0.312      0.228
            (.000 .357) (.007 .474) (.001 .391) (.007 .532) (.026 .824)
    4         0.210           0.034       0.214       0.349       0.240
           (.010 .416)     (.018 .392) (.019 .427) (.010 .598) (.036 .868)
    8         0.141           0.026   0.167        0.369      0.324
           (.023 .366) (.021 .482) (.038 .367) (.013 .624) (.069 .908)
   12         0.088       0.038       0.163        0.467      0.407
           (.038 .432) (.019 .596) (.045 .417) (.024 .686) (.138 .933)
   16         0.062        0.038      0.162        0.584       0.483
           (.040 .539) (.017 .642) (.051 .432) (.041 .760) (.219 .949)
   20         0.049       0.032       0.153       0.674       0.550
           (.038 .567) (.020 .652) (.055 .435) (.063 .821) (.309 .959)


              0.000           0.000       0.000        0.863          1.00


Notes: See the notes to Table 3.
the corresponding trivariatemodel in Section 4, although the responses are

typically slower in the five variable case. GNP exhibits a similar "hump-

shaped" response, peaking after four years. Investment exhibits a strong

oscillatory pattern with an initial negative response. The initial response

of prices to the real innovation is a sharp deflation, becoming inflationary

only after three years. Interestingly, the initial response of real balances

to the real innovation is to increase sharply: despite the growth in GNP,

with prices falling and nominal money expanding, velocity drops by .5% after

six quarters, and is still off by .3% after four years.17

   The forecast error variance decompositions (reported in Table 5) are

generally consistent with the impulse response functions and, where they

overlap, with the results for the trivariate model of Section 4. The results

in Table S suggest that the real permanent innovation plays a dominant role in

fluctuations in y and c at forecast horizons of eight quarters or more. In

contrast, only a small fraction of the variation in investment is explained by

this factor even over horizons as long as 5 years. Innovations in the real

component also play an important role in explaining fluctuations in m and p,

even at short horizons. While the nominal component accounts for a negligible

proportion of the variation in c, it explains 20% of the variability in y and

i at the one year horizon. The two factors are roughly equally important in

explaining price movements at business cycle horizons, although the nominal

factor plays the more important role in monetary fluctuations.18

  As a measure of the historical importance of the response of GNP to the

real trend, the eight quarter ahead forecast error for CNP is plotted in

Figure 3, along with that part of this forecast error attributable to errors

in forecasting the real permanent component. As discussed by Blanchard and




                                    -   28   -
                                     Table Sb

                  Fraction of Variance Attributed to Innovation
        in Second (Real) Permanent Component -- Mixed
                                                      Real-Monetary Model



 Horizon                      a            I


    1          0.262       0.453        0.021         0.155        0.436
            (.008 .587) (.038 .714) (.001 .258)    (.043 .716) (.002 .537)
   4           0.443       0.664        0.032         0.205       0.454
            (.147 .742) (.236 .826) (.019 .283)    (.080 .744) (.005 .585)
   8           0.562        0.697        0.045        0.221       0.428
            (.267 .715) (.228 .801) (.027 .300)    (.102 .730) (.004 .571)
  12           0.652       0.742        0.061         0.244        0.391
            (.266 .735) (.211 .825) (.034 .289)    (.118 .742) (.003 .542)
  16           0.730      0.799        0.110          0.228       0.352
            (.245 .769) (.214 .856) (.053 .318)    (.107 .764) (.003 .515)
  20          0.784        0.843       0.158          0.196        0.311
            (.249 .810) (.233 .872) (.068 .347)    (.091 .765) (.003 .468)

              1.000       1.000        1.000         0.137        0.00

Notes: See the notes to Table 3.
         0.06


    F 8.04
    0
    R
    £
        8.82
    S
    T

         0.80
    R
    0
    R
        —0.02
    H
    P
        —0.04
    C
    a
    H
    T —0.06



        —0.08
             55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85
                                       DATE




                                  Figure 3
          Historical decomposition of GNP Forecast Error, Eight Quarters Ahead
                  Based on the five variable common trends model

          Total luMP forecast error
—   .- — - Forecasterror attributable to the real permanent factor
Watson (1986), the former series closely resembles the popular notion of the

postwar U.S. "business cycle," with turning points coinciding with NBER-dated

cyclical peaks and troughs. The error attributed to the real permanent

component tracks the total forecast error rather closely. In particular, the

real permanent component appears to have played an important role in the

expansion of the 1960's, in the 1975 recession, and in the short recession of

early 1980. In contrast, this series explains little of the movement in 1957-

58 and in the more prolonged 1982 downturn.

   The interpretation of    in the first model as a permanent shock requires

that the innovations c span the space of underlying structural disturbances.

If there are a large number of structural disturbances
                                                         generating X, then it
is possible that the estimated permanent innovation is capturing the effects

of a complicated function of these disturbances. Thus if our findings from

Section 4 were spuriously caused by the limited information set, we would

expect to find substantially different results when the information set is

increased. Specifically, if the model of Section 4 is a perfect

characterization of the relationship between y, c and i, then its permanent

component and the second permanent component in Model 2 should be the same.

In fact, the two components are similar, having a correlation of .86.




              6. Analysis of Trend and Stationary Components of GNP



   The expression (3.5) provides a decomposition of      into a permanent (or

trend) and a stationary (or "cyclical") component. These permanent and

cyclical components of CNP, and the innovations    in the underlying




                                    -   29   -
stochastic trends from the five-variable model, are now briefly compared with

some alternative measures of productivity, trend GNP, and cyclical

fluctuations.

  The trend component of GNP, y, is plotted in Figure 4, along with

Denison's (1985) estimate of real potential GNP per capita.19 Despite the

different approaches used to construct the two trend estimates, they are

broadly similar. The three major differences between the two series are the

treatments of the prolonged growth of the 1960's (where the Common Trends

model ascribes more of this growth to a shift in the trend), the 1974

contraction (where again the Common Trends model attributes much of the

decline to a shift in trend GNP), and the slowdown of the late 1970's (in

which Denison's potential CNP is consistently higher than the trend CNP (y)

from the Common Trends model). In addition, the stationary component of CNP

and the unemployment rate are plotted in Figure 5. The correlation between

the stationary component and linearly detrended unemployment is - .53.

   We interpret these broad similarities as checks that our techniques provide

an estimate of "trend" and "cyclical" ClIP that is consistent with what other

researchers, from very different perspectives, take to be "reasonable"

estimates. This is not to suggest that these methods should be used to

detrend economic time series for use in subsequent econometric modeling.

Indeed, a central point of this paper is to show the importance of innovations

in trend components in explaining shorter run "business cycle" fluctuations.

Stated another way, our results suggest that techniques that arbitrarily

separate high and low frequency components of macroeconomic data will miss

important linkages between the two, thereby resulting in misleading

inferences.




                                     -   30   -
         —4.2



         4u13



    i0   —4.4
    0
    ci
    F'

    T
    R
    E
    H
    c    —4.6




         —4.7




         —4.8
            53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 7? 79 81 83 85
                                          DATE




                                   Figure 4
                           Estimates of Annual Trend GNP

-   - - — Denison
                   (1985, Table 2-2)
           Permanent component of GNP from the five variable common trends model
           described in the text.
   P
   E
   R
   C
   E

   I
   N




         53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 95
                                  DATE




                                Figure 5
            Quarterly unemployment and the Stationary Component of GNP


       Unemployment rate
- - - - Stationary component of GNP from the five variable common trends model
       described in the text.
    In the theoretical model of Section 2, the long run movements in aggregate

 variables arise from changes in productivity. Is there any evidence that

 productivity movements are related to innovations in the trend
                                                                           component of
 GNP or, more generally, to
                                It? We investigate this by comparing these
 estimated innovations to a popular measure of the change in total factor

productivity in the economy, the Solow (1957) residual. If the economy can be

 characterized by a Cobb-Douglas production function       -   - as   in the theoretical
model of Section 2 -   - the   Solow residual has the convenient interpretation of

being exactly Alog(A) in (2.2).20           We use two measures of this productivity

residual, Hall's (1986, Table 1) estimate for total manufacturing and

Prescott's (1986) economy-wide estimate based on Hansen's (1984) adjusted

hours series.21 Hall's series is reported annually, and we have aggregated

Prescott's quarterly series to the annual level for comparability.

   The time path of the Solow residual and the change in the permanent

component of GNP from the five variable Common Trend model is
                                                                         plotted in
Figure Ga for Hall's measure and in Figure 6b for Prescott's measure. Visual

examination suggests that the relationship between the Solow residual and

ar2 was stronger in the l970's than it was in the 1950's and 1960's. In

addition, Hall's productivity measure was substantially more volatile than the

innovation in the trend component of CNP in the early period. Overall, the

correlation of the innovation in the real factor with Hall's measure is very

low, .12, and the correlation with Prescott's measure is only .42. Of course,

the Solow residual is an imperfect measure of technical
                                                                change; for example,
Prescott (1986) points to errors in measuring the variables used in its

construction, and Hall (1986) has suggested that this measure of productivity

will misrepresent true technological progress in noncompetitive environments




                                        -   31   -
                                                       Figure Ba
                                                Hell's Lob ma S cf Salow Residual

                   7


                    5


                    3
              P
              E
              R
              C     1
              E
              I
              N
                   —1




                   —3



                   —5
                        53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85
                                                               DATE


- - - - Solow residual (Hall [1986, Table 1])
       Innovation to real permanent component from the five variable common
       trends model described in the text.

                                                        Figure 6b
                                           PRE9OThS TDMTE OF flDW REDUAL

                    4



                    2

               P
               E
               p
               C    0
               E
               N
               I
                   —2




                    —4
                         53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85
    — — — — Solow residual (Prescott 11986])
           Innovation to real permanent component from the five variable common
           trends model described in the text.
                                                          Figure 6.
                                                                                                  residual.
       Innovations in the real permanent component and annual estimates of the Solow productivity
where price exceeds marginal cost. Nonetheless, these results suggest that

 large parts of the movement in the permanent components and in the change in

 trend ON? are not accounted for by changes in
                                                  productivity, particularly in
the early part of the sample, at least as measured by Prescott's and Hall's

series.




                                  7. Conclusions



   The results in this paper suggest that there is an important empirical

relationship in aggregate U.S. data between long run growth and movements over

the one to four year horizon, where "long run" movements are formally

identified by modeling them as random walks with drifts. In particular, the

series we examine are well characterized as having a reduced number of common

stochastic trends, and innovations in these permanent trends seem to be

closely related to temporary economic fluctuations. These results emphasize

that it is important to study the permanent and transitory components of

macroeconomic time series simultaneously, and that analyzing the residuals

obtained after extracting a trend - -   stochastic   or otherwise -   - is   likely to
be misleading.

   Focusing on real per capita GNP, the more important of the permanent

components in our five-variable system is a stochastic trend that we associate

with a shock to the real economy; this component accounted for over one-half

the forecast error variance in ON? at the two year horizon. In contrast, a

permanent nominal shock is of substantially less overall importance in the

evolution of ON?. However, a qualitative examination of the 8-quarter ahead




                                    -    32   -
forecast errors indicates that there are important features of the history of

ON? not explained by movements in the real component, in particular the

fluctuations of the late 1950's and the 1981-2 recession. While it is

tempting to identify the permanent shock to the real economy as an innovation

in productivity, our estimate of this shock is only weakly correlated with two

recent measures of Solow's (1957) productivity residual.




                                    -   33   -
                                       Footnotes




 1. Using a closely related model, Christiano (1987) obtained simulation
 results indicating this positive short-run response of hours to an
 unanticipated productivity improvement.
 2. Extensions to incorporate
                              monetary systems of various sorts have been
undertaken by King and Plosser (1984) and Eichenbauin and Singleton (1986).
The former paper utilizes a conventional
                                         macroeconomic approach, so that the
dynamics of real quantities are not influenced
                                                by incorporation of banking and
currency. In particular, the King-Plosser economy is one in which the
substitution effects of sustained inflation are taken to be small for real
quantities with the exception of
                                 currency and bank deposits. The latter paper
uses a general equilibrium, cash-in-advance framework
                                                       which places greater
stress on the allocative role of banking and
                                             currency, thereby highlighting
the substitution effect of sustained inflation
                                                as higher inflation induces
alterations in the real dynamics of quantities.

3. The estimates are optimal in the sense that they are the linear minimum
mean square estimates formed from current and lagged values of X.

4. Both of these approaches would
                                    require the complicated nonlinear
estimation techniques associated with dynamic factor models or multivariate
unobserved components models, as discussed by Geweke and Singleton (1981),
Watson and Engle (1983), or Harvey (1985).

5. Additional assumption concerning the ordering of
                                                        would be necessary to
compute impulse responss and variance decompositions with respect to these
remaining elements of ,4, although we do not perform such calculations.

6. There are a variety of ways to estimate the cointegrating vectors; Stock
(1984) shows that the OLS estimator based on regressions with contemporaneous
variables are consistent, and Stock and Watson (1986) use principal components
to estimate the cointegrating vectors. Here we use the estimated eigenvectors
corresponding to the smallest n-k roots of the first order autocorrelation
matrix obtained by regressing X against its lag, after detrending the data
with t-, j—O,1,2 (the rationale for the quadratic detrending is given below).
When a pair of complex eigenvectors
                                    (a1,a2) were computed, the cointegrating
vectors were taken be to the real linear combinations,
                                                       a1-i-a2 and
where i—fl.

7. From (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3) it follows that, conditional on c5O for ssO,
                    Combining this with the assumption that
(the kxk iaentity matrix), it follows that C(1)ZC(1)'—A01m'A0. Given estimates
of S an C(l), II therefore
(A6A0Y AoC(l)EC(1)'Ao(Ao)
                          ca   be estimated as the Cholesky factor of
                               . F can be estimated from the




                                   -   34 -
eigenvectors corresponding to the nonzero eigenvalues of C(l), although in
practice it is sometimes easier to use the corresponding eigenvectors of the
symmetric matrix C(1)C(l)'.

8. The Citibase M2 series was used for 1959:1-1985:4; the earlier M2 data was
formed by splicing the M2 series reported in Banking and Monetary Statistics.
1941-1970, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to the Citibase
data in January 1959. We thank Dennis Icraft for his advice in this matter.
The monthly data were averaged to obtain the the quarterly observations.

9. For comparable univariate results obtained using the Phillips-Perron
(1986) test statistic, see Perron (1986).

10. The estimation period was 1953:1 to 1985:IV, using the 1952 observations
for initial conditions.

11. Since the permanent component has a positive drift, the reported impulse
responses are actually deviations from a (common) deterministic time trend.
Thus a permanent response of 1% actually represents a shift upwards of the
long-run growth path by 1%. The confidence intervals for the impulse response
functions and variance decompositions were computed using 500 bootstrap
replications. The procedure is that described for VAR's in Runkle (1987),
except that the basis of the bootstrap was the VECM described in Section 3.

12. This should not be a surprising result. If consumption followed a random
walk with drift, then our model implies that consumption and  are identical.

13. The point estimates measuring the importance to GNP of the permanent
component drop somewhat when the lag length is increased from 4 to 6 (although
they are within the 90% confidence intervals in Table 3), while remaining
roughly unchanged for consumption and investment. For example, at the 8
quarter horizon the permanent component explains 41%, 78% and 20% of y. c and
i, respectively. This measure drops further (for y) when the number of lags
is increased from 6 to 8. However, conventional tests suggest that 4 lags are
adequate, relative to either 6 or 8. For example, the likelihood ratio test
for four lags vs. 8 lags (calculated using the degrees of freedom correction
suggested by Sims [1980]) has a p-value of .36. The F-Statistics for the
individual equations have p-values .59 (CNP), .81 (Consumption), and .32
(Investment).

14. For additional discussion of the power of these tests, see Stock and
Watson (1986, section 7).

15. Specifically, A0=[A01 A02], where A01—(0 0 0 1 1)' and A02—(l 1 1 1 0)'.
Note that (5.2) also can Be written in this form, with A0—[A02 A01], where
A01 and A02 are as defined for (5.1).

16. From the expression in footn1te 7, II can be estimaed nonparametrically
as the Cholesky factor of (AoAOY Ab(2xx(O))An(A6AoY , where
is an estimate the spectral density matrix of     at frequency zero. The
estimate in Table 4 is based on a fourth order VECM approximation to this
spectral density. As an alternative, when t(0) is estimated using a




                                    -   35   -
Bartlett (triangular) window with a truncation point of four autocovariances,
   .04; with a truncation point of 10, ==. 18. In addition, the mean and the
*='-

median of the bootstrapped confidence intervals is less than - .01,
                                                                    suggesting
that the reported estimate in Table 4 is biased downwards. These results
reinforce the conclusion that   is small, but is estimated imprecisely.

17. Confidence intervals for these impulse responses were also calculated,
although they are not reported since they complicate the figures
substantially. Broadly speaking, the confidence intervals for this model are
similar to those calculated for the 3 variable model, indicating rather
imprecise the point estimates.

18. Using a VECM(6), the 8-quarter ahead variance decompositions for
 (y,c,i,m,p) are: first component, (.20 ,.02,.25,.30,. 32); second
component, (.54,.77,.lo,.27,. 42). These estimates are well within the
confidence intervals in Table 5. Using a VECM(8), the real
                                                            component explains
somewhat less of the variability in y and c at horizons 1-20, while the
nominal factor increases in importance. As in the three variable case,
conventional tests indicate that 4 lags are adequate. For example, the
likelihood ratio test for 4 vs. 8 lags (using Sims' [1980] correction) has an
asymptotic p-value of .57. The F-statistics for the individual equations in
the test of 4 vs. 8 lags have p-values of:
                                           y, .45; c, .68; i, .29; m, .23; and
p, .16.

19. Denison's measure of potential output is computed by adjusting actual
output using an Okun's law relationship, adjusting for capacity utilization,
and by making other adjustments such as for labor disputes, the weather, and
the size of the armed forces. Source: Denison (1985), Table 2-4.

20. For recent discussion of Solow's measure of technical progress, see Hall
(1986) or Prescott (1986).

21. We are grateful to Gary Hansen for providing us with his adjusted hours
series and Prescott's Solow residual series.




                                   -   36   -
                                       References

Altug, S., "Gestation Lags and the Business Cycle: An Empirical Analysis,"
   manuscript, University of Minnesota (1994).

Barro, R.J. "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy," Journal
   of Monetary Economics 2 (1976), 1-32.

Beveridge, S., and C.R. Nelson, "A New Approach to Decomposition of Economic
   Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular
   Attention to Measurement of the 'Business Cycle'," Journal of Monetary
   Economics 7 (1981), 151-174.

Blanchard, O.J., and M.W. Watson, "Are Business Cycles All Alike?" in R.J.
   Cordon (ed.), The American Business Cycle, University of Chicago Press:
   Chicago, 1986.

Brock, W.A., and L. Mirman, "Optimal Growth and Uncertainty: The Discounted
   Case," Journal of Economic Theory 4 (1972), 479-513.

Christiano, L., "Why Does Inventory Investment Fluctuate so Much?",
   manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (1986).

Christiano, L., "Is Consumption Insufficiently Sensitive to Innovations in
   Income?," American Economic Review (May 1987), 337-341 (forthcoming)

Denison, E.F., Trends in American Economic Growth. 1929-1982, The Brookings
   Institution: Washington, D.C., 1985.

Dickey, D.A. , and W.A. Fuller, "Distribution of the Estimators for
    Autoregressive Time Series With a Unit Root," Journal of the American
    Statistical Association 74, no. 366 (1979), 427-431.

Eichenbaum, M., and K.J. Singleton, "Do Equilibrium Real Business Cycle
   Theories Explain Postwar U.S. Business Cycles," NBER Macroeconomics Annual
   1986, 91-134.

 Engle, R.F., and C.W.J. Granger, "Dynamic Model Specification with Equilibrium
    Constraints: Co-Integration and Error-Correction," Econometrica 55 no. 2
    (1987), 251-276.

 Fischer, S., "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
    Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy 85 (1977), 191-205

 Fuller, W.A. ,   Introduction   to Statistical Tine Series, New York: Wiley, 1976.

 Ceweke, J. ,and K.J. Singleton, "Maximum Likelihood 'Confirmatory' Factor
    Analysis of Economic Time Series," International Economic Review 22 (1981),
    3 7-54.




                                          -   37   -
 Hall, R.E., "The Relationship Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S.
    Industry," Hoover Institution Discussion Paper #E-86-24 (1986).

 Hansen, C., "Fluctuations in Total Hours Worked:
                                                  A Study Using Efficiency
    Units," Working paper, University of Minnesota, 1984.

 Hansen, G., "Growth and Fluctuations,"
                                        manuscript, University of California,
    Santa Barbara, 1986.

 Harvey, A.C., "Trends and Cycles in Macroeconomic Time Series," Journal of
    Business and Economic Statistics 3 (1985), 216-227.

 King R.C., C.I. Plosser, "Money, Credit and Prices in a Real Business Cycle,"
    American Economic Review 74 (1984), 363-380.

King, R.G., C.I. Plosser, and S.?. Rebelo, "Production,
                                                        Growth, and Business
   Cycles," Working Paper, University of Rochester (1986).

King, R.G. and S.P. Rebelo, "Business Cycles with
                                                  Endogenous Growth,'t Working
   Paper, University of Rochester (1986).

Kydland, S. and E.G. Prescott, "Time to Build and
                                                  Aggregate Fluctuations,"
   Econometrica 50 (1982), 1345-70

Long, J.B., and Plosser, C.I., "Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political
   Economy 91 (1983), 39-69

Lucas, R.E., Jr., "Some International Evidence on
                                                  Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
   American Economic Review 63 (1973), 326-334.

Nelson, C.R., and 0.1. Plosser, "Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic Time
   Series," Journal of Monetary Economics (1982), 129-162.

Phelps, E.S., and J.B. Taylor, "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy under
   Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy 85 (1977), 63-190

Phillips, P.C.B., and P. Perron (1986), "Testing for a Unit Root in Time
   Series Regression," Discussion Paper, Department of Economics, Universite
   de Montreal.

Perron, P. (1986), "Tests of Joint Hypotheses for Time Series Regression with
   a Unit Root," C.R.D.E. Discussion Paper #2086, Universite de Montreal.

Prescott, E.G., "Business Cycle Theory Ahead of Measurement," forthcoming,
   Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, 1986.

Runkle, D., "Vector Autoregressions and Reality," Journal of Business and
   Economic Statistics, forthcoming (1987).

Sims, C.A., "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica 48 (1980), 1-48.

Sims, C.A., J.H. Stock, and M.W. Watson (1986), "Inference in Linear Time




                                    -   38   -
   Series Models with Some Unit Roots," manuscript, Stanford University.

Solow, R.M. ,"Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function," Review
   of Economics and Statistics 39 (1957), 312-320.

Stock, J.H., "Asymptotic Properties of Least Squares Estimators in Error
   Correction Models," Kennedy School of Government Discussion Paper #128D,
   Harvard University, (August 1984); forthcoming, Econometrica.

Stock, J.H. , and M.W. Watson, "Testing for Common Trends," Harvard Institute
   for Economic Research Discussion Paper #1222, (March 1986); revised, Hoover
   Institution Discussion Paper #E872, February 1987.

Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson, "Interpreting the Evidence on Money-Income
   Causality," manuscript, The Hoover Institution, February 1987.

Watson, M.W., "Univariate Detrending Methods with Stochastic Trends," Journal
   of Monetary Economics 18 (1986), 49-75.

Watson, M.W., and R.F. Engle, "Alternative Algorithms for Estimation of
   Dynamic MIMIC, Factor, and Time Varying Coefficient Regression Models,"
   Journal of Econometrics 23 (1983), 385-400.




                                     -   39   -
                                           Appendix
                            Cannon Trends and         Cointegration



   This appendix     presents the derivation of the "common trends" model (3.1)

from Engle and Granger's (1987) cointegrated model. Suppose that the nxl

vector      has a moving average representation in first differences, perhaps

with a nonzero nx]. drift 6:




   (A.l)                     t 5 +

where
        E(ctIX5,sct)_o, E(etcIXs,s.cmax(t,r))..o tr, and =Z, t—r.             Engle and
Granger (1987) define            to be cointegrated if there exists some tixi vector a
such   that a'Xt is stationary; here, this implies that a'S—O and a'C(1)O. We

assume that there are n-k such cointegrating vectors. It will be shown that

   has a common trends representation with k common stochastic trends.

Expanding   (A.1),


   (A.2)              —   X0 +   St + C(1)et    +
                                                    D(L)ct


where Dj_-X7_+iG1 and Et=E51c5 so that                  is a nxl random walk with

serially uncorrelated innovations e. Since a'S=O and a'C(l)—O, the

cointegrating residual or "error correction" term has the representation,



  (A.3)          a'Xt — a'X0 +       a'D(L)€t




                                           -   40 -
   To derive the common trends representation from (A.2), note that since C(l)

has rank k, it has n-k eigenvalues that equal zero.                Let H1JH denote the
                                                                    1
Jordan canonical form of C(l), where the columns            of 11       are the eigenvectors

of C(l) and 3 is a block diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues of C(1) on its

diagonal. Since C(l) has rank k, it has n-k zero eigenvalues and 3 can be

partitioned as:


                        3110                                            Hi
                                ,
                                    H1=      (111112)
                        0   0                                           112




where l1 is a nonsingular kxk matrix and where H and                          are partitioned

conformably with 3, so that H1 is kxn. Note that H1C(1)=J11H1 and H2C(1)—0.

Thus the rows of 112 are a basis of the cointegrating vectors of X.                     With

these definitions, C(1)E=H'JHe=H'J,1Hl€. By the definition of

cointegration, since ct'6=O and a'C(l)=O, 6 must also lie in the column space

 of H', so that it can be written as 6=Htp, where p is some kxl vector.

 Combining these expressions for C(1)e and 6, (A.2) can be written,



                    =       + H1pt + H'J1H1E          +   D(L)ct
                    =                  JuliEt)        + D(L)et
                        X0 + H1(pt
                                   +

    (A.4)           =       + H1 + D(L)ct

 where t=pti1HiEtP+tl+fltt where
    The innovations ,7 have nondiagonal covariance matrix

 EP1tn=JllHlXHjJiffQ. Defining         to be the transformed innovations

            where Q'Q½=Q, Eq77f=I. Thus (A.4) can be rewritten in the

 common trends form,




                                         -   41   -
   (A.5)             '1'   + Art   +
                                       D(L)c

where -y=X0,                            and   A==H1Q½.

   The permanent and transient innovations are related by ntFct, where

FQ½J11H1, so that E?7tcL=FE_QJiiHiE                    Thus the correlation between the

permanent and transitory shocks depends on the nonzero Jordan block of C(1),

its corresponding eigenvectors, and the covariance matrix of the transitory

innovations themselves. In the uiultivariate case considered here, the "factor

loadings" of the different trends are given by H1Q or, in the notation of

(A.5), by A. In the univariate case, this Common Trends representation

reduces to the stationary/nonstationary decomposition
                                                                   proposed by Beveridge
and Nelson (1981).




                                          -   42   -
Number         Author                       Title                                 Date

2173     David Card and              Measuring the Effect of Subsidized         2/87
         Daniel Sullivan             Training Programs on Movements In and
                                     Out of Employment

2174     A. Mitchell Polinsky        Optimal Liability When the Injurer's       3/87
                                     Information About the Victim's Loss is
                                     Imperfect
2175     Sebastian Edwards           Tariffs, Terms of Trade, and the Real      3/87
                                     Exchange Rate in an Intertemporal
                                     Optimizing Model of the Current Account

2176     Jonathan Leonard            Carrots and Sticks: Pay, Supervision       3/87
                                     and Turnover

2177     Jorge Braga de    Macedo    Currency Incontrovertibility, Trade        3/87
                                     Taxes and Smuggling

2178     Dennis Carlton              The Theory and the Facts of How Markets   3/87
                                     Clear: Is Industrial Organization
                                     Valuable for Understanding Macroeconomics?

2179     Sebastian Edwards           Economic Liberalization and the Equil—     3/87
                                     ibrium Real Exchange Rate in Developing
                                     Countries

2180     Douglas Holtz-Eakin         The Revenues—Expenditures Nexus:           3/87
         Whitney Newey and           Evidence From Local Government Data
         Harvey Rosen

2181     Martin S. Eichenbauni and   Estimating Models with Intertemporal Sub— 3/87
         Lars Peter Hansen           stitution Using Aggregate Time Series Data

2182     Kala Krishna                High Tech Trade Policy                       3/87

2183     Stephen Johnson             Can People Compute? An Experimental          3/87
         Laurence J. Kotlikoff and   Test of the Life Cycle Consumption Model

2184     Roger Klein                 Factors Affecting the Output and Quit        3/87
         Richard Spady and           Propensities of Production Workers
         Andrew Weiss

2185     Harry U. Holzer             Hiring Procedures in the Firm: Their         3/87
                                     Economic Determinants and Outcomes

2186     Benjamin M. Friedman        New Directions in the Relationship           3/87
                                     Between Public and Private Debt

2187     Christina D. Romer          Gross National Product, 1909—1928:           3/87
                                     Existing Estimates, New Estimates, and
                                     New Interpretations of World War I and
                                     it's Aftermath
