NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSEHOLD RISK MANAGEMENT
Adriano A. Rampini
S. Viswanathan
Working Paper 22293
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22293

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016, Revised May 2017

We thank Ing-Haw Cheng (WFA discussant), João Cocco (NBER discussant), Mariacristina De
Nardi (NBER discussant), Emmanuel Farhi, Nobu Kiyotaki, David Laibson, David MartinezMiera (CEPR discussant), Alex Michaelides, Martin Oehmke (AFA discussant), Tomek Piskorski
(AEA discussant), Alp Simsek (Wash U discussant), Jeremy Stein, Roberto Steri (FIRS
discussant), George Zanjani, and seminar participants at the AEA Annual Meeting, Duke, the
NBER-Oxford Sa d-CFS-EIEF Conference on Household Finance, the HBS Finance Unit
Research Retreat, the Asian Meeting of the Econometric Society, MIT, UC Berkeley, Harvard,
USC, the WFA Annual Conference, the SED Annual Meeting, the Bank of Canada and Queen's
University Workshop on Real-Financial Linkages, Cheung Kong GSB, Cornell, DePaul,
Princeton, BYU, Carnegie Mellon, Indiana, Wharton, Chicago, Amsterdam, UCL, Imperial
College, Warwick, the CEPR European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the
Washington University Conference on Corporate Finance, the AFA Annual Meeting, Houston,
Minnesota, Illinois, Virginia, the Conference in Honor of Robert M. Townsend, the FIRS
Conference, and the NBER SI on Capital Markets and the Economy for helpful comments. Part
of this paper was written while the first author was visiting the finance area at the Stanford
Graduate School of Business and the economics department at Harvard University and their
hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Adriano A. Rampini and S. Viswanathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Household Risk Management
Adriano A. Rampini and S. Viswanathan
NBER Working Paper No. 22293
May 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. D14,D91,E21,G22,I13
ABSTRACT
Households' insurance against shocks to income and asset values (that is, household risk
management) is limited, especially for poor households. We argue that a trade-off between
intertemporal financing needs and insurance across states explains this basic insurance pattern. In
a model with limited enforcement, we show that household risk management is increasing in
household net worth and income, incomplete, and precautionary. These results hold in economies
with income risk, durable goods and collateral constraints, and durable goods price risk, under
quite general conditions and, remarkably, risk aversion is sufficient and prudence is not required.
In equilibrium, collateral scarcity lowers the interest rate, reduces insurance, and increases
inequality.

Adriano A. Rampini
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
rampini@duke.edu
S. Viswanathan
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
viswanat@duke.edu

1

Introduction

In economics, insurance is typically thought of as trade across states. With limited
enforcement, however, trade across states is linked to intertemporal trade. Indeed, in such
an environment insurance may be better viewed as state-contingent savings as insurance
premia need to be paid in advance. Since insurance is state-contingent saving, savings
and insurance are intimately connected. Households with limited funds may not want
to save and hence may choose to insure less or not at all. We argue that this trade-off
between insurance and financing is a key factor explaining the absence of household risk
management for poor households and the basic relation between insurance and household
income or net worth.
We provide a standard neoclassical model in which households’ ability to promise to
pay is subject to limited enforcement. In our benchmark model there is no collateral
and limited enforcement implies that households have access to complete markets for
state-contingent claims subject to short-sale constraints. We first show that optimal
household risk management of risk averse households whose income (net of expenditures
for health and other non-discretionary spending needs) follows a stationary Markov chain
with positive persistence is increasing in household net worth and income, and incomplete,
even in the long run, that is, under the stationary distribution of household net worth.
Thus, the limited ability to pledge restricts and links financing and risk management.
Given this link, households limit their risk management and may completely abstain
from insurance when their current funds are sufficiently low.
We extend these results to an economy with durable goods that the households can
borrow against, and show that the increasing risk management result generalizes. In practice, beyond consumption needs, households’ primary financing needs are two: purchases
of durable goods and the accumulation of human capital. First, households consume the
services of durable goods, most importantly housing, and the purchase of such goods
needs to be financed. Second, investment in education requires financing, and education
and learning-by-doing imply an age-income profile which is upward sloping on average.
The bulk of financing actually extended to households is for purchases of durable goods.
Indeed, more than 90% of household liabilities are attributable to durable goods purchases, mainly real estate (around 80%) and vehicles (around 6%), and less than 4% of
household liabilities are attributable to education purposes.1 In our model all household
1

Data from the U.S. Flow of Funds Accounts for the first quarter of 2009 shows that home mortgages
are 78% of household liabilities and consumer credit is about 19% and, according to the Federal Reserve
Statistical Release G.19, 12% is non-revolving consumer credit (including automobile loans and nonrevolving loans for mobile homes, boats, trailers, education, or vacations). Data from the 2007 Survey

1

borrowing needs to be collateralized by households’ stocks of durable goods. Since most
household financing is comprised of such loans, our model is plausible empirically. While
households are able to borrow for education only to a limited extent, consistent with our
model, education and learning-by-doing are nevertheless important as they result in ageincome profiles that are upward sloping on average which means that households have an
incentive to borrow against the future using other means, namely, by financing durable
goods.
Furthermore, we consider durable goods price risk, in addition to income risk, and
provide conditions for increasing risk management. Under some assumptions, households
partially hedge income risk but do not hedge durable goods price risk at all. When
households can choose to rent durables as well as buy them, we show that households with
low net worth rent and that renters may hedge high durable goods prices. Shiller (1993)
has argued that markets that allow households to manage their risks would significantly
improve welfare and that the absence of such markets hence presents an important puzzle.
For example, Shiller (2008) writes that “[t]he near absence of derivatives markets for real
estate ... is a striking anomaly that cries out for explanation and for actions to change the
situation.” We provide a rationale why households may not use such markets even if they
exist. And given this lack of demand from households, the absence of such markets may
not be so puzzling after all. The explanation we provide is simple: households’ primary
concern is financing, that is, shifting funds from the future to today, not risk management,
that is, not transferring funds across states in the future. Risk management would require
households to make promises to pay in high income states in the future, but this would
reduce households’ ability to promise to pay in high income states to finance durable goods
purchases today, because households’ total promises are limited by collateral constraints.
Our dynamic model of complete markets subject to collateral constraints allows an explicit
analysis of the connection between financing and risk management, and shows that the
cost of risk management may be too high.
Our economy with income risk only is similar to the classic model of buffer stock
savings of Bewley (1977) and Aiyagari (1994), among others. The main difference is that
this class of models typically assumes that households have access only to risk-free assets
subject to short-sale (or borrowing) constraints, whereas households in our model have
access to state-contingent claims, albeit subject to similar short-sale constraints. The
behavior of state-contingent savings in our model differs from the savings behavior in the
of Consumer Finances on the purpose of debt shows that in 2007, 83% of household debt is due to the
purchase or improvement of a primary residence or other residential property, 6% to vehicle purchases,
less than 4% to education, and 6% to purchases of goods or services not further broken out.

2

standard incomplete markets model. Most notably, risk aversion is sufficient for statecontingent savings to be precautionary, that is, for an increase in uncertainty to lead to an
increase in state-contingent savings. In contrast, with incomplete markets guaranteeing
that an increase in uncertainty increases savings requires assumptions about prudence,
that is, the third derivative of the utility function. Moreover, in our model net worth
next period is monotone increasing in current income given current net worth, whereas
this is not the case in the standard incomplete markets model.
Finally, we study the general equilibrium in the economy with durable goods in which
the market for collateralized claims clears, determining the equilibrium interest rate. If
durable goods are sufficiently collateralizable, collateral is abundant, the interest rate
equals the rate of time preference, and households are fully insured in a stationary equilibrium. Otherwise collateral is scarce, the interest rate is below the rate of time preference, and household insurance is incomplete; the characterization of household risk
management above applies. Moreover, the more scarce collateral is, the lower the interest
rate, the less insurance, and the more wealth and consumption inequality there is in a
stationary equilibrium. An interest rate on collateralized claims below the rate of time
preference corresponds to such claims trading at a “liquidity premium,” as in Holmström
and Tirole (1998, 2011), but in our economy the premium can be positive even when risk
is purely idiosyncratic unlike in their model.
Consistent with the view that financing needs may override risk management concerns, we discuss evidence on U.S. households which suggests that poor (and financially
constrained) households are less well insured against many types of risks, such as health
risks or flood risks, than richer (and less financially constrained) households. Most pertinently, Fang and Kung (2012) study panel data on life insurance coverage and find
that income shocks are a key determinant of individuals’ decisions to maintain or lapse
insurance coverage; specifically, “individuals who experience negative income shocks are
more likely to lapse all coverage.” This within-household variation in insurance coverage
is consistent with the predictions of our model. Furthermore, a similar positive relation
between income and risk management has recently been documented for farmers in developing economies. In addition, there is evidence that firms’ financial constraints affect
corporate risk management. One important consequence of the absence of risk management by constrained households and firms is that such households and firms are then
more susceptible to shocks.
We show how to derive the collateral constraints in our model from an environment
with limited enforcement in the spirit of Kehoe and Levine (1993) and Kocherlakota
(1996). However, while these models assume that households can be excluded from in-

3

tertemporal trade if they default on their promises, in our model enforcement is more
limited as households cannot be excluded from financial markets, which is similar to the
limits on enforcement considered by Chien and Lustig (2010) in an endowment economy.
In our environment, the optimal dynamic contract can be implemented with complete
markets in one-period ahead Arrow securities subject to state-by-state collateral constraints. This rather tractable decentralization of the optimal contract is similar in spirit
to the decentralization in Alvarez and Jermann (2000), but the borrowing constraints are
more straightforward as borrowing is simply constrained to be no more than a fraction
of the value of household’s durable assets in each state next period, whereas the endogenous solvency constraints in their model are history-dependent. Our decentralization is
hence very similar to the market structure in the standard incomplete markets model
except of course that it allows contingent claims. Our main contribution is a general
characterization of dynamic household insurance behavior.2
Much of the economics literature on insurance has focused on moral hazard (Holmström (1979)) and adverse selection (Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976)) as barriers to insurance. While these frictions are important, we consider limited enforcement as the only
friction in our model in order to focus on the relation between intertemporal trade and
insurance across states. This allows us to characterize the dynamic behavior of savings
and insurance analytically and obtain global characterization results. We also abstract
from life-cycle patterns for the sake of analytical tractability. Further, one might consider
behavioral issues, such as hyperbolic discounting or optimism, and financial literacy as
reasons for underinsurance. However, the challenge for all these theories is that they do
not predict the relation between insurance and net worth in the cross section of households
and within households over time.
We think our model applies to both aggregate shocks, such as earthquakes, floods,
or house prices, and idiosyncratic shocks, such as death, health shocks, accidents, fire,
or disability. In the model, all shocks are priced in a risk-neutral way, so to the extent
that the shocks are aggregate, this is clearly a simplifying assumption, although our basic
insight would carry over to an environment where aggregate risk is priced. Moreover, we
model the shocks directly as income shocks, which should be interpreted as income net of
non-discretionary expenditure shocks for health, accidents, fire, and so forth. One could
argue that such expenditures and events are to a large extent observable and indeed
we assume this throughout, thus abstracting away from other agency problems. This
allows us to focus on the novel aspect of our model, the connection between financing
2

Alvarez and Jermann (2000) and Chien and Lustig (2010) focus on the implications of limited
enforcement for asset pricing.

4

and insurance. Finally, while incomplete markets models allow for intertemporal consumption smoothing, they do not allow an analysis of insurance per se. Indeed, Kaplan
and Violante (2010) find that households in the data have access to more consumption
insurance against permanent earnings shocks than a calibrated life-cycle version of the
standard incomplete-markets model suggests and call for alternative models of household
insurance. We provide such a model based on limited enforcement.
In related work, Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013) study the relation between
financing and risk management for firms in an environment with risk neutral entrepreneurs
and a concave production function.3 They show analytically that severely constrained
firms do not hedge at all, but the fact that firms with higher net worth also invest more
does not allow a more general analytical characterization. In contrast, our model with risk
averse households allows us to prove much more general results. Specifically, we provide
a general characterization of the relation between insurance and net worth and show that
insurance is increasing in net worth globally under quite general conditions. Moreover,
our global results use only risk aversion, whereas their result requires the assumption that
the production function satisfies an Inada condition. In addition, we consider household
insurance in general equilibrium here. Finally, our analysis of the case of an endowment
economy makes the basic trade-off between savings and insurance especially stark.
Section 2 analyzes household income risk management in an economy with income
risk only, derives the basic increasing household risk management result, and shows that
households’ state-contingent savings are precautionary. Section 3 extends the model to
an economy with durable goods and shows how the increasing risk management result
generalizes. Section 4 studies the general equilibrium in the market for collateralized
claims in the economy with durable goods. Durable goods price risk management is
analyzed in Section 5. This section also considers households’ ability to rent durable goods
and the interaction between the rent vs. buy decision and risk management.4 Section 6
reviews the evidence on household insurance. Section 7 concludes. All proofs are in
Appendix A. An online appendix provides a comparison to the standard buffer stock
savings model with incomplete markets.
3

The rationale for risk management in their model is that the value function of a firm subject to
financial constraints is concave in net worth, making the firm effectively risk averse.
4
Two recent studies consider the asset pricing implications of housing in endowment economies with
similar preferences over two goods, (nondurable) consumption and housing services with a frictionless
rental market for housing: Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005) study the role of solvency constraints
similar to ours and Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) analyze the frictionless benchmark.

5

2

Household Income Risk Management

In this section we consider household income risk management in an endowment economy.
We show that optimal household income risk management is incomplete and monotone
increasing in the households’ net worth, that is, richer households are better insured.
Moreover, we show that household risk management is precautionary, that is, increases
when uncertainty is higher, and that there is a sense in which “the poor can’t afford
insurance.” Finally, we characterize household risk management in the long run.

2.1

Household Finance in an Endowment Economy

Consider household income risk management in an endowment economy. Time is discrete
P
t
and the horizon is infinite. Households have preferences E [ ∞
t=0 β u(ct )] where we assume
that β ∈ (0, 1) and u(c) is strictly increasing, strictly concave, continuously differentiable,
and satisfies limc→0 uc (c) = ∞ and limc→∞ uc (c) = 0. Households’ income y(s) follows
a Markov chain on state space s ∈ S with transition matrix Π(s, s0 ) > 0 describing the
transition probability from state s to state s0 , and ∀s, s+ , s+ > s, y(s+ ) > y(s) > 0.
We interpret household income as net of non-discretionary spending needs for health,
accidents, and other such shocks.5 We use the shorthand y 0 ≡ y(s0 ) for income in state s0
next period wherever convenient and analogously for other variables. Moreover, let s =
min{s : s ∈ S} and s̄ = max{s : s ∈ S} and analogously for y and ȳ and let S also denote
the cardinality of S in a slight abuse of notation.
Lenders are risk neutral and discount the future at rate R−1 > β, that is, are patient
relative to the households, and have deep pockets and abundant collateral in all dates
and states; lenders are thus willing to provide any state-contingent claim at an expected
return R.6 Thus we take the interest rate R as given for now. We endogenize the interest
rate in general equilibrium in Section 4.7
Enforcement is limited as follows: households can abscond with their income and
cannot be excluded from markets for state-contingent claims in the future. Extending
the results in Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013) to this environment, we show in
Appendix B that the optimal dynamic contract with limited enforcement can be imple5

A significant cost of health shocks may be to force reduced labor force participation, reducing income.
We discuss the case in which R = β −1 in the online appendix. In models of buffer stock savings with
idiosyncratic risk and incomplete markets, Bewley (1977), Huggett (1993), Aiyagari (1994), and others
show that aggregate asset holdings are finite only if R−1 > β in equilibrium.
7
The general equilibrium in Section 4 applies to an economy with durable goods, which serve as
collateral backing households’ collateralized state-contingent claims, whereas in the endowment economy
considered in this section we require outside lenders supplying claims.
6

6

mented with complete markets in one-period ahead Arrow securities subject to short-sale
constraints (which are a special case of collateral constraints).8
In some parts of the analysis, we consider Markov chains which exhibit the following
notion of positive persistence:
Definition 1 (Monotone Markov chain). A Markov chain Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically monotone, if it displays first order stochastic dominance (FOSD), that is, if ∀s, s+ , ŝ0 , s+ > s,
P
P
0
0
s0 ≤ŝ0 Π(s+ , s ) ≤
s0 ≤ŝ0 Π(s, s ).
This definition requires that the distribution of states next period conditional on current state s+ first order stochastically dominates the distribution conditional on current
state s, for all s+ > s. A Markov chain which is independent over time, that is, satisfies
Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s ∈ S, is stochastically monotone.9 Arguably, such positive persistence
in household income is plausible empirically.
The household solves the following recursive problem by choosing (non-negative) consumption c and a portfolio of Arrow securities h0 for each state s0 (and associated net
worth w0 ) given the exogenous state s and the net worth w (cum current income),
v(w, s) ≡

max

c,h0 ,w0 ∈R+ ×R2S

u(c) + βE[v(w0 , s0 )|s]

(1)

subject to the budget constraints for the current and next period, ∀s0 ∈ S,
w ≥ c + E[R−1 h0 |s],

y 0 + h0 ≥ w0 ,

(2)
(3)

and the short-sale constraints, ∀s0 ∈ S,
h0 ≥ 0.

(4)

Since the return function is concave, the constraint set convex, and the operator
defined by the program in (1) to (4) satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient conditions, there exists
8

These one-period ahead Arrow securities are akin to the cash-in-advance contracts in Bulow and
Rogoff (1989). Krueger and Uhlig (2006) provide a model of competitive risk sharing and switching costs
and obtain short sale constraints, a special case of the collateral constraints in our model, in the limit as
switching costs go to zero. Alvarez and Jermann (2000) provide a decentralization with complete markets and endogenous solvency constraints for economies with limited enforcement as in Kehoe and Levine
(1993) and Kocherlakota (1996). The outside option in their model is exclusion from intertemporal markets and implies solvency constraints that are agent and state specific, whereas our outside option without
exclusion results in simple short-sale and collateral constraints with a straightforward decentralization;
Chien and Lustig (2010) consider this type of outside option in an endowment economy.
9
For a symmetric two-state Markov chain, stochastic monotonicity is equivalent to assuming that
Π(s̄, s̄) = Π(s, s) ≡ p ≥ 1/2, that is, that the autocorrelation ρ is positive, as ρ = 2p − 1 ≥ 0.

7

a unique value function v which solves the Bellman equation. The value function v
is strictly increasing, strictly concave, and differentiable everywhere.10 Denoting the
multipliers on the budget constraints (2) and (3) by µ and βΠ(s, s0 )µ0 , respectively, and
the multipliers on the short-sale constraints (4) by βΠ(s, s0 )λ0 , the first order conditions
are
µ = uc (c),

(5)

µ0 = vw (w0 , s0 ),

(6)

µ = βRµ0 + βRλ0 .

(7)

We have ignored the non-negativity constraint on consumption since it is slack. The
envelope condition is vw (w, s) = µ.

2.2

Increasing Household Risk Management

We first show that household risk management is increasing in household net worth. In
particular, the set of states that the households hedge is increasing in net worth and
richer households’ net worth and consumption distribution next period dominate those
of poorer households. Richer households moreover spend more on hedging.
Proposition 1 (Increasing household risk management). Let w+ > w and denote variables associated with w+ with a subscript +. Given the current state s, ∀s ∈ S, we have:
(i) The set of states that the household hedges Sh ≡ {s0 ∈ S : h(s0 ) > 0} is increasing in
0
≥ w0 and c0+ ≥ c0 ,
w, that is, Sh+ ⊇ Sh . (ii) Net worth and consumption next period w+
0
and c0+ statewise dominate and hence FOSD w0 and c0 , respectively;
∀s0 ∈ S, that is, w+
moreover, h0+ ≥ h0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, and E[h0+ |s] ≥ E[h0 |s]. Consumption across the hedged
states Sh is constant, that is, c0 = ch , ∀s0 ∈ Sh , and ch is strictly increasing in w.
Note that Proposition 1 does not impose any additional structure on the Markov
process for income and hence does not determine which states are hedged. If we further assume that the Markov chain is stochastically monotone, then we can show that
households hedge a lower interval of income realizations. Moreover, with this assumption
10

See Theorem 9.6 and 9.8 in Stokey and Lucas with Prescott (1989). To see the differentiability,
following Lemma 1 in Benveniste and Scheinkman (1979) define v̂(ŵ, s) ≡ u(ŵ − E[R−1 h0 (w, s)|s]) +
βE[v(w0 (w, s), s0 )|s] where h0 (w, s) and w0 (w, s) are optimal at (w, s). Note that c(w, s) > 0 and hence
there exists a neighborhood N of w such that v̂ is a strictly concave differentiable function with the
property that v̂(w, s) = v(w, s) and v̂(ŵ, s) ≤ v(w, s) for all ŵ in N . Therefore, v is differentiable at w
with derivative uc (c(w, s)); indeed, by the Theorem of the Maximum, c is continuous in w and hence
v(w, s) is continuously differentiable.

8

household risk management is increasing in both net worth w and the current state s,
that is, income.
Proposition 2 (Increasing household risk management with stochastic monotonicity).
Assume that Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically monotone. (i) The marginal value of net worth
vw (w, s) is decreasing in s. (ii) The household hedges a lower interval of states, if at all,
given w and s, that is, Sh = {s0 , . . . , s0h }; net worth next period w0 , hedging h0 , the interval
of states hedged Sh , and hedged consumption next period ch are all increasing in w and s,
∀s, s0 ∈ S. (iii) If moreover Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 ∈ S, then w(s0 ) = wh , ∀s0 ∈ Sh , and
wh is increasing in w, and the variance of net worth w0 and consumption c0 next period
is decreasing in w.
The key to the result is the fact that the marginal value of net worth vw (w, s) is
decreasing not just in w, as before, but also in the state s.11 Stochastic monotonicity
means that if the household is in a higher state today, holding current net worth w
constant, then the household’s income next period is higher in a FOSD sense. This reduces
the cost of hedging to a given level for each state next period, as hedging decreases with
the state, and hedging the same amount becomes less costly. The household partially
consumes the resources that are thus freed up and partially uses them to buy additional
Arrow securities, that is, purchase more insurance, allowing the household to consume
more in the hedged states next period.12 Thus, there is a sense in which richer households
are better insured.
Positive persistence in the income process means that a high income realization reduces
the marginal value of net worth for two reasons: first, high current income raises current
net worth, which lowers the marginal value of net worth due to concavity; and second, a
high current income implies higher expected future income, further reducing the marginal
value of net worth by the mechanism described above.13
11

The proof is of technical interest as we prove that the marginal value of net worth is (weakly) decreasing in s by showing that the Bellman operator maps functions satisfying this property into functions
satisfying the property as well, and that the unique fixed point must satisfy the property, too.
12
In state s+ > s, the household is therefore (weakly) better insured for all states next period, h0+ ≥ h0 ,
while at the same time the household’s insurance expenditures are lower, E[R−1 h0+ |s+ ] ≤ E[R−1 h0 |s]; this
is possible because the household’s insurance purchases are decreasing in s0 and stochastic monotonicity
implies that the same portfolio of Arrow securities is cheaper at s+ than at s.
13
In contrast, in a production economy with technology shocks, positive persistence has two effects
which go in opposite directions: on the one hand, high current productivity implies high cash flow and
thus raises current net worth, which lowers the marginal value of net worth due to the concavity of the
value function; on the other hand, high current productivity increases the expected productivity which
means firms would like to invest more, and this effect in turn raises the marginal value of net worth.

9

Under the additional assumption of independent income shocks, the household ensures
a minimum level of net worth next period, which is increasing in current net worth.
Moreover, the variance of both net worth and consumption next period is decreasing in
current net worth, that is, there is a strong sense in which richer households are better
insured.14

2.3

Incomplete and Precautionary Household Risk Management

Next we show that household risk management is incomplete and some households do
not hedge at all.
Proposition 3 (Incomplete risk management). Assume that Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically
monotone. (i) At net worth w = y in state s, the household does not hedge at all, i.e.,
λ0 > 0, ∀s0 ∈ S, and Sh = ∅. (ii) At net worth w = ȳ, the household does not hedge the
highest state next period, that is, λ(s̄0 ) > 0 and Sh ( S, ∀s ∈ S.
At net worth y (and in state s) the household does not insure at all, which can be
interpreted as saying that “the poor can’t afford insurance.” We emphasize that all
households could buy any state-contingent claims they want, but that households with
low net worth choose not to. Thus, it is not that poor households cannot insure, but
rather that they choose not to given their low net worth; it is in this sense that they
cannot afford to buy insurance. Moreover, even at net worth ȳ, the household does not
engage in complete risk management, and since hedging is increasing, the household does
not hedge the highest state for any level of wealth w ≤ ȳ.
Figure 1 illustrates Propositions 2 and 3 for an economy with an independent, symmetric two state Markov chain. The top left panel illustrates that household risk management
is increasing, with the bottom left panel showing that consumption is concave in wealth
and hence richer households actually spend a larger fraction of their budget on Arrow
securities to hedge future income shocks.
Thus there are two competing effects when productivity shocks have positive persistence and if the second
effect is sufficiently strong, firms hedge states with high productivity.
14
If income is lower in downturns and risk management consequently declines, then the cross sectional
variation of consumption can be countercyclical, a property that is of interest due to its asset pricing implications (see, for example, Mankiw (1986) and Constantinides and Duffie (1996)). Storesletten, Telmer,
and Yaron (2004) find that the cross-sectional variation of labor income is countercyclical, and Guvenen,
Ozkan, and Song (2012) find that the left-skewness of idiosyncratic income shocks is countercyclical,
rather than the variance itself, in earnings data from the U.S. Social Security Administration. Rampini
(2004) provides a real business cycle model with entrepreneurs subject to moral hazard in which the
cross sectional variation of the optimal incentive compatible allocation is similarly countercyclical.

10

In our model of income risk management without durable goods, household insurance
can be interpreted as state-contingent savings. The properties of such state-contingent
savings are similar to the properties of savings noted by Friedman (1957) in his famous
treatise A Theory of the Consumption Function (page 39):
“These regressions show savings to be negative at low measured income levels,
and to be a successively larger fraction of income, the higher the measured
income. If low measured income is identified with ‘poor’ and high measured
income with ‘rich,’ it follows that the ‘poor’ are getting poorer and the ‘rich’
are getting richer. The identification of low measured income with ‘poor’ and
high measured income with ‘rich’ is justified only if measured income can be
regarded as an estimate of expected income over a lifetime or a large fraction
thereof.”
In our model, all households have the same expected income in the long run, and therefore
households that are currently poor hedge less, that is, have lower state-contingent savings,
than households that are currently rich, and thus our model yields a “theory of the
insurance function” akin to Friedman’s theory of the consumption function.
How does household risk management behave in the long run, given that households
can accumulate net worth? We show that the model induces a stationary distribution for
household net worth. Under the unique stationary distribution, households never hedge
completely. Notably, households abstain from risk management completely with positive
probability under the stationary distribution. This means that even households whose
current net worth is high, that are hit by a sufficiently long sequence of low income realizations, end up so constrained again that they no longer purchase any Arrow securities,
that is, stop buying any insurance at all.15
Proposition 4 (Household risk management under the stationary distribution). Assume
that Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically monotone. (i) There exists a unique stationary distribution
of net worth. (ii) The support of the stationary distribution is a subset of [w, wbnd ] where
w = y and wbnd ≥ ȳ with equality if Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 ∈ S. (iii) Under the stationary
distribution, household risk management is increasing, incomplete with probability 1, and
completely absent with strictly positive probability.
The bottom right panel of Figure 1 illustrates Proposition 4 for an independent two
state Markov chain as in the example above. This panel displays the unconditional
15

In the model with incomplete markets, Schechtman and Escudero (1977) provide conditions under
which households run out of buffer stock savings with positive probability.

11

stationary distribution whose support is between the low income realization (y = 0.8 in
the example) and the high income realization (ȳ = 1.2). The household never hedges
the high state next period, which means the household’s net worth conditional on a high
realization is always w(s̄0 ) = ȳ. The household does hedge low realizations of income, at
least as long as net worth is sufficiently high, so starting from net worth ȳ low income
realizations decrease the household’s net worth gradually over time; the probability mass
decreases at a rate π(s) in this range. Eventually, the household stops hedging, and
subsequent realizations result in net worth y until a high income realization lifts the
household’s net worth again.
When βR = 1, we show in the online appendix that households are unconstrained and
fully insured in the limit, but their net worth remains finite, in contrast to the models
with incomplete markets in which households accumulate infinite buffer stocks to smooth
consumption in the limit. Thus, the extra flexibility that state-contingent savings in our
model affords households dramatically reduces their incentives to accumulate wealth. We
emphasize that household risk management is incomplete and increasing even in this case,
albeit only in the transition.
Finally, we show that household risk management is precautionary in the sense that a
mean preserving spread in income leads the household to increase the expenditure on risk
management when income shocks are independent over time. Remarkably, risk aversion
alone is sufficient for this result.
Proposition 5 (Precautionary state-contingent saving). Assume that Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ),
∀s0 ∈ S, and suppose π̃(s0 ) is a mean-preserving spread of π(s0 ). Then Ẽ[h̃0 ] ≥ E[h0 ],
where Ẽ is the expectation operator and h̃0 is optimal risk management given π̃(s0 ).
Thus, state-contingent saving is precautionary without additional assumptions about
preferences, whereas saving in the Bewley (1977) economy with incomplete markets is
guaranteed to be precautionary only if preferences display prudence, that is, the marginal
utility of consumption is convex in consumption. We provide a more explicit comparison
to the standard buffer stock savings problem in the online appendix.
Since the household increases the expenditure on risk management when risk increases,
the household must consume less today. In fact, one can show that the household ends
up consuming less in each date and state going forward:
Corollary 1 (Consumption implications of precautionary state-contingent saving). Given
the assumptions of Proposition 5 and given net worth w, precautionary state-contingent
saving implies for consumption that c̃ ≤ c, c̃0 ≤ c0 , and indeed c̃(st ) ≤ c(st ) for any
subsequent history st and time t.
12

3

Household Risk Management with Durable Goods

This section extends our model of household finance to include durable goods that provide
consumption services. Durable goods can serve as collateral for households’ promises to
pay. Durable goods allow consumption smoothing to some extent, but are associated with
additional financing needs at the same time. The increasing household risk management
results generalize to this environment to a large extent. Moreover, we extend the model
to consider the financing of education and investment in human capital.

3.1

Household Finance with Durable Goods

Consider an extension of the economy of Section 2 with two goods, (non-durable) consumption c and durable goods k, which in practice comprise mainly housing. The environment, income process, and lenders are as before, but households have separable
P
t
preferences E[ ∞
t=0 β {u(ct ) + g(kt )}] where g(k) is strictly increasing, strictly concave,
and satisfies limk→0 gk (k) = +∞ and limk→∞ gk (k) = 0.
Durable goods depreciate at rate δ ∈ (0, 1) and the price in terms of consumption
goods is assumed to be constant and normalized to 1, ∀s ∈ S. Households can adjust
their durable goods stock freely, but there is no rental market for durable goods and
households have to purchase durable goods to consume their services. Durable goods
are also used as collateral as we discuss below. We consider durable goods price risk in
Section 5 and analyze the implications of households’ ability to rent durables as well as
purchase durables and borrow against them in Section 5.2.
Enforcement is limited as follows: households can abscond with their income and a
fraction 1 − θ of durable goods, where θ ∈ (0, 1), and cannot be excluded from markets
for state-contingent claims or durable goods.16 As before, one can show that the optimal
dynamic contract with limited enforcement can be implemented with complete markets
in one-period Arrow securities subject to collateral constraints that limit the household’s
state-contingent promises b0 in state s0 next period as follows: θk(1 − δ) ≥ Rb0 , ∀s0 ∈ S.17
The simplest and equivalent formulation of the household’s problem is to assume that
the household levers durable assets fully, that is, borrows b̂0 = R−1 θk(1 − δ), ∀s0 ∈ S,
and purchases Arrow securities in the amount h0 = θk(1 − δ) − Rb0 , ∀s0 ∈ S. Under this
equivalent formulation, the collateral constraints on b0 reduce to short-sale constraints
16

One interpretation of this assumption for housing, for example, is that it takes time to foreclose on
borrowers who default and hence it is as if households abscond with some fraction of housing services.
17
These collateral constraints are reminiscent of the ones in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) but allow
state-contingent claims and can be explicitly derived in our model by extending the proof in Appendix B
to the case with durable goods.

13

on h0 . Moreover, since the household borrows as much as possible against durable assets,
the household pays down ℘ ≡ 1 − R−1 θ(1 − δ) per unit of durable assets purchased only,
where ℘ can be interpreted as the minimal down payment required from the household
to purchase a unit of the durable asset.
The household solves the following recursive problem by choosing (non-negative) consumption c, (fully levered) durable goods k, and a portfolio of Arrow securities h0 for each
state s0 (and associated net worth w0 ) given the exogenous state s and the net worth w
(cum current income and durable goods net of borrowing),
v(w, s) ≡

max

c,k,h0 ,w0 ∈R2+ ×R2S

u(c) + βg(k) + βE[v(w0 , s0 )|s]

(8)

subject to the budget constraints for the current and next period, ∀s0 ∈ S,
w ≥ c + ℘k + E[R−1 h0 |s],

y 0 + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ) + h0 ≥ w0 ,

(9)
(10)

and the short-sale constraints (4), ∀s0 ∈ S.
The return function u(c) + βg(k) includes the service flow of durables purchased this
period for use next period, which is deterministic given purchases of durables this period.
This definition of the value function and net worth allows us to formulate the problem
with only one endogenous state variable, net worth w.18 Defining the multipliers as before,
the first order conditions are (5) through (7) and
℘µ = βgk (k) + E[βµ0 (1 − θ)(1 − δ)|s],
or written as an investment Euler equation for durable goods
 0

µ (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
gk (k) 1
s .
+E β
1=β
µ ℘
µ
℘

(11)

(12)

The first term on the right hand side is the service flow of the durable goods purchased
this period and consumed next period, that is, the “dividend yield” of durables, and the
second term on the right hand side is the return from the resale value of durables net of
borrowing. Since durables are fully levered, k(1 − δ) − Rb̂0 = (1 − θ)k(1 − δ). The down
payment requirement ℘ = 1 − R−1 θ(1 − δ) is in the denominator as this is the amount of
net worth the household has to invest per unit of durable assets.
18

Arguing analogously to before, there exists a unique value function which is strictly increasing,
strictly concave, and everywhere differentiable. There is no need to impose non-negativity constraints
on consumption and durable goods as these are slack given our preference assumptions.

14

3.2

Increasing Household Risk Management with Durable Goods

A key aspect of durable goods is that purchases of durables force the household to save,
as the household cannot pledge the full resale value. Indeed, if the household were able
to pledge the full resale value, that is, if θ were 1, then durable goods purchases this
period would not affect net worth next period as k would not appear in equation (10).
The choice between non-durable consumption c and durable goods k reduces to a withinperiod problem given consumption expenditures ĉ which induces an indirect utility function û(ĉ) ≡ maxc,k u(c) + βg(k) subject to ĉ ≥ c + ℘k, where û inherits the properties of
u and g. Therefore, Propositions 1 to 5 apply without change when θ = 1, that is, household risk management is increasing, incomplete, and precautionary, and is completely
absent with positive probability under the stationary distribution.
With durable goods and θ ∈ (0, 1), household risk management is increasing in net
worth in the sense that the household’s net worth w0 next period is strictly increasing in
current net worth. Unlike in the economy with income risk only in Section 2, we can no
longer conclude that the household’s purchases of Arrow securities necessarily increase
in wealth, as the household also buys more durables which increases its net worth next
period.
For a monotone Markov chain we can again show that the marginal value of net worth
vw (w, s) decreases in state s. Therefore, households hedge a lower set of income realizations and, among the states they hedge, hedge worse income realizations strictly more.
With independence of the income process, household risk management is incomplete under the stationary distribution.
Proposition 6 (Household risk management with durable goods and stochastic monotonicity). Assume that Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically monotone. (i) The marginal value of net
worth vw (w, s) is decreasing in s. (ii) The household hedges a lower interval of states,
if at all, given w and s, that is, Sh = {s0 , . . . , s0h }, and h0 is strictly decreasing in s0 on
Sh . Consumption c, durable goods k, and net worth next period w0 are strictly increasing
in w, given s; consumption c is also increasing in s, given w. (iii) For w sufficiently
low, h0 = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S. (iv) If moreover Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 ∈ S, then w(s0 ) = wh ,
∀s0 ∈ Sh , and wh is strictly increasing in w. For w ≤ w̄, the household never hedges the
highest state next period, h(s̄0 ) = 0, where w̄ is the highest wealth level attained under the
stationary distribution.
Part (iii) shows that if a household’s financing needs are sufficiently strong, then
financing needs override hedging concerns. Since the budget constraint next period
(10) binds in all states and purchases of Arrow securities are limited by short-sale con15

straints (4), we know that net worth w0 in state s0 next period is bounded below, namely,
w0 ≥ y 0 + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ) > y 0 ,
for all states s0 , due to households’ limited ability to promise. But this means that the
household must be collateral constrained against all states s0 next period if the household’s
current net worth w is sufficiently low, since the marginal value of net worth next period
must be bounded above.
Households’ limited ability to credibly promise repayment means that households
cannot pledge future income and households’ net worth has to be at least future labor
income. Moreover durable goods purchases require some down payment per unit of capital
from the household and hence implicitly force households to shift additional net worth to
the next period. Both these aspects imply that if current household net worth is relatively
low, the household shifts resources to the present to the extent possible, that is, borrows
as much as possible against durable goods.
Panel A of Figure 2 illustrates Proposition 6 in the case of an independent symmetric
two state Markov process for income. The consumption of both non-durables and durables
are concave in household net worth, consistent with one of the basic stylized facts of the
empirical consumption literature. Hedging is increasing in net worth; indeed, for low net
worth the household does not hedge at all. The household hedges the low state only
once net worth reaches a relatively high level, about the level of the high income in the
example. This is due to the financing needs for the purchases of durable goods, which
force the household to save. At the bottom of the stationary distribution (where w(s0 )
intersects the 45-degree line), the household does not hedge at all. This level of net worth
is also considerably above the low income. The financing needs for durable goods reduce
household risk management. The behavior of the households in our model with durables is
reminiscent of the “hand-to-mouth” households in Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner (2014),
who find that as much as a third or more of U.S. households live effectively hand-to-mouth;
two thirds of these households are “wealthy hand-to-mouth” with sizable illiquid wealth,
primarily in the form of housing, but little or no liquid financial assets.
Panel B of Figure 2 illustrates the effect of collateralizability by considering the example from Panel A except with collateralizability θ = 0.6 instead of 0.8. The effects are
striking. The household reduces consumption of non-durables and durables for given net
worth, which is intuitive as a given durable goods purchase now requires more net worth
(not shown in the figure). Moreover, the household drastically reduces risk management
and does not hedge at all until a much higher level of net worth is reached and even
then, hedges much less. Essentially, the household is forced to save so much to finance its
durable goods purchases that it chooses not to hedge. At the same time, the households’
16

stationary distribution of net worth shifts to the right. This comparative statics result
provides an interesting perspective on the effects of financial development, which we interpret as an increase in collateralizability. Financial development that allows households
to lever durable goods more, results in lower net worth accumulation, which all else equal
would leave households more susceptible to shocks. Thus, by enabling higher leverage,
financial development renders households’ risk management concerns more pertinent.
Panel C of Figure 2 illustrates the effect of persistence on household risk management
by considering the same example except with a Markov process for income with autocorrelation 0.5 instead of 0. When income is persistent, the household consumes more
non-durables and durables in the high state than in the low state, holding net worth
constant (not shown in the figure). Moreover, the household hedges the low state more,
in particular when the current state is high. Thus an increase in persistence increases
household risk management. That said, the household saves less for the high state, in
particular when the current state is low.

3.3

Financing Education

Age-income profiles are upward sloping on average partly because of economic growth
and partly presumably because of learning by doing, that is, skill accumulation with experience. These properties of the labor income process give households further incentives
to borrow as much as they can against their durable goods, such as housing, and thus
exhaust their debt capacity and abstain from risk management.19
Suppose moreover that households are able to invest in education or human capital e.
An amount of education e invested in the current period, which includes both foregone
labor income and direct costs, results in income A0 f (e) in state s0 next period, where
f is strictly increasing and strictly concave, lime→0 fe (e) = +∞, and lime→∞ fe (e) = 0,
and the productivity of human capital A0 > 0, for all s0 ∈ S, is described by a Markov
process also summarized by state s. Human capital depreciates at a rate δe ∈ (0, 1).
Note that households in our model can borrow against neither future labor income nor
human capital, as education capital is inalienable, and can only borrow against durable
goods. The household’s problem is to choose (non-negative) consumption c, (fully levered)
durable goods k, education e, and a portfolio of Arrow securities h0 (with associated net
worth w0 ) for each state s0 given the exogenous state s and net worth w (cum current
income, durable goods net of borrowing, and human capital) to maximize (8) subject to
19

Such age-income profiles can be captured by appropriately specifying the exogenous Markov chain
for income. In this spirit, Krebs, Kuhn, and Wright (2015) study life-cycle patterns in life insurance
coverage in a calibrated model with human capital accumulation and limited enforcement.

17

the budget constraints for the current and next period, ∀s0 ∈ S,
w ≥ c + ℘k + e + E[R−1 h0 |s],

A0 f (e) + e(1 − δe ) + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ) + h0 ≥ w0 ,

(13)
(14)

and the short-sale constraints (4), ∀s0 ∈ S. Note that the household’s problem is still
well behaved, that is, the constraint set is convex.
Proposition 7. In the problem with education, that is, investment in human capital, if a
household’s current net worth w is sufficiently low, the household is constrained against
all states next period and hence does not engage in risk management.
The intuition is that if the household’s net worth is sufficiently low, then the household’s human capital has to be very low, too, and thus the marginal rate of transformation
on investment in human capital must exceed the return on saving net worth for state s0 ,
for all states.
Investment in education is an additional reason why households are likely to have
higher net worth later in life, giving them further incentives to finance as much of their
durable goods purchases as they can, rather than using their limited ability to pledge to
shift funds across states later on.

4

Equilibrium and Effect of Collateral on Insurance

We now consider the general equilibrium in the economy with durable assets and idiosyncratic risk in which the interest rate R is determined to clear the market for statecontingent claims. We show that βR ≤ 1 and that when collateral is scarce, that is, θ
is below some threshold, βR < 1, as we assume throughout the paper. The interest rate
affects not just the cost of collateralized loans, that is, the supply of collateralized claims,
but also the price of state-contingent claims, that is, the demand for collateralized claims.
When collateral is scarce, state-contingent claims are in short supply, lowering the equilibrium interest rate, which is equivalent to collateralized assets trading at a premium as
in Holmström and Tirole (1998, 2011); notably, in contrast to their model, in our model
collateral may be scarce in equilibrium even if the risk in the economy is purely idiosyncratic. Collateral scarcity results in less insurance in equilibrium and more consumption
and wealth inequality. When the collateralizability is sufficiently high, however, βR = 1,
and households are fully insured, in stark contrast to models with incomplete markets in
which βR < 1 always.

18

4.1

Stationary Equilibrium and Aggregation

A stationary equilibrium is an allocation x(z) ≡ {c(z), k(z), h0 (z), w0 (z)} for each household given z ≡ {w, s}, an interest rate R, and a stationary distribution F (z) such that
x(z) solves each household’s problem stated in (8)-(10) and (4), given z, and the market
for state-contingent promises clears, that is,
Z
E[b0 (z)|s]dF (z) = 0,
(15)
z

or, equivalently, the supply of collateralized claims equals the demand for state-contingent
claims h0 (z)
Z
Z
z

θk(z)(1 − δ)dF (z) =

E[h0 (z)|s]dF (z).

(16)

z

State-contingent promises are in zero net supply which is reflected in (15) where we use the
law of large numbers and the assumption that risk is idiosyncratic and independent across
agents. Using the equivalent formulation in which households lever durables fully, that
is, borrow b̂0 = R−1 θk(1 − δ), and purchase Arrow securities h0 = θk(1 − δ) − Rb0 , we can
rewrite (15) as (16); this equation states that the aggregate supply of fully levered claims,
which equals the aggregate supply of collateralized assets, equals the aggregate demand for
Arrow securities. In terms of institutions, we can interpret the market clearing condition
as a competitive representative insurance firm with collateralized loans as assets and a
diversified portfolio of insurance claims as liabilities. The competitive insurer makes zero
profits and prices the contingent claims at their risk neutral price given the equilibrium
interest rate R.
For simplicity, we restrict attention to the case in which households’ income is independent over time. To simplify notation, we define the aggregate quantities W ≡
R
R
R
R 0
0
w(z)dF
(z),
C
≡
c(z)dF
(z),
K
≡
k(z)dF
(z),
and
H
≡
h (z)dF (z). In a staz
z
z
z
tionary equilibrium, we can take the cross-sectional expectation of the budget constraints
for the current period and the expectation of the budget constraints for the next period,
∀s0 ∈ S, (9) and (10), and write these as
W = C + ℘K + E[R−1 H 0 ],
0

0

E[y ] + (1 − θ)K(1 − δ) + E[H ] = W.

(17)
(18)

Using the market clearing condition (16), θK(1 − δ) = E[H 0 ], (17) and (18) imply that
W = C + K = E[y 0 ] + K(1 − δ).

(19)

In a stationary equilibrium, aggregate net worth equals aggregate consumption plus the
value of the aggregate durables stock and also equals the aggregate income plus the
19

aggregate value of the depreciated durables stock. Rewriting the second equality we
conclude that the aggregate income equals aggregate consumption plus the aggregate
investment required to maintain the durables stock, that is,
E[y 0 ] = C + δK.

(20)

This is the resource constraint of the economy.

4.2

Full Insurance in Economy with Abundant Collateral

When the aggregate supply of collateralized assets is sufficiently large, a stationary equilibrium obtains in which βR = 1. When βR = 1, the first order condition for h0 , (7),
implies that µ = µ0 + λ0 ≥ µ0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, and thus in a stationary equilibrium µ = µ0 = µ∗ ;
the marginal value of net worth is constant and equal for all households, that is, there
is full insurance. Equations (5), (6), and (11) imply that consumption c∗ , net worth w∗ ,
and durable goods k ∗ are constant as well. Using the notation R∗ ≡ β −1 and r∗ = R∗ − 1,
the investment Euler equation (12) simplifies to
r∗ + δ =

gk (k ∗ )
,
uc (c∗ )

(21)

implying that the user cost of durable goods equals the marginal rate of substitution
between durables and consumption. Using ℘∗ = 1 − R∗−1 θ(1 − δ), the budget constraints
for the current and the next period, ∀s0 ∈ S, (9) and (10), can be written as
w∗ = c∗ + ℘∗ k ∗ + E[R∗−1 h0∗ ],
y 0 + (1 − θ)k ∗ (1 − δ) + h0∗ = w∗ ,

∀s0 ∈ S.

(22)
(23)

Equations (19) and (20) reduce to w∗ = c∗ + k ∗ = E[y 0 ] + k ∗ (1 − δ) and E[y 0 ] = c∗ + δk ∗ ,
respectively. This last equation and (21) determine c∗ and k ∗ uniquely.
So far we have ignored the restriction that h0∗ ≥ 0, ∀s0 ∈ S. Using (19) to substitute
for w∗ in (23) we obtain h0∗ = θk ∗ (1 − δ) − (y 0 − E[y 0 ]) ≥ 0, ∀s0 ∈ S, which is satisfied for
all s0 ∈ S as long as
y(s̄0 ) − E[y 0 ]
≥ 0,
θ ≥ θ̄ ≡
k ∗ (1 − δ)
where y(s̄0 ) is the income in the highest state. As long as pledegeablity exceeds this lower
bound, which is strictly positive if income is not deterministic, collateral is not scarce
and there is full insurance in the steady state and βR = 1. In contrast, in the analogous
model with exogenously incomplete markets à la Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994) the
interest rate is below the rate of time preference in any equilibrium and the full-insurance
allocation cannot be attained. Further, we can conclude the following in our model:
20

Proposition 8. In equilibrium βR ≤ 1 with equality iff θ ≥ θ̄.
We discuss the equilibrium when collateral is scarce below.

4.3

Effect of Collateral Scarcity on Interest Rate and Insurance

When the aggregate supply of collateralized assets is insufficient, that is, θ < θ̄, collateral
is scarce and the interest rate that clears the market for contingent claims satisfies βR < 1,
as Proposition 8 implies. The intuition is that if βR equalled 1, the households would
fully insure, but then the demand for collateralized assets would strictly exceed the supply.
Appendix C shows that there exists a unique stationary equilibrium in this case.
We demonstrate the effect of the scarcity of collateral on the equilibrium interest rate
and insurance in Figure 3 by varying the collateralizability θ from 0 to values above θ̄. The
top left of Panel A shows that the lower the collateralizability, the lower the interest rate,
and that when the collateralizability exceeds θ̄, βR = 1. The top right of Panel A shows
that the aggregate demand for insurance claims E[H 0 ] in equilibrium increases with the
collateralizability; when θ = 0 the interest rate has to be sufficiently low so households
do not demand insurance claims; the demand for collateralized claims increases with
the collateralizability as the return on insurance claims increases.20 Since the supply
of collateralized claims equals the demand in equilibrium, the supply of collateralized
claims is also strictly increasing in the collateralizability. The bottom left of Panel A
displays the aggregate durable goods stock; lower collateralizability reduces the interest
rate and reduces the user cost of capital, increasing investment; when θ ≥ θ̄, investment
is first-best efficient, in contrast to Aiyagari’s (1994) result in a model with exogenously
incomplete markets where investment is higher in any equilibrium.
The reduced equilibrium purchases of insurance claims mean that households are less
well insured, resulting in a welfare loss, as the bottom right of Panel A shows.21 Reduced
household insurance also implies more inequality, as Panel B illustrates. The top part
shows the net worth distribution associated with various levels of collateralizability. When
collateralizability exceeds θ̄, households are fully insured and the net worth distribution
is degenerate at w∗ . The lower the collateralizability, the less well insured households
are and the more the wealth distribution fans out. Indeed, the standard deviation of net
worth and consumption increase as collateralizability goes down, as the bottom part of
20

The demand for collateralized claims is strictly increasing even when the collateralizability exceeds
θ̄, but this is simply due to the fact that households start to purchase non-contingent claims in our
implementation, effectively reducing leverage.
21
We measure the welfare loss as the equivalent reduction in expected income (in percent) in a deterministic economy that achieves the same welfare.

21

Panel B illustrates. Collateral scarcity due to lower collateralizability reduces insurance
and increases inequality.
Remarkably, the scarcity of collateral can lower the equilibrium interest rate so much
that the frictionless Jorgensonian user cost of durable goods is negative. By rewriting
the investment Euler equation (12), we define the user cost of durable goods (given net
worth w) as


gk (k)
λ0
(1 − θ)(1 − δ) = βR
,
u(w) ≡ r + δ + E βR
µ
µ
that is, the user cost of durable assets to a household with net worth w has two components. The first is the Jorgensonian user cost that would prevail in a frictionless economy,
u ≡ r + δ. The second component is the premium on internal funds, which is the internal
funds (1 − θ)(1 − δ) that have to be put up by the household times the expectation of the
scaled multiplier on the collateral or, equivalently, short-sales constraint λ0 . The marginal
rate of substitution on the right hand side must be strictly positive, but the Jorgensonian
user cost r + δ could be negative in equilibrium, and indeed is negative in our example for
θ sufficiently low (see the top left of Panel A), because the premium on internal funds for
households is positive as they are not fully insured and βR < 1 in such an equilibrium.
Consider the economy with zero collateralizability, that is, θ = 0, and denote the
equilibrium (shadow) interest rate by R(0). At this interest rate, any household must
0
choose not to buy any insurance claims, so 1 ≥ β µµ R(0) with equality for at most one
0
state s0 ; therefore, 1 > E[β µµ R(0)]. Consider now households’ demand for non-contingent
claims; at R(0) that demand is zero and there exists a (shadow) interest rate R̄ > R(0)
0
for which 1 ≥ E[β µµ R̄] with equality for some households. The interest rate that reduces
the demand for insurance claims to zero for all households is therefore strictly lower
than the interest rate that reduces the demand for non-contingent claims to zero. In
this sense, the demand for state-contingent collateralized claims exceeds the demand
for non-contingent collateralized claims at θ = 0. At the same time, state-contingent
collateralized claims conserve collateral and a finite supply of collateralized claims, θ ≥ θ̄,
suffices to accommodate the demand for such claims that allow households to fully insure,
in contrast to incomplete markets economies.
Observe that the economy with durable goods nests the economy with income risk
only which we considered in Section 2 by setting δ = 1.22 Further, we can characterize
22

When δ = 1, the budget constraints for the next period (10) reduce to (3) and, since the down
payment ℘ = 1 and defining ĉ ≡ c + k, using this change of notation the budget constraint for the current
period (9) reduces to (2). Finally, defining û(ĉ) ≡ maxc,k u(c) + βg(k) subject to ĉ ≥ c + k as before,
where ĉ is the consumption expenditure, the objective (8) is identical to (1) except for the change of
notation. The indirect utility function û(·) inherits the properties of u(·) and g(·).

22

the equilibrium interest rate in the economy with income risk only as the limit of the
economy with durable goods when δ → 1.23
In sum, the general equilibrium version of our model provides several novel insights in
addition to endogenizing the assumption that βR < 1 in the rest of the paper: collateral
can be scarce even with purely idiosyncratic risk; collateral scarcity reduces the interest
rate and insurance, increasing inequality; and a finite amount of collateral is sufficient
to achieve the first best, with βR = 1, when markets are complete except for collateral
constraints.

5

Durable Goods Price Risk Management

In this section we consider households’ hedging of durable goods price risk in addition to
income risk. Moreover, we study households’ choice between owning and renting durable
goods and its interaction with the hedging of price risk. We show that financially constrained households choose not to hedge durable goods price risk. Moreover, households’
ability to rent durables leads them to hedge due to the high implied leverage and indeed
can affect the sign of the hedging demand.

5.1

Risk Management and Durable Goods Price Risk

We now consider an economy with durable goods price risk. Suppose the price of durable
goods q(s) is stochastic, where the state s describes the joint evolution of income y(s) and
q(s), and the economy is otherwise the same as in Section 3.24 For simplicity, we take the
price process q(s) and the interest rate R as exogenously given here. As before, we assume
without loss of generality that the household levers durable assets fully, that is, borrows
b̂0 = R−1 θq 0 k(1−δ) against state s0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, and purchases Arrow securities in the amount
h0 , ∀s0 ∈ S. The collateral constraints again reduce to short-sale constraints. Moreover,
since the household borrows as much as possible against durable assets, the household
pays down ℘(s) ≡ q(s) − R−1 θE[q 0 |s](1 − δ) per unit of durable assets purchased only.
23

When δ → 1, the supply of collateralized assets is zero and there is no insurance. The equilibrium
interest rate therefore has to be such that the first order condition for h0 , (7), is satisfied ∀s0 ∈ S without
insurance, and has to be just satisfied for a household with current income ȳ who considers buying claims
for the worst state next period, y, that is, ûc (ȳ) = βRûc (y), implying that the equilibrium interest rate
 û (y) −1
1−γ
1−γ
c
−1
is R = β ûc (ȳ)
= β −1 ûûcc (ȳ)
. In our example, u(c) = c1−γ , g(k) = g k1−γ , and the indirect
(y) < β
1−γ

utility function takes the form û(ĉ) = κ ĉ1−γ where κ is a constant; given the parameters in the numerical
illustration, R ≈ −88%.
24
In Section 3, the price of durable goods is constant and normalized to 1.

23

We assume that q(s) and ℘(s) are increasing in s, although some of our results obtain
more generally.
The household’s problem, formulated recursively, is to choose (non-negative) consumption c, (fully levered) durable goods k, and a portfolio of Arrow securities h0 for
each state s0 (and associated net worth w0 ) given the exogenous state s and the net
worth w (cum current income and durable goods net of borrowing), to maximize (8)
subject to the budget constraints for the current and next period, ∀s0 ∈ S,
w ≥ c + ℘(s)k + E[R−1 h0 |s],

y 0 + (1 − θ)q 0 k(1 − δ) + h0 ≥ w0 ,

(24)
(25)

and the short-sale constraints (4), ∀s0 ∈ S.
Defining the multipliers as before, the first order conditions are (5) through (7) and
℘(s)µ = βgk (k) + E[βµ0 (1 − θ)q 0 (1 − δ)|s].

(26)

The durable goods price affects the down payment ℘(s) in the current period and the
resale value of durable goods next period. If the household cannot pledge the full resale
value of durables, that is, if θ < 1, then durable goods purchases force the household to
implicitly save. Moreover, the household is then exposed to the price risk of durables
in two ways: first, the resale value of durable goods affects the household’s net worth
next period, and second, the durable goods price affects the down payment which in turn
affects the marginal value of net worth. If the household can pledge the full resale value
of durables, that is, if θ = 1, the second term on the right hand side of (26) is zero, and
the first order condition simplifies to ℘(s)µ = βgk (k). In this case, the durable goods
price only affects the household’s problem through the down payment. We are able to
characterize the solution explicitly in the case of isoelastic preferences with coefficient
of relative risk aversion γ ≤ 1: household risk management is increasing. Specifically,
we show that the economy is equivalent to an economy with income risk and preference
shocks. Remarkably, with logarithmic preferences, households do not hedge the durable
goods price risk at all, but may partially hedge income risk. With γ < 1, higher durable
goods prices, and hence higher down payments, reduce the marginal value of net worth
as the substitution effect dominates the income effect. And vice versa, lower house prices
amount to investment opportunities and raise the marginal value of net worth.
Proposition 9. Suppose θ = 1 and preferences satisfy u(c) = c1−γ /(1 − γ) and g(k) =
gk 1−γ /(1 − γ) where γ > 0 and g > 0. (i) If γ = 1 (logarithmic preferences), then
v(w, s) = (1 + βg)v̂(w, s) + vϕ (s), where v̂(w, s) solves the income risk management
24

problem (without durable goods) in equations (1) through (4) and vϕ (s) is an exogenous
function defined in the proof. Household risk management is increasing in the sense of
Propositions 1 and 2 and the household does not hedge durable goods price risk at all.
(ii) For γ 6= 1, the problem is equivalent to an income risk management problem in an
economy with preference shocks where û(ĉ, s) = φ(s)u(ĉ) with ĉ and φ(s) defined in the
proof. Household risk management is increasing in the sense of Proposition 1. Moreover,
if Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically monotone, ℘(s) is increasing in s, and γ < 1, then the marginal
value of net worth vw (w, s) is decreasing in s, the household hedges a lower set of states,
and w0 , h0 , and Sh are all increasing in w and s, ∀s, s0 ∈ S.
More generally, when θ < 1, a drop in the durable goods price lowers the household’s
net worth and hence raises the marginal utility of net worth, and, when γ < 1, the low
durable goods price may further raise the marginal utility of net worth. Thus, households
likely hedge low durable goods prices in this case. In contrast, when γ > 1, a drop in the
durable goods price has two opposing effects, on the one hand lowering net worth and
on the other hand raising the marginal utility of net worth due to the price effect. This
additional effect reduces the household’s hedging demand. Under plausible parameterizations, the direct effect on net worth arguably dominates nonetheless, but this is of course
a quantitative question.25
Figure 4 illustrates the effect of durable goods price risk on the household’s consumption and insurance problem. We consider an example in which income and the price of
durables are perfectly correlated, that is, there are two states only, one with high income and a high durable goods price and one with low income and a low durable goods
price,26 and assume that the Markov process is independent across time.27 For given
net worth, when the durable goods price is currently low, the household consumes more
non-durables and durables and hedges less. The household hedges less because the higher
durable goods purchases force the household to save more resulting in a higher level of
net worth next period. At the bottom of the stationary distribution, and for levels of net
worth below that, the household does not hedge at all. This implies that the household
chooses not to hedge the price risk of durable goods when the household is sufficiently
25

This result is reminiscent of the results in the consumption based asset pricing literature that show
that investors’ hedging demand in the presence of expected return variation depends in a similar way
on the coefficient of relative risk aversion; investors hedge states with low expected returns when the
coefficient of relative risk aversion exceeds 1 and otherwise hedge high expected returns (see, for example,
Campbell (1996)).
26
We analyze the case where income and durable goods price processes are independent of each other
in the next subsection.
27
Persistence of the Markov process has quantitative but not qualitative effects on the solution.

25

constrained.

5.2

Risk Management and the Rent vs. Buy Decision

In the analysis so far we have not considered households’ ability to rent durable goods.
If there were a frictionless rental market, ownership of a durable good and the use of its
services would be separable. The need to collateralize claims might still limit risk sharing,
but tenure choice would not affect households’ portfolio choice. Moreover, households’
demand for housing services would not induce a substantial financing need in that case.
We consider a rental market that is not frictionless. Renting durable goods is possible, albeit costly, but relaxes collateral constraints as landlords or lessors can more easily
repossess rented durables.28 Sufficiently constrained households choose to rent, which
affects their risk management or portfolio choice. Because renting housing is costly,
households will continue to have a strong incentive to own housing and hence face considerable financing needs for housing. We are able to characterize the interaction between
risk management and home ownership since in our model markets are complete, although
subject to collateral constraints. In contrast the literature typically studies the interaction
of the risk of home ownership and portfolio choice under the assumption that markets
are incomplete. Sinai and Souleles (2005) argue that both home ownership and renting
are risky when households do not have access to complete markets.29
The household can purchase durable goods as before as well as rent them. We denote
the total amount of durable goods of the household by k, owned durables by ko and rented
durables by kl , where k = ko + kl . Given the current price of durables q(s) in state s, the
user cost of rented capital is ul (s) ≡ rq(s)−(E[q 0 |s]−q(s))+E[q 0 |s](δ +m) where m is the
landlord’s or lessor’s monitoring cost per unit of durable asset, which we assume is paid
in terms of durable goods at the end of the period.30 Because of limited enforcement, the
household has to pay the rental fee up front, in present value terms, that is, R−1 ul (s).
The household’s problem with renting, formulated recursively, is to choose (nonnegative) consumption c, (fully levered) owned and rented durable goods ko and kl and a
portfolio of Arrow securities h0 for each state s0 (and associated net worth w0 ) given the
28

Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2013) analyze a similar market for
rented capital in a corporate finance context.
29
Our model may also provide a useful framework to study household interest rate risk management,
which Campbell and Cocco (2003) model as the choice of mortgage type, specifically the choice between
adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) and fixed rate mortgages.
30
Note that if the price of durable goods were constant and normalized to 1, then ul = r + δ + m which
is the sum of Jorgenson’s (1963) frictionless user cost r + δ plus the monitoring cost m. The additional
term adjusts the user cost for the expected capital gain or loss E[q 0 |s] − q(s).

26

exogenous state s and the net worth w (cum current income and owned durable goods
net of borrowing), to maximize (8) subject to the budget constraints for the current and
next period, ∀s0 ∈ S,
w ≥ c + ℘(s)ko + R−1 ul (s)kl + E[R−1 h0 |s],

y 0 + (1 − θ)q 0 ko (1 − δ) + h0 ≥ w0 ,

(27)
(28)

the non-negativity constraints on owned and rented durables,
ko , kl ≥ 0,

(29)

and the short-sale constraints (4), ∀s0 ∈ S.
Defining the multipliers as before, the first order conditions are (5) through (7) and
℘(s)µ ≥ βgk (k) + E[βµ0 (1 − θ)q 0 (1 − δ)|s],

R−1 ul (s)µ ≥ βgk (k).

(30)
(31)

Using (30) and (31) one can show that a necessary condition for the household to rent
some durables is that the down payment required to purchase durables exceeds the rental
cost, that is, ℘(s) − R−1 ul (s) > 0, as renting is otherwise dominated. Moreover, when the
household is severely constrained, the household rents all its durable assets; the intuition
is that renting durables allows the household to borrow more. Such households also
typically do not hedge as noted throughout. There is an interesting interaction between
the rent vs. buy decision and hedging. Since renting allows higher leverage, renters’ net
worth becomes rather volatile, and hence renters with sufficient net worth may partially
hedge until they reach net worth levels where they start to own their durables. Households
with higher net worth on the other hand own some or all of their durables, and may hedge
income and durable goods price risk. This implies that household risk management may
no longer be monotone in household net worth.
Interestingly, renters’ hedging demand for durable goods price risk may have the
opposite sign from that of households who own most of their durables. That said, since
renting is endogenous and more constrained households rent, the demand from renters
for hedging claims which pay off in high durable goods price states may be low.
Figure 5 illustrates risk management when households can rent and buy durables,
say housing. We assume that the income and price processes are independent of each
other and independent across time. This allows us to separate hedging of income and
price risk. The bottom right panel shows that households rent when their net worth is
low but substitute to owning houses as net worth increases. Rented houses are smaller
than owned houses because renters are low net worth households. Households rent and
27

buy smaller houses, and consume fewer non-durables, when the price of housing is high.
Moreover, households start to own housing at higher levels of net worth, so rent longer,
when the price of housing is high, as high house prices imply larger downpayments and
hence households are more constrained all else equal, that is, for given net worth.
The top left panel shows households’ risk management which displays the by now
familiar properties with two noteworthy changes: since renting allows higher leverage,
households are more inclined to hedge when they rent; indeed, for moderate levels of net
worth households are hedging but switch back to not hedging at all at higher levels of
net worth. Thus, hedging is no longer monotone increasing in net worth. Moreover, the
housing price affects the level of hedging as households purchase larger houses when the
price is low forcing them to save more and in turn reducing their incentives to save, and
hedge, using financial assets.
The other main additional insight regards the sign of the hedging demand: households,
in particular renters, hedge the high house price state. Note that when income and the
price of housing are independent, there are four states next period that households could
hedge. As before, households primarily hedge the low income state, except for households
with very high net worth. More interestingly, households hedge the high price state, that
is, buy more claims for the state with low income and high house prices than for the state
with low income and low house prices; to see this in the figure, note that the dashed lines
(associated with high house prices) are above the corresponding solid lines (associated
with low house prices). Here it is important to keep in mind that the example features
isoelastic preferences with γ = 2. Renting has implied collateralization one and hence the
fact that renters hedge the high house price state is related to the results in Proposition 9
for γ > 1; high house prices increase the marginal value of net worth, all else equal. For
owners there is an additional effect, that is, all else is not equal: owners’ home equity
(1 − θ)q 0 k(1 − δ) is worth more when house prices are high. This effect reduces the
marginal utility of net worth when prices are high, but in the example the first effect
dominates and even home owners hedge the high price state somewhat more.
Our results on durable goods price risk management lead to two important conclusions.
First, financial constraints may be at the heart of the absence of hedging of house prices.
Second, the sign of the hedging demand depends on households’ preferences, their ability
to borrow, and on whether households rent or buy.

28

6

Evidence on Household Insurance

In this section we briefly survey evidence of what we consider a stylized fact, namely that
poor (and more financially constrained) households are less well insured than richer (and
less financially constrained) households. Indeed, we think this is part of a much broader
pattern applying to entrepreneurial households and firms as well, and we briefly discuss
evidence on risk management by Indian farmers suggesting that financial constraints
reduce risk management substantially.31
Among U.S. households, health insurance coverage varies considerably with income
and age according to data from the U.S. Census Bureau.32 The percentage of people
without health insurance in the U.S. decreases from 25% of people with income less
than $25,000 to 21% for people with income between $25,000 and $50,000, and further
decreases to 15% of people with income between $50,000 and $75,000 and finally decreases
to 8% of people with income exceeding $75,000. Similarly, by age, the fraction of adults
without health insurance decreases from 28% and 26% for age groups 18-24 and 25-34,
respectively, to 18% and 14% for age groups 35-44 and 45-64, respectively, and to less than
2% for age group 65 and up. Krebs, Kuhn, and Wright (2015) find that the median young
married household with children insures only between 10% and 40% of the net present
value loss associated with the death of an adult family member, whereas older households
are close to fully insured. Brown and Finkelstein (2007) report that participation in longterm care insurance by individuals aged 60 and over also varies substantially by wealth
in U.S. data, increasing from about 3% for the bottom wealth quartile to about 6%, 11%,
and 20% for the second, third, and top quartile, respectively.33 Inkmann, Lopes, and
Michaelides (2011) find that annuity market participation among U.K. households with
at least one retired person increases substantially with financial wealth, from less than 1%
in the bottom 5% to almost 20% in the top 5% of the wealth distribution. Browne and
Hoyt (2000) find that flood insurance coverage, both in terms of the number of policies
31

For firms, Rampini, Sufi, and Viswanathan (2014) find a strong positive correlation between net
worth and risk management both in the cross section and within firms over time in data on fuel price
risk management by U.S. airlines. Moreover, fuel price hedging drops remarkably as airlines approach
distress and recovers only slowly after distress. Relatedly, the corporate finance literature documents a
strong size pattern in risk management, when measured by participation of firms in derivatives markets,
among U.S. corporations overall. Thus, the basic pattern for corporate insurance seems to be the same
as for households: better financed firms are better hedged than poorly financed firms.
32
Table 6 of the U.S. Census Bureau’s Report on Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in
the United States: 2007 provides data on people without health insurance coverage by income and age.
33
See their Table 1 which provides data on private long-term care insurance ownership rates among
individuals aged 60 and over from the 2000 Health and Retirement Survey.

29

per capita and the amount of coverage per capita, is positively correlated with disposable
personal income per capita using U.S. state level data.
Clearly, the extent to which households are insured varies substantially with households’ income and, assuming that younger individuals and households are more financially
constrained, also seems to vary with financial constraints. This cross-sectional evidence
is consistent with the view that there is an important connection between household
risk management and households’ financial constraints. That said, there are certainly
other reasons why insurance participation varies with income, such as crowding out of
private insurance by public programs, as stressed, for example, by Brown and Finkelstein
(2008), financial literacy that varies with income, or fixed costs of obtaining insurance.
We now turn to data documenting the relation between insurance coverage and income
using within-household variation, which is consistent with our theory and challenges explanations based on financial literacy or fixed costs.
Fang and Kung (2012) use panel data for males from the Health and Retirement Survey, a representative longitudinal survey of older Americans conducted every two years.
They find that income shocks are one of the important determinants of whether individuals maintain or lapse life insurance coverage, along with changes in health and marital
status. The probability of buying life insurance increases with income and importantly the
probability of lapsing coverage decreases with income; “individuals who experience negative income shocks are more likely to lapse all coverage.” Therefore, the within-household
variation in insurance coverage is consistent with the predictions of our model.
Among farmers in rural India, Giné, Townsend, and Vickery (2008) find that participation in rainfall insurance programs increases in wealth and decreases with measures of
borrowing constraints. Cole, Giné, Tobacman, Topalova, Townsend, and Vickery (2013)
provide evidence on the importance of credit constraints for the adoption of rainfall insurance using randomized field experiments in rural India. Farmers who are randomly
surprised with a positive liquidity shock are much more likely to buy insurance. Moreover,
the authors report that the most frequently stated reason for not purchasing insurance
is “insufficient funds to buy insurance.” Farmers might of course use other risk sharing
mechanisms, including informal ones. To overcome the limitation of analyzing specific
risk sharing mechanisms in isolation, Townsend (1994) studies data on Indian farmers’
household consumption directly in a seminal paper, and finds that, while the full insurance model provides a remarkably good benchmark, “[t]here is evidence that the landless
are less well insured than their village neighbors in one of the three villages.” That is,
there is “a hint of a pattern by land class. Specifically, the landless and small farmers in
Aurepalle and the small and medium farmers in Shirapur seem more vulnerable.”

30

In the spirit of Townsend (1994), Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) study the
extent of insurance by analyzing the income and consumption distribution for U.S. households jointly. They find “some partial insurance of permanent shocks, especially for the
college educated and those near retirement. [They] find full insurance of transitory shocks
except among poor households.” Overall, we conclude that there is a basic pattern in
household insurance: richer households are better insured than poorer households.
That said, much of the existing evidence is on the extensive margin of insurance –
that is, whether households do or do not have a particular type of coverage – and mostly
cross-sectional in nature with limited panel dimension. The main empirical prediction of
our theory is that household insurance increases in net worth not just at the extensive
margin, but also importantly at the intensive margin, both across and within households.
To date, evidence on the intensive margin of household insurance is limited. Our model
provides a guide for empirical work on within-household variation of the intensive margin
of insurance in household panel data going forward.

7

Conclusion

An explicit analysis of household risk management is provided in which households have
access to complete markets subject to collateral constraints. With limited enforcement,
insurance may be better viewed as state-contingent savings and hence insurance and
financing are fundamentally connected. We show the optimality of increasing household risk management, that is, risk management that increases in household net worth
and income, under quite general conditions. Moreover, household risk management is
precautionary in the sense that an increase in uncertainty increases risk management.
Remarkably, risk aversion alone is sufficient for this result and assumptions on prudence,
that is, the third derivative of the utility function, are not required to guarantee this
result, in contrast to the classic results on precautionary savings using risk-free assets.
Durable goods, most importantly housing, are used as collateral. In the absence of a
frictionless rental market, households’ demand for the services of consumer durables results in substantial financing needs. We show that if these financing needs are sufficiently
strong, they override hedging concerns, which explains the limited extent, or lack, of
household risk management. In our view, proposals to introduce new markets providing
household risk management tools are hence unlikely to be successful, as many households
may not use such markets even if they exist.
The fact that household risk management may require collateral in the form of margins has been recognized in the literature, but not explicitly analyzed. For example,

31

Athanasoulis and Shiller (2000) write that “[m]argin requirements might deal with this
[collection] problem, but only for people who have sufficient assets as margin. We will
disregard these kinds of ... problems.” Our work, in contrast, suggests that collateral
constraints, together with households’ intertemporal financing needs, are at the heart of
the explanation why household risk management is limited and key to understanding the
basic patterns in household insurance.
The main empirical prediction of our theory – that household insurance increases in
net worth at both the intensive and extensive margin, across and within households – is
consistent with the basic patterns documented in the existing literature. That said, the
theory provides a guide for empirical work on the within-household dynamics of insurance
at both the intensive and extensive margin, on which there is limited evidence to date.

32

Appendix A: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Part (i): Suppose ∃ŝ0 ∈ Sh such that ŝ0 6∈ Sh+ . Using (7),
(6), the envelope condition, and strict concavity of the value function we have
βRvw (w(ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ) = vw (w, s) > vw (w+ , s) ≥ βRvw (w+ (ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ),
implying, again by strict concavity of the value function, that w(ŝ0 ) < w+ (ŝ0 ). But w(ŝ0 ) =
y(ŝ0 ) + h(ŝ0 ) > y(ŝ0 ) = w+ (ŝ0 ), a contradiction.
0
0
≥ w0 = y 0 + h0 ,
≥ w0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, implies that y 0 + h0+ = w+
Part (ii): Note that w+
that is, h0+ ≥ h0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, and hence E[h0+ |s] ≥ E[h0 |s], and, using the envelope con0
dition, uc (c0+ ) = vw (w+
, s0 ) ≤ vw (w0 , s0 ) = uc (c0 ), implying that c0+ ≥ c0 . To see that
0
w+
≥ w0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, suppose not, that is, suppose ∃ŝ0 ∈ S, such that w+ (ŝ0 ) < w(ŝ0 ), i.e.,
h+ (ŝ0 ) < h(ŝ0 ). Proceeding as in part (i), since h(ŝ0 ) > 0, βRvw (w(ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ) = vw (w, s) >
vw (w+ , s) ≥ βRvw (w+ (ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ), implying that w+ (ŝ0 ) > w(ŝ0 ), a contradiction. Finally,
for s0 , ŝ0 ∈ Sh , using (7), (6), and the envelope condition for next period, we have
βRuc (c(s0 )) = vw (w, s) = βRuc (c(ŝ0 )), that is, c(s0 ) = c(ŝ0 ) ≡ ch . By strict concavity
of the value and utility function, ch is strictly increasing in w when Sh is non-empty. 2
Proof of Proposition 2. Part (i) & (ii) Define the operator T as
T v(w, s) ≡

max

c,h0 ,w0 ∈R+ ×R2S

u(c) + βE[v(w0 , s0 )|s]

subject to equations (2) through (4). We show that if v is a weakly concave function in
w and has the property that ∀s, s+ , s+ > s,
v(ŵ, s+ ) − v(w, s+ )
v(ŵ, s) − v(w, s)
≤
,
ŵ − w
ŵ − w

∀ŵ, w,

then T v inherits this property. Since the set S of bounded, continuous, and weakly
concave functions which satisfy the property is closed under the sup norm, the fixed
point has the property, too.
Recall that for any concave function, the left and right derivatives exist and denote
these by vw− (w, s) and vw+ (w, s), respectively; by concavity, vw− (w, s) ≥ vw+ (w, s). For
v ∈ S, vw− (w, s0+ ) ≤ vw− (w, s0 ) and vw+ (w, s0+ ) ≤ vw+ (w, s0 ). Let the set S o of bounded,
continuous, strictly concave, and differentiable functions which satisfy the property that
∀s0 , s0+ , s0+ > s0 , vw (w, s0+ ) ≤ vw (w, s0 ), ∀w. The set S o is not a closed set under the sup
norm, but S o ⊂ S. We show that T (S) ⊂ S o ⊂ S and use Corollary 1 to Theorem 3.2 of
Stokey, Lucas with Prescott (1989) to conclude that v = T v ∈ S o .
Using an argument similar to the proof of Theorem 9.8 in Stokey, Lucas with Prescott
(1989), one can show that T v(w, s) is strictly concave and using Benveniste and Scheinkman
(1979) T v(w, s) is differentiable (see footnote 10). Suppose v ∈ S. For given w and s,
suppose ∃s0+ > s0 such that h(s0+ ) > h(s0 ). Note that the first order condition with
respect to h0 can be written as T vw (w, s) ≥ βRvw− (w0 , s0 ) if h0 = 0 and T vw (w, s) ∈
[βRvw+ (w0 , s0 ), βRvw− (w0 , s0 )] if h0 > 0. Then βRvw− (w(s0+ ), s0+ ) ≥ vw (w, s) ≥ βRvw− (w(s0 ), s0 ),
33

implying, given the assumed property, that w(s0+ ) ≤ w(s0 ). But w(s0+ ) = y(s0+ ) + h(s0+ ) >
y(s0 ) + h(s0 ) = w(s0 ), a contradiction. Therefore, h(s0+ ) ≤ h(s0 ), ∀s0+ > s0 , that is, the
household hedges lower income realizations (weakly) more. Hence, the household hedges
a lower set of states, if at all.
Denote the set of states that the household hedges by Sh ≡ {s0 ∈ S : h(s0 ) > 0}. Take
s+ > s and let Sh+ be associated with s+ (and similarly for other variables). Suppose
∃s+ > s, such that T vw (w, s+ ) > T vw (w, s) and, using the envelope condition, c+ < c.
Since h0 is decreasing in s0 , stochastic monotonicity implies that E[h0 |s] ≥ E[h0 |s+ ] and
hence (2) implies that the solution at s, {c, h0 , w0 }, is feasible at s+ . Since we assumed
that c+ < c, there must exist an ŝ0 ∈ S such that h+ (ŝ0 ) > h(ŝ0 ) since otherwise the
household would not spend all its net worth. Using the first order condition stated above
and the envelope condition, we have
T vw (w, s+ ) ≤ βRvw− (w+ (ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ) ≤ βRvw+ (w(ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ) ≤ βRvw+ (w(ŝ0 ), s0 ) ≤ T vw (w, s),
a contradiction. Thus T v inherits the property that ∀s, s+ , s+ > s, T vw (w, s+ ) ≤
T vw (w, s); moreover, T v(w, s) is a strictly concave differentiable function, and hence
T (S) ⊂ S o ⊂ S.
As a corollary of Proposition 1, w0 , h0 , Sh , and ch are increasing in w given s, ∀s0 ∈ S.
To see that Sh is increasing in s given w, take s+ > s and suppose instead that ∃ŝ0
such that h(ŝ0 ) > 0 but h+ (ŝ0 ) = 0. Then βRvw (y(ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ) ≤ vw (w, s+ ) ≤ vw (w, s) =
βRvw (w(ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ) which implies w(ŝ0 ) ≤ y(ŝ0 ), contradicting w(ŝ0 ) = y(ŝ0 ) + h(ŝ0 ) > y(ŝ0 ).
Thus, any state that the household hedges at s, the household hedges at s+ > s, that
is, Sh is increasing in s. If the household hedges s0 at s+ but not at s, then clearly
0
0
, s0 ) =
> w0 and h0+ > h0 . If the household hedges s0 at both s+ and s, then βRvw (w+
w+
0 0
0
0
0
0
0
vw (w, s+ ) ≤ vw (w, s) = βRvw (w , s ) and hence w+ ≥ w and h+ ≥ h . Thus, w and h0
are increasing in s. Moreover, since w0 is increasing in s, the envelope condition for next
period vw (w0 , s0 ) = uc (c0 ) implies that c0 , and ch , are increasing in s as well.
Part (iii): Take w+ > w and denote with a subscript + the optimal policy associated
with w+ . Let w̃0 ≡ w0 −E[w0 ], w̃h ≡ wh −E[w0 ], (and ỹ 0 = y 0 −E[w0 ],) and analogously for
0
0
0
w̃+
, w̃h+ , and ỹ+
. We need to show that var(w̃+
) ≤ var(w̃0 ). Note that w̃0 = max{w̃h , ỹ 0 }
0
0
and analogously for w̃+
. If w̃h+ = w̃h , then w̃+
= w̃0 and the result is obvious. Otherwise,
0
0
noting that E[w+
] − E[w0 ] ≤ wh+ − wh , we have w̃h+ > w̃h , and hence E[w+
] > E[w0 ].
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Moreover, w̃+ < w̃ , ∀s ∈ S such that w̃ > 0 and E[w̃+ |w̃+ > 0] < E[w̃ |w̃ > 0]. We
0
0
construct a random variable w̃ˆ+
such that w̃0 is a mean preserving spread of w̃ˆ+
and
0
0
0
0
0
w̃ˆ+ is in turn a mean preserving spread of w̃+ . Let w̃ˆ+ ≡ max{w̃+ , 0}, ∀s ∈ S such
0
0
that w̃0 > 0 and w̃ˆ+
≡ max{w̃ˆh , ỹ 0 } otherwise, where w̃ˆh such that E[w̃ˆ+
] = 0. Note
0
0
0
0
0
0
that ∃w̃ˆh ∈ (w̃h , w̃h+ ] since E[w̃ |w̃ > 0] > E[w̃+ |w̃+ > 0] = E[w̃ˆ |w̃ > 0] and thus
0
0
0
0
E[w̃+
|w̃+
≤ 0] = E[w̃ˆ+
|w̃0 ≤ 0] > E[w̃0 |w̃0 ≤ 0]. Since |w̃ˆ+
| ≤ |w̃0 |, ∀s0 ∈ S, with strict
0
0
0
0
inequality for some s0 ∈ S, var(w̃ˆ+
) < var(w̃0 ). Moreover, E[w̃ˆ+
− w̃+
] = 0 and w̃ˆ+
0
0
0
is a mean preserving spread of w̃+
, that is, var(w̃+
) < var(w̃ˆ+
) < var(w̃0 ). Moreover,
consumption c is monotone and strictly increasing in net worth w and, defining c̃0 , c̃h , c̃0+ ,
and c̃h+ analogously, we can proceed in a similar fashion for consumption. 2

34

Proof of Proposition 3. Part (i): Using (6) and the envelope condition, equation (7)
evaluated at w = y and s = s implies that βRλ(s0 ) = vw (y, s) − βRvw (w(s0 ), s0 ) ≥
(1 − βR)vw (y, s) > 0 where we used the fact that w(s0 ) ≥ y. But then Part (ii) of
Proposition 2 implies that Sh = ∅.
Part (ii): At net worth w = ȳ, using (7) and the envelope condition, we have
vw (ȳ, s) = βRvw (w(s̄0 ), s̄0 ) + βRλ(s̄0 ) which implies that λ(s̄0 ) > 0 since w(s̄0 ) ≥ ȳ and
hence, by strict concavity of v and the fact that vw (w, s) is decreasing in s (see Part (i)
of Proposition 2), βRλ(s̄0 ) = vw (ȳ, s) − βRvw (w(s̄0 ), s̄0 ) ≥ (1 − βR)vw (ȳ, s) > 0. 2
Proof of Proposition 4. Part (i): We first argue that levels of net worth below y and
above wbnd (s), ∀s ∈ S, defined below, are transient. Using (3) which holds with equality
and (4) we have w0 ≥ y 0 ≥ y and hence levels of net worth below y are transient, ∀s ∈ S.
Using part (ii) of Proposition 3, ∀w ≤ ȳ, λ(s̄0 ) > 0, ∀s ∈ S. Suppose Sh = ∅ at (ȳ, s̄),
then since hedging is increasing, Sh = ∅, ∀(w, s) with w ≤ ȳ. Therefore, once w ≤ ȳ,
net worth never exceeds ȳ again. Suppose Sh 6= ∅ at (w̄, s̄); then vw (ȳ, s̄) = βRvw (w0 , s0 ),
∀s0 ∈ Sh , and let wbnd (s0 ) solve this equation ∀s0 ∈ Sh . Moreover, define wbnd (s0 ) = y(s0 ),
∀s0 ∈ S \ Sh . By part (i) of Proposition 2, vw (w0 , s0 ) is decreasing in s0 and hence wbnd (s0 )
is decreasing in s0 , ∀s0 ∈ Sh , and wbnd (s0 ) = maxs0 ∈Sh wbnd (s0 ). Note that for any s ∈ S,
∀w ≤ wbnd (s), w0 ≤ wbnd (s0 ), ∀s0 ∈ S. To see this, suppose instead that ∃ŝ0 such that
w0 > wbnd (ŝ0 ). If w ≤ ȳ, both w and s are smaller than or equal ȳ and s̄, respectively,
and the fact that w0 is increasing in w and s (see part (ii) of Proposition 2) implies
w0 ≤ wbnd (ŝ0 ), a contradiction. Therefore, w > ȳ and wbnd (s) > y(s); moreover,
vw (wbnd (s), s) ≤ vw (w, s) = βRvw (w0 , ŝ0 ) + βRλ(ŝ0 ) < βRvw (wbnd (ŝ0 ), ŝ0 )
≤ vw (ȳ, s̄) = βRvw (wbnd (s), s) < vw (wbnd (s), s),
a contradiction. Thus, for any s ∈ S, once w ≤ wbnd (s), w0 ≤ wbnd (s0 ), ∀s0 ∈ S, and let
wbnd = max{ȳ, wbnd (s0 )}.
To show that net worth levels above wbnd are transient, suppose net worth w(st ) at
time t in state st is such that w(st ) > wbnd . Any path which reaches a state st+n against
which the household is constrained at time t+n results in a household net worth w(st+n ) =
y(st+n ) ≤ ȳ and indeed net worth is bounded above by wbnd from then onwards. Consider
a path along which the household is never constrained; since vw (w, s) = βRvw (w0 , s0 )
along such a path, ∃n < ∞, such that vw (wt+n , st+n ) = (βR)−n vw (wt , st ) > vw (ȳ, st+n )
and hence again wt+n < ȳ at time t + n and net worth is less than wbnd thereafter.
To prove that the existence of a unique stationary distribution, define Z ∗ as the set of
(w, s) such that either (w, s) = (y(s), s), any s ∈ S, or for any ŝ ∈ S, s ∈ S, (w, s) solves
vw (y(ŝ), ŝ) = (βR)n vw (w, s), for n ≥ 1, and w ≥ y(s). Let Z ≡ ∪s∈S ([y, wbnd (s)] × {s}).
For any z = (w, s) ∈ Z, vw (w, s) ≥ βRvw (y(s̄) = ȳ, s̄), as the household does not hedge
the highest state. So ∀z ∈ Z, P (z, (ȳ, s̄)) > 0, where P (z, z 0 ) is the induced transition
function, and hence (ȳ, s̄) is a consequent ∀z ∈ Z. Next we show that (ȳ, s̄) is recurrent,
and indeed that all z ∈ Z ∗ are recurrent, whereas all z ∈ Z \ Z ∗ are transient. For
(ȳ, s̄) pick s ∈ S and solve for vw (ȳ, s̄) = (βR)n vw (w, s) for each n ≥ 1 such that
w ≥ y(s). Each such (w, s) ∈ Z ∗ is a consequent of (ȳ, s̄) and so is (y(s), s), ∀s ∈ S,
35

since the household stops hedging state s in state s after a finite n. Hence for each ŝ,
(y(ŝ), ŝ), ∀s ≤ ŝ, solve for vw (ŷ, ŝ) = (βR)n vw (w, s), for each n ≥ 1, such that w ≥
y(s). Each such (w, s) ∈ Z ∗ is a consequent of (y(s), s) and hence of (ȳ, s̄). Hence,
∀z ∈ Z ∗ , P ((ȳ, s̄), z) > 0, that is, all z ∈ Z ∗ are consequent for (ȳ, s̄). Therefore,
(ȳ, s̄) is recurrent and so are all z ∈ Z ∗ . In contrast, for any z ∈ Z \ Z ∗ , (ȳ, s̄) is a
consequent of z but not vice versa, that is, P ((ȳ, s̄), z) = 0 for z ∈ Z \ Z ∗ , and such z
are transient. Since P (z, (ȳ, s̄)) ≥ mins∈S Π(s, s̄) > 0, Theorem 11.2 in Stokey and Lucas
with Prescott (1989) implies that there exists a unique invariant distribution. For each
z ∈ Z ∗,P
define εz = minẑ∈Z ∗ P (ẑ, z) and note that ε(ȳ,s̄) = mins∈S Π(s, s̄) > 0. Hence,
let ε = z∈Z ∗ εz ≥ ε(ȳ,s̄) > 0. Theorem 11.4 in Stokey and Lucas with Prescott (1989)
implies that there exists a unique ergodic set with no cyclically moving subsets and the
rate of convergence is geometric.
Part (ii): See the proof of part (i) for a proof that net worth levels below y and above
wbnd are transient. When Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 ∈ S, denote the net worth at the upper
bound of the stationary distribution by wbnd and using (7) and the envelope condition,
we have vw (wbnd ) = βRvw (wbnd ) + βRλ(s̄0 ), implying that λ(s̄0 ) > 0 and hence since w0 is
weakly increasing in w and s0 , wbnd = w(s̄0 ) = ȳ.
Part (iii): Household risk management is increasing by Proposition 1. Household
risk management is incomplete with probability 1 since the stationary distribution of net
worth is bounded above by wbnd and at wbnd (s) for s ∈ Sh we have wbnd (s) > y(s) and
vw (wbnd (s), s) = βRvw (w(s̄0 ), s̄0 ) + βRλ(s̄0 )
≤ βRvw (ȳ, s̄0 ) + βRλ(s̄0 ) = (βR)2 vw (wbnd (s), s) + βRλ(s̄0 )
implying that λ(s̄0 ) > 0, and at wbnd (s) for s ∈ S \ Sh we have wbnd (s) = y(s) and
vw (ȳ, s̄) ≤ vw (wbnd (s), s) = βRvw (w(s̄0 ), s̄0 ) + βRλ(s̄0 ) ≤ βRvw (ȳ, s̄0 ) + βRλ(s̄0 )
and again λ(s̄0 ) > 0. Therefore, since risk management is increasing, λ(s̄0 ) > 0 for all
w ≤ wbnd (s), ∀s ∈ S. By Part (i) of Proposition 3, risk management is completely absent
at w = y and s; by continuity, ∃ε > 0 such that for w > w with |w − w| < ε, vw (w, s) >
βRvw (y, s), which means that the household does not hedge at all in this neighborhood.
Clearly, w = ȳ has positive probability under the stationary distribution since household income ȳ has positive probability under the stationary distribution of income. If the
household does not hedge s0 at ȳ, then w has strictly positive probability. Consider instead
a path along which the household continues to hedge the lowest income realization the
following period, then ∃n < ∞ such that vw (wt+n , st+n ) = (βR)−n vw (ȳ, s̄) > vw (y, st+n )
and hence wt+n < y, which is not possible. So the household must stop hedging the lowest
state after a finite sequence of lowest income realizations, that is, the household does not
hedge at all with positive probability under the stationary distribution. 2
Proof of Proposition 5. Let S̄ be the set of bounded, continuous, and weakly concave
functions and S¯o be the set of bounded, continuous, strictly concave, and differentiable
functions. Using a proof similar to that in Proposition 2 and defining the operator T
36

analogously, we conclude that T (S̄) ⊂ S̄ o ⊂ S̄ so v ∈ S̄ o , and similarly for ṽ (using T̃ ),
which denotes the value function (and operator, respectively) associated with π̃(s0 ).
Consider some v̂ ∈ S̄ o . We show that if T̃ n v̂w (w) ≥ T n v̂w (w), then T̃ n+1 v̂w (w) ≥
n+1
T
v̂w (w), which in turn implies that the value functions v and ṽ satisfy ṽw (w) ≥ vw (w),
∀w, too. Suppose that T̃ n v̂w (w) ≥ T n v̂w (w), but that Ẽ[h̃0 ] < E[h0 ], which, from the
budget constraint, implies that c̃ > c. Moreover, Sh 6= ∅ and using the first order condition
with respect to h and the envelope condition we have
βRuc (ch ) = βRT n v̂w (wh ) = T n+1 v̂w (w) = uc (c)
> uc (c̃) = T̃ n+1 v̂w (w) ≥ βRT̃ n v̂w (w̃h ) = βRuc (c̃h ),
and therefore c̃h > ch . Further, T̃ n v̂w (w̃h ) = uc (c̃h ) < uc (ch ) = T n v̂w (wh ), which in turns
implies that w̃h > wh . Then, since max{·, 0} is convex,
E[h0 ] = E[max{wh − y 0 , 0}] < E[max{w̃h − y 0 , 0}] ≤ Ẽ[max{w̃h − y 0 , 0}] = Ẽ[h̃0 ],
a contradiction. Hence, Ẽ[h̃0 ] ≥ E[h0 ], which implies that c̃ ≤ c and (T̃ n+1 v̂)w (w) =
uc (c̃) ≥ uc (c) = (T n+1 v̂)w (w), so the value function T̃ n+1 v̂ and T n+1 v̂ satisfy the property, too. 2
Proof of Corollary 1. The fact that c̃ ≤ c is an immediate consequence of Proposition 5.
To see that c̃0 ≤ c0 , suppose not, that is, suppose ∃ŝ0 such that c̃(ŝ0 ) > c(ŝ0 ), which can
only be true if w̃(ŝ0 ) > w(ŝ0 ) and therefore h̃(ŝ0 ) > 0. But then
βRuc (c̃(ŝ0 )) = uc (c̃) ≥ uc (c) ≥ βRuc (c(ŝ0 )),
which in turn implies that c̃(ŝ0 ) ≤ c(ŝ0 ), a contradiction.
Proceeding analogously, suppose ∃ŝ00 such that c̃(ŝ00 ) > c(ŝ00 ), which can only be true
if w̃(ŝ00 ) > w(ŝ00 ) and therefore h̃(ŝ00 ) > 0. But then
βRuc (c̃(ŝ00 )) = uc (c̃(s0 )) ≥ uc (c(s0 )) ≥ βRuc (c(ŝ00 )),
where s0 is the state preceding ŝ00 and where we used the fact that c̃0 ≤ c0 , ∀s0 ∈ S. This
in turn implies that c̃(ŝ00 ) ≤ c(ŝ00 ), a contradiction. By induction, c̃(st ) ≤ c(st ) for any
subsequent history st and time t. 2
Proof of Proposition 6. Part (i): The proof is in a similar spirit to the Proof of
Part (i) of Proposition 2. We show that if the properties that v(w, s) is increasing in s
and vw (w, s) is decreasing in s are satisfied by v next period, then T v satisfies these same
properties this period, and conclude that the fixed point satisfies these properties as well.
Moreover, as before, we observe that if the properties are satisfied next period, then the
household hedges a lower set of states and h0 is decreasing in s0 .
Now suppose that ∃s+ > s, such that T vw (w, s+ ) > T vw (w, s), implying by the
envelope condition that c+ < c. From the budget constraint(2) we have
X
X
c+ + ℘k+ +
Π(s+ , s0 )h0+ = w = c + ℘k +
Π(s, s0 )h0 ,
s0 ∈S

s0 ∈S

37

and given stochasticPmonotonicity and the fact that h0 is decreasing in s0 we have
P
0 0
0 0
0
s0 ∈S Π(s+ , s )h ≤
s0 ∈S Π(s, s )h , which implies that x = {c, k, h } is feasible at s+
and, since v(w, s) is increasing in w and s, T v(w, s+ ) ≥ T v(w, s).
Suppose k+ ≤ k. There must exist an ŝ0 such that w+ (ŝ0 ) > w(ŝ0 ), since otherwise
consumption of goods and durables and the net worth next period are all lower at s+
than s, contradicting the optimality of x+ since x is feasible. But then h(ŝ) > 0 and
therefore βRµ+ (ŝ0 ) = µ+ > µ ≥ βRµ(ŝ0 ) implying w+ (ŝ0 ) < w(ŝ0 ), a contradiction.
Now suppose k+ > k. For s0 ∈ Sh ∩ Sh+ , βµ0 /µ = R−1 = βµ0+ /µ+ . For s0 ∈ S \
Sh ∩ S \ Sh+ , βµ0 /µ > βµ0+ /µ+ . For s0 ∈ Sh ∩ S \ Sh+ , βµ0 /µ = R−1 ≥ βµ0+ /µ+ . Finally
Sh ∩ S \ Sh+ = ∅, since for such s0 we would have βRµ0+ = µ+ > µ ≥ βRµ0 , implying
0
0
= y 0 + (1 − θ)k+ (1 − δ) + h0+ > y 0 + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ) = w0 , a
< w0 , whereas w+
w+
contradiction. Recalling that R−1 ≥ βµ0 /µ and that the right hand side is decreasing in
s0 , the Euler equation for durables (12) implies
 X

X
µ0+ (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
gk (k+ ) 1
0
−1
0
1 = β
+
Π(s+ , s )R +
Π(s+ , s )β
µ+ ℘
µ+
℘
0
0
s ∈Sh+
s ∈S\Sh+
X

X
µ0 (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
gk (k) 1
0
0
−1
Π(s+ , s )β
< β
Π(s+ , s )R +
+
µ ℘
µ
℘
s0 ∈Sh
s0 ∈S\Sh
X

X
gk (k) 1
µ0 (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
0
−1
0
≤ β
+
Π(s, s )R +
Π(s, s )β
= 1,
µ ℘
µ
℘
0
s0 ∈S
h

s ∈S\Sh

a contradiction.
Part (ii): Arguing analogously to Part (i) of Proposition 2, since the property in
Part (i) above is satisfied, the household hedges a lower set of states and w0 and h0 is
0
, s0+ ) =
decreasing in s0 since for two states s0+ > s0 which are hedged we have vw (w+
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0 0
vw (w , s ) ≥ vw (w , s+ ), that is, w ≥ w+ , and h > h+ as y < y+ .
Using the envelope condition and (5) we have vw (w, s) = uc (c), and given the strict
concavity of the value function, if w+ > w, vw (w+ , s) < vw (w, s) and hence c+ > c, that
is, c is strictly increasing in w, given s, and since vw (w, s) is decreasing in s, c is increasing
in s.
To see that k is strictly increasing in w given s, take w+ > w and note that by strict
concavity of v, µ+ < µ. Suppose that k+ ≤ k, then gk (k) ≤ gk (k+ ). Rewriting the Euler
equation for durable goods purchases (12) we have
X
X
gk (k) 1
(1 − θ)(1 − δ)
µ0 (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
1=β
+
Π(s, s0 )R−1
+
Π(s, s0 )β
.
µ ℘ s0 ∈S
℘
µ
℘
0
s ∈S\Sh

h

Assume, without loss of generality, that Sh = Sh+ . Since gk (k+ )/µ+ > gk (k)/µ, it must
be the case that ∃ŝ0 ∈ S \ Sh such that µ+ (ŝ0 )/µ+ < µ(ŝ0 )/µ and hence µ+ (ŝ0 ) < µ(ŝ0 ),
that is, w+ (ŝ0 ) > w(ŝ0 ). But since ŝ0 ∈ S \ Sh , w+ (ŝ0 ) = y(ŝ0 ) + (1 − θ)k+ (1 − δ) ≤
y(ŝ0 ) + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ) = w(ŝ0 ), we have a contradiction.
To see that w0 is strictly increasing in w given s, ∀s0 ∈ S, assume again w.l.o.g.
0
0
that Sh = Sh+ . On Sh , vw (w, s) = βRvw (w0 , s0 ) and hence w+
> w0 . On S \ Sh , w+
=
0
0
0
y + (1 − θ)k+ (1 − δ) > y + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ) = w .
38

Part (iii): The budget constraint (9) implies that w ≥ c; thus, as w goes to 0,
c goes to 0 and using the envelope condition vw (w, s) = uc (c) goes to +∞. Since w0 ≥
y 0 +(1−θ)k(1−δ) > y 0 ≥ y and vw (y, s0 ) is bounded for all s0 , vw (w0 , s0 ) < vw (y, s0 ) < +∞,
and hence for sufficiently low w, λ0 > 0, ∀s0 ∈ S.
Part (iv): If Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 , then for any two states s0+ > s0 that are hedged
0
0
≡ wh .
) = vw (w0 ), that is, w0 = w+
we have vw (w+
Since w̄ is the highest wealth level that is attained under the (unique) stationary
distribution, we have at w̄ that vw (w̄) = βRvw (w̄0 ) + βRλ(s̄0 ), so λ(s̄0 ) > 0. Now suppose ∃ŵ < w̄ such that the household hedges all states at ŵ implying that vw (ŵ) =
βRvw (ŵ(s0 )), ∀s0 ∈ S, that is, net worth next period must be lower than net worth
this period in all states. But then there would have to exist a w− < ŵ such that
w− (s̄0 ) > ŵ(s̄0 ) (since otherwise w̄ could not be attained from below ŵ), which implies
that ŵ(s̄0 ) < w− (s̄0 ) = y(s̄0 ) + (1 − θ)k− (1 − δ) + h− (s̄0 ), so h− (s̄0 ) > 0. This in turn implies
that vw (w− ) = βRvw (w− (s̄0 )), that is, vw (w− ) < vw (ŵ), a contradiction. 2
Proof of Proposition 7. The household’s Euler equation for education, that is, investment in human capital, can be written as


vw (w0 , s0 ) 0
1 = E β
(A fe (e) + (1 − δe )) s
vw (w, s)
vw (w0 , s0 )
≥ Π(s, s0 )β
(A(s0 )fe (e) + (1 − δe )), ∀s, s0 ∈ S.
vw (w, s)
The budget constraint (13) implies that w ≥ e and hence as w goes to zero, so does e
implying that fe (e) goes to +∞. But then βvw (w0 , s0 )/vw (w, s) must go to zero, ∀s0 ∈ S,
using the Euler equation for investment in education, and, using equation (7), βλ0 /µ must
go to R−1 implying that the multipliers on the short-sale constraints λ0 > 0, ∀s0 ∈ S. 2
Proof of Proposition 8. If βR > 1, then µ > µ0 by (7). Hence µ > E[µ0 ] and the
supermartingale theorem (see Chamberlain and Rothschild (1984) for example) implies
that there is a limit µ∞ with E[µ∞ ] = 0 and since µ∞ must be weakly positive, µ∞ = 0.
From the envelope condition µ∞ = uc (c∞ ) = 0 and thus consumption is infinite, which
violates the resource constraint (20).
If βR = 1, the argument above implies that we have full insurance but then in general equilibrium there must be sufficient collateralizability to ensure that these insurance
claims can be issued, that is, θ ≥ θ̄.
Suppose that θ < θ̄ but nevertheless βR = 1. Then households are fully insured and
(21) holds. Using (22) and the expectation of (23) we obtain
E[y 0 ] = c∗ + δk ∗ + (1 − R∗−1 ) (θk ∗ (1 − δ) − E[h0∗ ]) .

(32)

Subtracting (23) at s̄0 from (23) at s0 yields h∗ (s0 ) = y(s̄0 ) − y(s0 ) + h∗ (s̄0 ) and E[h0∗ ] =
y(s̄0 ) − E[y 0 ] + h∗ (s̄0 ) ≥ y(s̄0 ) − E[y 0 ]. At θ = θ̄, h∗ (s̄0 ) = 0, so indexing variables associated
with θ and θ̄ we conclude E[h0∗ (θ)] ≥ E[h0∗ (θ̄)]. Moreover, market clearing at θ̄ implies
39

that θ̄k ∗ (θ̄)(1 − δ) = E[h0∗ (θ̄)]. Suppose there is (weakly) positive excess supply of collateralized claims at θ, that is, θk ∗ (θ)(1 − δ) ≥ E[h0∗ (θ)]; combined with market clearing at
θ̄, this implies that k ∗ (θ) > k ∗ (θ̄), and, using (21), c∗ (θ) > c∗ (θ̄). But substituting into
(32) yields a contradiction. Thus, if θ < θ̄, then βR = 1 implies strictly positive excess
demand. 2
Proof of Proposition 9. Part (i): When θ = 1, the investment Euler equation for
durable goods (26) simplifies to
℘(s)µ = βgk (k),
(33)
which in the case of logarithmic utility further simplifies to k = (βg/℘(s))c. Define the
total expenditure on consumption and durable goods as ĉ = c + ℘(s)k = (1 + βg)c.
Substituting for c and k in the return function we have
û(ĉ, s) = u(c) + βg(k) = (1 + βg)u(ĉ) + ϕ(s),
where ϕ(s) = −(1+βg) log(1+βg)+βg log(βg)−βg log(℘(s)). The problem with durable
goods can then be written as an income risk management problem with preference shocks
v(w, s) =

max

ĉ,h0 ,w0 ∈R+ ×R2S

û(ĉ, s) + βE[v(w0 , s0 )|s]

(34)

subject to
w ≥ ĉ + E[R−1 h0 |s],

(35)

(3), and (4).
Let v̂(w, s) solve the following income risk management problem without preference
shocks
v̂(w, s) =
max
u(ĉ) + βE[v̂(w0 , s0 )|s]
ĉ,h0 ,w0 ∈R+ ×R2S

subject to (35), (3), and (4). This is in fact the problem considered in Section 3. Noting that the preference shock component of utility ϕ(s) is separable and defining vϕ (s)
recursively as
vϕ (s) ≡ ϕ(s) + βE[vϕ (s0 )|s],
we have v(w, s) = (1 + βg)v̂(w, s) + vϕ (s) as can be verified by substituting into equation
(34).
Part (ii): With isoelastic preferences, (33) simplifies to k = (βg/℘(s))1/γ c. Define the total expenditure on consumption and durable goods as ĉ = c + ℘(s)k =
(1 + ℘(s)(βg/℘(s))1/γ )c. Substituting for c and k in the return function we have
û(ĉ, s) = u(c) + βg(k) = φ(s)u(ĉ),
where φ(s) = (1+(βg)1/γ ℘(s)(γ−1)/γ )γ . The proof of Proposition 1 applies without change.
Suppose Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically monotone and ℘(s) is increasing in s. To prove that
vw (w, s) is decreasing in s when γ < 1, first observe that φ(s) is decreasing in s in that
case (whereas it is increasing in s if γ > 1). We can now proceed as in the proof of the
40

first part of Part (ii) of Proposition 2, that is, we assume that the property is satisfied
by v(·) next period and then show that it has to be satisfied by T v(·) in the current
period as well. As before, note that if the property is satisfied next period, the household
hedges a lower set of states and h0 decreases in s0 . Suppose the opposite, that is, suppose
∃s+ > s, such that T vw (w, s+ ) > T vw (w, s), implying by the envelope condition that
φ(s+ )u(ĉ+ ) = µ+ > µ = φ(s)u(ĉ) and therefore u(ĉ+ ) > φ(s)/φ(s+ )u(ĉ) ≥ u(ĉ), which
further implies that ĉ+ < ĉ. Since h0 is decreasing in s0 , E[R−1 h0 |s] ≤ E[R−1 h0 |s+ ] and
{ĉ, h0 , w0 } is feasible at s+ . Since ĉ+ < ĉ, ∃ŝ0 such that w+ (ŝ0 ) > w(ŝ0 ) since otherwise
0
{ĉ+ , h0+ , w+
} would achieve lower utility than switching to {ĉ, h0 , w0 }, contradicting optimality. But then y(ŝ0 ) + h+ (ŝ0 ) = w+ (ŝ0 ) > w(ŝ0 ) = y(ŝ0 ) + h(ŝ0 ) and h+ (ŝ0 ) > h(ŝ0 ) ≥ 0,
so βRµ+ (w+ (ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ) = µ+ > µ ≥ βR(w(ŝ0 ), ŝ0 ), implying w+ (ŝ0 ) < w(ŝ0 ), a contradiction.
Therefore vw (w, s) is decreasing in s, and the rest of the proposition obtains from the
proof of Part (ii) of Proposition 2 without change. 2

41

Appendix B: Equivalence of Economies with Limited
Enforcement and Collateral Constraints
This appendix shows the equivalence of the optimal dynamic contract with limited enforcement without exclusion and an economy with one-period state-contingent claims
subject to collateral constraints. For simplicity we consider the case without durable
goods. The household’s problem with limited enforcement at time τ ≥ 0 given net
worth w(sτ ), which we denote Pτ (w(sτ )), is to choose a sequence of consumption choices
and net payments {c(st ), p(st )}t≥τ where st ≡ {s0 , . . . , st }, to maximize
Eτ

X
∞

β

(t−τ )


u(ct ) ,

(36)

t=τ

subject to
w(sτ ) ≥ c(sτ ) + p(sτ ),
y(st ) ≥ c(st ) + p(st ),

(37)
(38)

∀t > τ,

the lender’s participation constraint
Eτ

X
∞

R

−(t−τ )

t=τ


pt ≥ 0,

the limited enforcement constraint


X
X
∞
∞
(t−τ 0 )
(t−τ 0 )
β
u(ct ) ≥ Eτ 0
β
u(ĉt ) ,
Eτ 0
t=τ 0

(39)

∀τ 0 ≥ τ, ∀{ĉ(st )}∞
t=τ 0 ,

t=τ 0

0

0

(40)
0

τ
τ
τ
t ∞
where {ĉ(st )}∞
t=τ 0 together with {p̂(s )}t=τ 0 solve Pτ 0 (ŵ(s )) with ŵ(s ) = y(s ). We
say a sequence of net payments is implementable if it satisfies the lender’s participation
constraint and the limited enforcement constraints.

Proposition 10 (Equivalence of limited enforcement and collateral constraints). (i) Any
τ
sequence of net payments {p(st )}∞
t=τ is implementable in problem Pτ (w(s )) iff
0 ≥ Eτ 0

X
∞

R

−(t−τ 0 )

t=τ 0


pt ,

∀τ 0 > τ,

(41)

that is, the present value of the remaining payments is never positive. (ii) The set of
sequences of net payments satisfying (41) is equivalent to the set of sequences of one-period
state-contingent claims {h(st )}∞
t=τ that satisfy the short-sale constraints
h(st ) ≥ 0,

42

∀t > τ.

(42)

Proof of Proposition 10. Part (i): (⇒) Suppose not, that is, suppose that {p(st )}∞
t=τ
0
is such that (41) is violated for some sτ , τ 0 > τ, that is
X

∞
−(t−τ 0 )
Eτ 0
R
pt > 0.
t=τ 0

W.l.o.g. let τ 0 = τ + 1. The household could default in state sτ +1 at time τ + 1 and
t
t
issue new
payments {p̂(st )}∞
>Pτ + 1, and p̂(sτ +1 ) =
t=τ +1 such that p̂(s ) = p(s ), t 
P∞
∞
−(t−(τ +1))
−(t−(τ +1))
−Eτ +1
p̂t , and hence by construction Eτ +1
p̂t ) =
t=τ +2 R
t=τ +1 R
τ +1
τ +1
t
t
0. Clearly, p̂(s ) < p(s ) and ĉ(s ) = c(s ), for all t ≥ τ + 2, but
 X

∞
τ +1
τ +1
τ +1
τ +1
τ +1
−(t−(τ +1))
ĉ(s ) = c(s ) + p(s ) − p̂(s ) = c(s ) + Eτ +1
R
pt > c(sτ +1 ),
t=τ +1

which would be an improvement and hence a contradiction. We prove the other direction
after proving part (ii).
Part (ii): Take any sequence of net payments {p(st )}∞
t=τ that satisfies (41) and define
X

∞
τ0
−(t−τ 0 )
h(s ) ≡ −Eτ 0
R
pt ≥ 0,
∀τ 0 > τ,
t=τ 0

0

0

0

0

then h(sτ ) = −p(sτ ) + R−1 Eτ 0 [hτ 0 +1 ] or p(sτ ) = −h(sτ ) + R−1 Eτ 0 [hτ 0 +1 ]. We can
therefore rewrite (38) as
y(st ) + h(st ) ≥ c(st ) + R−1 Et [ht+1 ],

∀t ≥ τ + 1,

(43)

and (37) as
w(sτ ) ≥ c(sτ ) + R−1 Eτ [hτ +1 ],

(44)

where h(sτ ) = 0 as (39) holds with equality.
t
Moreover, any sequence {h(st )}∞
t=τ +1 with h(s ) ≥ 0, ∀t > τ , satisfies (41) as
X

X

∞
∞
−(t−τ 0 )
−(t−τ 0 )
−1
Eτ 0
R
p t = Eτ 0
R
{−ht + R Et [ht+1 ]}
t=τ 0

= −Eτ 0

t=τ 0
X
∞

R

−(t−τ 0 )


ht + Eτ 0

t=τ 0

 X
∞
t=τ 0 +1

R

−(t−τ 0 )



0

ht = −h(sτ ) ≤ 0.

Finally, to complete part (i), (⇐), the household would never default on a sequence
t
t ∞
{h(st )}∞
t=τ +1 with h(s ) ≥ 0, ∀t > τ, establishing that if (41) is satisfied, the sequence {p(s )}t=τ
is implementable. 2
The problem with limited enforcement Pτ (w(sτ )) in equations (36) to (40) is therefore
equivalent to maximizing (36) subject to (44), (43), and (42), which can be written recursively as in equations (1) to (4). Moreover, the proof can be extended to the case with
durable goods by adapting the proof in Rampini and Viswanathan (2013).
43

Appendix C: Existence of a Stationary Equilibrium
This appendix shows first that, for given R such that βR < 1, a unique bounded stationary
distribution of net worth exists, and second that when θ < θ̄, an equilibrium with an
interest rate satisfying βR < 1 exists. Proposition 11 provides a sufficient condition for
the existence of a bounded stationary distribution, in particular a unique lower bound w
for the stationary distribution via a restriction on the slope of the growth of wealth in
the lowest state next period.34
(1 − cw (w)) < 1 for all w, then
Proposition 11. Assume that βR < 1. If (1−θ)(1−δ)
℘
there is an unique stationary distribution on [w, w̄] where w is the unique solution to
y(s0 )+ (1−θ)(1−δ)
(w −c(w)) = w and w̄ is the lowest solution to y(s̄0 )+(1−θ)(1−δ)k(w̄) =
℘
w̄.
Proof of Proposition 11. Consider the function G(w) = y(s0 ) + (1−θ)(1−δ)
(w − c(w))
℘
0
which gives the wealth next period in the lowest state assuming that h(s ) = 0 (and hence
h(s0 ) = 0 for all s0 ∈ S). Since G(0) > 0 and the function G(w) has a slope less than
(1 − cw (w))
one, it must intersect the 45-degree line from above. Further since (1−θ)(1−δ)
℘
< 1, the function G(w) does not have any more intersections with the 45-degree line.
Thus a unique intersection w exists. Consider now the wealth next period in the low
state w(s0 )(w). At any intersection where w(s0 )(w) = w, we must have h(s0 ) = 0 from
µ(w) > βRµ(w) = βRµ0 (w(s0 )(w)), thus h(s0 ) = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S (no state is hedged). Thus
at such an intersection, we must have w(s0 )(w) = G(w), which implies that w(s0 )(w)
intersects the 45-degree line only once at w. Further w(s0 )(0) > 0, hence for w < w,
w(s0 )(w) > w and for w > w, w(s0 )(w) < w.
Consider the function Ḡ(w) = y(s̄0 ) + (1−θ)(1−δ)
(w − c(w)). Since Ḡ(w) only differs
℘
0
0
from G(w) by the constant y(s̄ ) − y(s ), there is a unique intersection point with 45degree line at ŵ. Now consider the wealth in the highest state w(s̄0 )(w). At w = 0,
w(s̄0 )(0) ≥ w(s0 )(0) > 0. Further at any intersection point w where w(s̄0 )(w) = w (if such
a point exists), µ(w) > βRµ(w) = βRµ0 (w(s̄0 )(w)) and thus h(s̄0 ) = 0, the high state
cannot be hedged. But then at such an intersection w,
Ḡ(w) = y(s̄0 ) +

(1 − θ)(1 − δ)
(w − c(w)) ≥ y(s̄0 ) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)k(w) = w(s̄0 )(w) = w
℘

which implies that any intersection w must have w ≤ ŵ. If there are multiple intersections,
we pick the lowest one and call this w̄ (at this intersection as we have already argued the
high state is not hedged). It follows by construction that w(s̄0 )(w) > w for all w < w̄.
Immediately, for w < w̄, µ(w) > µ0 (w(s̄0 )(w)) and hence the highest state is not hedged.
Hence insurance is incomplete on [w, w̄].
Any w ∈
/ [w, w̄] is transient. For any w < w, create the sequence, w0u = w, w1u =
u
w(s̄0 )(w0u ), w2u = w(s̄0 )(w1u ), . . . , wnu = w(s̄0 )(wn−1
), . . ., and wnu < w̄. This is a strictly
34

For R >

θ(1−δ)
δ+θ(1−δ) ,

this slope condition automatically obtains. The bound of the proposition allows

θ(1−δ)
verification of a unique intersection at interest rates lower than δ+θ(1−δ)
, though these interest rates are
far from the equilibrium interest rate in our numerical illustration.

44

increasing bounded sequence that must converge to a limit that is less than or equal to
w̄; in fact the limit is w̄. But then ∃Nu > 0 such that for n ≥ Nu , wnu > w and we
never go below w once we cross w as for n ≥ Nu w(s0 )(wnu ) > w(s0 )(w) = w as w(s0 ) is
strictly increasing in w. Similarly, if w > w̄, create the sequence w0d = w, w1d = w(s0 )(w0d ),
d
), . . .. By construction this is a decreasing bounded
w2d = w(s0 )(w1d ), . . . , wnd = w(s0 )(wn−1
0
sequence as w(s ) < w for w > w; hence it must converge to a limit. But this sequence
lives between the 45-degree line and the function G(w) = y(s0 ) + (1−θ)(1−δ)
(w − c(w))
℘
(which assumes no hedging of the lowest state). Hence it must converge to w (since at
any intersection with the 45-degree line, there is no hedging of the lowest state). But
then ∃Nd > 0 such that for n ≥ Nd , wnd < w̄ and we never go above w̄ once we cross w̄ as
for n ≥ Nd , w(s̄0 )(wnd ) < w(s̄0 )(w̄) = w̄ since w(s0 ) is strictly increasing in w.35
We show existence of a unique stationary distribution as follows. We consider all right
continuous distribution functions on the interval [w, w̄]. Given two distribution functions
F1 (w) and F2 (w) we say that F1  F2 if F1 (w) ≤ F2 (w) for all w (and F1  F2 if
F1 (w) ≤ F2 (w) for all w with strict inequality for a positive interval of w). Given this
partial order, min{F1 (w), F2 (w)} and max{F1 (w), F2 (w)} are also distribution functions
and are the greatest lower bound and least upper bound for the pair {F1 (w), F2 (w)}.
Thus the set F = {F |F is a distribution on [w, w̄]} has as its least upper bound the
distribution F̄ (w), F̄ (w) = 0 for w < w̄ and F̄ (w̄) = 1 and as its greatest lower bound
the distribution F (w), F (w) = 1 for w ∈ [w, w̄]; hence the set F is a complete lattice.
Further the
equilibrium mapping w(s0 )(w) implies the adjoint map T ∗ : F → F by
P
T ∗ (F (w)) = Ss0 =1 π(s0 )F (w(s0 )−1 (w)); this is a monotone map in the following sense: if
F1  F2 , then T ∗ (F1 )  T ∗ (F2 ) as
T ∗ (F1 (w)) =

S
X
s0 =1

π(s0 )F1 (w(s0 )−1 (w)) ≤

S
X

π(s0 )F2 (w(s0 )−1 (w)) = T ∗ (F2 (w)).

s0 =1

By Knaster-Tarski’s theorem, there exists a fixed point in the space of distribution functions. We show next that this fixed point is unique. Start with the least upper bound
F̄ (w), then T ∗n (F̄ ) converges downwards to the highest fixed point. Similarly start with
the greatest lower bound F (w), then T ∗n (F ) converges upwards to the lowest fixed point.
Since these two limiting distributions are identical, the stationary distribution is unique.
Define w(s0n )(w) as the random wealth that occurs starting with wealth w where s0n
is the subsequent history of states for the next n periods. Let wo ∈ (w, w̄) and create
the strictly increasing sequence wnu starting at w and the strictly decreasing sequence wnd
starting at w̄ (as before in this proof). Since wnu → w̄ and wnd → w, there exists Nu and
Nd such that for n ≥ Nu , wnu > wo and for n ≥ Nd , wnd < wo . Take N = max{Nu , Nd }
and ε = min{(π(s̄0 ))Nu , (π(s0 ))Nd }. Since w(s0 ) is increasing in w, it follows that ∀n ≥ N
and ∀w ∈ [w, w̄], P n (w, w(s0n )(w) < wo ) > ε and P n (w, w(s̄0n )(w) > wo ) > ε, where s0n
(s̄0n ) corresponds to the lowest (highest) state occurring n times. Hence the monotone
mixing condition in Theorem 2 in Hopenhayn and Prescott (1992) and in Theorem 2.1 in
35

This proves that even though there may be multiple intersections of net worth in the highest state
next period w(s̄0 )(w) with the 45-degree line, only the first intersection w̄ is relevant as any w > w̄ is
transient. The uniqueness of the intersection of G(w) with the 45-degree line is critical here.

45

Bhattacharya and Lee (1988) is satisfied and a unique invariant distribution exists; further starting from any initial distribution, the convergence to the invariant distribution
is exponential. 2
For θ < θ̄, we now prove the existence of an equilibrium interest rate R, with βR < 1,
such that the excess demand for collateralized claims equals zero, that is, rewriting (16),
Z

w̄(R)

w(R)

0

E[h (w|R)]dF (w|R) −

Z

w̄(R)

w(R)

θk(w|R)(1 − δ)dF (w|R) = 0.

(45)

From the proof of Proposition 8, we know that at βR = 1 there must be strict excess
demand for collateralized
claims, that is, the left-hand side of (45) is strictly positive.
P
Suppose πh = s0 ∈Sh π(s0 ) where Sh is a potential set of states to be hedged. Then if
(1−θ)(1−δ)
≥ R−11 πh , households do not hedge this set of states. This follows from the fact
℘
that the return to hedging these states is less than the marginal return in terms of net
resale value of investing in the durable good in these states and purchasing the durable
good yields additional positive marginal utility in terms of housing services as well as a
≥ R−11π(s0 ) , no household hedges any state.
payoff in the other states. Hence if (1−θ)(1−δ)
℘
We can rewrite this inequality as R ≤ [π(s0 ) + θ(1 − π(s0 ))](1 − δ); at such interest rates,
the left-hand side of (45) must be strictly less than zero.
Proposition 12. Assume that θ < θ̄. If for R ∈ [θ(1 − δ) + π(s0 )(1 − θ)(1 − δ), β −1 ],
(1−θ)(1−δ)
(1 − cw (w)) < 1 for all w, then there exists an R such that βR < 1 that solves
℘
(45), that is, clears the market for collateralized claims.
Proof of Proposition 12. We have already shown that at R = θ(1−δ)+π(s0 )(1−θ)(1−
δ), the left-hand side of (45) is strictly greater than zero and at R = β −1 (45) is strictly
less than zero. Also from Proposition 11, for all R ∈ [θ(1 − δ) + π(s0 )(1 − θ)(1 − δ), β −1 ],
a unique stationary distribution F (w|R) on [w(R), w̄(R)] exists. It is immediately clear
that both w(R) and w̄(R) are continuous in R since c(w|R) is continuous in w and R by
the theorem of the maximum. Further the net worth next period w(s0 |R)(w) is continuous
in w and R. Hence, we take wl = min w(R) and wu = max w̄(R) for R ∈ [θ(1 − δ) +
π(s0 )(1 − θ)(1 − δ), β −1 ] (these exist since w(R) and w̄(R) are continuous functions on a
compact set), and for each R, P (w, W 0 |R) is induced by the function w(s0 |R)(w) where
W 0 ⊂ [wl , wu ]. Then if (wn , Rn ) → (w, R), the sequence P (wn , W 0 |Rn ) → P (w, W 0 |R)
using the continuity of w(R), w̄(R) and w(s0 |R)(w). Further for each R, there is an unique
stationary distribution, and hence following the argument in Theorem 12.13 in Stokey and
Lucas with Prescott (1989), the stationary distribution is continuous in the parameter R.
Integrating against this stationary distribution we conclude that the left-hand side of (45)
must be continuous in R. Hence by the intermediate value theorem, there exists an R for
which (45) is zero, that is, an interest rate at which the market for collateralized claims
clears. 2

46

References
Aguiar, M., M. Amador, and G. Gopinath, “Investment Cycles and Sovereign Debt
Overhang,” Review of Economic Studies 76 (2009) 1-31.
Aiyagari, S.R., “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 109 (1994) 659-684.
Alvarez, F., and U.J. Jermann, “Efficiency, Equilibrium and Asset Pricing with Risk of
Default,” Econometrica 68 (2000) 775-797.
Athanasoulis, S.G., and R.J. Shiller, “The Significance of the Market Portfolio,” Review
of Financial Studies 13 (2000) 301-329.
Benveniste, L.M., and J.A. Scheinkman, “On the Differentiability of the Value Function
in Dynamic Models of Economics,” Econometrica 47 (1979) 727-732.
Bewley, T., “The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formulation,” Journal
of Economic Theory 16 (1977) 252-292.
Bewley, T., “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in Models of Monetary Economies,
eds. John H. Kareken and Neil Wallace. (Minneapolis, MN: Federal Reserve Bank,
1980).
Bhattacharya, R.N., and O. Lee, “Asymptotics of a Class of Markov Processes which
Are Not in General Irreducible,” Annals of Probability 16 (1988) 1333-1347.
Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston, “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,” American Economic Review 98 (2008) 1887-1921.
Brown, J.R., and A. Finkelstein, “Why is the Market for Long-term Care Insurance so
Small?” Journal of Public Economics 91 (2007) 1967-1991.
Brown, J.R., and A. Finkelstein, “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance:
Medicaid and the Long-term Care Insurance Market,” American Economic Review
98 (2008) 1083-1102.
Browne, M.J., and R.E. Hoyt, “The Demand for Flood Insurance: Empirical Evidence,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 20 (2000) 291-306.
Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff, “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?” American Economic Review 79 (1989) 43-50.
Campbell, J.Y., “Understanding Risk and Return,” Journal of Political Economy 104
(1996) 298-345.
Campbell, J.Y., and João F. Cocco, “Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2003) 1449-1494.

47

Castañeda, A., J. Dı́az-Giménez, and J.-V. Rı́os-Rull, “Accounting for the U.S. Earnings
and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy 111 (2003) 818-857.
Chamberlain, G., and C.A. Wilson, “Optimal Intertemporal Consumption under Uncertainty,” Review of Economic Dynamics 3 (2000) 365-395.
Chien, Y., and H. Lustig, “The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth Distribution,” Review of Financial Studies 23 (2010) 1596-1650.
Cole, S., X. Giné, J. Tobacman, P. Topalova, R. Townsend, and J. Vickery, “Barriers to
Household Risk Management: Evidence from India,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 5 (2013) 104-135.
Constantinides, G.M., and D. Duffie, “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers,”
Journal of Political Economy 104 (1996) 219-240.
Deaton, A., “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica 59 (1991) 1221-1248.
Eisfeldt, A.L., and A.A. Rampini, “Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and Debt Capacity,”
Review of Financial Studies 22 (2009) 1621-1657.
Fang, H., and E. Kung, “Why Do Life Insurance Policyholders Lapse? The Roles of
Income, Health and Bequest Motive Shocks,” University of Pennsylvania and Duke
University Working Paper, 2012.
Friedman, M., A Theory of the Consumption Function (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1957).
Froot, K.A., D.S. Scharfstein, and J.C. Stein, “Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate Investment and Financing Policies,” Journal of Finance 48 (1993) 1629-1658.
Fuster, A., and P.S. Willen, “Insuring Consumption Using Income-Linked Assets,” Review of Finance 15 (2011) 835-873.
Giné, X., R. Townsend, and J. Vickery, “Patterns of Rainfall Insurance Participation in
Rural India,” World Bank Economic Review 22 (2008) 539-566.
Guvenen, F., S. Ozkan, and J. Song, “The Nature of Countercyclical Income Risk,”
University of Minnesota Working Paper, 2012.
Harris, M., and B. Holmström, “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” Review of Economic
Studies 49 (1982) 315-333.
Holmström, B., “Moral Hazard and Observability,” Bell Journal of Economics 10 (1979)
74-91.
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
Political Economy 106 (1998) 1-40.
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole, Inside and Outside Liquidity (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2011).
48

Hopenhayn, H.A., and E.C. Prescott, “Stochastic Monotonicity and Stationary Distributions for Dynamic Economies,” Econometrica 60 (1992) 1387-1406.
Huggett, M., “The Risk Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent, Incomplete-Insurance Economies,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17 (1993) 953-969.
Inkmannn, J., P. Lopes, and A. Michaelides, “How Deep is the Annuity Market Participation Puzzle?” Review of Financial Studies 24 (2011) 279-319.
Jorgenson, D.W., “Capital Theory and Investment Behavior,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 53 (1963) 247-259.
Kaplan, G., and G.L. Violante, “How Much Consumption Insurance Beyond Self-Insurance?”
American Economic Journals: Macroeconomics 2 (2010) 53-87.
Kaplan, G., G.L. Violante, and Justin Weidner, “The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring (2014) 77-138.
Kehoe, T.J., and D.K. Levine, “Debt-constrained Asset Markets,” Review of Economic
Studies 60 (1993) 865-888.
Kimball, M.S., “Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large,” Econometrica 58
(1990) 53-73.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105 (1997)
211-248.
Kocherlakota, N.R., “Implications of Efficient Risk Sharing Without Commitment,”
Review of Economic Studies 63 (1996) 595-609.
Krebs, T., M. Kuhn, and M.L.J. Wright, “Human Capital Risk, Contract Enforcement,
and the Macroeconomy,” American Economic Review 105 (2015) 3223-3272.
Krueger, D., and H. Uhlig, “Competitive Risk Sharing Contracts with One-sided Commitment,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (2006) 1661-1691.
Leland, H.E., “Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand for Saving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (1968) 465-473.
Ljungqvist, L., and T.J. Sargent, Recursive Macroeconomic Theory (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2012).
Lustig, H.N., and S.G. Van Nieuwerburgh, “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance,
and Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective,” Journal of Finance 60 (2005) 11671219.
Mankiw, N.G., “The Equity Premium and the Concentration of Aggregate Shocks,”
Journal of Financial Economics 17 (1986) 211-219.
Modigliani, F., and M.H. Miller, “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the
Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review 48 (1958) 261-297.
49

Piazzesi, M., M. Schneider, and S. Tuzel, “Housing, Consumption and Asset Pricing,”
Journal of Financial Economics 83 (2007) 531-569.
Rampini, A.A., “Entrepreneurial Activity, Risk, and the Business Cycle, Journal of
Monetary Economics 51 (2004) 555-573.
Rampini, A.A., A. Sufi, and S. Viswanathan, “Dynamic Risk Management,” Journal of
Financial Economics 111 (2014) 271-296.
Rampini, A.A., and S. Viswanathan, “Collateral, Risk Management, and the Distribution of Debt Capacity,” Journal of Finance 65 (2010) 2293-2322.
Rampini, A.A., and S. Viswanathan, “Collateral and Capital Structure,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 109 (2013), 466-492.
Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An
Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
90 (1976) 629-649.
Sandmo, A., “The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions,” Review of Economic
Studies 37 (1970) 353-360.
Schechtman, J., “An Income Fluctuation Problem,” Journal of Economic Theory 12
(1976) 218-241.
Schechtman, J., and V.L.S. Escudero, “Some Results on ‘An Income Fluctuation Problem’,” Journal of Economic Theory 16 (1977) 151-166.
Shiller, R.J., Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s Largest Economic Risks (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1993).
Shiller, R.J., “Derivatives Markets for Home Prices,” NBER Working Paper 13962, 2008.
Sibley, D.S., “Permanent and Transitory Income Effects in a Model of Optimal Consumption with Wage Income Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory 11 (1975)
68-82.
Sinai, T., and N.S. Souleles, “Owner-occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent Risk,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2005) 763-789.
Stokey, N.L., and R.E. Lucas, with E.C. Prescott, Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989).
Storesletten, K., C.I. Telmer, and A. Yaron, “Cyclical Dynamics in Idiosyncratic LaborMarket Risk,” Journal of Political Economy 112 (2004) 695-717.
Townsend, R.M., “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica 65 (1994) 539592.
Yaari, M.E., “A Law of Large Numbers in the Theory of Consumer’s Choice under
Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory 12 (1976) 202-217.
50

Figure 1: Increasing Household Risk Management
This figure displays household income risk management when household income follows an independent
two state Markov process. The solid (dashed) lines plot the policies for the low (high) state next
period. Top left: hedging h0 ; top right: net worth next period w0 and 45-degree line (dotted);
bottom left: consumption c; and bottom right: stationary distribution of net worth. The parameter
values are: β = 0.90, R = 1.05, Π(s, s) = Π(s̄, s̄) = 0.50, y(s) = 0.80, y(s̄) = 1.20, and preferences
u(c) = c1−γ /(1 − γ) with γ = 2.
2.5
Net worth next period

Hedging

1.5

1

0.5

0

0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

1.5
1
0.5
0

2.5

2.5

0.5

2

0.4
Density

Consumption

0

2

1.5
1

0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

0

0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

0.3
0.2
0.1

0.5
0
0.5

0

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

0

Figure 2: Household Risk Management with Durable Goods
This figure displays household income risk management with durable goods when income follows a two
state Markov process with independence (Panel A and B) and persistence (Panel C). The solid (dashed)
lines plot the policies for the low (high) state next period. In Panel C, the darker (and red) lines are
associated with s and the lighter (and green) lines with s̄. Top left: hedging h0 ; top right: net worth
next period w0 and 45-degree line (dotted); bottom left (Panel A): consumption c; and bottom right
(Panel A): durable goods consumption k. Parameters are as in Figure 1 except that θ = 0.80 in Panel A
and C and θ = 0.6 in Panel B and utility from durable goods g(k) = gk 1−γ /(1 − γ) with γ = 2 and
g = 2. In Panel A and B (C), Π(s, s) = Π(s̄, s̄) = 0.50 (0.75).

Panel A: Independent income
2.5
Net worth next period

Hedging

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.5

2.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

3

0.6
Durables

Consumption

2.5

4

0.8

0.4

2
1

0.2
0
0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

0
0.5

2.5

Panel B: Effect of Collateralizability
2.5
Net worth next period

Hedging

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.5

2.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

Panel C: Persistent income
2.5
Net worth next period

Hedging

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.5

Figure 3: Equilibrium and Effect of Collateral on Insurance
This figure displays equilibrium household risk management as a function of collateralizability θ. Panel A
displays the equilibrium net interest rate r (top left), aggregate hedging H (top right), aggregate
durable goods K (bottom left), and the welfare loss (in terms of equivalent income reduction (percent))
(bottom right). Panel B displays the equilibrium distribution of net worth for various levels of θ (top)
and inequality measured by the cross-sectional standard deviation of consumption (bottom left) and net
worth (bottom right). Parameters are as in Panel A of Figure 2 except that g = 1, δ = 0.2, y(s) = 0.5,
and y(s̄) = 1.5, implying θ̄ = 0.4736.

Panel A: Interest Rate, Hedging, Durable Stock, and Welfare Loss
0.8
Aggregate hedging (H)

Interest rate (r)

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2

0.2
0.4
Collateralizability (θ)

2

0.2

0

0.2
0.4
Collateralizability (θ)

0.6

0

0.2
0.4
Collateralizability (θ)

0.6

0.1
0.08

1.5
1
0.5
0

0.4

0

0.6

Welfare loss

Aggregate durable goods (K)

0

0.6

0.06
0.04
0.02
0

0

0.2
0.4
Collateralizability (θ)

0.6

Stationary distribution

Panel B: Wealth Distribution and Inequality
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
1

1.5

2
2.5
Current net worth (w)

Std. dev. consumption ( c)

0
0.5

Std. dev. net worth ( w)

≥ θ̄
= 0.45
= 0.40
= 0.30
= 0.20
= 0.10
= 0.00

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0

0.2
0.4
Collateralizability (θ)

0.6

3

3.5

4

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0

0.2
0.4
Collateralizability (θ)

0.6

Figure 4: Household Risk Management with Durable Goods Price Risk
This figure displays household income risk management with durable goods price risk when household
income and durable goods prices follow a two state Markov process with independence. The solid
(dashed) lines plot the policies for the low (high) state next period. The darker (and red) lines are
associated with s and the lighter (and green) lines with s̄. Top left: hedging h0 ; top right: net worth
next period w0 and 45-degree line (dotted); bottom left: consumption c; and bottom right: durable
goods consumption k. Parameters are as in Figure 2 except that q(s) = 0.95 and q(s̄) = 1.05, and
Π(s, s) = Π(s̄, s̄) = 0.50.

2.5
Net worth next period

Hedging

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.5

2.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

3

0.6

Durables

Consumption

2.5

4

0.8

0.4

2
1

0.2
0
0.5

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

1
1.5
2
Current net worth (w)

2.5

0
0.5

Figure 5: Risk Management, Rent vs. Buy, and Durable Goods Price Risk
This figure displays household risk management with durable goods price risk when households can
choose to rent as well as buy durables and where income and durable goods prices each follow an
independent two state Markov process which is independent over time. The solid (dashed) lines plot
the policies for the low (high) price state next period (except where noted otherwise). The darker (and
red) lines are associated with s and the lighter (and green) lines with s̄. Top left: hedging h0 ; top right:
net worth next period w0 and 45-degree line (dotted); bottom left: consumption c; and bottom right:
consumption of durable goods, total k (dotted), owned ko (solid), and rented kl (dashed). Parameters
are as in Figure 4 except that the monitoring cost m = 0.02.

2
Net worth next period

Hedging

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1
1.5
Current net worth (w)

1
0.5
0

2

0.4

2

1
1.5
Current net worth (w)

2

2
1

0.2
0

1
1.5
Current net worth (w)

3

0.6
Durables

Consumption

0

1.5

1
1.5
Current net worth (w)

2

0

Appendix -- For Online Publication

Appendix D: Extensions
In this appendix we compare our results from Section 2 to the savings behavior in the
standard buffer stock savings model. We show that buffer stock savings are not monotone
increasing in the state s and that convexity of the marginal utility is required to guarantee
precautionary behavior of household savings. Moreover, we compare the limiting behavior
of our model and the buffer stock savings model as βR → 1.

Appendix D.1: Comparison to Buffer Stock Savings Models
Consider the standard incomplete markets model of Bewley (1977), Aiyagari (1994), and
others.36 The household solves the following recursive problem by choosing (non-negative)
consumption c and (gross) savings h which do not vary with the state s0 next period (and
associated net worth w0 ) given the exogenous state s and the net worth w (cum current
income),
v(w, s) ≡
max
u(c) + βE[v(w0 , s0 )|s]
(D.1)
c,h,w0 ∈R+ ×RS+1

subject to the budget constraints for the current and next period, ∀s0 ∈ S,
w ≥ c + R−1 h,

(D.2)

y 0 + h ≥ w0 ,

(D.3)

h ≥ 0.

(D.4)

and the short-sale constraint
While this canonical model behaves similarly to ours in some ways, we stress that
household savings are not monotone increasing in the Bewley model, in the sense that
savings are decreasing in the current state s, which means that the household’s consumption is lower in some states next period when the current state s is higher.
Proposition D.1 (Household savings in Bewley model not increasing). Assume that
Π(s, s0 ) is stochastically monotone. (i) The marginal value of net worth vw (w, s) is decreasing in net worth w and in the state s. (ii) The household’s savings h are increasing
in w given s, but decreasing in s given w; therefore, net worth and consumption next
period w0 and c0 are decreasing in the current state s.
Proof of Proposition D.1. Part (i): The proof proceeds analogously to the proof of
Part (i) of Proposition 2.
T v(w, s) ≡

max

c,h,w0 ∈R+ ×RS+1

36

u(c) + βE[v(w0 , s0 )|s]

See Ljungqvist and Sargent (2012) for an authoritative treatise of savings behavior in incomplete
markets models.

1

Appendix -- For Online Publication
subject to equations (D.2) through (D.4). Define the sets S and S o as before. We show
that T (S) ⊂ S o ⊂ S and hence v ∈ S o has the required property.
Suppose that v ∈ S, but that ∃s+ > s, such that T vw (w, s+ ) > T vw (w, s), that is
T v 6∈ S o . Using the envelope condition, c+ < c which implies, using the budget constraint
0
= y 0 + h+ > y 0 + h = w, ∀s0 ∈ S. The Euler equation for
(D.2), that h+ > h and w+
savings can be written as
T vw (w, s) ≥ βRE[vw− (w0 , s0 )|s] ≥ βRE[vw+ (w0 , s0 )|s] if h = 0
T vw (w, s) ∈ [βRE[vw+ (w0 , s0 )|s], βRE[vw− (w0 , s0 )|s]] if h > 0.

(D.5)

Using (D.5) and the envelope condition, we have
0
, s0 )|s+ ] ≥ T vw (w, s+ ) > T vw (w, s) ≥ βRE[vw+ (w0 , s0 )|s].
βRE[vw− (w+
0
However, since w+
> w0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, and given stochastic monotonicity, we also have that
0
E[vw+ (w0 , s0 )|s] ≥ E[vw+ (w0 , s0 )|s+ ] > E[vw− (w+
, s0 )|s+ ],

a contradiction. Therefore, T v ∈ S o .
Part (ii): Since v ∈ S o by part (i), it is differentiable and vw (w, s) is decreasing in s.
Suppose that, given s, w+ > w and h+ < h, then
0
uc (c) = vw (w, s) = βRE[vw (w0 , s0 )|s] < βRE[vw (w+
, s0 )|s] ≤ vw (w+ , s) = uc (c+ ),

whereas c+ > c implies that uc (c+ ) < uc (c), a contradiction. Thus, h is increasing in w
given s.
0
> w0 , ∀s0 ∈ S.
Let s+ > s and suppose that h+ > h for given w. Then c+ < c and w+
Then
0
uc (c) < uc (c+ ) = vw (w, s+ ) = βRE[vw (w+
, s0 )|s+ ] < βRE[vw (w0 , s0 )|s+ ] ≤ βRE[vw (w0 , s0 )|s]

since vw (w, s) is decreasing in s by part (i) and w0 is increasing in s0 , contradicting (D.5).
0
So for s+ > s, h+ ≤ h and thus w+
≤ w0 . Moreover, using the envelope condition,
0
uc (c0 ) = vw (w0 , s0 ) ≤ vw (w+
, s0 ) = uc (c0+ ) and thus c0+ ≤ c0 . 2
The parallels between our model and the Bewley economy are that since vw (w, s) is
decreasing in w and s in both cases, the envelope condition implies that current consumption c is increasing in w and s in both economies as well. Therefore, both risk
management expenditures E[R−1 h0 |s] in our model and savings h in the Bewley economy
increase in w given s and decrease in s given w. The key distinction however is that
household risk management h0 in our model increases in s, for all s0 ∈ S, although as
stated before the total risk management expenditures E[R−1 h0 |s] decrease in s; in other
words, w0 and c0 increase in s, and household risk management is increasing in s in this
sense. In contrast, savings h decrease in s implying that net worth and consumption next
2

Appendix -- For Online Publication
period w0 and c0 decrease in s; again, household savings are thus not increasing in s in
the Bewley economy.
The critical difference is the following. If the future is brighter, the household in
the Bewley economy consumes more and saves less, making it less well off state-bystate next period; in contrast, the household in our economy consumes more and buys
more state-contingent claims, which are now cheaper, making it better off state-by-state
next period, too. The incompleteness of markets has significant consequences for the
qualitative behavior of the economy.
In contrast to the precautionary nature of state-contingent savings in our model (see
Proposition 5), in the Bewley model convexity of marginal utility uc (c) is required to
guarantee precautionary savings.
Proposition D.2 (Precautionary saving in Bewley model). Assume that Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ),
∀s0 ∈ S. (i) If uc (c) is (weakly) convex in consumption c, the marginal value of net worth
vw (w) is convex in net worth w. (ii) Suppose π̃(s0 ) is a mean-preserving spread of π(s0 ).
If uc (c) is (weakly) convex in c, then household’s savings h̃ ≥ h.
Proof of Proposition D.2. Part (i): Suppose uc (c) is (weakly) convex. Take w0 , w1 >
w0 , and ϕ ∈ (0, 1), and define wϕ ≡ (1 − ϕ)w0 + ϕw1 and analogously for other variables.
Consider operator T defined analogously to the one in the proof of Proposition D.1. By
the same argument, S o ⊂ S and we can restrict our attention to functions in S o . Assume
that savings are strictly positive at w0 and note that this implies that they are strictly
positive at w1 and indeed for any w ≥ w0 as savings are increasing in w by part (ii) of
Proposition D.1. From the first order condition for savings we have
T vw (w0 ) = uc (w0 − R−1 h0 ) = βRE[vw (y 0 + h0 )]

and analogously for h1 at w1 and h(wϕ ) at wϕ . Suppose v ∈ S o and vw (w) is convex,
∀w ∈ R+ , but that T vw (w) is not convex, that is,
uc (wϕ − R−1 h(wϕ )) = T vw (wϕ ) > (1 − ϕ)T vw (w0 ) + ϕT vw (w1 )
= (1 − ϕ)uc (w0 − R−1 h0 ) + ϕuc (w1 − R−1 h1 ) ≥ uc (wϕ − R−1 hϕ ),

and, thus, h(wϕ ) > hϕ . But then, using the fact that vw (w) is convex, we have
(1 − ϕ)E[vw (y 0 + h0 )] + ϕE[vw (y 0 + h1 )] ≥ E[vw (y 0 + hϕ )] > E[vw (y 0 + h(wϕ ))]

and combining the two results, T vw (wϕ ) > βRE[vw (y 0 + h(wϕ ))], a contradiction. When
savings are zero at w1 , then T vw (w) = uc (w) in the relevant range which is convex by
assumption. Let w∗ = inf w {h > 0}. The above shows that T vw (w) is convex on [0, w∗ ]
and [w∗ , ∞). Next we consider the case where w0 < w∗ < w1 .
Note that for w ≤ w∗ , T vw (w) = uc (w), and for w > w∗ , c < w as h > 0 and hence
T vw (w) = uc (c) > uc (w). First, consider ϕ ∈ (0, 1) such that wϕ ≡ (1−ϕ)w0 +ϕw1 ≤ w∗ ;
then
(1 − ϕ)T vw (w0 ) + ϕT vw (w1 ) > (1 − ϕ)uc (w0 ) + ϕuc (w1 ) ≥ uc (wϕ ) = T vw (wϕ ).
3

Appendix -- For Online Publication
If instead wϕ > w∗ , then define ϕ∗ and ϕ̂ implicitly by w∗ = (1 − ϕ∗ )w0 + ϕ∗ w1 and
wϕ = (1 − ϕ̂)w∗ + ϕ̂w1 , which implies that ϕ = (1 − ϕ̂)ϕ∗ + ϕ̂; then by the previous
argument
(1 − ϕ∗ )T vw (w0 ) + ϕ∗ T vw (w1 ) > T vw (w∗ )
and hence
(1 − ϕ)T vw (w0 ) + ϕT vw (w1 ) = (1 − ϕ̂)[(1 − ϕ∗ )T vw (w0 ) + ϕ∗ T vw (w1 )] + ϕ̂T vw (w1 )
> (1 − ϕ̂)T v(w∗ ) + ϕ̂T vw (w1 ) ≥ T vw (wϕ ),
where the last inequality follows from the convexity above w∗ . Therefore, T vw (w) is
convex with strict convexity at w∗ .
We already know that v ∈ S o and for any v̂ ∈ S o , T n v̂ → v. But by above if we start
with v̂ such that v̂w (w, s) is convex, then T n v̂ is convex; moreover, T n v̂w (w, s) = uc (ĉ)
and the policy function converges, and hence so does the marginal value of net worth.
Thus, vw (w, s) is convex, too.
Part (ii): Define S̄ and S̄ o as in the proof of Proposition 5. Define the operator
T as in the proof of Proposition D.1 and define the operator T̃ associated with π̃(s0 )
analogously. Proceeding along the lines of the proof of part (i) of Proposition D.1, one
can show that T (S̄) ⊂ S̄ o ⊂ S̄ and analogously for T̃ .
Pick v̂ ∈ S̄ o such that v̂w (w) is convex. We show that if T̃ n v̂w (w) ≥ T n v̂w (w), then
n+1
T̃
v̂w (w) ≥ T n+1 v̂w (w). Suppose that T̃ n v̂w (w) ≥ T n v̂w (w), but that h̃ < h, and hence
c̃ > c and w̃0 < w0 . Using the first order condition for savings, we have
uc (c) = E[βRT n vw (y 0 + h)] ≤ Ẽ[βRT n vw (ỹ 0 + h)] < Ẽ[βRT̃ n vw (w̃0 )] ≤ uc (c̃),
and thus c > c̃, a contradiction. Thus, h̃ ≥ h, c̃ ≤ c, and T̃ n+1 v̂w (w) ≥ T n+1 v̂w (w).
Since T n v̂ → v and T n v̂w (w, s) = uc (c) (and analogously for T̃ v̂), and the policy
functions converge, the value functions v and ṽ satisfy the property, too. 2
While this result is well-understood (see Leland (1968), Sandmo (1970), Sibley (1975),
and Kimball (1990)), we provide a simple and to the best of our knowledge novel proof
using a similar recursive approach to the one in the proof of Proposition 2. Again, we
emphasize that risk aversion is sufficient for state-contingent savings to be precautionary
in our model, in contrast to savings in incomplete markets models which require further
assumptions about preferences, in particular prudence, to guarantee precautionary behavior. Note that the presence of borrowing constraints strengthens the precautionary
demand for saving by inducing local convexity in the marginal utility of net worth (see
Deaton (1991)), but additional assumptions about preferences are required to guarantee
precautionary behavior globally.
Figure D.1 illustrates the effect of an increase in risk (that is, a mean-preserving
spread) on hedging in our model and on saving in the incomplete markets model when
the marginal utility is convex. The top left panel shows that in our model the expenditure
4

Appendix -- For Online Publication

on state-contingent savings is precautionary (see Proposition 5). The bottom left panel
shows that, when uc (c) is convex, saving is precautionary in the Bewley economy (see
Proposition D.2). The example has an independent income process with three states.
Specifically, y(s0 ) ∈ {y − σ, y, y + σ} with probabilities π(s0 ) = πσ , 1 − 2πσ , and πσ
respectively. We study an increase in risk in the sense of a mean-preserving spread by
considering values of πσ equal to 0 (in which case the economy is deterministic), 0.2, and
0.5 (which is the example studied in Figure 1).
Notice that the deterministic limit of our economy and the Bewley economy coincide
and hence the solid (black) line denoting “hedging” expenditure R−1 h0 in our model in
the top left panel is identical to the solid (black) line denoting saving R−1 h in the Bewley
economy in the bottom left panel. In a deterministic economy, there is no “hedging” or
saving in the steady state, but for higher (and transitory) levels of net worth “hedging”
or saving is clearly positive as households dissave slowly.
In our model, hedging expenditures are increasing in risk (see the top left panel), but
the behavior of hedging for each state h(s0 ) is not monotone in risk. Indeed, one can prove
that inf w {h(s0 ) > 0} is the same for all values of πσ and that in a neighborhood above
that threshold h(s0 ) is decreasing in πσ . But the top right panel shows that this pattern
reverses for higher levels of net worth. In contrast, in the example h(s̄0 ) is monotone
increasing in πσ . In comparison, in the Bewley economy with convex marginal utility, an
increase in risk increases saving (as the bottom left panel shows), that is, households save
more for a given level of wealth than they would in the deterministic economy.

Appendix D.2: Risk Management when Households are Eventually Unconstrained
Consider the limit of the economy in Section 2 where βR = 1, which means that households are eventually unconstrained.37 We show that the economy displays full insurance
under the stationary distribution in the limit and that household net worth is nevertheless
bounded in the limit. These results are related to results for the classic class of income fluctuations problems studied among others by Yaari (1976), Schechtman (1976), Schechtman
and Escudero (1977), Bewley (1977, 1980), Aiyagari (1994), and especially Chamberlain
and Wilson (2000), in which households solve a consumption savings problem with noncontingent debt and borrowing constraints, that is, have access to incomplete markets
37

Aguiar, Amador, and Gopinath (2009) discuss the effect of impatience on the long run behavior of
models with limited commitment.

5

Appendix -- For Online Publication
only.38 Our results are similar in that there is complete consumption insurance in the
limit, but they are rather different in that net worth is bounded in the limit whereas it
grows without bound in these related papers. Thus, our model features substantially less
asset accumulation than the canonical model with incomplete markets.
We emphasize that for net worth levels below the upper bound of net worth under
the stationary distribution wbnd (s), ∀s ∈ S (see the proof of Proposition 4 for an exact
definition), household risk management is incomplete and increasing in current net worth
even when βR = 1, although such levels of net worth are transient. The main result of
our paper hence obtains even in this case, albeit only in the transition.
When income is independent over time and βR = 1, we know from equation (7) and
the envelope condition that vw (w) = vw (w0 ) + λ0 and therefore vw (w) is non-increasing
and w is non-decreasing.39 Denoting the upper bound of net worth under the stationary
distribution by w̄, we hence have vw (w̄) ≥ vw (w0 ), but by strict concavity vw (w̄) ≤ vw (w0 ),
and thus w̄ = w0 , ∀s0 ∈ S, that is, w̄ is absorbing. Note that for w < ȳ, λ(s̄0 ) > 0 and
w(s̄0 ) = ȳ. Moreover, suppose ∃s0 ∈ S, such that w0 > ȳ, then vw (ȳ) > vw (w0 ) and
λ0 > 0, that is, w0 = y 0 ≤ ȳ, a contradiction. Therefore, w0 = ȳ, for all s0 ∈ S. Thus, the
stationary net worth distribution collapses to unit mass at w̄ = ȳ.
Proposition D.3 states that the full insurance result is general, that is, does not require independence of the income process. Moreover, as βR goes to 1, the stationary
distribution converges to the stationary distribution given βR = 1 and, when the income
process is independent, the stationary distribution for higher β first-order stochastically
dominates the distribution for lower β.
Proposition D.3 (Full insurance under the stationary distribution in the limit). (i)
When βR = 1, the household engages in full insurance under the stationary distribution.
(ii) Let p∗ (β) be the stationary distribution of net worth for given β. As β % R−1 ,
p∗ (β) → p∗ (R−1 ); moreover, when Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 ∈ S, if β+ > β, then p∗ (β+ )
FOSD p∗ (β).
Proof of Proposition D.3. Part (i): From equation (7) and the envelope condition
that vw (w, s) = vw (w0 , s0 ) + λ0 and therefore vw (w, s) is non-increasing. Consider the
marginal value of net worth at the upper bound of the stationary distribution for some
state s, vw (w̄(s), s); suppose there exists some state, say, w.l.o.g., next period, such that
vw (w̄(s), s) > vw (w0 , s0 ). But vw (w0 , s0 ) ≥ vw (w00 , s00 ), ∀s00 ∈ S, including s00 = s. But
then, by concavity, vw (w̄(s), s) ≤ vw (w00 , s), a contradiction. Thus, vw (w, s) = vw (w0 , s0 ),
∀(w, s), (w0 , s0 ) in the support of the stationary distribution.
38

In a calibrated life-cycle model with incomplete markets, Fuster and Willen (2011) study the trade-off
between insuring consumption across states and intertemporal smoothing quantitatively.
39
This result is reminiscent of the downward rigidity of wage contracts in Harris and Holmström (1982).

6

Appendix -- For Online Publication
Part (ii): We first prove that as β % R−1 , p∗ (β) → p∗ (R−1 ). From the proof of
Proposition 4 and Theorem 11.4 in Stokey and Lucas with Prescott (1989), we know that
kp0 P (β)k − p∗ (β)k∆ ≤ (1 − ε)k kp0 − p∗ (β)k∆ ≤ (1 − ε)k 2,
where p0 and p∗ (β) are defined in the proof of Proposition 4 and k · k∆ denotes the total
variation norm, and we use the fact that the total variation norm is bounded by 2. Note
that ε = ε(ȳ,s̄) does not depend on β.
Let δn > 0, δn & 0. Given δn , there exists kn such that kp0 P (β)kn − p∗ (β)k∆ < δn /2,
∀β. Further, pick βn such that ∀β > βn ,
vwβ (ȳ, s̄) = (βR)l vwβ (wlβ (s), s), wlβ (s) ≥ y(s), and |wlβ (s) − w∗ (s)| < δn , 1 ≤ l ≤ kn , ∀s 6= s̄,
−1

−1

where vwR (ȳ, s̄) = vwR (w∗ (s), s), ∀s 6= s̄. Note that by continuity of the optimal policy
in β we can ensure that there is such a βn . Essentially, for all β > βn , the household
hedges all states (except the highest one) for the first kn periods.
Define Hn (β) = {z ∈ Z ∗ (β)|p0 P (β)kn (z) > 0}, Rn (β) = {z ∈ Z ∗ (β)|p0 P (β)kn (z) =
0} = Z ∗ (β) \ Hn (β), and Hn (β, s) = {z ∈ Z ∗ (β)|z = (wlβ (s), s), 1 ≤ l ≤ kn }, ∀s 6= s̄, and
Hn (β, s̄) = {(ȳ, s̄)}. By construction, we have p0 P (β)kn (Hn (β, s)) = p0 P (R−1 )kn ({(w∗ (s), s)})
and p0 P (β)kn (Hn (β)) = p0 P (R−1 )kn (Z ∗ (R−1 )) = 1. For β > βn ,
|p∗ (β)(Hn (β, s)) − p∗ (R−1 )({(w∗ (s), s)})| < |p∗ (β)(Hn (β, s)) − p0 P (R−1 )kn ({(w∗ (s), s)})|
+|p0 P (R−1 )kn ({(w∗ (s), s)}) − p∗ (R−1 )({(w∗ (s), s)})|
= |p∗ (β)(Hn (β, s)) − p0 P (β)kn (Hn (β, s))|
+|p0 P (R−1 )kn ({(w∗ (s), s)}) − p∗ (R−1 )({(w∗ (s), s)})| < δn /2 + δn /2 = δn ,
which follows from the convergence in the total variation norm given any β. Moreover,
Hn (β, s) → {(w∗ (s), s)}, ∀s 6= s̄, and p∗ (β)(Rn (β)) → 0 and p∗ (β)(Hn (β)) → 1.
We now prove that when Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 ∈ S, if β+ > β, then p∗ (β+ ) FOSD
p∗ (β). We follow a proof strategy similar to the one used in Part (i) of Proposition 5.
Define the operator T as in the proof of Proposition 2. Let β+ > β and denote variables
associate with β+ with a subscript +. As before, T (S̄) ⊂ S̄ o ⊂ S̄ and analogously for T+ .
Pick v̂ ∈ S̄ o . We show that if T+n v̂w (w, s) ≥ T n v̂w (w, s), then T+n+1 v̂w (w, s) ≥
n+1
T
v̂w (w, s). Suppose T+n v̂w (w, s) ≥ T n v̂w (w, s), but that T+n+1 v̂w (w, s) < T n+1 v̂w (w, s),
and hence by the envelope condition uc (c+ ) < uc (c), implying that c+ > c and E[h0+ |s] <
E[h0 |s]. If so, there must exist a state s0 for which 0 ≤ h+ (s0 ) < h(s0 ) and w+ (s0 ) < w(s0 ),
but then
uc (c+ ) < uc (c) = βRT n vw (w(s0 ), s0 ) ≤ βRT n vw (w+ (s0 ), s0 ) < β+ RT+n vw (w+ (s0 ), s0 ) ≤ uc (c+ ),
a contradiction. Hence, T+n+1 v̂w (w, s) ≥ T n+1 v̂w (w, s), c+ ≤ c, and E[h0+ |s] ≥ E[h0 |s].
Since T n v̂ → v and T n v̂w (w, s) = uc (c) (and analogously for T+ v̂), and the policy
functions converge, the value functions v and v+ satisfy the property, too.
Note that if Π(s, s0 ) = π(s0 ), ∀s, s0 ∈ S, then net worth in the hedged states wh is
constant and E[h0+ ] ≥ E[h0 ] implies wh+ ≥ wh . In this case we can follow the proof of
7

Appendix -- For Online Publication

Part (i) of Proposition 4 and start at (ȳ, s̄), a recurrent state, with the distribution

1 if z = (ȳ, s̄)
p0 =
0 if z 6= (ȳ, s̄), z ∈ Z ∗ (β).
Let P (β) denote the transition matrix on the induced state space z = (w, s) ∈ Z ∗ (β).
Then p0 P (β+ )k FOSD p0 P (β)k and hence p∗ (β+ ) FOSD p∗ (β). 2
In the case of a symmetric two state Markov chain for income, we can solve for the
stationary distribution of net worth in closed form. Specifically, say S = {sL , sH } with
sL < sH , and Π(sH , sH ) = Π(sL , sL ) ≡ p. We use subscripts L and H where convenient.
Using the fact that the stationary distribution of y is (1/2, 1/2) and that wH = yH since
the household does not hedge the highest state next period given stochastic monotonicity
(see Proposition 3), wL = yL + hL , cH = wH − (1 − p)R−1 hL , cL = wL − pR−1 hL , and
cH = cL , that is, full insurance, we obtain
hL =

R
(yH −yL ),
R−ρ

wL −wH =

ρ
(yH −yL ),
R−ρ

cH = cL ≡ c = E[y]+

1 r
(yH −yL )
2R−ρ

where ρ = 2p − 1 ≥ 0 and r ≡ R − 1. When income is independent over time, p = 1/2
and ρ = 0, we have hL = yH − yL , wH = wL = yH , and c = E[y] + r/R(yH − E[y]).
Note that wL ≥ wH and that the difference wL − wH is increasing in the persistence ρ.
So net worth as we defined it is higher in the low state than in the high state. To see why
this is, denote the present value of income (ex current income), that is, human capital,
by P Vs , and note that
P VH = R−1 (p(yH + P VH ) + (1 − p)(yL + P VL ))
P VL = R−1 ((1 − p)(yH + P VH ) + p(yL + P VL ))

which implies that P VH − P VL = wL − wH or wH + P VH = wL + P VL , that is, total
wealth, (financial) net worth plus human capital, is constant across states. When the
household has low current income, his (financial) net worth is high to compensate for the
reduction in present value of future labor income. When income is independent over time,
the present value of future labor income is constant across states and so is the household’s
(financial) net worth.
To sum up, when βR = 1, households are eventually unconstrained and fully insured,
but their net worth remains finite, in contrast to the models with incomplete markets in
which households accumulate infinite buffer stocks to smooth consumption in the limit.40
40

That said, assuming βR < 1, Castañeda, Dı́az-Giménez, and Rı́os-Rull (2003) and the subsequent
literature are able to match the wealth accumulation in calibrated versions of the incomplete markets
model.

8

Appendix -- For Online Publication

Figure D.1: Risk and Precautionary Behavior of Hedging and Saving

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2
0.1
0

Bewley Saving (uc convex)

Hedging

Hedging Expenditure

This figure displays the effect of an increase in risk on the precautionary behavior of household
income risk management in our model (top two panels) and of saving in a Bewley (1977) economy
with convex uc (c). Household income follows an independent three state Markov process with
y(s0 ) ∈ {y − σ, y, y + σ} and π(s0 ) = πσ , 1 − 2πσ , and πσ , respectively, with y = 1, σ = 0.2,
and πσ taking the values 0 (solid (black) – deterministic case), 0.2 (dash-dotted (green)), and 0.5
(dashed (red) – two state case as in Figure 1). For our model, the top left panel displays hedging
expenditures E[R−1 h0 ] and the top right panel hedging for each state next period h(s0 ) as a function
of net worth for various values of πσ . For the Bewley (1977) economy, the bottom left panel displays
saving h as a function of net worth for various values of πσ . The other parameter values are as in Figure 1.

0.1

0.8

1
1.2
Current net worth (w)

1.4

0.8

1
1.2
Current net worth (w)

1.4

0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.2

9

0.8

1
1.2
Current net worth (w)

1.4

