                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       A CONTAGIOUS MALADY? OPEN ECONOMY DIMENSIONS OF SECULAR
                             STAGNATION

                                     Gauti B. Eggertsson
                                      Neil R. Mehrotra
                                      Sanjay R. Singh
                                    Lawrence H. Summers

                                      Working Paper 22299
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22299


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2016




This paper was written for the conference ”Secular Stagnation, Growth and Real Interest Rates,”
organized by the European University Institute and the International Monetary Fund on June
18-19, 2015 for a special issue of the IMF Economics Review. We would like to thank
Emmanuel Farhi, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Jean-Paul L’Huillier, Matteo Maggiori, Gregory
Thwaites, and Jaume Ventura for helpful discussions and conference and seminar participants at
Brown, Cambridge, Duke, the EUI-IMF Conference on Secular Stagnation, Federal Reserve
Board, FRB San Francisco, MIT, NBER IFM, Oxford, Stanford, UC Berkeley, and the World
Bank for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Gauti B. Eggertsson, Neil R. Mehrotra, Sanjay R. Singh, and Lawrence H. Summers.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Contagious Malady? Open Economy Dimensions of Secular Stagnation
Gauti B. Eggertsson, Neil R. Mehrotra, Sanjay R. Singh, and Lawrence H. Summers
NBER Working Paper No. 22299
June 2016
JEL No. E31,E32,E52,F33

                                           ABSTRACT

Conditions of secular stagnation - low interest rates, below target inflation, and sluggish output
growth - characterize much of the global economy. We consider an overlapping generations, open
economy model of secular stagnation, and examine the effect of capital flows on the transmission
of stagnation. In a world with a low natural rate of interest, greater capital integration transmits
recessions across countries as opposed to lower interest rates. In a global secular stagnation,
expansionary fiscal policy carries positive spillovers implying gains from coordination, and fiscal
policy is self-financing. Expansionary monetary policy, by contrast, is beggar-thy-neighbor with
output gains in one country coming at the expense of the other. Similarly, we find that
competitiveness policies including structural labor market reforms or neomercantilist trade
policies are also beggar-thy-neighbor in a global secular stagnation.


Gauti B. Eggertsson                             Sanjay R. Singh
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Brown University                                Brown University
64 Waterman Street                              64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912                            Providence, RI 02912
and NBER                                        sanjay@brown.edu
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu
                                                Lawrence H. Summers
Neil R. Mehrotra                                Harvard Kennedy School of Government
Department of Economics                         79 JFK Street
Brown University                                Cambridge, MA 02138
64 Waterman Street                              and NBER
Providence, RI 02906                            lhs@harvard.edu
neil_mehrotra@brown.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22299
                                                                                                                            Figure 1: Short and Long-Term Interest Rates

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


 "                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
           "#


                              #



                                                            #
                                                                       #!
                                                                                 #"
                                                                                          ##
                                                                                                     


                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                   


                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                 #


                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                         #




                                                                                                                                                                                               
                     #



                                                   #




                                                                                                               



                                                                                                                                              



                                                                                                                                                                           



                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "#


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
1              Introduction

In this paper we analyze the open economy dimensions of secular stagnation. The concept of
secular stagnation, dating back to Hansen (1939), was recently resurrected by Summers (2013).1
The key idea, in Summers formulation, is that the natural rate of interest - the real interest rate the
Federal Reserve needs to track to achieve full employment - is permanently negative. This poses
a major challenge for policy due to the fact the nominal interest rate cannot be cut below the zero
lower bound (ZLB). Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) offer the ﬁrst attempt to formally model sec-
ular stagnation using an overlapping generation model (OLG) in the spirit of Samuelson (1958) in
a closed economy. However, low interest rates and lackluster growth are a global phenomenon. To
understand secular stagnation in a open economy, we here consider a two country open economy
OLG framework with varying degrees of ﬁnancial market imperfection across countries.
           Broadly speaking, this paper makes three central points. First, secular stagnation - which can
be thought of as economies permanently facing the possibility of the ZLB without any natural
force toward normalcy - may be important in modeling modern economies. Secular stagnation
can be an important phenomenon in the global economy either because the world economy as a
whole is in stagnation or a part of the global economy is in stagnation. In the latter case, we show
how stagnation can be transmitted from one part of the global economy to another via capital
ﬂows and the associated trade dislocations.
           Second, in the open economy, policies that are stimulative for the home economy can have very
different impacts on other economies and on the choices available to other countries in a secular

          1
              See also Summers (2014), Summers (2015a) and Summers (2015b) for further exposition on the secular stagnation
hypothesis.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
stagnation. In general, monetary policies and those directed at competitiveness carry negative
externalities, while ﬁscal policies and policies directed at stimulating domestic demand carry pos-
itive externalities. In a positive sense, the fact that ﬁscal policy beneﬁts spillover across countries
explains why the world has relied more on monetary policies relative to ﬁscal policies in the wake
of the ﬁnancial crisis. In a normative sense, our ﬁndings point towards the desirability of a robust
ﬁscal response.
   Third, ﬁscal policies in response to secular stagnation are consistent with the government’s
long run budget constraint with three considerations being central. First, they may pay for them-
selves as in DeLong and Summers (2012), and we verify, in our model, that ﬁscal expansions
actually lower the debt to GDP ratio. Second, balanced budget policies like tax ﬁnanced spending
or the expansion of pay as you go social security have positive ﬁscal impacts. Third, a one shot
increase in debt will raise demand and is clearly sustainable in a secular stagnation.
   At the time of writing, the US has just raised the Federal Funds rate for the ﬁrst time since
2008 based upon the hope that recovery is well underway and inﬂation will rise back to target.
Meanwhile, much of the world remains stuck at the ZLB with some central banks seeking further
stimulus. Our analysis suggest that, to the extent that the rise in US rates increases capital ﬂows
to the US, these ﬂows place further downward pressure on the natural rate of interest in the US. If
these forces are strong enough, the Federal Reserve will be forced to cut rates back to zero. Capital
ﬂight to the US due to a slowing economy and political instability from emerging markets, such
as China, Brazil and Russia, will have the same effect. Figure 2 shows the estimated acceleration
in capital outﬂows from China in 2015 and 2016 according to an estimate from the Institute for
International Finance.
   The paper is organized as follows with some key results highlighted. Section 2 proposes a
two country overlapping generations endowment economy with imperfect capital integration.
Here, we provide a simple framework that rationalizes the secular decline in short and long term
interest rates, seen in 1, throughout the world in the past quarter of a century. We incorporate
imperfect capital integration across countries to explain persistent differences in real interest rates
across countries, thus rationalizing how one part of the world may ﬁnd itself in a secular stagna-
tion, while the other is not. Indeed, Japan hit the zero bound in the mid 1990’s - well before the
Great Recession brought the rest of the developed world to the ZLB. While the closed economy
literature on secular stagnation emphasized forces like demographic trends, inequality, the fall in
relative price of investment, and debt deleveraging, our framework shows how these forces can
be transmitted across regions via ”global imbalances” - countries with excess savings and low real
interest rates will export savings to those countries where returns are higher.
   In Section 3, we extend the model to include government debt, taxes, and reserve accumula-
tion. The goal is to show how the global saving glut hypothesis of Bernanke (2005) ﬁts naturally
into our framework. According to this hypothesis, current account deﬁcits in the US prior to
                                                  2
                                  Figure 2: Net capital ﬂows from China


   

              

              

               

         

            

        
                                                                                          
                                                 




the Great Recession were a consequence of heightened demand for US debt, including the accu-
mulation of US Treasuries by various foreign governments. Figure 3 displays global imbalances
leading up to the ﬁnancial crisis. Both the global savings glut and the forces emphasized in secular
stagnation theory can generate a persistent decline in the natural rate of interest in the US.
   Section 4 extends the simple endowment economy to include production and price determi-
nation and formally deﬁnes equilibrium in the full model. Section 5 shows how the model can
be reduced to a simple set of steady state relationships that can by analyzed via basic aggregate
demand and supply diagrams. This simpliﬁes our expressions considerably and corresponds to a
limiting case in which case the secular stagnation is permanent without any pullback to full em-
ployment. We consider secular stagnation under both imperfect and perfect capital integration.
In the former case, one country is in secular stagnation while the other is not; we think of this
version of the model as capturing the salient features of the global imbalances period pre 2008
and, particularly, the interaction of the US and Japan prior to 2008. In the latter case, we think
of our model as capturing features of the US and Eurozone interaction from 2008 to 2015. In the
endowment economy in section 2, current account imbalances transmitted low real rates; in the
production economy with wage rigidity, capital markets may propagate output shortfalls and a
binding zero lower bound rather than lower real interest rates.
   The fact that capital ﬂows can worsen stagnation allows us to formalize the idea of neomercan-
tilism - a policy regime that encourages exports and discourages imports with the aim of increas-
ing a country’s net foreign asset position. If a country targets a positive net foreign asset position
via its trading partner (e.g. by running large trade surpluses), this policy will exert a negative


                                                              3
                                                                                                 Figure 3: Global Imbalances


                    & )$0
                                                 
                    & $$0                       
                                                 
                    % )$0                       
                                                  
                    % $$0                      ! 
                                                    
  0  




                    $ )$0

                    $ $$0

                    !$ )$0

                    !% $$0

                    !% )$0

                    !& $$0
                              %--$
                                      %--%
                                              %--&
                                                      %--'
                                                              %--(
                                                                      %--)
                                                                              %--*
                                                                                      %--+
                                                                                              %--,
                                                                                                      %---
                                                                                                              &$$$
                                                                                                                      &$$%
                                                                                                                              &$$&
                                                                                                                                      &$$'
                                                                                                                                              &$$(
                                                                                                                                                      &$$)
                                                                                                                                                              &$$*
                                                                                                                                                                      &$$+
                                                                                                                                                                              &$$,
                                                                                                                                                                                      &$$-
                                                                                                                                                                                              &$%$
                                                                                                                                                                                                      &$%%
                                                                                                                                                                                                              &$%&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &$%'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &$%(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &$%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &$%*
externality on the trading partner. A policy of this type can, in principle, generate a recovery at
home, depending on the details of how the increase in net asset holdings is ﬁnanced. Neomercan-
tilism is therefore an example of a beggar-thy-neighbor policy. It is worth emphasizing that these
effects are speciﬁc to a world in which the nominal interest rate are zero.
         Another example of a beggar-thy-neighbor policy are structural reforms where a country in-
creases wage ﬂexibility. While this policy raises output in the country undertaking the reform, it
comes at the expense of its trading partner. Moreover, aggregate world output declines as a con-
sequence. This ﬁnding is suggestive that structural reforms of this type in Southern Europe may
not be the magic bullet for restoring growth in Europe.
         Section 6 studies monetary and exchange rate policy. We ﬁnd that exchange rate depreciation,
in general, is at the expense of the trading partner if both countries are in secular stagnation. It
is thus yet another example of beggar thy neighbor policy. Increasing the inﬂation target in one
country can be effective, but will also have similarly strong negative externalities on the trading
partner if the trading partner does not inﬂate as well. We also identify a key difﬁculty with mone-
tary policy in a secular stagnation which extends the previous result in Eggertsson and Mehrotra
(2014) to an open economy. While a higher inﬂation target, if credible, allows for a better equilib-
rium, the secular stagnation equilibrium cannot be excluded.
         Section 7 introduces ﬁscal policy. In contrast to monetary policy, trade policy, or structural
reforms, expansionary ﬁscal policy generates positive externalities for the trading partners in a

                                                                                                                                       4
secular stagnation. Moreover, ﬁscal policy does not suffer from the multiple equilibria problem
that we ﬁnd for monetary policy. A sufﬁciently robust ﬁscal expansion eliminates the secular
stagnation equilibrium altogether. Fiscal policy ”jump starts” the economy.
      One reason ﬁscal policy is so powerful in our model is that Ricardian equivalence does not
hold due to the assumption of ﬁnite lifetimes. This means that government debt is far from neu-
tral. Higher levels of public debt raise the natural rate of interest directly and thus eliminate the
need for a negative real interest rate, thereby pulling the economy out of secular stagnation. We
formally establish, under mild conditions, that debt ﬁnanced ﬁscal expansions actually reduce the
debt to GDP ratio in a secular stagnation as suggested in DeLong and Summers (2012). We obtain
this ﬁnding without assuming any hysteresis effects.
      While this policy is quite powerful, we also discuss some possible drawbacks. We consider the
effect of increasing government spending with direct taxation on the working population. This
balanced budget policy, as well, directly increases the natural rate of interest and pulls the econ-
omy out of secular stagnation. As with debt expansion, this policy has strong positive externalities
for the trading partners. Given that ﬁscal policy carries positive externalities, countries will tend
to undersupply ﬁscal expansion. We show formally how ﬁscal expansion absent coordination is
undersupplied relative to cooperation, and show what factors inﬂuence the severity of the coor-
dination problem.
      In Section 8, we calibrate our model to quantify the two particular episodes already alluded to:
the asymmetric stagnation of Japan and the US pre 2008 and the symmetric stagnation of US and
Eurozone from 2008-2015. Our calibration suggests that Japan greatly beneﬁted from capital ﬂows
to the US, as this allowed it to export its excess savings during this period. Our calibration also
suggests that the US in fact may have beneﬁted from closing capital markets in the latter period, as
it would have avoided the zero bound. These numerical examples are meant to highlight that the
framework presented here can easily be parameterized to draw concrete quantitative conclusions
on the sources of secular stagnation and possible policy responses. We expect it can be enhanced
considerably to yield more detailed quantitative predictions.


1.1     Related Literature

We have already pointed out that our paper draws heavily on Summers original reformulation
of the secular stagnation hypothesis, and the model proposed in Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014).
Our paper also relates to the emerging literature on models of economic stagnation, including
Kocherlakota (2013), Caballero and Farhi (2014), Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2013), Benigno and
Fornaro (2015), Bianchi and Kung (2014), and Guerron-Quintana and Jinnai (2014). With the ex-
ceptions of Kocherlakota (2013) and Caballero and Farhi (2014), these models feature a steady
state real interest rate that is always positive and determined solely by the discount factor of the

                                                   5
representative household.
    This paper is closest in spirit to recent work by Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2015) which
was developed independently and concurrently with our work. In their model, a stagnation
episode in their model is driven by shortage of safe assets. In contrast, our framework highlights
several alternative forces that have been more closely tied to the secular stagnation hypothesis, in-
cluding demographics, debt deleveraging, a fall in the relative price of investment goods, income
inequality, and global capital ﬂows. While, we do not analyze the safe asset shortage hypothesis,
we do not view it as incompatible with our framework. Despite a different theoretical setup, we
ﬁnd that many of our policy conclusions are broadly complementary.
    At a conceptual level, another key difference in our model from Caballero, Farhi and Gourin-
chas (2015) is our focus on imperfect ﬁnancial integration across countries. Our model allows for
the possibility that only part of the world is in a secular stagnation while the rest of the world is
not. By contrast, in Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2015) all countries are in a secular stagnation
or none. This feature is necessary to capture the long lasting slump in Japan, and the fact that
the US is appears to exiting the ZLB while Europe and Japan are not. This difference arises from
the fact that we consider the case of incomplete ﬁnancial integration which allows us to model
violations of interest rate parity.
    One key advantage of our framework, relative to others is that our model delivers a locally
unique equilibria which allows for comparative statics.2 Our model is thus easier to quantify
and delivers sharper implications for policy relative to the literature that focuses on the deﬂation
steady state in a standard representative agent model.
    Our approach contrasts with the analysis of liquidity traps in New Keynesian open economy
models. These models, including Fujiwara et al. (2013), Cook and Devereux (2013), and Acharya
and Bengui (2016) analyze monetary policy in a global liquidity trap and consider the implications
of capital market integration. As in our model, Devereux and Yetman (2014) show that capital
controls can potentially prevent the spread of liquidity traps. In general, like the closed economy
New Keynesian model, these models cannot generate a ZLB steady state (or highly persistent ZLB
episodes) and generally suffer from the forward guidance puzzle (see McKay, Nakamura and
Steinsson (2015)).
    Our model is similar in structure to the model of Coeurdacier, Guibaud and Jin (2015) which
examines how ﬁnancial integration accounts to declining real interest rates and capital ﬂows from
emerging markets to advanced economies. We consider the implications of low natural rates with
a binding zero lower bound and nominal frictions. Our model also shares features of models that
examine the global demand for safe assets and the persistent US current account deﬁcit: Caballero,
Farhi and Gourinchas (2008), Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013) and Maggiori (2013). Interestingly,
    2
        Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2013) and Benigno and Fornaro (2015) are examples of models in which the stagnation
steady state is locally indeterminate.

                                                           6
when the natural rate falls below the population growth rate, our model can generate a trade
deﬁcit in steady state for debtor countries. Finally, our results on the gains from monetary and
ﬁscal coordination build on earlier work by Clarida, Galı and Gertler (2002), Dixit and Lambertini
(2003) and Benigno and Benigno (2006).
    Finally, let us note, that Eggertsson, Mehrotra and Summers (2016) consider a textbook vari-
ation of this model, conﬁrming the basic insights of what we show here and also discussing the
role of real exchange movements.


2   Capital Integration and the Natural Rate of Interest

We start by showing how the real interest rate is determined in an endowment economy, allowing
for varying degrees of ﬁnancial integration. In the more general model we introduce later, the
real interest rate we derive here maps directly into the natural rate of interest in each country.
To consider intermediate cases between autarky and full ﬁnancial integration, we introduce a
constraint on international capital ﬂows. Our focus is to show how the domestic real interest rate
is affected by the degree of ﬁnancial market integration.
    There are two countries, domestic and foreign. Each country trades a one period risk free bond
with returns rt and rt∗ respectively. Without loss of generality, we focus here on the case in which
rt ≥ rt∗ , - a situation in which the returns on the asset in the domestic economy dominate that in
the foreign country so long as capital markets are imperfectly integrated.
    Consider a simple overlapping generation economy. Households live for three periods: they
are born in period 1 (young), earn income in period 2 (middle aged), and retire in period 3 (old).
We assume there are no aggregate savings, but that the generations can borrow and lend to one an-
other. We assume that only the middle age receive income, Yt and Yt∗ respectively. This will imply
that the middle aged generation in each country lend to the young in order to save for retirement.
A key constraint we impose is on the borrowing of the young. The young are constrained by a
borrowing limit (1 + rt )Bty ≤ Dt and (1 + rt∗ )Bt∗y ≤ Dt as in Eggertsson and Krugman (2012).
Implicitly, we think of this limit as emerging from some type of incentive constraint, however, for
our purposes, we take it to be exogenous.
    If the real interest rate is higher in one country than the other, savings will ﬂow to the coun-
try with the highest yield. If there are no constraints on capital ﬂows, then the real interest rate
in equilibrium is equalized across the two countries. We impose a simple quantity constraint on
international capital ﬂows which we denote by Kt . In particular, we assume that the domestic
debt held by the foreign middle generation has to be lower than some Kt . Again, implicitly, we
are assuming this constraint reﬂects some sort of incentive constraint, perhaps due to incomplete
enforcement of contracts across national borders, home bias for investors, or other limits to arbi-
trage. For the purpose of our analysis, we will simply treat this constraint as exogenous. One
                                                 7
could similarly interpret this as representing some form of capital controls since it places a direct
quantity limit on how much capital can move across countries. When the constraint is not binding,
then real interest rates must be equalized across the two countries.3
    Formally, consider the following overlapping generation model. A domestic household born
at time t has the following utility function:
                                                                 m            o 
                                max         Et log (Cty ) + β log Ct+1 + β 2 log Ct+2
                            Cty ,Ct+1
                                  m ,C o
                                      t+2


subject to the following (real) budget constraints:

                                            Cty = Bty                                                              (1)
                                        m
                                       Ct+1 = Yt+1 − (1 + rt )Bty − AD
                                                                     t+1 − At+1
                                                                            I
                                                                                                                   (2)
                                                                      ∗
                                        o
                                       Ct+2 = (1 + rt+1 )AD
                                                          t+1 + (1 + rt+1 )At+1
                                                                            I
                                                                                                                   (3)
                                 (1 + rt )Bti ≤ Dt                                                                 (4)
                                              0 ≤ AIt+1 ≤ Kt+1                                                     (5)

Here Cti denotes consumption for each generation i, Bty borrowing in a one period risk-free bond
that carries an interest rate rt . AD
                                    t is the asset holding of the middle aged household of the domes-
tic bond that carries interest rate rt while AIt+1 is the middle generation holdings of the foreign
asset. The foreign economy has the same set of preferences and faces the same set of constraints.
We assume that there is no short-selling of the foreign asset. While the middle generation can
accumulate a positive position in AIt+1 , which earns interest rt∗ , it cannot issue its own debt at the
rate rt∗ .
    We consider an equilibrium in which the borrowing constraint for the young is binding:

                                                                   Dt
                                                  Cty = Bty =                                                      (6)
                                                                 1 + rt
In equilibrium, the middle generation lend to the young to save for their retirement. Their savings
decision satisﬁes a consumption Euler equation:
                                                 1                  1
                                                  m = βEt (1 + rt ) o                                              (7)
                                                Ct                 Ct+1

while the old consume all their income - principal and interest on domestic and foreign savings.

                                                                    ∗
                                                        t−1 + (1 + rt−1 )At−1
                                      Cto = (1 + rt−1 )AD                 I
                                                                                                                   (8)

    3
        We derive similar results when there is a credit spread function that depends on the level of the capital ﬂow
between the two countries. We adopt the quantity restriction here given that the resulting equilibrium conditions are a
generalization of the closed economy case considered in Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), and provide a slightly simpler
exposition.

                                                           8
    The residents of the foreign economy satisfy the same conditions where we denote each vari-
able with a star. The model is closed by bond market clearing in each country. For the domestic
market it is given by:
                                                                    ∗
                                                Nt Bty = Nt−1 AD
                                                               t + Nt−1 At
                                                                         I∗
                                                                                                                                     (9)
while the foreign bond market clearing condition is given below:

                                                Nt∗ Bty∗ = Nt−1
                                                            ∗
                                                                 t + Nt−1 At
                                                                AD∗        I
                                                                                                                                   (10)

which closes the model.4
    Without loss of generality, we consider the case in which rt > rt∗ . In this case, the international
lending constraint is binding (5). Deﬁne 1 + gt =                       Nt
                                                                       Nt−1   and ωt =       Nt
                                                                                           Nt +Nt∗ .   Then we can express the
domestic asset market clearing constraint as:
                                                                          1 − ωt−1 ∗
                                              (1 + gt ) Bty = AD
                                                               t +                Kt
                                                                            ωt−1
The left-hand side is the domestic demand for loans, Ldt , and the right-hand side is the supply of
loans, Lst from domestic and foreign sources. The domestic demand for loans can be expressed in
terms of the collateral constraint (6) so that:
                                               1 + gt
                                                      Dt  Ldt =
                                               1 + rt
    Assuming perfect foresight, we obtain the domestic supply of loans by substituting the budget
constraint of the old (8) to solve for the consumption of the middle aged using the Euler equation,
(7). We then substitute the resulting expression for Ctm into the middle aged budget constraint
(2), use (6) and solve for AD
                            t to obtain:
                                                 β                  1 − ωt−1 ∗
                                        Lst =       (Ytm − Dt−1 ) +         Kt
                                                1+β                   ωt−1
    Figure 4 depicts the demand and supply for loans in the domestic economy. The demand for
loans increases as the real interest rate fall. A lower interest rate increases the borrowing capacity
of the young, allowing them to take on more debt. As emphasized by Eggertsson and Mehrotra
(2014), both the debt deleveraging shock Dt as well as slowdown in population growth can reduce
the real interest rate. Either mechanism will shift down the demand for loans, as shown at point
B in Figure 4, leading to a drop in the real interest rate.
    By contrast, the supply for loans remains unchanged with deleveraging and population growth
shocks.5 This assumption implies that the middle aged are simply saving a ﬁxed fraction of their
    4
        For a given set of exogenous processes {Dt , Nt , Yt } and {Dt∗ , Nt∗ , Yt∗ }, an equilibrium in the global economy is
now characterized by a collection of stochastic processes {Cty , Cto , Ctm , rt , Bty , AIt } and {Cty∗ , Cto∗ , Ctm∗ , rt∗ , Bty∗ , AI∗
                                                                                                                                      t }

that solve (1), (2), (5), (6), (7), and (8) for the domestic and the foreign households respectively along with asset
market clearing conditions (9) and (10).
   5
     This is not a general feature of the model, but is due to the assumption of log preferences and the fact that all
income is accrued in middle aged. Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) treat the more general cases, that we omit here for
simplicity.

                                                                   9
                                                     Figure 4: Equilibrium in the asset market

                                    1.1
                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                       L
                                   1.08
                                                                                                       LS
                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                       L D shock
                                   1.06                                                                 S
                                                                                                       L D shock
        Gross Real Interest Rate




                                   1.04

                                   1.02                                      A

                                     1

                                   0.98
                                                                             B
                                   0.96
                                                                                 C
                                   0.94

                                   0.92

                                    0.9
                                      0.28   0.29      0.3      0.31    0.32     0.33           0.34    0.35       0.36
                                                                       Loans

disposable income. As a result, the supply of savings is a vertical line in Figure 4. One interesting
mechanism that shifts the supply for loans is a permanent debt deleveraging shock. This shock
leads to a reduction in Dt−1 triggering a further reduction in the real interest rate by shifting out
the supply for loans in the next period as shown by point C in Figure 4 in line with Eggertsson
and Mehrotra (2014) but in contrast to the earlier literature on deleveraging such as Eggertsson
and Krugman (2012). The fact that the young can take on less debt after a persistent decrease in
Dt means that these households have greater disposable income in middle age and thus a higher
supply of savings. Thus a permanent tightening of the collateral constraint leads to a permanent
reduction in the real interest rate.
   Relative to Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014),the new element in this model that impacts the
interest rate determination is the presence of international lending Kt∗ in the supply of loans.
The inﬂow of foreign capital will directly shift out the supply of loans, thereby reducing the real
interest rate. This provides for an additional force that can lead to secular stagnation.
   Equating loan supply and loan demand, we obtain an expression for the domestic interest rate:

                                                               1+β       (1 + gt )Dt
                                                    1 + rt =                                                              (11)
                                                                β Yt − Dt−1 + 1−ωt−1 1+β Kt∗
                                                                                     ωt−1   β

The most important implication of our supply and demand framework for loanable funds is that

                                                                        10
                 Figure 5: Effect of an increase in international lending on natural rate

                                         natural interest rates
                  1.4
                                                                              Home
                                                                              Foreign
                  1.3


                  1.2


                  1.1


                    1


                  0.9


                  0.8


                  0.7
                        0    0.05       0.1       0.15         0.2     0.25             0.3
                                      International Collateral Limit


there is no inherent reason to expect the equilibrium real interest rate to be positive. Whether
rates are positive or negative depends on the relative size of demand and supply for loanable
funds. While we show above how population dynamics and debt deleveraging may affect this
relationship, the earlier literature has also emphasized other forces such as an increase in income
inequality (which increases the supply of savings), a fall in the relative price of investment, or an
increase in uncertainty. Importantly, liberalization of capital markets - to the extent it leads to a
capital inﬂow - also exerts downward pressure on the domestic interest rates via increases in Kt∗ .
   Analogously, using the foreign asset market clearing condition (10) and combining foreign
budget constraints, we can obtain an expression for the foreign real interest rate:
                                                        ∗   ∗   1+rt ∗
                                            1 + β (1 + gt )Dt + 1+β Kt
                                1 + rt∗ =                                                         (12)
                                              β     Yt∗ − Dt−1
                                                            ∗  − Kt∗

where the foreign real interest rate will be inﬂuenced by the domestic interest rate, since the for-
eign old collect higher interest income from the domestic borrowers. Figure 5 shows the domestic
and foreign interest rate determination graphically. The x-axis reﬂects ranges of Kt∗ , and the y-axis
shows the gross real interest rate. In autarky then K ∗ = 0 so the two interest rates are determined
independently of each other. In the current example the foreign interest rate is negative while the
domestic rate is positive. We see that as Kt∗ increases, the two interest rates converge.
   Finally when Kt∗ is high enough, the international lending constraint (5) is no longer binding
and interest rates are equalized. The point of convergence may happen at either positive or neg-
ative world interest rates, depending on parameter values. Beyond this point, there is a single
                                                    11
world interest rate given by:

                                       1 + β ωt−1 (1 + gt ) Dt + (1 − ωt−1 ) (1 + gt∗ ) Dt∗
                          1 + rtW =                                                                           (13)
                                         β ωt−1 (Yt − Dt−1 ) + (1 − ωt−1 ) Yt∗ − Dt−1   ∗


Under full integration, the world interest rate will lie in between the two autarky rates.
                                   ∗                            ∗
Proposition 1. If rtaut > rtaut , then rtaut > rtW > rtaut .

Proof. Follows directly from the expression for the world interest rate under integration and the
domestic/foreign interest rates under autarky.

    Observe that in this equilibrium, as long as rt > rt∗ in autarky then capital will ﬂow into the
domestic economy. The domestic economy’s net foreign asset position under full integration is
given by:
                                     β                              Dt
                              N F Aft ull =
                                         (Yt − Dt−1 ) − (1 + gt )        <0
                                   1+β                            1 + rt
The trade balance is simply the change in the net foreign asset position adjusted for interest pay-
ments and population growth. In the case of the domestic economy, the trade balance is given by
the following expression:
                                                            1 + rt−1
                                         T Bt = N F At −             N F At−1                                   (14)
                                                            1 + gt−1
In steady state, if the real interest rate exceeds the growth rate of population, the trade balance
takes the opposite sign of the net foreign asset position. Debtor countries with negative NFA
positions must run a trade surplus in steady state. However, if r < g, the trade balance and NFA
share the same sign. Debtor countries can run perpetual trade deﬁcits.6
    As we show in coming sections, the assumption of incomplete integration will be helpful to
make sense of the fact that Japan has been experiencing conditions consistent with a secular stag-
nation for a far longer period than the rest of the world. Incomplete integration will also help
us analyze the spillover from reserve accumulation and rising global imbalances in the pre 2008
period.


3       Government Debt and the Global Savings Glut

The global saving glut hypothesis argues that the reduction in real interest rates in the US and
developed countries in recent years has been triggered by reserve accumulation by East Asian
and oil producing countries. We have shown how these forces could work via private capital
    6
        The intuition for why debtor countries can run permanent trade deﬁcits is somewhat distinct in our model from
Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008) and Maggiori (2013). Those models carry a well deﬁned risk premium, and
debtor country trade deﬁcits reﬂects compensation for risk (akin to the equity premium). In our case, r < g implies
dynamic inefﬁciency and the debtor country can borrow since the present value of national income is inﬁnite. We thank
Matteo Maggiori for pointing out this distinction.

                                                           12
ﬂows, where interest rates fall in higher interest rate countries as the lending constraint slackens.
The emphasis in the global savings glut literature, however, has usually been on government
policies that put downward pressures on US interest rates via purchases of US Treasuries. We
now extend our model to focus more squarely on reserve accumulation and ﬁscal policies, which
will, in general, impact the determination of interest rates in an OLG economy. One interesting
feature of our environment is that the effects of reserve accumulation depend both on how reserve
accumulation is ﬁnanced and the extent of capital market integration.
    We denote the lump sum tax levied on each generation by Tty , Ttm , Tto . The domestic govern-
ment issues public debt and levies taxes on each generation to make interest payments on past
government debt and ﬁnances some level of government expenditure Gt . The government’s bud-
get constraint is given by:
                                      1                                    1 + rt−1 g
                           Btg +           T o + Ttm + (1 + gt )Tty = Gt +         B                                 (15)
                                   1 + gt−1 t                              1 + gt−1 t−1

    Our aim here will not be to analyze ﬁscal policy in general (we defer that discussion until we
have incorporated endogenous production), but instead clarify how foreign reserve accumulation
can lead to a drop in the natural rate of interest. For now, assume that Tty = 0 and Gt = 0. Also,
as in Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), we assume that both governments adopt a particular ﬁscal
rule that eliminates any loan supply effects of taxation:

                                                   o
                                                  Tt+1 = β (1 + rt ) Ttm                                             (16)

    The overall level of taxes will adjust to ensure the government budget constraint is satisﬁed.
The foreign government also issues public debt and levies taxes on each generation to make inter-
est payments on past government debt. However, the foreign government also chooses to accu-
mulate some of the debt issued by the other country, IRt :
                 1                                                                        g∗
   Btg∗ +          ∗   (Tto∗ + (1 + rt ) IRt−1 ) + Ttm∗ + (1 + gt∗ )Tty∗ = G∗t + 1 + rt−1
                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                           Bt−1 + IRt                (17)
              1 + gt−1

    Here the left-hand side of the equation tallies the revenues of the government while the right-
hand side gives government expenditures. We express the variables in terms of spending/reserves
per middle age person. In particular, a positive level of IRt denotes foreign reserve assets accu-
mulated by the foreign government which are in the form of the bond issued by the domestic
government. Observe that we assume that the government is not constrained by Kt which only
applies to private capital ﬂows.7

    7
        The rationale for assuming that the reserve accumulation decision is not subject to the international lending con-
straint is that emerging market economies are, typically, quite closed to private portfolio ﬂows despite considerable of-
ﬁcial capital ﬂows. Further, some emerging market economies accumulate low interest US Treasuries for non-pecuniary
reasons (i.e. insurance against sudden stops, exchange rate manipulation to favor traded sector, etc.).

                                                             13
   Fiscal policy impacts interest rates through its effects on the asset market clearing conditions:

                                                ∗                    ∗
                           Nt Bty + Nt−1 Btg − Nt−1 IRt = Nt−1 AD
                                                                t + Nt−1 Kt                        (18)
                                       Nt∗ Bty∗ + Nt−1
                                                   ∗          ∗
                                                       Btg = Nt−1 AD∗
                                                                   t                               (19)

   To avoid unnecessary notation, we assume symmetric country size for now so that ωt = 1/2
and no population growth, gt = gt∗ = 0 If the capital constraint is binding, then the equilibrium
real interest rate in debtor and creditor countries is given by:
                                      1+β                    Dt
                           1 + rt =                       1+β
                                                                                                   (20)
                                       β (Yt − Dt−1 ) +            ∗    g
                                                           β (Kt − Bt       + IRt )
                                      1+β         Dt∗ + 1+r t
                                                        1+β Kt
                                                                ∗
                        1 + rt∗ =                                                                  (21)
                                       β Yt∗ −    ∗
                                                 Dt−1 − Kt∗ − 1+β    g∗
                                                                  β Bt

while if capital markets are perfectly integrated, the single world interest rate given by:
                                 1+β                Dt + Dt∗
                    1 + rtW =                                                                      (22)
                                  β Yt + Yt∗ − Dt−1 − Dt−1
                                                       ∗   − Btg − Btg∗ − IRt

   The equations above offer several insights. First of all, notice that an increase in government
debt will always raise the real interest rate in that country. However, fully integrated capital
markets are necessary for a rise in the foreign country debt to have an effect on the interest rate in
the domestic economy. Therefore, the manner in which foreign reserve accumulation is ﬁnanced
has different effects under complete versus incomplete integration.
   Consider ﬁrst incomplete integration. We see in equation (20) that an increase in reserves will
directly reduce the real interest rate in the domestic economy. However, the foreign economy
only has an inﬂuence on the domestic real interest rate through IRt and Kt∗ . Hence from the
perspective of the domestic economy, it does not matter whether the increase in reserves are ﬁ-
nanced by debt or taxes (for example, some commentators have suggested that the accumulation
of foreign reserves in commodity rich countries was mostly driven by increased revenues from
high commodity prices, while in cases such as China, it was driven by a proportional increase in
Chinese debt).This is likely the empirically relevant case given that the reserve accumulation is
concentrated in countries with low degrees of integration with world ﬁnancial markets.
   Under perfectly integrated ﬁnancial markets, however, we see that the ﬁnancing of foreign
reserves, IRt matters a great deal. In particular imagine that the increase in IRt is met by a pro-
portional increase in the debt of the foreign country Btg∗ . In that case, foreign reserve accumulation
has no effect on the world real interest rate as the increased supply of bonds offset the decline in
debt held by the public.
   The effect of reserve accumulation on global rates we have just outlined is fully consistent with
the argument advanced in Bernanke (2015). Hence, a global saving glut is a natural complement
to other forces that may trigger secular stagnation, like a fall in population growth or deleveraging
                                                    14
shocks. A ﬁnal point to emphasize is that IRt reﬂects a policy choice of the government. While
we would not expect private capital to ﬂow from one country in our model to another unless
there is a positive interest rate differential, no such interest rate differential is needed for reserve
accumulation. This matters, since a large driver of current account deﬁcits we documented in the
introduction stems from countries such as China or oil producing countries. It is not obvious that
rates of returns in the US dominate the returns in these countries. The fact that those countries
still choose to invest in US Treasuries still acts as a negative force on the US natural rate of interest,
which (as we will show) can have negative consequences when we take nominal frictions and
the zero lower bound into account. Foreign reserve accumulation, in this way, exerts a negative
externality on the US.


4         Prices, Production and Exchange Rates

That the natural rate of interest is negative need not be a problem in and of itself. It only becomes
a problem once we incorporate the zero lower bound and nominal frictions. We now introduce
nominal price determination, the zero lower bound, endogenize production, and introduce nom-
inal frictions. Critically, we assume that each country runs its own monetary policy. Accordingly,
each country has a currency which determines the price level in terms of that nominal unit. On
the production side we assume frictions in the adjustment of nominal wages deﬁned in the price
level of each country.


4.1        Prices

We follow the literature by introducing nominal price determination via the Woodford ”cashless”
economy. Each country now trades, in addition to the real bond, a nominal bond denominated in
each country’s price level. We assume that households in either country can hold these nominal
bonds implying arbitrage equations between the real and the nominal bonds within a country, but
also arbitrage equations across nominal assets denominated in different currencies.8 Let us denote
the domestic price level by Pt and the foreign price level with Pt∗ . The nominal exchange rate is
St =       Pt
           Pt∗
      The presence of the two nominal bonds implies two new Euler equations for the middle gen-
eration in each country:
                                              1                 1 Pt
                                               m = (1 + it )βEt o                                                  (23)
                                             Ct                Ct+1 Pt+1

      8
          In equilibrium, we assume that the nominal bonds may be in zero net supply. Hence these equations are only
important for pricing, i.e. the resulting pricing equations for these nominal bonds is what pins down the nominal price
level in each country - see equations (23)- (24). This is convenient because it implies that, in equilibrium, the budget
constraint will be identical to in the endowment economy so that the previous derivations continue to hold.

                                                           15
and an equivalent Euler equation for the foreign middle generation. Each middle generation
household also must be indifferent between real and nominal debt implying the Fisher relation:
                                                       1                 1 Pt
                                        (1 + rt )Et    o   = (1 + it )Et o                                         (24)
                                                      Ct+1              Ct+1 Pt+1

4.2        Monetary Policy

We assume that each country follows a strict inﬂation targeting regime, so that:

                                   Πt = Π̄ if it ≥ 0 otherwise it = 0 and Πt < 1                                   (25)
                                   Π∗t = Π̄∗ if i∗t ≥ 0 otherwise i∗t = 0 and Π∗t < 1                              (26)

Each country will set its nominal interest rate so as to achieve its inﬂation target. If the inﬂation
target cannot be achieved, then the central bank sets its nominal interest rate equal to zero. The
zero interest rate then closes the model instead of the inﬂation target.9 This assumption conve-
niently abstracts altogether from a particular feedback rule while focusing on the possible prob-
lems a country may face if it cannot achieve its inﬂation target due to the zero bound. Fiscal policy
follows the same ﬁscal rule as outlined in Section 3.


4.3        Production

We assume that ﬁrms are price takers on product and labor markets. However, we assume that
wages are downwardly rigid. This assumption is sufﬁcient to generate a long-run trade-off be-
tween inﬂation and output, which is what is needed to generate a secular stagnation.10
      Households supply labor inelastically at L̄. We assume that only the middle aged supply
labor. There is one ﬁrm per middle aged household. Firms hire labor to produce output using
a decreasing returns to scale technology. Firms maximize proﬁts Zt , taking wages and prices as
given:

                                                   Zt = max Pt Yt − Wt Lt                                          (27)
                                                           Lt

                                               s.t. Yt = Lαt                                                       (28)

The optimality condition for ﬁrm labor demand is standard:
                                                        Wt
                                                           = αLα−1
                                                               t                                                   (29)
                                                        Pt
      9
          One way in which a policy regime of this kind can be implemented is to assume that the central bank follows a
Taylor rule where the response coefﬁcient approaches inﬁnity, but the zero bound is respected.
   10
      In Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), we examine alternative nominal frictions that incorporate forward looking
behavior, like Calvo pricing, but ﬁnd that it added much complexity with little additional insight. In that environment,
the long run trade-off between inﬂation and output stems from inefﬁcient price dispersion and misallocation across
identical producers.

                                                               16
    If prices and wages are ﬂexible, the model is closed by setting aggregate labor supply equal to
labor demand:
                                                         Lt = L̄                                                   (30)
Under this assumption, the economy is identical to the endowment economy we have already
studied, except for the determination of nominal prices and exchange rates.
    What separates our model from the endowment economy is that we replace the market clear-
ing relationship (30) with the assumption that wages do not fully adjust. In particular, we assume
that workers will never be willing to supply labor to ﬁrms if the ﬁrm offers a wage that falls below
some wage norm W̃t (the classic example of this is the Keynesian idea that workers will never ac-
cept wages lower than last years nominal wages). This constraint is asymmetric, that is, workers
would happily accept higher nominal wages. Accordingly, if the wage rate implied by competi-
tive markets is above W̃t , then wages get bid up and the market clears. This implies is that if the
wage norm is binding real wages can be higher than they would need to be for the market to clear.
In this case, employment is rationed.
    To be more speciﬁc, we assume that wages are downwardly rigid and given by:

                                                Wt = max{W̃t , Wtf lex }

where W̃t is a wage norm determined by:

                                          W̃t = γWt−1 Π̄ + (1 − γ)Pt αL̄α−1

When γ = 1 and Π̄ = 1 wages are perfectly downwardly rigid and when γ = 0, wages are ﬂexible
and real wages always attain their market clearing level.11
    We allow for possibility that the wage norm is binding at the inﬂation target of the central
bank, Π̄ which implies costs of inﬂation rates below the central bank’s target.12 With a positive
inﬂation target, outright deﬂation is not needed to generate a secular stagnation. When inﬂation
is less than target, Wt > Wtf lex , and, therefore, Lt < L̄ because ﬁrms’ labor demand does not
exhaust the labor endowment and employment is rationed. Let us denote output when labor is
fully employed as Yf ≡ L̄α .
    Combining labor demand, the production function, and the wage norm, we can obtain an
aggregate supply curve of the form:
                          ⎧                                                                  1−α
                          ⎪
                          ⎪   f                                                       f
                                                                         if Πt ≥ ( YYt−1 )
                          ⎨Y                                        α
                                                                                              α

                    Yt =          α−1
                                                α−1                α−1                                             (31)
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                                   α
                                Yt−1
                                  Πt + (1 − γ)Yf
                                                 α
                          ⎩  γ                                           otherwise

   11
        This type of wage rigidity can be incorporated in a search and matching framework as in Hall (2005) and could be
microfounded by staggered wage bargaining as in Gertler and Trigari (2009)
   12
      To generate a secular stagnation, a long-run Phillips curve is needed whereby inﬂation below target reduces output
below its full employment level. Pricing frictions as in Calvo would also generate this type of Phillips curve, assuming
either price or wage rigidities. See Appendix G in Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) for discussion.

                                                            17
Analogously, for the foreign economy, we have:
                                  ⎧                                                            1−α
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪  ∗f                                                   ∗f
                                                                           if Π∗t ≥ ( YY ∗ )
                                  ⎨Y                                                     t−1
                                                                                                α
                                                                     α
                          Yt∗ =           ∗ α−1
                                                          ∗ α−1
                                                                    α−1                                             (32)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪    Yt−1α
                                  ⎩ γ ∗ Π∗t + (1 − γ ∗ )Yf α               otherwise


     With production, we now adjust the middle generation household budget constraint to take
account of labor income and proﬁts, replacing Yt in (2) with              Pt Lt + Pt .
                                                                          Wt      Zt
                                                                                         Noting that Yt =   Pt L t + Pt ,
                                                                                                            Wt       Zt

the budget constraints takes on exactly the same form as before, and hence the ﬁrst order condi-
tions for the each generation’s maximization problem we derived in the endowment economy still
apply. Hence, following the same steps as before, we can express the interest rate in each country
as in equations (11) and (12) while under full integration, we use (22).
     We now have all the pieces together to explicitly deﬁne the equilibrium in the model and,
without loss of generality, we restrict our attention to the case in which rt ≥ rt∗ .

Deﬁnition 1. An equilibrium under incomplete capital integration is a set of quantities {Yt , Cty , Ctm , Cto ,
Bty , Am
       t , Tt , Tt } and a set of prices {rt , it , Πt } for the domestic economy, an analogous set of quantities and
            m    o

prices for the foreign economy, and a set of exogenous processes for {Dt , Dt∗ , Nt , Nt∗ , Gt , G∗t , Btg , Btg∗ , IRt }
that satisﬁes (1), (2), (3), (4), (7), (16), (23), (25), (31), for the domestic and foreign economies, along with
government budget constraints (15), (17) and asset market clearing conditions (18), (19) with (5) binding.
If rt = rt∗ , then global asset market clearing (22) replaces the domestic and foreign asset market clearing
conditions and (5) not binding.


5        Open Economy Secular Stagnation

While the equilibrium deﬁned above may appear somewhat unwieldy, the model can be reduced
to only a few equations and exposited by a simple AD-AS diagram, not unlike a typical textbook
model. We obtain this tractability by focusing on steady states so the model can be summarized
by two equations relating output and inﬂation in steady state. Our focus on steady states follows
naturally from our interest in analyzing protracted slumps across developed countries - the steady
state being a limiting case.13 For simplicity, we assume below that both countries are of the same
size, there is no population growth, and r ≥ r∗ .14
     Monetary policy in (25) and (26) is useful to organize our thinking about global secular stag-
nation. It helps us reduce the equilibrium conditions to the essentials. In particular, we consider
the four possible scenarios that represent possible combinations of monetary policy:
    13
         Our full model exhibits transition dynamics with differences in the response of output and inﬂation on impact
and with a lag. Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) features a quantitative examination of the transition dynamics of our
model. Moreover, the determinacy results in this section concern the behavior of the log-linearized dynamic model.
  14
     These assumptions are not critical and are in fact relaxed in our numerical examples.

                                                           18
Deﬁnition 2. An inﬂation targeting equilibrium represents 4 scenarios at time t:

   1. Scenario 1: Full-Employment: Both countries set Πt = Π̄ and Π∗t = Π̄∗ while it ≥ 0 and i∗t ≥ 0.

   2. Scenario 2: Global Secular Stagnation: Both countries miss their inﬂation targets with Πt < Π̄
      and Π∗t < Π̄∗ and set it = i∗t = 0.

   3. Scenario 3: Foreign Secular Stagnation: Home sets Πt = Π̄ while it ≥ 0. Foreign misses its
      inﬂation target Π∗t < Π̄∗ and sets i∗t = 0.

   4. Scenario 4: Domestic Secular Stagnation: Home misses its inﬂation target Πt < Π̄ and sets
      it = 0. Foreign sets Π∗t = Π̄∗ while i∗t ≥ 0

    Notable in our deﬁnition of the inﬂation target equilibrium is what it excludes. We do not
consider the possibility that inﬂation is above Π̄ in each country. The central bank could always
eliminate this equilibrium by raising interest rates. In other words, the only reason inﬂation fails
to meet its target according to this deﬁnition is because of the zero bound.We will explore later
the effect of the central bank deliberately increasing its inﬂation target and the conditions under
which this target can be reached.
    The deﬁnition below establishes the equilibrium conditions satisﬁed by a steady state in our
model:

Deﬁnition 3. The inﬂation targeting steady state consists of a vector (Y, Y ∗ , Π, Π∗ ,
i, i∗ , r, r∗ ) that satisﬁes the following eight conditions:
                             ⎧
                             ⎪          1+β1+g        1+β 1−ω ∗
                             ⎪
                             ⎨Y =    1+            D−           K − B g + IR                      (33)
                         ∗                β 1+r         β     ω
              if r > r
                             ⎪
                             ⎪           1+β 1+g             1 1+r        1 + β g∗
                             ⎩Y∗ =    1+            D∗ + 1 +        K∗ +       B                  (34)
                                           β 1+r ∗           β1+r ∗         β

                             ⎧                                        
                             ⎨ωY + (1 − ω) Y ∗ =         1+β 1+g
                                                                    + 1 (ωD + (1 − ω) D∗ )
                                                          β 1+r w
      if r = r∗ = rw                                                                              (35)
                             ⎩                       + (ω (B g   − IR) + (1 −   ω) B g∗ )




                                                           19
                                           ⎧
                                           ⎪
                                           ⎨Yf                       if Π ≥ 1
                                     Y =          1− γΠΠ̄
                                                              α
                                                             1−α                                       (36)
                                           ⎪
                                           ⎩Yf                       otherwise
                                                   1−γ
                                           ⎧
                                           ⎪
                                           ⎨Yf∗                        if Π∗ ≥ 1
                                    Y∗ =               ∗ ∗
                                                  1− γ ΠΠ̄
                                                                α
                                                               1−α                                     (37)
                                           ⎪
                                           ⎩Yf∗         ∗
                                                                       otherwise
                                                   1−γ ∗

                                     Π = Π̄ or i = 0                                                   (38)
                                    Π∗ = Π̄∗ or i∗ = 0                                                 (39)
                                         1+i
                                 1+r =                                                                 (40)
                                           Π
                                         1 + i∗
                                1 + r∗ =                                                               (41)
                                           Π∗
       The ﬁrst two equations apply under incomplete capital market integration. They are equiv-
alent to a basic IS relationship in many macroeconomic models. A lower real interest rate raises
output demanded. If the value of K ∗ is high enough, then interest rates are equated across the two
countries and the third equation (35) is operative. World demand depends on a world real inter-
est rate rw . Equations (36) and (37) describe aggregate supply under both imperfect and perfect
integration. Under this speciﬁcation, if inﬂation is above target, output is at its full-employment
level and wages are equal to their market clearing wage. If inﬂation falls below the inﬂation target
then real wages rise above their market clearing level (due to the binding wage norm) so labor
demand falls below the labor endowment. Equations (38) and (39) describe the monetary policy
rules, while the last two equations are the domestic and foreign Fisher relations.
       For future reference it will be useful to deﬁne the natural rate of interest. It is the real in-
terest rate and that emerges if the central bank hits its inﬂation target and output is at its full-
employment level. The natural rate corresponds to the interest rate we derived in the endowment
economy. It is straightforward to conﬁrm that in our general model, the natural rate of interest is
given by equations (20)-(22) where output in each equation is replaced by full employment output
Yf .

Deﬁnition 4. The natural rate of interest rn , rn∗ is the real interest rate in (33) and (34) with output at
Yf and Yf∗ respectively.

       When full employment in both countries is not feasible, the cases deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2 often
allow for any of the three scenarios (i.e. either both countries are in stagnation or exactly one
country is in stagnation) to be consistent with the equilibria in Deﬁnition 4. This holds true either
under perfect integration or imperfect ﬁnancial integration (albeit under stricter conditions in the
latter case).
                                                       20
      Discussing all the different cases, however, is somewhat unwieldy. Accordingly, we focus our
analysis on a subset of scenarios. We ﬁrst consider the case of imperfect ﬁnancial integration
where one country is in a secular stagnation and the other is not. This is a useful benchmark
because it illustrates how secular stagnation is transmitted via capital ﬂows - a country that is
in a secular stagnation will in general attempt to export its excess savings to its trading partner,
thereby possibly exporting secular stagnation. While the same forces also operate under full ﬁ-
nancial integration, differing degrees of ﬁnancial integration makes this transmission mechanism
particularly clear. We also illustrate the case in which both countries are in secular stagnation but
markets are not fully integrated. This case makes transparent the important role of reserve accu-
mulation, and how reserve accumulation can exert negative externalities on the trading partner, a
result similar to neomercantilism.15
      While the possibility of multiple equilibria suggested in Deﬁnition 2 can arise under both per-
fect or imperfect ﬁnancial market integration, analyzing the model under perfect integration is
simpler and more transparent for that purpose. Accordingly we highlight the multiplicity of equi-
libria in this simpler setting. Similarly, the study of both monetary and ﬁscal policy is simpler
under perfect integration, which is why we will also use perfectly integrated ﬁnancial markets
as a benchmark when analyzing monetary and ﬁscal policy in the later sections. We leave the
analysis of the interactions between capital market imperfection and monetary and ﬁscal policy
to future research.16


5.1      Stagnation under Imperfect Financial Integration

We start by considering the case when one country is in a secular stagnation while the other is
not. This case shows how secular stagnation can be transmitted through greater capital market
integration. In particular, this case can show how current account surpluses in Japan during the
late 1990’s and early 2000s reduced interest rates in US while easing the effects of stagnation in
Japan. In Section 8, we analyze quantitatively the spillover from Japan to the US in the pre 2008
global imbalances period. This section also answers a broader question: how can international
capital ﬂows coincide with a world in which one country suffers from secular stagnation while
the other does not? Imperfect arbitrage on capital ﬂows allows for this outcome. The prospect of
asymmetric stagnation has once again become relevant as the US seeks to normalize interest rates

   15
        As we have already pointed out in Section 3 this result also obtains under perfect ﬁnancial integration but, in that
case, it depends on how reserve accumulation is ﬁnanced.
   16
      Another reason for focusing on perfectly integrated capital markets is that the way in which we introduce incom-
pleteness is via ﬁxed quantity constraint. A more general characterization could specify capital ﬂows as a function
of the interest rate differential between two countries. In general, the policy implications are likely to depend on the
precise speciﬁcation of capital market imperfections so we have opted here to focus largely on the case of complete
integration. We have some discussion of this in Eggertsson, Mehrotra and Summers (2016).

                                                              21
in 2016 while other developed economies remain stuck at the zero lower bound.
   We can plot graphically the equilibria in Deﬁnition 3 via simple diagrams. The panels of Fig-
ure 6 plots steady state output and inﬂation for the home and foreign country. Aggregate demand
is determined by combining the IS equation (33) with the monetary policy rule (38) and the Fisher
relation (40). The demand curve is horizontal at the inﬂation target of the domestic economy,
which, for simplicity, is set at Π = 1. The central bank will set interest rates at whatever is needed
to achieve this target. We can then back out from the IS equation (33) the required nominal in-
terest rate to achieve the inﬂation target. However, at some point, keeping inﬂation at target may
require a negative nominal interest rate. A kink appears in the aggregate demand curve as shown
in the ﬁgure at the point when the nominal rate hits zero. Once interest rates hit zero, the aggre-
gate demand curve is increasing in inﬂation and since higher inﬂation reduces real interest rates
and raises demand. Below the kink, the AD curve (home country) is given by combining the IS
equation (33) with the Fisher equation (40) and imposing the zero bound:
                               1+β               1+β            1−ω ∗
                   Y =    1+       Π (1 + g) D −                   K − B g + IR
                                β                 β              ω
   The aggregate supply curve is given by equation (36) and is shown as the red line in Figure
6. At positive inﬂation this relationship is vertical as the wage rate is equal to its ﬂex price level
and the labor endowment is fully employed. If inﬂation is below zero (or, more generally, be-
low the central bank’s inﬂation target), then the wage norm becomes binding in equation (36).
Accordingly, the AS curve is upwards sloping in inﬂation and output.
   The left panel in Figure 6 depicts the steady state in the domestic economy when the natural
rate of interest is positive at home. The aggregate demand and aggregate supply curve intersect at
full employment. The right panel in Figure 6 shows the equilibrium in the foreign economy under
the assumption that the foreign natural rate of interest is negative. The solid line shows the case
when K ∗ = 0 and the dashed line the case in which K ∗ > 0 and capital moves from the foreign
country to the domestic. Indeed, we can prove under general conditions that a unique asymmetric
stagnation equilibrium exists. In this equilibrium, the foreign country in stagnation accumulates
claims on the domestic economy.

Proposition 2. If the international lending constraint, K ∗ , is binding so that r > r∗ and rn > 0, rn∗ < 0,
Π̄ = Π̄∗ = 1 and γ ∗ > 0, there exists a unique, locally determinate secular stagnation equilibrium in the
creditor country with i∗ = 0, Π∗ < 1, and Y ∗ < Yf∗ .

Proof. See Appendix A.

   As shown in Figure 6, an increase in international lending leads to capital ﬂows from the for-
eign country to the domestic economy. This has no effect on output in the domestic economy, but
reduces the domestic real interest rate. For the foreign economy, greater international lending al-
lows the foreign economy to export its excess savings and thereby reduce the downward pressures
                                                    22
                                                             Figure 6: Effect of an increase in international lending
                                          1.2                                                                               1.2
                                                        Home AS                                                                           Foreign AS
                                                        AD partial integration                                                            AD partial integration
                                                        AD integration                                                                    AD integration
                                         1.15                                                                              1.15
                                                        Increase in Reserves



                                          1.1                                                                               1.1



                                         1.05                                                                              1.05




                                                                                              Gross Inflation at Foreign
               Gross Inflation at Home




                                           1                                                                                 1



                                         0.95                                                                              0.95



                                          0.9                                                                               0.9



                                         0.85                                                                              0.85



                                          0.8                                                                               0.8



                                         0.75                                                                              0.75



                                          0.7                                                                               0.7
                                            0.6   0.7     0.8      0.9       1   1.1   1.2                                    0.6   0.7     0.8      0.9       1   1.1   1.2
                                                                 Home Output                                                                      Foreign Output



on the natural rate. In a secular stagnation, this increases demand and raises output by increasing
the inﬂation rate. There is no reason to assume that this process of exporting excess savings will
not push the domestic economy all the way to the zero lower bound. The condition needed for
this is simply that K ∗ is large enough so that the natural rate of interest is negative in the home
country as well. In this scenario, it may be beneﬁcial for the home country to close its capital mar-
kets to prevent secular stagnation from spreading, and we will investigate this possibility with
some numerical examples in Section 8.
    The effect of increasing private foreign capital holdings on the domestic economy is exactly
the same as if the foreign government directly invests in the foreign economy through reserve
accumulation (as we see in equation 33). In either case, the foreign government is exporting excess
savings and putting downward pressure on the real interest rate in the domestic economy. This
capital inﬂow, in principle may be large enough so as to drag the domestic economy into a secular
stagnation.17 . In this case, foreign capital inﬂows no longer transmit lower interest rates, but
instead transmits a recession. We see this case in the second dotted line in Figure 6, whereby
foreign ofﬁcial capital ﬂows (given by IR) pushes the domestic economy into a secular stagnation.
It is worth noting that this increase in IR need not have any effect on the foreign economy (see
equation 34)) if the ﬁscal rule is formulated so that there are no loan supply effects.
   17
        Substantial reserve accumulation in the pre 2008 era may have made the US more vulnerable to negative demand
shocks by increasing the likelihood of hitting the zero lower bound

                                                                                             23
Proposition 3. If the international lending constraint at K ∗ = 0, Π̄ = 1 and γ > 0, then, if rn > 0,
i > 0,       ∂r
            ∂IR   < 0 and   ∂Y
                            ∂IR   = 0. If rn < 0, i = 0,    ∂r
                                                           ∂IR   > 0 and   ∂Y
                                                                           ∂IR   < 0.

Proof. See Appendix A.

      Proposition 3 shows that while capital inﬂows typically lower the real interest rate, once the
zero bound becomes binding, capital inﬂows instead transmit a recession and higher real interest
rate. We have framed Proposition 3 in terms of the government policy variable IR which measures
the amount of domestic assets (reserves) acquired by the foreign government. We do this for
simplicity. We have seen that an increase in capital ﬂows as measured by an increase in K ∗ , has
exactly the same effect.18
      Our model offers a framework for thinking about neomercantilism - policies that attempt to
boost a country’s net foreign asset position by targeting persistent trade surpluses for some period.
In our model, these policies may be expansionary for the country that implements them but comes
at the expense of a trading partner in secular stagnation. Thus if successful, this policy corresponds
to a classic beggar thy neighbor policy.
      Under imperfect integration, private capital ﬂows from the country with lower rates to the
country with higher rates. Given our assumptions, however, reserve accumulation need not go
in the same direction as private capital ﬂows. Moreover, we can imagine that a country can cur-
tail private capital inﬂows with capital controls. Reserve accumulation will always worsen the
stagnation in the debtor country. An increase in international reserves, say by Japan or China pur-
chasing US Treasuries, reduces the stock of US Treasuries held by the US residents. This lowers
the natural rate of interest in the US. If US is at the ZLB and in a secular stagnation, this has the
effect of pushing inﬂation further below target and worsening the output shortfall.
      Figure 7 shows how reserve accumulation can be beggar-thy-neighbor. The ﬁgure depicts two
countries in secular stagnation under imperfect integration. In this case, an increase in reserve ac-
cumulation by the foreign country (Japan) shifts inward the US aggregate demand curve lowering
inﬂation and output. Under the appropriate ﬁscal policy for the foreign country, this reserve accu-
mulation alleviates a secular stagnation as shown by the dashed line in the right panel of Figure
7.
      For the country building up reserves, it will in general matter how reserve accumulation is
ﬁnanced, while this is irrelevant from the perspective of the US under incomplete ﬁnancial inte-
gration. If reserve accumulation is ﬁnanced by taxation of savers or by issuance of public debt,
this policy has the effect of raising the natural rate of interest and boosting inﬂation/output in the

     18
          Framing the proposition in term of K ∗ instead of IR, however, involves some complications. We then need to
ensure that there remains a positive interest rate differential r ≥ r∗ at all times. Otherwise, the international lending
constraint may no longer be binding or private capital ﬂows can reverse (leading to different special cases depending
on parameters).

                                                                 24
                                                           Figure 7: Effect of international reserve accumulation
                                        1.2                                                                            1.2
                                                      Home AS                                                                        Foreign AS
                                                      AD autarky                                                                     AD autarky
                                                      AD integration                                                                 AD integration
                                       1.15                                                                           1.15



                                        1.1                                                                            1.1



                                       1.05                                                                           1.05




                                                                                         Gross Inflation at Foreign
             Gross Inflation at Home




                                         1                                                                              1



                                       0.95                                                                           0.95



                                        0.9                                                                            0.9



                                       0.85                                                                           0.85



                                        0.8                                                                            0.8



                                       0.75                                                                           0.75



                                        0.7                                                                            0.7
                                          0.6   0.7     0.8      0.9   1    1.1   1.2                                    0.6   0.7     0.8      0.9   1       1.1   1.2
                                                              Home Output                                                                    Foreign Output



creditor country. Alternatively, if both the middle-aged and old are taxed according to ﬁscal rule
(16), then reserve accumulation has no impact on equilibrium inﬂation and output in the creditor
country. In this particular case, reserve accumulation worsens secular stagnation in the debtor
country while providing no beneﬁt for the creditor country.
      Reserve accumulation is equivalent to a net foreign asset target for the country acquiring re-
serves. Along the transition path, the country accumulating reserves will need to run a trade
surplus. If equilibrium interest rates are negative, then these surpluses can even be permanent
as we saw in equation (14). Signiﬁcant trade surpluses in Japan and Germany along with contin-
ued reserve accumulation by emerging market economies are policies that may have ameliorated
output gaps in those countries while exerting a signiﬁcant drag on the US economy.
      Let us now move onto the issue of the possibility of multiple equilibria, and some policy op-
tions. Either issue is most clearly illustrated assuming perfect capital integration.


5.2     Perfect Capital Integration and Multiple Equilibria

Consider now a world in a secular stagnation with perfect ﬁnancial integration. In this case, the
world interest rate is determined by a single equation (35) which then determines aggregate world
demand, given by the population weighted output of the two countries. Importantly, under full
capital integration, the real interest rate is always the same across the two countries. The zero

                                                                                        25
lower bound and the inﬂation target in each country now place a lower bound on the equilibrium
world real interest rate. Let us ﬁrst consider the case in which both countries are in a secular
stagnation, so that interest rates in both countries are at the ZLB. Equation (40) and (41) then
imply that the inﬂation rate is equalized across these two countries with world gross inﬂation Πw .
   We depict this equilibrium in Figure 8 that shows aggregate world demand and supply. The
intersection of these schedules at point A shows the case of a positive world natural rate of interest.
If the world natural rate is negative due to, for example, a negative ﬁnancial shock like the US
housing crisis, both countries ﬁnd themselves in a world secular stagnation (point B). Assuming
both countries share the same inﬂation target, we can establish the next proposition:

Proposition 4. If rW,n < Π̄−1 , there exists a locally determinate secular stagnation equilibrium with
Y < Yf , Y ∗ < Yf∗ , i = i∗ = 0 and Π < Π̄.

Proof. See Appendix A.

   Even if both countries are in a secular stagnation, this need not imply that both countries
experience the same output gap. The output gap in each country is determined by the deviation
of inﬂation below the inﬂation target and the degree of wage rigidity. Assuming a symmetric
inﬂation target of Π̄ = Π̄∗ = 1, Deﬁnition 3 implies that the output gap in each country is given by
the following equations:
                                                                α
                                                    1 − Πγw    1−α
                                          Y =                            Yf                       (42)
                                                     1−γ
                                                          ∗       α
                                                    1 − Πγ w       1−α

                                         Y∗ =                            Yf∗                      (43)
                                                    1 − γ∗
                                                 1
                                      1+r =                                                       (44)
                                                Πw
where equation (42) and equation (43) are the domestic and foreign AS curves, and (44) is the
Fisher equation deﬁning the real interest rate when the zero lower bound is binding in both the
home and foreign country. Equations (35), (42) - (44) jointly determine the endogenous variables
r, Πw , Y , and Y ∗ in a symmetric stagnation equilibrium.
   The country with the higher degree of wage rigidity, as given by the higher γ or γ ∗ , will suffer
a more severe output gap. The wage norm reacts more sluggishly in the less ﬂexible labor market,
moving the real wage further from its market-clearing level. Holding constant the world interest
rate, it is unambiguously beneﬁcial for each country to increase its wage ﬂexibility in a secular
stagnation as seen in equations (42) and (42). The general equilibrium effect, however, is ambigu-
ous and depends on the size of the country relative to the world economy. What is clear, however,
is that this policy increases the world demand shortfall and increases global deﬂation, as seen by
point C in 8. Overall, a structural reform policy leads to a paradox of ﬂexibility, lowering global
                                                      26
                                                     Figure 8: Global stagnation

                                            1.2
                                                          AS
                                           1.15           AS flexible
                                                          AD w shock
                                            1.1           AD w/o shock

                                           1.05


                         Gross Inflation
                                                                                         A
                                             1

                                           0.95                                      B

                                            0.9                                C

                                           0.85

                                            0.8

                                           0.75

                                            0.7
                                              0.5   0.6        0.7       0.8   0.9       1   1.1
                                                                 Global Output


output, and can, at best, just redistribute the output shortfall from one country to the other. In
other words, structural reforms under perfect integration are also a beggar-thy-neighbor policy.
This insight carries particular relevance for the Eurozone.
   Our previous proposition assumed a symmetric equilibrium. Our model, however, is also
consistent with one country in secular stagnation while its trading partner is at full employment.
Under perfect integration, real rates could be equalized with one country at the ZLB experiencing
deﬂation while the other country has a high nominal rate with inﬂation on target.
   Proposition 5 establishes conditions and properties of an asymmetric stagnation equilibrium
under perfect integration in the case when home is in stagnation and foreign is not. The analogous
conditions establish when the mirror case occurs: home country at full employment with foreign
country in stagnation. Depending on parameter values, both, one or neither of these asymmetric
stagnation equilibria may emerge.

Proposition 5. If rW,N at < Π̄−1 , DW > (1 − ω) Yf∗ , γ > 0, there exists a unique, locally determinate
asymmetric secular stagnation with r = r∗ , Y < Yf , Y ∗ = Yf∗ , i = 0, and Π < Π̄.

Proof. See Appendix A.

   The left panel of Figure 9 displays the asymmetric equilibria. Real interest rates are equalized
across the two countries. Assuming for simplicity that Π̄ = 1 for both economies, this means that
the country in secular stagnation experiences actual deﬂation, while the economy not in stagnation
will see its inﬂation on target and positive interest rates. For the foreign country not in stagnation,



                                                                         27
then, Y ∗ = Yf∗ and Π∗ = 1. World output is given by the following expression:
                                                           α
                                                     γ
                                                  1− Π    1−α
                                     Y   w
                                             =ω                 Yf + (1 − ω) Yf∗ +                                  (45)
                                                  1−γ

The global AD curve remains unchanged from equation (35). An analogous equation for world
output obtains in the mirror case if the foreign economy is in secular stagnation and domestic is
not, with γ replaced by γ ∗ and Π with Π∗ . In drawing Figure 9, we have assumed that γ < γ ∗ -
wages are more ﬂexible at home than abroad.
    The different possibilities are shown in Figure 9. While panel A shows that asymmetric equi-
libria are possible, panel B depicts a case where no asymmetric equilibria emerge.19 , A sufﬁcient
condition for multiplicity is given in Proposition 5: if the global collateral constraint exceeds the
level of output of the country that is not in stagnation, then we can guarantee existence of an
asymmetric stagnation steady state.
    An important implication of Proposition 4 and Proposition 5 is that, if the asymmetric stag-
nation equilibrium exist, then a symmetric stagnation will also always be a possibility. Figure 9,
panel A, shows the three possibilities: home-only stagnation (HS), foreign-only stagnation (FS)
and symmetric stagnation (SS). The key takeaway from the ﬁgure – and this is a general property
of the model – is that in the event of an asymmetric stagnation, the country that is in stagnation
must absorb the entire drop in output needed to balance desired investment and savings. More-
over, because of decreasing returns in labor, the total drop in world output will always be larger
in an asymmetric stagnation than if both countries share the burden. Therefore, if one country
escapes secular stagnation at the expense of the other, world output will fall, even if the country
that escapes will obviously beneﬁt. This is an important insight when thinking about monetary
policy in the next section.
    As we have shown in this section, the possibility of a natural rate of interest that falls below a
central bank’s inﬂation target leads to secular stagnation equilibria into which one or both coun-
tries may fall. While capital controls may prevent secular stagnation from spreading to countries
with a sufﬁciently high autarky natural rate, other policy options may be preferable. We next turn
to monetary and ﬁscal policy to investigate whether these policies can eliminate the possibility of
secular stagnation.




   19
        In an asymmetric stagnation, one country must absorb the entire shortfall in world output. Intuitively, supply
exceeds demand and if higher interest rates drive down global demand faster than global supply no equilibria exists.
The failure of the AD and AS curves to cross is due to the fact that global supply in an asymmetric stagnation is bounded
below by the full-employment level of output in the country not in stagnation. In a symmetric stagnation, there always
exists a sufﬁciently high rate of deﬂation that drives global output to zero while demand remains bounded away from
zero.

                                                           28
                                                                         Figure 9: Asymmetric stagnation
                                                      (A) Multiple Equilibria                                                             (B) Unique Equilibrium
                                     1.2                                                                                  1.2
                                               Symm Stag AS                                                                         Symm Stag AS
                                               Foreign Stag AS                                                                      Foreign Stag AS
                                               Home Stag AS                                                                         Home Stag AS
                                    1.15       Global AD
                                                                                                                         1.15       Global AD



                                     1.1                                                                                  1.1



                                    1.05                                                                                 1.05



                                      1                                                                                    1
                  Gross Inflation




                                                                                                       Gross Inflation
                                                                              SS

                                    0.95                                           FS                                    0.95



                                     0.9                                      HS                                          0.9



                                    0.85                                                                                 0.85
                                                                                                                                                        SS
                                     0.8                                                                                  0.8



                                    0.75                                                                                 0.75



                                     0.7                                                                                  0.7
                                       0.5   0.6       0.7        0.8        0.9        1   1.1                             0.5   0.6       0.7        0.8        0.9   1   1.1
                                                             Global Output                                                                        Global Output




6        Monetary Policy

6.1       Increasing the Inﬂation Target

Imagine that both countries have an inﬂation target of Π = Π∗ = 1 and the natural rate of in-
terest is negative in a world with perfect capital integration. Assume that the domestic economy
announces a higher inﬂation target while the foreign economy does not. If the domestic economy
reaches this new inﬂation target, the only possible equilibrium is an asymmetric secular stagna-
tion where the foreign economy remains trapped and the domestic economy is at full employment.
This possibility will be important when we analyze the effects of monetary policy formulated in
terms of an exchange rate rule. Crucially, there is no guarantee that the domestic economy will
reach its new inﬂation target - one cannot exclude the possibility of the domestic economy remain-
ing in a secular stagnation.
      Consider now a symmetric secular stagnation where both countries increase their inﬂation
target. Figure 10 displays the effect of an increase in the global inﬂation target. Our model does
not have much new to say about this policy change. In essence, this policy is equivalent to the
experiment considered in Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) in a closed economy. An increase in
both inﬂation targets shifts up the kink point in the AD curve. This allows for the possibility
of a new equilibrium at the intersection of the two curves at the new inﬂation target. While the
higher inﬂation target allows for a full employment equilibrium, it does not exclude the secular
stagnation steady state.20 This multiplicity provides one motivation for ﬁscal policy. Before getting
    20
         Our model does does not feature any costs of a higher steady state level of inﬂation. With Calvo pricing, deviations

                                                                                                  29
                                                 Figure 10: Effect of raising the inﬂation target

                                         1.2
                                                            AS
                                        1.15                AD
                                                            AD higher  target
                                         1.1

                                        1.05
                      Gross Inflation


                                          1

                                        0.95

                                         0.9

                                        0.85

                                         0.8

                                        0.75

                                         0.7
                                           0.5        0.6        0.7         0.8     0.9      1      1.1
                                                                    Global Output

there, however, our model does have something new to say about about how relative monetary
policies of the two countries can interact.


6.2    Currency Wars

So far, we have formulated the policy of each economy as a simple inﬂation target. Consider an
alternative formulation - the central bank in the domestic economy formulates its policy target in
terms of the nominal exchange rate, St =                            Pt
                                                                    Pt∗ .   Thus we replace the monetary policy rule (25) for
the domestic economy with
                                                      St
                                                          = S̄ if it ≥ 0 otherwise it = 0                                (46)
                                                     St−1
This rule, in and of itself, does not change the possible equilibria under perfect integration as
shown in panel A of Figure 9. However, if monetary policy has additional tools to implement an
exchange rate policy at the zero lower bound, exchange rate policy may select one of the equilibria.
      We note that, in our model, the real exchange rate is ﬁxed so we cannot analyze the expen-
diture switching effect of a change in the real exchange rate. However, we can still think about
monetary policies that affect the evolution of the nominal exchange rate. Broadly speaking, com-
mitments about nominal exchange rates represent alternative monetary policy regimes across the
of inﬂation in steady state from zero impose misallocation costs. If these costs are sufﬁciently large, these misallocation
costs must be weighed against the unemployment costs due to downward nominal wage rigidity.

                                                                            30
two countries. A target for growth rate of nominal exchange rate for the domestic economy, as
above, is simply a policy commitment that refers to the relative inﬂation rates in each country
                   Πt
since    St
        St−1   =   Π∗t .   Hence the domestic economy is pinning down the path of the domestic price
level relative to path of the price level abroad.
   Many authors have suggested that the nominal exchange rate can act as an additional instru-
ment of policy and that the central bank can affect the exchange rate by printing money and buy-
ing foreign currencies (see, for example, Bernanke (2000)). In our model, however, the nominal
exchange rate is simply pinned down by the relative price level of the two countries, and if the
central bank loses control of its own price level, it loses control over the nominal exchange rate as
well. It still seems of interest, however, to explore what are the consequence for the trading part-
ner if the domestic monetary authority can successfully formulate a policy commitment in terms
of the nominal exchange rate, even if we do not explicitly model the means through which this
commitment is implemented.
   Consider ﬁrst the case of an asymmetric secular stagnation. Under asymmetric stagnation, one
country is producing at full capacity, while the other is not. As a result, the nominal exchange rate
is continuously appreciating for the country in stagnation. If, for example, the domestic economy
is in stagnation, so that i = 0, while the foreign economy achieves price stability (inﬂation target
of Π̄∗ = 1), then:
                                               St+1 −1
                                               ΠD =
                                                St
The nominal exchange rate domestic currency is continuously appreciating at the rate of deﬂation
of the domestic economy.
   Consider a policy in which the domestic economy pegs its exchange rate to the foreign cur-
rency so that St+1 = St . In this case, a straightforward proposition follows:

Proposition 6. Suppose rW,n < 0, capital markets are perfectly integrated, and the domestic and foreign
inﬂation targets are given by Π̄ = Π̄∗ = 1, and the nominal exchange rate is pegged at   St+1
                                                                                          St    = 1. Then the
global symmetric secular stagnation equilibrium is the unique solution of the model.

The proof of this proposition follows directly from the fact that if the nominal peg is constant,
inﬂation rates of the two countries must be equalized. Since the inﬂation target of Π̄ = Π̄∗ = 1
cannot be achieved due to the negative world natural interest rate, the only equilibria is a sym-
metric secular stagnation.
   Interestingly, if a given country ﬁnds itself in a secular stagnation (and the other does not) and
reacts by pegging its exchange rate, it does not escape stagnation. Instead, it exports deﬂation to
its trading partner. Like neomercantilism and structural reform, an exchange rate policy of this
type is a beggar-thy-neighbor policy.
   Can a country escape a secular stagnation all together via exchange rate policy? Denote the rate
deﬂation of the foreign country if it ﬁnds itself in an asymmetric secular stagnation by ΠF S∗ < 1.
                                                      31
                                                                                                    St+1
Suppose now that the nominal exchange rate target of the domestic economy is such that               St    =
S̄ < ΠF S∗ . We then obtain the following proposition:
                          St+1
Proposition 7. Suppose     St    = S̄ < ΠF S∗ and the world natural rate of interest is negative. Then there
exists no equilibrium in which the domestic economy is in a secular stagnation, but, if Π̄∗ = 1, the foreign
economy must always be in secular stagnation.
                                                                            St+1
      The proof of this proposition follows directly from the fact that      St    < ΠF S∗ implies that the
inﬂation rate in domestic economy has to be higher than that of the foreign economy. Since the
inﬂation target of the foreign economy is Π∗ = 1, we can exclude the possibility that neither one
is in a secular stagnation, and since the inﬂation rate of the domestic economy is higher, the only
feasible equilibria is one in which the domestic economy is not in stagnation so it is achieving
its inﬂation target Π̄ (which can be any number greater than unity), while the foreign economy
remains trapped.
      An interesting element of the last two propositions is that a successful monetary policy com-
mitment that is framed in terms of the nominal exchange rate when the world natural rate of
interest is negative, will always come at the expense of its trading partner. This is in contrast to
the policy we initially considered of a higher inﬂation target in both countries in which both coun-
tries can beneﬁt. This suggests the desirability of framing policy objectives in terms of nominal
domestic variables, instead of framing policy relative to those of the trading partner.
      We emphasize that the model, in its current form, is one in which the home and foreign good
are perfect substitutes thereby ﬁxing the real exchange rate. Therefore, secular stagnation is not
transmitted via the real exchange rate. Eggertsson, Mehrotra and Summers (2016) sketch out how
this framework can be expanded to include variation in the real exchange rate. Real exchange rates
strengthen the beggar-thy-neighbor aspect of monetary policy. In this case, currency depreciation
not only operates through capital ﬂows by redirecting excess saving overseas, but, additionally,
the induced real exchange rate depreciation switches expenditure away for its trading partner
further exacerbating the demand shortfall.
      Our ﬁnding show that, generically, a weakness of monetary and exchange rate policies is that
these solutions cannot exclude the secular stagnation equilibria. Are there policies available that
eliminate these secular stagnation equilibria? The answer is yes - through the use of ﬁscal policy.


7     Fiscal Policy

7.1     Government Spending

One natural policy option, emphasized in the zero bound literature, is an increase in government
spending. However, in contrast to some of the existing literature, the effects of an increase in gov-
ernment spending depend crucially on how expenditures are ﬁnanced. For example, an increase
                                                     32
                                    Table 1: Government Spending Multipliers

                           Regime                                        US       Eurozone
                           Baseline output gap                          -10%        -15%
                           Symmetric expansion output gap               -7.1%      -10.7%
                           Asymmetric expansion output gap              -7.1%      -10.7%
                           Welfare (rel. to symmetric)                  -0.2%       +0.2%


in government spending ﬁnanced via a tax on the credit-constrained young has no effect, since
every dollar of increased government spending is offset by a corresponding decrease in spending
by the young.21 For now, we consider balanced budget ﬁnancing and perfectly integrated capital
markets. The most natural balanced budget assumption is that spending is ﬁnanced via a tax on
the working age population (the middle generation).
   Assuming Gt = Ttm and setting taxes on the old to zero in the government budget constraint
(equation (15)), we can write the IS equation under perfect capital integration in steady state as:

                                            1+β 1+g
              ωY + (1 − ω) Y ∗ =       1+                    (ωD + (1 − ω) D∗ ) + ωG + (1 − ω) G∗                 (47)
                                             β 1 + rw

As this expression shows, it is the weighted average of government purchases in both countries
that is relevant for the world real interest rate. Higher government spending in one country raises
the natural rate in both countries - a beneﬁcial policy in a secular stagnation.
   In normal times, government purchases would leave output unaffected given that labor is
supplied inelastically. Therefore, an increase in either G or G∗ is met with an increase in the
world rate rw leaving aggregate world output unchanged. In a symmetric secular stagnation,
higher government purchases instead lower the real interest rate. Fiscal policy accomplishes this
by raising inﬂation and crowding in consumption resulting in multipliers great than one. We
can illustrate this by way of a numerical example. In Table 1, we use values from a quantitative
experiment we describe in detail in Section 8 where we calibrate our model to ﬁt the US and
Eurozone stagnation episodes from 2008-2015. It is worth emphasizing here that the assumption of
perfect ﬁnancial markets is important in this case; the effect of ﬁscal spillovers is more complicated
if there are limits to arbitrage between the two countries (see Eggertsson, Mehrotra and Summers
(2016) for some discussion of this case).
   The table shows that small changes in government spending carry sizable multipliers. More-
over, it does not matter which country increases government expenditures - the symmetric and
asymmetric ﬁscal expansions deliver the same increase in output in both the US and Eurozone.
However, the welfare implications are somewhat different. If only the US undertakes a ﬁscal

  21
       See Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) for further discussion on ﬁscal multipliers under different ﬁnancing regimes.

                                                           33
expansion, then US working age population bears the greater burden of taxation reducing do-
mestic consumption. The Eurozone meanwhile enjoys the beneﬁts of higher global inﬂation and
higher consumption. Quantitatively, these welfare effects are not particularly large compared to
the overall beneﬁt of higher output in both countries. The inﬂation rate rises from 1% in the base-
line calibration to 1.2% - a twenty basis point reduction in the global real interest rate.
    As equation (47) reveals and our numerical experiment demonstrates, output in a symmetric
secular stagnation depends on overall global government spending. Spending in one country
carries positive demand externalities - the foreign country beneﬁts from a purely domestic increase
in government spending. If government stimulus is costly, then each country may provide too
little ﬁscal expansion if it only cares about the welfare of its own citizens and does not coordinate
policy with its trading partner.
    To formalize this insight, let us assume that each government has a loss function given by:

                                   Lt = (Πt − 1)2 + (Yt − Y f )2 + (Gt − Gtarget )2

and the loss function for the foreign government is the same but in terms of foreign variables.
While this loss function is ad hoc, a welfare criterion of the same form can be derived by assuming
that government spending enters additively separately in household utility.22 We also assume that
there is some cost of inﬂation deviating from target (see Eggertsson (2001) which derives a welfare
function of this form).       23

    Let us call a solution that selects G and G∗ jointly to maximize both countries objective function
simultaneously the cooperative solution. Let us call the solution if each country maximizes its own
objective, taking the other country’s spending as given the non-cooperative solution. We prove
the following proposition:

Proposition 8. Government spending in the noncooperative solution is less than in the cooperative solu-
tion, with coordination losses maximized when ω = 12 .

Proof. See Appendix B

    The logic of this proposition is straightforward. Because ﬁscal stimulus is costly (government
is larger than its optimal size in absence of frictions) each country supplies too little stimulus to
stabilize world output since the beneﬁts are shared by foreigners. As we establish in a corollary

   22
        At the ﬁrst best, optimal government spending is then determined by equating the marginal utility of private and
public consumption. The planner only wishes to deviate from target in a secular stagnation since higher government
expenditures can alleviate the output gap and inﬂation shortfall.
   23
      To obtain exactly the same welfare function in our current setting we could assume that there is some resource
cost of changing prices which does not directly alter the AS equation as these ﬁrms are perfectly competitive. It does,
however, imply that social welfare can be approximated as above. Note, however, that one would want to assume that
all generations receive the same welfare weights.

                                                            34
in the Appendix B, the coordination problem - the gap between government spending in the co-
operative and noncooperative solutions - is increasing in the number of countries and, in the case
of two countries, is worst when these countries are the same size. This result has implications
for the Eurozone where ﬁscal expansion by smaller periphery economies will have little impact
on overall Eurozone demand. Likewise, our results suggest a substantial coordination problem
between the US and Eurozone given the similar size of their economies to the extent that capital
markets are perfectly integrated.24


7.2      Debt Policy

As we have shown in Section 3, our model can be generalized to incorporate government debt.
Foreign reserve accumulation in the absence of an increase in public debt issuance puts downward
pressure on the natural rate of interest, as can be seen in equation (22).
      Equation (22) has other important implications. In particular, an increase in government debt
will directly increase the natural rate of interest. Thus, a straightforward solution to secular stag-
nation is to issue government debt. That foreign reserve accumulation puts downward pressure
on the natural rate of interest is essentially the inverse of this - an increase in reserve accumulation
reduces the total amount of government bonds held by the private sector.25
      One concern about debt-ﬁnanced ﬁscal expansions may be the risk that materializes from a
higher debt to GDP ratio that may become a burden in the future. In a secular stagnation, our
model shows that increases in government spending ﬁnanced by an increase in public debt ac-
tually lower the debt to GDP ratio. As emphasized in DeLong and Summers (2012) in a setting
with hysteresis effects, debt-ﬁnanced ﬁscal expansions in our model are ﬁscally sustainable. Con-
versely, reductions in the public debt actually worsen the ﬁscal position of countries in secular
stagnation. In Proposition 9, we show that, in autarky, a permanent increase in government
spending ﬁnanced by debt issuance will lower the debt to GDP ratio. The proposition carries
over directly to the open economy (modulo notation) under the case of perfect integration.

Proposition 9. Consider a secular stagnation in autarky with taxes levied only on the middle generation
and where r < g. Then an increase in steady state government spending G lowers the public debt to GDP
ratio: Bg /Y

Proof. We wish to show that dBg /dY < 1. When taxes are levied on the middle generation and
the zero lower bound is binding, the AD curve becomes:
                                                                  β
                                   Bg + D (1 + g) Π (Y ) =           (Y − D − T )
                                                                 1+β
   24
        With imperfect integration, the beneﬁts of government spending are fully realized by the country undertaking the
ﬁscal expansion conditional on the lending constraint remaining binding.
   25
      A permanent increase in government debt has the same effects as a helicopter drop at the zero lower bound. A
permanent increase in the money supply can eliminate a secular stagnation.

                                                            35
where we have implicitly substituted the aggregate supply relation into the AD equation. Holding
taxes constant, we can derive an expression for the change in output given a change in the public
debt:
                                                               −1
                          dY         β                                  1+β
                              =         − D(1 + g)Π (Y )           >       >1
                          dBg       1+β                                  β
It remains to show that an increase in government spending raises the level of public debt. With
constant taxes, the steady state government budget constraint becomes:
                                                 r−g
                                           T =       Bg + G
                                                 1+g
Holding taxes constant, an increase in government spending raises the level of public debt when
r < g as required.

   The assumption that r < g holds in a mild secular stagnation where inﬂation falls below the
target and the population is growing modestly. Indeed, this appears to be the relevant empirical
case in the US and other developed countries where real rates on government debt are slightly
negative and population growth is slightly positive or ﬂat. Importantly, a pure redistribution of
increasing public debt and issuing refunds to the young and/or old generations will also lower
the debt to GDP ratio.
   However, will increasing government debt always work? Japan, in confronting its extended
period of stagnation, has experienced a large increase in the gross level of public debt without
successfully increasing inﬂation or interest rates. However, it is worth noting, that debt expansion
will only be effective to the extent that the expansion is regarded as permanent. As shown in
Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), a temporary (one-period) increase in public debt is Ricardian
and will be offset by a rise in private sector saving. Likewise, what matters is debt held by the
private sector. To the extent that increase in public debt are held as assets by institutions like the
Bank of Japan or other entities, the natural rate remains unaffected.
   In the open economy, increases in public debt are also subject to the same coordination prob-
lems as government spending if governments perceive a cost of carrying excessive levels of public
debt. One possibility is, given a probability that the forces that give rise to a secular stagnation ulti-
mately reverse themselves, interest rates eventually may rise. If the government has accumulated
large amounts of debt, the real cost of servicing this debt may be quite high. Higher distortionary
taxation may result in welfare losses, and hence place limits on the amount of debt the govern-
ment is willing to issue. Another possibility is that if debt rises above a certain level, this triggers
uncertainty about if debt will get repaid again.
   To the extent such constraints exist on the government’s willingness to issue debt, a reasonable
approximation to the planner’s objective function might take a similar form as we considered
earlier. The government would choose the optimal level of debt to minimize a loss function of the


                                                   36
following form (in this case holding Gt constant for simplicity):

                              Lt = (Πt − 1)2 + λY (Yt − Ytf ) + λb (Bt − B saf e )2

where we denote B saf e as the level above which agents start putting some probability on a gov-
ernment default.26 If the loss function of the government of each country takes this form, then
policy will be subject to exactly the same problem as we considered in previous section: each gov-
ernment has the incentive to free ride on the ﬁscal stimulus of the other country. Austerity will be
oversupplied, and the coordination problem worsens with the number of countries.


8        Quantitative Examples

8.1      Asymmetric Stagnation: US-Japan, 2000-2008

We now illustrate how this framework can be used to rationalize recent developments in the global
economic environment. The ﬁrst question, is whether our model is consistent with the fact that
Japan appears to have been in a secular stagnation with zero interest rates since the mid/late
1990’s while, in the US, the nominal interest rate only fell to zero following the economic crisis of
2008. Here we consider, for simplicity, a world in which Japan and US are the only two countries.
The key insight of the experiment is to conﬁrm quantitatively one of the main conclusion we had
previously reached qualitatively, that a country in a secular stagnation beneﬁts greatly from the
opening of ﬁnancial markets so that it can export its excess savings. The host of these capital
inﬂows, then, will experience a drop in the real interest rate and a credit boom in the private
sector.
      We calibrate the model to get a sense of the magnitudes of various parameters and the im-
plications of capital ﬂows for interest rates, output, and the external balance. In Table 2, we ﬁt
the model to match several targets for the US and Japan between 2002 and 2008. Typical param-
eters such as the rate of time preference and labor share are set to conventional values: β = 0.96,
α = 0.7. We must choose population growth rates, inﬂation targets, and collateral constraints for
each country. Additionally, we must choose the wage rigidity parameter γ ∗ for Japan. We must
also set the international lending constraint K ∗ .
      For the US, the population growth rate is set at 1%, the US inﬂation target is set at 2% - the
unofﬁcial target of the Federal Reserve, and the nominal interest is set at 3% to match the average
real interest rate from 2002-2007. The real interest rate determines the level of the collateral con-
straint D. For Japan, the population growth rate is set at 0, the inﬂation target is set at 0% given
    Formal microfoundations could be provided as follows. Imagine that if debt rises above a target level B saf e , the
    26
                                                                                
household incurs some monitoring cost to prevent default given by g Bt − B saf e . Furthermore as before assume
that the perfectly competitive ﬁrms pay a resource cost from changing prices. Then a second order approximation of a
representative utility (weighting all generations the same) can generate a loss function of this form.

                                                           37
                             Table 2: Parameterization: US and Japan, 2002-2008

                    Panel A: Common parameters               Symbol     Value
                    Labor share                                 α        0.7
                    Discount rate                               β       0.9620
                    Int’l lending constraint                   K        0.14


                    Panel B: Country-speciﬁc parameters      Symbol      US       Japan
                    Inﬂation target                          Π̄, Π̄∗     2%        0%
                    Population growth                         g, g ∗     1%        0%
                    Potential output                         Yf , Yf∗     1       0.34
                    Wage adjustment                           γ, γ ∗    N/A       0.296
                    Collateral constraint                    D, D∗      0.237     0.071


that the Bank of Japan has only recently announced a 2% target. The rate of inﬂation is set at -0.5%
to match the average real interest rate in Japan from 2002-2007. Given the OLG structure, periods
last 20 years and all rates are converted accordingly.
   Measuring the output gap is somewhat more difﬁcult. We set the output gap at -10% based on
the discussion in Hausman and Wieland (2014). US potential output is normalized to one, while
potential output in Japan is set at 0.35 based on Japanese GDP (as a percentage of US GDP in
2007) at market exchange rates. The output gap and inﬂation rate in Japan pin down the foreign
collateral constraint D∗ and γ ∗ . The international lending constraint K is set to match the bilateral
net foreign asset position. Based on TIC data from the Department of the Treasury, net Japanese
holdings of debt securities in the US were approximately $2 trillion in June 2008. The K value in
Table 2 is the net foreign asset position as a percentage of 20-year GDP ($2 trillion/$14.5 trillion x
1/20).
   These targets imply a modest degree of wage rigidity with γ ∗ = 0.3 (or 0.94 annualized) - when
γ ∗ = 1, wages are fully rigid. The collateral constraint is looser for the US but comparable across
both countries. Given this calibration, we can consider the implications of autarky for secular
stagnation in Japan. If K = 0, Japan’s inﬂation rate would fall to -1.38% per year and the output
gap would rise drastically from -10% to -28.6%. Based on this numerical example, the $2 trillion
net asset position in the US signiﬁcantly ameliorated Japan’s output gap. Conversely, full capital
market integration between Japan and US would pull Japan out of a secular stagnation with the
world natural rate of interest. However, equilibrium world real interest rates would be quite low
in this scenario at 0.87%.
   By contrast, the effects of this large negative NFA position were fairly modest for the US.
Setting K = 0, the US nominal (and real) interest rate would be 7 basis points higher and the

                                                    38
household debt to GDP ratio would be 1.5% percent lower relative to the baseline. However,
these calculation ignore substantial capital inﬂows into the US during this time for other emerging
market and oil-producing countries. These patterns qualitatively ﬁt the rise in household debt and
easing of collateral constraints experienced in the US during the credit boom between 2001 and
2008.27
      In short, in a world with incomplete ﬁnancial integration, we can construct numerical exam-
ples that match the broad patterns in the data seen in the US and Japan. Japan gained signiﬁcantly
from capital market integration, as that allowed it to export some of its excess savings to the US. In
the US, this capital ﬂow reduced interest rates, easing lending constraints, and boosted household
debt - albeit by a modest amount. One interesting implication of this is that both countries would
have beneﬁted from full ﬁnancial integration, as this would have pulled Japan out of a secular
stagnation, a conclusion that, however, can be overturned in different setting as we now shall see.


8.2      Symmetric Stagnation: US-Europe 2008-2015

Under perfectly integrated ﬁnancial markets, one country may beneﬁt from closing its capital
account. To illustrate this possibility, we calibrate the model to model the interaction of the US
and Eurozone in the post 2008 Great Recession period. In this numerical experiment, we ﬁnd that
US interest rates would be positive in the absence of capital inﬂows from Europe. We also show
that our calibration implies that the Eurozone suffers a greater shortfall in output due to a higher
degree of wage rigidity
      To calibrate the model, we choose the wage rigidity parameters in the US and the Eurozone
to match output gaps in each region and chose the collateral constraints to match global interest
rates and the net foreign asset position of the Eurozone in the US. Standard parameters - the rate
of time preference β and the labor share α are set as before. The growth rate g is set at 1% annually
in accordance with the average population growth rate across the regions.
      Both the US and Eurozone nominal rates are set at zero given the zero lower bound has re-
mained binding in each region over this period. The inﬂation target is set at 1.75% to reﬂect the
Eurozone’s somewhat lower desired inﬂation target. The inﬂation rate is set at 1% in both regions
to equate the world real interest rate at -1% - approximately consistent with US and Eurozone
short-term real rates between 2008-2015. The full-employment level of output is normalized to
unity in the US and 0.96 in the Eurozone based on GDP relative to the US evaluated at market
exchange rates in 2008.
      We target an output gap in the US and Eurozone at -10% and -15% respectively reﬂecting the
deviation of real GDP per capita in the US and Eurozone relative to pre-recession trend. The

   27
        This mechanism is also at work in the quantitative lifecycle model of Favilukis, Ludvigson and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2015) who consider the effect of the global savings glut on US house prices and asset prices.

                                                           39
                        Table 3: Parameterization: US and Eurozone, 2008-2015

                Panel A: Common parameters              Symbol      Value
                Labor share                                 α        0.7
                Discount rate                               β       0.96
                Inﬂation target                            Π̄       1.75%
                Population growth                           g        1%


                Panel B: Country-speciﬁc parameters     Symbol       US     Eurozone
                Potential output                         Yf , Yf∗     1         0.96
                Wage adjustment                           γ, γ ∗    0.217       0.297
                Collateral constraint                    D, D∗      0.157       0.136


                Panel C: Counterfactual under autarky   Symbol       US     Eurozone
                Output gap                               Y, Y ∗      0%      -21.3%
                Nominal rate                              i, i∗     0.25%        0%
                Welfare (rel. to integration)            U, U ∗     +7.5%    −4.2%


average output gap and global real interest rate determines the average collateral constraint. In
June of 2013, Eurozone holdings of US debt securities net of US holding of Euro debt equaled $2
trillion. The net foreign asset target is computed as a percentage of 20-year GDP ($2 trillion/$16.5
trillion x 1/20). The foreign asset position determines the difference between the US and Eurozone
collateral constraints: D and D∗ .
   In Table 3, we show the implied parameter values that match the targets described above.
Wage rigidity in the US and Eurozone are comparable and, for the Eurozone, imply a somewhat
greater degree of wage adjustment than found in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011). In particular,
the US display more ﬂexible wages than the Eurozone implying that, for a given level of inﬂation
below target, the shortfall in output is less in the US than the Eurozone. These wage rigidity values
are also consistent with the more prominent role of unions in wage-setting in the Eurozone.
   The collateral constraints are also comparable across regions and somewhat tighter in the Eu-
rozone to reﬂect the fact that net capital ﬂows towards the US. Interestingly, in steady state, the US
runs a trade deﬁcit with the Eurozone despite the fact that the US has a negative net foreign asset
position. Since the equilibrium world interest rate is negative, the US is, in effect, paid to borrow
from the Eurozone. This permanent trade deﬁcit is however quite small - only 0.22% of GDP in
steady state.
   Table 3, Panel C displays the counterfactual case of ﬁnancial autarky. In the absence of capital
integration, the natural rate of interest would be -1.5% in the US and -2.1% in the Eurozone. At

                                                 40
the assumed inﬂation target, the US would be able to remain at full-employment. In other words,
net capital ﬂows from the Eurozone pushed the US into a secular stagnation. These values also
suggest that only a modest increase in inﬂation expectations is needed to attain the world natural
rate of interest. Under autarky, the output gap in the Eurozone would worsen by 6 percentage
points and the inﬂation rate would fall to 0.7%. As Table 3 shows, US welfare increases under
autarky while Eurozone welfare worsens. Any gains for further consumption smoothing under
integration are offset by the gains from a smaller output gap in the US.


9   Conclusion

In this paper, we extend secular stagnation to an open economy setting, showing how capital mar-
kets act as a mechanism to transmit low natural rates. In the presence of the zero lower bound
and nominal frictions, negative natural rates of interest can result in a secular stagnation in one
or both countries characterized by a binding zero lower bound, low inﬂation or deﬂation, and a
persistent output gap. Our two country setting illuminates possible monetary and ﬁscal policy
spillovers. Uncoordinated changes in monetary policy have beggar-thy-neighbor effects, improv-
ing conditions in one country at the expense of the other. Fiscal policy, by contrast, has positive
externalities across countries. These positive externalities may give rise to a coordination problem
whereby ﬁscal expansion is undersupplied.
    While our model emphasizes the analysis of a steady state of an economy in which natural
rate of interest is permanently negative, this does not imply that the zero bound must always be
binding in our framework. The steady state is locally unique and determinate. It is therefore
straightforward to consider local perturbations of the model to shocks. We can therefore have
”secular stagnation” business cycles, in which interest rates rise from time to time above steady
state. A key prediction of the theory is that, if the steady state natural rate is negative, then the
zero bound will be hit much more frequently, and contractions will be more violent, as they cannot
be offset by interest rate cuts. The failure of long-term real interest rate to rise recently, even in the
wake of Fed’s decision to increase the Federal Funds rate, raises the distressing possibility that the
US may ﬁnd itself in this scenario in coming years.
    At the end of 2015, as the US embarks on the ﬁrst interest rate increase in nearly a decade, the
monetary policy stance is increasingly moving in different direction in US relative to the Eurozone
and Japan. Our model suggests that, at the very least, continued low interest rates in other devel-
oped economies will act as an anchor on US interest rates, limiting the degree to which nominal
interest rates in the US will rise. Our model also suggests a reemergence of global imbalances as
higher rates in the US increase capital inﬂows and widen the US current account deﬁcit. Indeed,
in recent quarters, US export growth has substantially slowed and the trade deﬁcit has increased,
lowering the growth rate of US GDP.
                                                   41
   Finally, it is worth considering the implications of the slowdown in economic growth in ma-
jor emerging market economies, and its implications for the global economy. Chinese economic
growth is decelerating while previously robust economies like Russia and Brazil are exhibiting
substantial weakness. The drop in global oil prices may have further negative implications for
other emerging market economies. On one hand, slow growth in these countries may reduce
demand for US Treasuries and safe assets, thereby providing a force to raise US and global inter-
est rates. China is already reducing its stock of US Treasuries to stabilize its exchange rate. On
the other hand, slower growth will likely reduce FDI ﬂows from developed to emerging market
economies. To the extent that the fall in portfolio ﬂows to the US is offset by a fall in FDI ﬂows
to emerging market economies, net capital ﬂows to the US may be unchanged or even increasing.
Such an outcome would place further downward pressure on US rates in the coming years.




                                               42
References

Acharya, Sushant, and Julien Bengui. 2016. “Liquidity Traps, Capital Flows and Currency Wars.”
  Mimeo. University of Montreal.

Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro. 2015. “Stagnation Traps.” Mimeo. London School of Eco-
  nomics.

Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno. 2006. “Designing Targeting Rules for International
  Monetary Policy Cooperation.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(3): 473–506.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2000. “Japanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self-Induced Paralysis?” Japan’s
  Financial Crisis and Its Parallels to US Experience, 149–166.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. “The global saving glut and the US current account deﬁcit.” Board of Gov-
  ernors of the Federal Reserve System (US) Speech, , (Mar 10).

Bernanke, Ben S. 2015. “Why Are Interest Rates so Low, Part 2: Secular Stagnation.”

Bianchi, Francesco, and Howard Kung. 2014. “Growth, Slowdowns, and Recoveries.” National
  Bureau of Economic Research 20725.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Emmanuel Farhi. 2014. “The Safety Trap.” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research 19927.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2008. “An Equilibrium
  Model of “Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review, 98(1): 358–
  393.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2015. “Global Imbal-
  ances and Currency Wars at the ZLB.” National Bureau of Economic Research 21670.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı, and Mark Gertler. 2002. “A Simple Framework for International
  Monetary Policy Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(5): 879–904.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Stephane Guibaud, and Keyu Jin. 2015. “Credit Constraints and Growth
  in a Global Economy.” American Economic Review, 105(9): 2838–2881.

Cook, David, and Michael B. Devereux. 2013. “Sharing the Burden: Monetary and Fiscal Re-
  sponses to a World Liquidity Trap.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3): 190–228.

DeLong, Bradford J., and Lawrence H. Summers. 2012. “Fiscal Policy in a Depressed Economy.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 233–297.


                                                   43
Devereux, Michael B., and James Yetman. 2014. “Capital Controls, Global Liquidity Traps, and
  the International Policy Trilemma.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 116(1): 158–189.

Dixit, Avinash, and Luisa Lambertini. 2003. “Interactions of Commitment and Discretion in Mon-
  etary and Fiscal Policies.” American Economic Review, 93(5): 1522–1542.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2001. “Real Government Spending in a Liquidity Trap.” Mimeo. Princeton
  University.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Neil R. Mehrotra. 2014. “A Model of Secular Stagnation.” National
  Bureau of Economic Research 20574.

Eggertsson, Gauti B, and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
  Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469–1513.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2016. “Secular Stagnation in
  the Open Economy.” American Economics Review, Papers and Proceedings, 106(5): 503–507.

Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2015. “The Macroeconomic
  Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General Equilib-
  rium.” Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

Fujiwara, Ippei, Tomoyuki Nakajima, Nao Sudo, and Yuki Teranishi. 2013. “Global Liquidity
  Trap.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(8): 936–949.

Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
  Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1): 38–86.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2013. “Capital Flows to Developing Countries:
  The Allocation Puzzle.” The Review of Economic Studies, 80(4): 1484–1515.

Guerron-Quintana, Pablo, and Ryo Jinnai. 2014. “Liquidity, Trends, and the Great Recession.”
  Mimeo. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.” American
  Economic Review, 95(1): 50–65.

Hansen, Alvin. 1939. “Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth.” American Economic
  Review, 29(1): 1–15.

Hausman, Joshua K., and Johannes F. Wieland. 2014. “Abenomics: Preliminary Analysis and
  Outlook.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, , (1): 1–63.



                                                 44
Kocherlakota, Naryana. 2013. “Impact of a Land Price Fall when Labor Markets are Incomplete.”
  Mimeo. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Maggiori, Matteo. 2013. “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Cur-
  rencies.” Mimeo. Harvard University.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2015. “The Power of Forward Guidance
  Revisited.” National Bureau of Economic Research 20882.

Samuelson, Paul A. 1958. “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest With or Without the
  Social Contrivance of Money.” Journal of Political Economy, 66(6): 467–482.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe. 2011. “Pegs and Pain.” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research 16847. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martın Uribe. 2013. “The Making of Great Contraction with a
  Liquidity Trap and a Jobless Recovery.” Mimeo, Columbia University.

Summers, Lawrence. 2013. “Why Stagnation Might Prove to be the New Normal.” The Financial
  Times.

Summers, Lawrence H. 2014. “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the
  Zero Lower Bound.” Business Economics, 49(2).

Summers, Lawrence H. 2015a. “Demand Side Secular Stagnation.” American Economics Review,
  Papers and Proceedings, 105(5): 60–65.

Summers, Lawrence H. 2015b. “Lower Real Rates, Secular Stagnation and the Future of Stabiliza-
  tion Policy.” Central Bank of Chile Annual Conference.




                                                 45
A     Existence, Uniqueness and Local Determinacy

Here we provide formal proofs for various propositions presented in the body of the text.


Proposition 2. If the international lending constraint is binding, rn > 0, rn∗ < 0, Π̄ = Π̄∗ = 1 and
γ ∗ > 0, there exists a unique, locally determinate secular stagnation equilibrium in the creditor country
with i∗ = 0, Π∗ < 1, and Y ∗ < Yf∗ .

Proof. Under the assumptions of the proposition and the monetary policy rule, the zero lower
bound is binding for the creditor country and the equilibrium real interest rate in steady state is
                    1
given by r∗ =      Π∗ .   Equilibrium inﬂation and output in steady state in the creditor country solve
the following equations:

                                           Y ∗ = D ∗ + K ∗ + ψ ∗ Π∗                                 (A.1)
                                                           α
                                                       γ∗   1−α
                                                   1 −   ∗
                                           Y∗ =        Π
                                                                 Yf∗                                (A.2)
                                                   1 − γ∗
                                               
               1+β                    1+r n ∗
where ψ ∗ =     β    (1 + g) D∗ +     1+β K         > 0. We may deﬁne the difference equation Δ (Π∗ ) by
taking the difference between (A.1) and (A.2) . This function is continuous in Π∗ with Δ(γ ∗ ) > 0
and Δ(1) < 0 . Therefore, there exists a γ ∗ < Π∗ < 1 such that Δ(Π∗ ) = 0. Since Π∗ < 1, it follows
that Y ∗ < Yf∗ .
    To establish uniqueness, we ﬁrst assume that their exist multiple distinct values of Π∗ at which
Δ(Π∗ ) = 0. Graphically, in inﬂation-output space (output on the x-axis), the AS curve (equation
(A.2)) lies above the AD curve (equation (A.2)) when inﬂation equals γ ∗ and the AS curve lies
below the AD curve for inﬂation at unity. Thus, if multiple steady states exist, given that AS is a
continuous function, there must exist at least three distinct points at which the AS and AD curve
intersect.
    At the ﬁrst intersection point, the slope of AS curve crosses the AD line from above and, there-
fore, at the second intersection the AS curve crosses the AD curve from below. Since the AD curve
is a line, the AS curve is locally convex in output in this region. Similarly, between the second and
third intersection, the AS curve is locally concave in output. Thus, as output Y ∗ increases, the AS
curve must ﬁrst have a positive second derivative followed by a negative second derivative.
    We compute the second derivative of inﬂation with respect output of the AS curve and derive




                                                         46
the following expression (we drop the ∗ for simplicity):
                                                                                 
                        d2 Π                             Y        φ

                           2
                              = G(Y ) (1 + φ) (1 − γ)                 + (φ − 1)                 (A.3)
                        dY                               Yf
                                               φ
                                   φγ (1 − γ) YYf
                       G (Y ) =                 φ                                           (A.4)
                                Y 2 1 − (1 − γ) YYf
                                 1−α
                            φ=                                                                  (A.5)
                                  α
As can be seen, over the region considered, the function G (Y ) is positive and, therefore, the con-
vexity of the AS curve is determined by the second term. This term may be negative if φ < 1,
but this expression is increasing in Y between 0 and Yf . Therefore, the second derivative can-
not switch signs from positive to negative. Thus, we have derived a contradiction by assuming
multiple steady states. Therefore, there must exist a unique intersection point.
   As established before, it must be the case that the AS curve has a lower slope than the AD
curve at the point of intersection. The slope of the AS curve is:

                                   dΠ∗    1 − α 1 Π∗ ∗
                                        =            (Π − γ ∗ )                                 (A.6)
                                   dY ∗     α γ∗ Y ∗
   If the slope of the AS curve is less than the slope of the AD curve at the intersection point, then
it must be the case that:
                                         1 − α Π∗      Π∗
                                                          − 1 < (ψ ∗ )−1
                                           α Y∗        γ∗
                                       1 − α ψ ∗ Π∗    Π∗
                                                          −1 <1
                                         α    Y∗       γ∗
                             1 − α Y ∗ − D∗ − K ∗      Π∗
                                                          −1 <1
                               α         Y∗            γ∗
                                                        α       Π∗
                                                   sy      +1> ∗
                                                      1−α        γ
                                           γ∗         α
                                                 sy       +1 >1
                                           Π∗       1−α

   Linearizing the equilibrium conditions around the secular stagnation steady state, we obtain
the following linearized AD and AS equations:

                                  0 = Et πt+1 − sy yt∗ + d∗t + sd d∗t−1                         (A.7)
                                                       α
                                 yt∗ = γw
                                        ∗         ∗
                                          yt−1 + γw        π∗                                   (A.8)
                                                    1−α t
where d∗t is the collateral shocks and various coefﬁcients are given in terms of their steady state




                                                  47
values.

                                                 ∗     γ∗
                                                γw =
                                                       Π̄∗
                                                           Ȳ ∗
                                                sy =
                                                    Ȳ ∗ − D̄∗ − K̄ ∗
                                                            D̄
                                                sd = ∗
                                                    Ȳ − D̄∗ − K̄ ∗
Substituting (A.8) into (A.7), we obtain a forward looking difference equation in yt∗ . The local
                                                     ∗
determinacy condition requires the coefﬁcient on Et yt+1 to be less than one. This condition is the
same as the slope condition. Therefore, the unique secular stagnation steady state is always locally
determinate as required.

Proposition 3. If the international lending constraint at K ∗ = 0, Π̄ = 1 and γ > 0, then, if rn > 0, i > 0,
 ∂r
∂IR   < 0 and   ∂Y
                ∂IR   = 0. If rn < 0, i = 0,    ∂r
                                               ∂IR   > 0 and      ∂Y
                                                                  ∂IR   < 0.

Proof. Given the inﬂation target, if rn > 0, then the domestic nominal interest rate is i = rn > 0.
Since the inﬂation target is attained, the wage norm does not bind and Y = Yf . The expression for
the real rate in steady state is given below:

                                               1+β           D
                                   1+r =
                                                β (Yf − D) + 1+β (IR − B g )
                                                              β

For small changes in IR, Y = Yf , therefore,           ∂Y
                                                       ∂IR    = 0 and, from the previous equation    ∂r
                                                                                                    ∂IR   < 0 as
required.
      Given the inﬂation target, if rn < 0, then the domestic nominal interest rate is i = 0. As shown
in Proposition 2, a unique secular stagnation steady steady state exists with Π < Π̄ and Y < Yf .
                          −1
              dΠ
Observe that dY   < 1+ββ D     - the slope of the AS curve is less than the slope of the AD curve
evaluated at the secular stagnation steady state.
      In the stagnation steady state, output is given implicitly by the following equation where Π (Y )
is output inﬂation relationship from the AS curve:

                                          1      1+β          D
                                               =              1+β
                                        Π (Y )    β (Y − D) +
                                                               β (IR − B )
                                                                        g

                                 1+β                   1+β
                             ⇒       DΠ (Y ) = Y − D +     (IR − Bg )
                                  β                      β
                                       ∂Y            1
                                     ⇒       =− β
                                       ∂IR          − dΠ D
                                                        1+β        dY

In a secular stagnation steady state, the denominator is positive (since the slope of the AS curve
is less than the slope of the AD curve at the intersection point), so the           ∂Y
                                                                                    ∂IR   = 0. Since   dΠ
                                                                                                       dY   > 0,
 ∂r
∂IR   > 0 as required.

                                                             48
Proposition 4. If rW,N at < Π̄−1 , there exists a locally determinate secular stagnation equilibrium with
Y < Yf , Y ∗ < Yf∗ , i = i∗ = 0 and Π < Π̄.

Proof. Under the assumptions of the proposition, monetary policy in both countries cannot track
the world natural rate of interest and i = i∗ = 0. Perfect capital market integration requires
equalization of the domestic and foreign real interest rate, hence Π = Π∗ . Steady state inﬂation,
domestic output, and foreign output jointly satisfy the following equilibrium conditions:

                                ωY + (1 + ω) Y ∗ = DW + ψ W Π                                      (A.9)
                                                             α
                                                     1 − γΠΠ̄ 1−α
                                              Y =                 Yf                              (A.10)
                                                      1−γ
                                                          ∗   α
                                               ∗     1 − γΠΠ̄ 1−α ∗
                                             Y =                   Yf                             (A.11)
                                                      1 − γ∗

                                                 1+β
where DW = ωD + (1 − ω) D∗ and ψ W =              β    (1 + g) DW > 0. We may deﬁne the difference
equation Δ (Π) by taking the difference between (A.9) and the weighted sum of (A.10) and (A.11).
Without loss of generality, assume that γ < γ ∗ . We assume that output is bounded below by zero
- that is, if Π < γ ∗ , then Y ∗ = 0. Given this assumption, the function Δ (Π) is continuous (but not
                                                      
necessarily differentiable), with Δ (γ) > 0 and Δ Π̄ < 0. Therefore, there exists a global inﬂation
rate Πss with Πss < Π̄ implying that, in steady state, Yss < Yf and Yss∗ < Yf∗ .
   To establish that this steady state is locally determinate, we observe that, graphically, at Π = γ
the global AS curve (weighted sum of equations (A.10) and (A.11)). At Π = Π̄, the global AD
curve lies above the AS curve. Thus, there exists at least one equilibrium in which the AD curve
is locally steeper than the AS curve. We ﬁrst derive the condition for local determinacy. The
log-linearized equilibrium conditions for a symmetric stagnation equilibrium are given below:

                                Et πt+1 = ω̄sy yt + (1 − ω̄) yt∗ + shocks                         (A.12)
                                       yt = γw yt−1 + γw φπt                                      (A.13)
                                     yt∗ = γw
                                            ∗ ∗       ∗
                                              yt−1 + γw φπt                                       (A.14)

where φ =    α
            1−α   and the other coefﬁcients are deﬁned below:

                                     γ Π̄
                                γw =
                                     Πss
                                 ∗   γ Π̄
                                γw =
                                     Πss
                                             ωYss + (1 − ω) Yss∗
                                sy =
                                      ω(Yss − D) + (1 − ω) (Yss∗ − D∗ )
                                            ωYss
                                 ω̄ =
                                      ωYss + (1 − ω) Yss∗
                                                    49
This linearized system can be expressed as:

                                   AEt xt+1 = Bxt + shocks
                                    Et xt+1 = A−1 Bxt + A−1 shocks

                         ∗ ] and the A, B are square matrices with suitably deﬁned coefﬁcients. Lo-
where xt = [πt , yt−1 , yt−1
cal determinacy requires that the matrix A−1 B has exactly one eigenvalue outside the unit circle.
   Since the matrix B has a row of zeros, one eigenvalue of the system is zero. The characteristic
polynomial that determines the remaining eigenvalues is:

                  λ2 − (φsy (ω̄γw − (1 − ω̄) γw
                                              ∗            ∗
                                                ) + γ w + γw           ∗
                                                             ) λ + γw γw (1 + sy φ) = 0

   Since the characteristic polynomial is positive at λ = 0, the condition that ensures local deter-
minacy is that the characteristic polynomial is negative at λ = 1. This condition requires:

                               ∗                                    ∗            ∗
                       1 + γw γw (1 + sy φ) < φsy (ω̄γw − (1 − ω̄) γw ) + γ w + γw              (A.15)

   It remains to show that this local determinacy condition is identical to the slope condition that
must be satisﬁed in equilibrium. The slope of the global AS curve and global AD curve is given
below:
                            W
                         dYAS            Yss                      Yss∗
                              = φ ωγw            + (1 − ω) γ ∗
                          dΠ          Πss − γ Π̄               Πss − γ ∗ Π̄
                           W
                         dYAD
                              = ψW
                          dΠ
   A steeper slope for the AD curve relative to the AS curve implies:
                                                           W
                                                         dYAS     W
                                                                dYAD
                                                              >
                                                          dΠ     dΠ
                            Yss                ∗     Yss∗
                 φ ωγw              + (1 − ω) γw                > ψW
                         Πss − γ Π̄              Πss − γ ∗ Π̄
                                     γw                 γw∗            Πss
                             φ ω̄         + (1 − ω̄)        ∗
                                                                > ψW
                                   1 − γw            1 − γw            YW
                                    ∗               ∗                              ∗
                    φsy (ω̄γw (1 − γw ) + (1 − ω̄) γw (1 − γw )) > (1 − γw ) (1 − γw )
                                                    ∗       ∗                ∗       ∗
                              φsy (ω̄γw + (1 − ω̄) γw − γw γw ) > 1 − γw − γ w + γw γw
                                                 ∗            ∗            ∗
                           φsy (ω̄γw − (1 − ω̄) γw ) + γ w + γw > 1 + γw γ w (1 + sy φ)

where the last inequality is identical to the determinacy condition derived in equation (A.15).



Proposition 5. If rW,N at < Π̄−1 , DW > (1 − ω) Yf∗ , γ > 0, there exists a unique, locally determinate
asymmetric secular stagnation with r = r∗ , Y < Yf , Y ∗ = Yf∗ , i = 0, and Π < Π̄
                                                   50
Proof. Under the assumptions of the proposition and the monetary policy rule, the zero lower
bound is binding for the home country and not binding for the foreign country. Nevertheless, real
                                                             1                   i∗
interest rates are equalized across both countries:          Π   = r = r∗ =     Π¯∗
                                                                                      where i∗ > 0. Equilibrium
inﬂation and output in the home country solve the following equations:
                                    1 W                       
                                Y =    D − (1 − ω) Yf∗ + ψ W Π                                           (A.16)
                                    ω
                                              α
                                      1 − γΠΠ̄ 1−α
                                Y =                Yf                                                    (A.17)
                                       1−γ

                                                  1+β
where DW = ωD + (1 − ω) D∗ and ψ W =               β     (1 + g) DW > 0. We may deﬁne the difference
equation Δ (Π) by taking the difference between (A.16) and (A.17) . This function is continuous
in Π with Δ(γ) > 0 (since DW > (1 − ω) Yf ) and Δ(Π̄) < 0 since rW,N at < Π̄−1 . Therefore, there
exists a γ < Π < Π̄ such that Δ(Π) = 0. Since Π < Π̄, it follows that Y < Yf .
   Uniqueness of an asymmetric stagnation equilibrium under perfect integration is established
identically as in Proposition 2. Graphically, the global AD curve (equation (A.16) form a line in
domestic inﬂation-output space. The domestic AS curve (equation (A.17)) is identical to equation
(A.2) and cannot cross the AD curve more than once given that the second derivative cannot
switch signs from positive to negative.
   It must be the case that the AS curve has a lower slope than the AD curve at the point of
intersection. The slope of the AS curve is identical to equation (A.6) If the slope of the AS curve is
less than the slope of the AD curve at the intersection point, then it must be the case that:
                                                                                        −1
                                               1−αΠ               Π             ψW
                                                                      −1   <
                                                 α Y             γ Π̄            ω
                                           1 − α ψW Π             Π
                                                                      −1   <1
                                             α    ωY             γ Π̄
                       1 − α ωY − D
                                    W     − (1 − ω) Yf∗        Π
                                                                   −1 <1
                         α            ωY                      γ Π̄
                                                                α        Π
                                                           sy       +1>
                                                              1−α       γ Π̄
                                                 γ Π̄         α
                                                         sy        +1 >1
                                                  Π         1−α

The linearization of the global AD curve (equation (A.16)) and the domestic AS curve (equa-
tion (A.17)) around the asymmetric stagnation steady state imply identical expressions to the lin-
earized equilibrium conditions in Proposition 2 where the coefﬁcients are given by:

                                          γ Π̄
                                   γw =
                                          Πss
                                                  ωYss
                                   sy =
                                          ωYss − DW − (1 − ω) Yf∗

                                                        51
where Πss and Yss are the solution to steady state equilibrium conditions (A.16) and (A.17). Sub-
stituting the linearized AS curve into the linearized AD curve as in Proposition 2 provides a
forward-looking difference equation in yt . Local determinacy requires the coefﬁcient on Et yt+1
to be less than unity. This condition is identical to slope condition derived above implying that
the asymmetric stagnation equilibrium is always locally determinate, as required.


B    Fiscal Policy Coordination

Non-Cooperative Game
    The government in each country unilaterally chooses its own level of government spending G
to minimize the deviations of output, inﬂation and level of government spending from their own
respective target levels. We assume both countries have identical aggregate supply curves - same
full-employment level of output, labor share, and degree of wage rigidity. The policy objective
and constraints is given below:




                                    min        (Y − Yf )2 + (Π − 1)2 + (G − Gtarget )2
                                  G,Y,Y ∗ ,Π

                   s.t. ωY + (1 − ω) Y ∗ = DW + ωG + (1 − ω) G∗ + ψ W Π
                                                              α
                                                      γ
                                                   1− Π      1−α
                                          Y =                      Yf
                                                   1−γ
                                                              α
                                                      γ
                                          ∗        1− Π      1−α
                                        Y =                        Yf
                                                   1−γ
                                                 1+β
where DW = ωD + (1 − ω) D∗ and ψ W =              β    (1 + g) DW .
    By substituting the domestic and foreign aggregate supply curves into the objective function
and global aggregate demand curve, we obtain the following Lagrangian:
                  1                    1          1
              L=     (YAS (Π) − Yf )2 + (Π − 1)2 + (G − Gtarget )2
                  2                    2          2
                                        ∗
                                                                              
                + λ ωYAS (Π) + (1 − ω) YAS (Π) − DW − ωG − (1 − ω) G∗ − ψ W Π

The ﬁrst-order conditions are given below:

                           dYAS                                           dYAS
                      0=        (YAS (Π) − Yf ) + Π − 1 + λ                    − ψW
                            dΠ                                             dΠ
                      0 = G − Gtarget − λω

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on the global aggregate demand curve. Given that the domestic
                                                                   dYAS
economy is in secular stagnation: Y < Yf and Π < 1 and              dΠ    > ψ W > 0 - and the slope of the AS
                                                        52
curve exceeds the slope of the AD curve, the multiplier λ > 0 and the ﬁscal authority in secular
stagnation always chooses a level of government spending that exceeds the target. The level of
government spending above target is increasing in ω.

Cooperative Game
   We now consider the optimal level of government spending when both countries jointly max-
imize their welfare. The loss function of the global planner is the weighted sum of each country’s
loss function. Given that the aggregate supply curve are identical and if we assume that the target
level of government expenditures is the same, we obtain the following loss function subject to a
global aggregate demand and global aggregate supply constraints:

                              min (Y − Yf )2 + (Π − 1)2 + (G − Gtarget )2
                             G,Y,Π

                            s.t. Y = DW + G + ψ W Π
                                                    α
                                           γ
                                        1− Π       1−α
                                 Y =                     Yf
                                        1−γ
                                               1+β
where DW = ωD + (1 − ω) D∗ and ψ W =            β    (1 + g) DW . In the cooperative setup, Y is global
output (instead of output of the domestic country only) and G is global government spending.
Relative to the non-cooperative setup, the only difference is that the planner chooses G and G∗
simultaneously.
   The ﬁrst-order conditions for the optimal level of global government spending is given below:
                            dYAS                                       dYAS
                       0=        (YAS (Π) − Yf ) + Π − 1 + λ                − ψW
                             dΠ                                         dΠ
                       0 = G − Gtarget − λ

where the multiplier is the same as in the case of the non-cooperative game. The only difference
is that ω no longer appears in the second optimality condition.

Proposition 7 Consider two countries in symmetric secular stagnation with identical aggregate supply
parameters, loss functions, and target levels of government spending. Then coordinated optimal government
spending exceeds uncoordinated government spending. Coordination losses are maximized when ω = 12 .

Proof. Global government spending under coordination and absent coordination are given below
along with the Lagrange multiplier, λ:

                                  Gcoop = Gtarget + λ
                                                                    
                              Gnon−coop = Gtarget + λ ω 2 + (1 − ω)2
                                            dYAS
                                                   (Yf − YAS (Π)) + 1 − Π
                                       λ=    dΠ
                                                         dYAS
                                                          dΠ    − ψW
                                                     53
where Gcoop is global government spending under cooperation and Gnon−coop is global govern-
ment spending absent coordination. Since ω ≤ 1, Gnon−coop ≤ Gcoop . The term ω 2 + (1 − ω)2 is
                   1
minimized at ω =   2   implying that losses from coordination are maximized when the two countries
have the same size.

Corollary Consider N countries in a symmetric secular stagnation with identical aggregate supply pa-
rameter, loss function, and target levels of government spending. Global government spending absent
coordination goes to zero as N → ∞.

                                            1
Proof. Since countries are identical, ω =   N.   The optimality condition for government spending for
each country is given by the ﬁrst-order condition of the non-cooperative game. Therefore, global
government spending absent coordination is given by the expression below:

                                      Gnon−coop = Gtarget + λN ω 2
                                                              1
                                                = Gtarget + λ
                                                              N
where the second term goes to zero as N → ∞.




                                                     54
