NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RETURNS TO EDUCATION:
THE CAUSAL EFFECTS OF EDUCATION ON EARNINGS, HEALTH AND SMOKING
James J. Heckman
John Eric Humphries
Gregory Veramendi
Working Paper 22291
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22291

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016
This paper was presented at the Becker Friedman Institute conference in honor of Gary Becker,
October 30, 2014. It was also presented as the Sandmo Lecture at the Norwegian School of
Economics, January 13, 2015. We thank Chris Taber for insightful comments on an early draft.
We also thank Ariel Pakes and other participants at a Harvard Labor Economics Workshop in
April, 2014, for helpful comments on a previous draft. We thank Eleanor Dillon and Matthew
Wiswall for comments received at a seminar at Arizona State University, February, 2015. We
thank the special editor, Ed Lazear, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. We also
thank Jessica Yu Kyung Koh, Joshua Shea, Jennifer Pachon, and Anna Ziff for comments on this
draft. This research was supported in part by: the American Bar Foundation; the Pritzker
Children's Initiative; the Buffett Early Childhood Fund; NIH grants NICHD R37HD065072,
NICHD R01HD054702, and NIA R24AG048081; an anonymous funder; Successful Pathways
from School to Work, an initiative of the University of Chicago's Committee on Education
funded by the Hymen Milgrom Supporting Organization; and the Human Capital and Economic
Opportunity Global Working Group, an initiative of the Center for the Economics of Human
Development, affiliated with the Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics, and
funded by the Institute for New Economic Thinking. Humphries acknowledges the support of a
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. The views expressed in this paper
are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the funders or the official
views of the National Institutes of Health or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Returns to Education: The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings, Health and Smoking
James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi
NBER Working Paper No. 22291
May 2016
JEL No. C32,C38,I12,I14,I21
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates returns to education using a dynamic model of educational choice that
synthesizes approaches in the structural dynamic discrete choice literature with approaches used
in the reduced form treatment effect literature. It is an empirically robust middle ground between
the two approaches which estimates economically interpretable and policy-relevant dynamic
treatment effects that account for heterogeneity in cognitive and non-cognitive skills and the
continuation values of educational choices. Graduating college is not a wise choice for all. Ability
bias is a major component of observed educational differentials. For some, there are substantial
causal effects of education at all stages of schooling.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Gregory Veramendi
Department of Economics
Arizona State University
501 East Orange Street
CPCOM 412A
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
gregory.veramendi@asu.edu

John Eric Humphries
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
johnerichumphries@gmail.com

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22291

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

1

May 19, 2016

Introduction

In his pioneering analysis of human capital, Gary Becker (1962; 1964) emphasized the
importance of the rate of return for evaluating the effectiveness of human capital investments.
He launched an active industry estimating returns to schooling.1
At the time Becker crafted his analysis, modern economic dynamics was in its infancy,
as was research on the economics of uncertainty in dynamic sequential models. In an early
contribution, Burton Weisbrod (1962) noted that each year of schooling attained opened up
options for additional schooling and training and provided opportunities for learning about
personal abilities and life opportunities.2
A parallel development in empirical economics was the growing awareness of heterogeneity
and diversity among individual cognitive and non-cognitive abilities.3 Agents differ in their
returns to schooling. Failure to account for this heterogeneity leads to confusion in interpreting
estimated effects of schooling.
Becker’s early work focused on internal rates of return that equated ex post discounted
values of earnings streams net of monetary and psychic costs at different levels of education.
He noted that the full return to schooling includes non-market benefits and non-pecuniary
costs. In modern parlance, individuals should continue their schooling as long as their ex
ante marginal return exceeds their ex ante marginal opportunity cost of funds.
Formidable empirical challenges arise in estimating ex post internal rates of return: lifetime
earnings profiles are required; observed earnings profiles are subject to the selection bias that
arises from the fact that earnings are observed only at schooling levels selected by agents; and
quantifying non-market benefits and non-pecuniary costs is a difficult task. For estimating

1

Becker (1964) also estimated rates of return. For surveys of this literature, see, e.g., Card (1999, 2001);
Heckman et al. (2006a); Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011); McMahon (2009); Oreopoulos and Petronijevic
(2013).
2
Weisbrod’s paper stimulated research on the option value of schooling. See, e.g., Comay et al. (1973);
Dothan and Williams (1981); Bamberger (1987); Altonji (1993); Cameron and Heckman (1993); Keane
and Wolpin (1997); Arcidiacono and Miller (2011); Heckman et al. (2008); Stange (2012); Eisenhauer et al.
(2015a).
3
See Heckman (2001).

3

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

ex ante returns, information on how agents forecast future events is also required.
In a neglected paper, Becker and Chiswick (1966) developed a tractable framework for
measuring ex post returns to schooling that utilizes cross-section synthetic cohort data on
earnings to approximate life cycle earnings data.4 Mincer (1974) improved on this model by
adding work experience. The “Mincer Equation” has become the workhorse of the empirical
literature on estimating ex post rates of return:

ln Y (Si , Xi ) = γi + ρi Si +φ( Xi )
|{z}
|{z}

(1)

years of
other
schooling determinants

where Y (Si , Xi ) is the earnings of individual i with Si years of schooling and a vector of
other determinants Xi .
This equation is interpreted as a causal relationship generated by hypothetical variations
of each of γi , ρi , and φ(Xi ), holding other components on the right-hand side of (1) fixed.5
γi is what person i would earn independent of any influence of schooling Xi . Correlation
between γi and Si is the source of “ability bias” (Griliches, 1977). Strictly speaking, γi may
or may not be related to ability. It is a determinant of earnings that may also be correlated
with Si . ρi is the “return to a unit of schooling” for person i and is allowed to vary among
individuals. It is a causal parameter realized by acquiring one more unit of schooling. There
are both ex ante and ex post definitions of γi and ρi . The early literature and most of the
empirical literature today focuses on estimating ex post returns.
This paper examines the economic foundations of Equation (1) and its generalizations
accounting for the dynamics of educational decision-making and multidimensional heterogeneity in abilities among agents. We develop and estimate an empirically robust dynamic
discrete choice model that allows for agent fallibility arising from imperfect information and
learning, as well as time inconsistency. We allow agents to make schooling decisions based
4

It is based on the assumption that the earnings of a person age a in a given cross section when that
person turns a0 (> a) is well-approximated by the earnings of agents a0 in that same cross section. This
synthetic cohort assumption is standard in the literature.
5
See Heckman (2008) and Heckman and Pinto (2015) for a discussion of causality and the role of fixing.

4

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

on expected future values. We test and reject strong forms of forward-looking behavior, but
nonetheless find that agents sort on ex post gains.
We develop and estimate a variety of economically motivated and policy-relevant treatment
effects. For most of the outcomes studied in this paper, we find strong evidence of ability
bias at all levels of education, where ability includes both cognitive and non-cognitive skills,
but only find sorting on gains (a relationship between ρi and Si ) at higher levels of schooling.

1.1

Interpreting Returns to Education

The Becker-Chiswick-Mincer Equation (1), and variants of it, have become the standard
framework for estimating ex post returns to schooling for a variety of outcomes.6 While ρi is
not, in general, an internal rate of return for individual i, it is the ex post causal effect of
increasing final schooling by exactly one year from any base state of schooling, holding γi
and Xi fixed.7 It is the slope of an hedonic wage function—the derivative of the aggregate
production function evaluated at S = s for a fixed γi and Xi .
ρi ignores the continuation values arising from the dynamic sequential nature of the
schooling decision where information is updated and schooling at one stage opens up options
for schooling at later stages. More generally, for a person at s − 1, the perceived ex ante
gain in log earnings of moving to schooling level s is the anticipated direct effect ρi and the
(undiscounted) perceived continuation value of schooling for person i:

Rs,i = ρi + ρi

s
X

Ps,l,i .

(2)

l=s+1

|

{z

}

Continuation Value

Under an ex ante interpretation, Ps,l,i is the agent’s perceived probability of attaining (at
least) schooling level S = l for a person starting at schooling level s, including any relevant
6

See, e.g., Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) who apply model (1) to estimate the causal effect of education
on health.
7
The stringent conditions under which ρi is an internal rate of return, and evidence that they are not
satisfied in many commonly used samples, are presented in Heckman et al. (2006a).

5

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

discounting of future benefits; s is the highest attainable value of S. Rs,i captures Weisbrod’s
notion of valuing the future options that attaining schooling level s opens up.8 It is the
individual causal effect of an extra year of schooling inclusive of continuation values. As long
as ρi 6= 0, it is distinct from Rs,i . One can define different versions of Rs,i depending on how
Ps,l,i and ρi are specified.
Determining (2) poses major empirical challenges. There are multiple sources of heterogeneity in Rs,i . Individuals may differ in their values of ρi . Even if all people have the same
ρi , they may differ in their expected anticipated probabilities of attaining schooling level s0
(Ps,s0 ,i , s0 > s).9
The causal effects ρi and Rs,i are formulated at the individual level. The modern treatment
effect literature defines versions of these parameters for different groups and typically estimates
ex post effects.10 Thus, one can define the mean causal effect for the whole population E(ρ).11
Another possible causal effect is E(Rs ) defined for schooling level s for the entire population.
One could also define the direct return to schooling for those who choose to be at a given
level of schooling E(ρ|S = s). This is the causal effect of one more unit of schooling for those
who stop at S = s. One can define causal parameters for samples defined by other choices
(e.g., for those indifferent between s and s0 ; for those who would stop at s − 1; etc.), and for
different notions of returns, e.g., E(R|S = s).
E(γ|S = s) is the population mean γ arising solely from statistical dependence between γ
and S. It has no causal basis and is the source of ability bias. Since dependence between γ
and S may arise from multiple sources, we refer to “ability bias” as selection bias throughout
much of this paper.
The early literature adopted a simple approach to identifying returns. It assumed that ρi

8

Note, however, that the continuation value is different from the option value. See, e.g., Stange (2012)
and Eisenhauer et al. (2015a).
9
Rational expectations models assume that objectively measured probabilities are subjective probabilities.
We do not impose this assumption in our analysis. For a survey of the expectation elicitation literature, see,
e.g., Manski (2004).
10
See Heckman (2008).
11
See, e.g., Card (1999; 2001).

6

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

is identical for persons with the same observed characteristics. In this case, the only source
of bias in estimating (1) is the statistical dependence between γi and Si (selection bias).
The recent literature recognizes heterogeneity in both γi and ρi . Both may be statistically
dependent on Si , giving rise to both selection bias and sorting on gains. The latter arises
because the causal effect of S may be moderated by other variables. Whether or not sorting
gains are a source of bias depends on the question being addressed.
To illustrate the importance of accounting for continuation values, consider a compulsory
schooling policy that forces all persons to take a minimum level of schooling (S ≥ s). What
causal effect is identified by this “natural experiment?” Abstracting from general equilibrium
effects, any estimated treatment effect is defined conditional on the set of people who change
their schooling from below s to at or above s. However, there is no presumption that such
agents will stop at s if they are forced to attain it. They may learn things about themselves
and their possibilities, so they continue beyond s and thereby generate continuation values.12
Thus, an experiment that evaluates the effects of this policy does not, in general, estimate
E(ρ) or even E(ρ|S = s). It does not, in general, estimate the marginal effect of a change in
S on the log marginal price of schooling.
The analysis just presented can be generalized to incorporate non-linear structural (causal)
returns to schooling by allowing the ρi to depend on the origin and destination schooling
states (ρs,s0 ,i ) for s0 > s. Non-linearities associated with sheepskin effects associated with
graduation are a potentially important source of continuation values.

1.2

Approaches to Identifying Causal Effects and Causal Rates of
Return

Two general approaches have been developed to estimate returns to schooling in the general
case. They are: (i) structural models that jointly analyze outcomes and schooling choices; and
12

This is recognized in the LATE literature. See Angrist and Imbens (1995). What is not recognized in
that literature is that LATE estimates the returns expected by agents only under a rational expectations
assumption.

7

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

(ii) treatment effect models that use instrumental variables methods (including randomization
and regression discontinuities as instruments) as well as matching on observed variables to
identify causal parameters.13
The structural approach explicitly models agent decision rules that generate Ps,l,i and the
dependence between ρi and Si . The modern version explicitly models agent expectations and
distinguishes ex ante from ex post returns.14 It uses a variety of sources of identification, including exclusion restrictions (instrumental variables), conditional independence assumptions
about unobservables, and functional form assumptions (see, e.g., Blevins, 2014). Among
other features, the structural approach identifies causal effects at well-defined margins of
choice and can evaluate the impacts of different policies never previously implemented.15
The treatment effect approach is typically agnostic about agent decision rules and relies
on exclusion restrictions to identify its estimands. It rarely distinguishes ex ante from ex post
returns.16 This approach is more transparent in securing identification than the structural
approach.17 However, the economic interpretation of its estimated parameters is often quite
obscure. In a model with multiple levels of schooling, LATE typically does not identify returns
at the various margins of choice that generate outcomes or the sub-populations (defined in
terms of observables and unobservables) affected by the instruments used.18 Its estimands do
not identify a variety of well-posed policy questions except when the variation induced by
the instruments corresponds closely to the variations induced by the policies of interest.19
We build on the analyses of Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2005, 2007a,b), Carneiro et al.
(2010, 2011), and Eisenhauer et al. (2015b), who introduce choice theory into the modern
13

See, e.g., Angrist and Imbens (1995) and Angrist and Pischke (2009) for IV, and Heckman et al. (1998)
for matching.
14
See, e.g., Keane and Wolpin (1997); Eisenhauer et al. (2015a).
15
See Heckman (2010) and Heckman and Urzúa (2010).
16
Eisenhauer et al. (2015b) distinguish and estimate ex ante and ex post returns in an instrumental
variable model.
17
The modern instrumental variables case requires assumptions about the validity of the instruments. If
there are heterogeneous treatment effects, additional assumptions such as “monotonicity” (better termed
uniformity) are required to interpret IV estimates. See Imbens and Angrist (1994); Heckman and Vytlacil
(2005); Angrist and Pischke (2009) for details.
18
See Heckman et al. (2006c) and Heckman et al. (2016) for a discussion.
19
See Heckman (2010).

8

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

analysis of instrumental variables. They focus on binary choice models but also analyze
ordered and unordered choice models with multiple outcomes to estimate economically
interpretable treatment effects. Expanding on that body of research, we consider multiple
sources of identification besides instrumental variables. We do not rely on continuous
instruments. In addition, we link our analysis to the dynamic discrete choice literature.

1.3

Our Approach

This paper develops a methodological middle ground between the reduced form treatment
approach and the fully structural dynamic discrete choice approach. As in the structural
literature, we estimate causal effects at clearly identified margins of choice. Our methodology
identifies which agents are affected by instruments as well as which persons would be affected
by alternative policies not previously implemented. As in the treatment effect literature, we
are agnostic about the precise rules used by agents to make decisions. Unlike that literature,
we recognize the possibility that people make decisions and account for the consequences of
their choices. We approximate agent decision rules and do not impose the cross-equation
restrictions that are the hallmark of the structural approach, nor do we explicitly model
agent expectations about costs and returns.20
Using a generalized Roy framework, we estimate a multistage sequential model of educational choices and their consequences. An important feature of our model is that educational
choices at one stage open up educational options at later stages. Each educational decision is
characterized using a flexible discrete choice model. The anticipated consequences of future
choices and their costs can be assessed in a variety of ways by individuals in deciding whether
or not to continue their schooling. Our model approximates a dynamic discrete choice model
without taking a stance on exactly what agents are maximizing or their information sets.
Like structural models, our model is identified though multiple sources of variation.
Drawing from the matching literature, we identify the causal effects of schooling at different
20

Such approximations are discussed in Heckman (1981), Eckstein and Wolpin (1989), Cameron and
Heckman (2001), and Geweke and Keane (2001).

9

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

stages of the life cycle by using a rich set of observed variables and by proxying unobserved
endowments. Unlike previous work on matching, we correct the match variables for measurement error and the bias introduced into the measurements by family background. We also
use exclusion restrictions to identify our model as in the IV and control function literatures.
Unlike many structural papers, we provide explicit proofs of model identification.21
Our framework allows agents to make ex ante valuations as in dynamic discrete choice
models but does not explicitly identify them.22 However, we estimate a variety of ex post
returns to schooling, and model how they depend on both observed and unobserved variables.
We decompose ex post treatment effects into (i) the direct benefits of going from one level
of schooling to the next;23 and (ii) continuation values arising from access to additional
education beyond the next step.
Estimating our model on NLSY79 data, we investigate foundational issues in human
capital theory. We report the following findings.
(1) There are substantial returns/causal effects of education on wages, the present value
of wages, health, and smoking.24
(2) The continuation values arising from sequential choices are empirically important
components of returns to education. Low-ability individuals gain mostly from graduating
high school and stopping there. High-ability individuals have substantial post-high school
continuation values.
(3) Estimated returns (causal effects) differ by schooling level and depend on observed and
unobserved characteristics of individuals. Graduating high school benefits all—and especially
low-ability persons. Only high-ability individuals receive substantial benefits from college
graduation. There is positive sorting on gains only at higher educational levels.
21

Heckman and Navarro (2007) and Blevins (2014) also proof identifiability of structural models.
See, e.g., Eisenhauer et al. (2015a).
23
The human capital literature traditionally focused on the direct causal benefits of one final schooling
level compared to another, but makes sequential comparisons from the lowest levels of schooling to the highest
(Becker, 1964).
24
There is a small, but growing literature on the effects of education on health and healthy behaviors.
See Grossman (2000); McMahon (2000); Lochner (2011); Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011); Cutler and
Lleras-Muney (2010). For a review of this literature see Web Appendix A.1.
22

10

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

(4) People sort on ex post gains, especially more able people at higher schooling levels,
confirming a core tenet of human capital theory. Yet, at the same time, people do not know
or act on publicly available information when making decisions about high school graduation.
(5) This paper contributes to an emerging literature on the importance of both cognitive
and non-cognitive abilities in shaping life outcomes.25 Consistent with the recent literature,
we find that both types of abilities are important predictors of educational attainment. Within
schooling levels, cognitive and non-cognitive abilities have impacts on most outcomes.26
(6) Selection bias arising from both observed and unobserved variables accounts for a
substantial portion (typically over one half) of the observed differences in wage outcomes
classified by education. This finding runs counter to a common interpretation in the literature
based on comparing IV and OLS estimates of Equation (1).27
Using our estimated model, we conduct two policy experiments. In the first, we examine
the impact of a tuition subsidy on college enrollment. We identify who is affected by the
policy, how their decisions change, and how much they benefit. Those induced to enroll
benefit from the policy, and many go on to graduate from college. In a second experiment,
we analyze a policy that improves the ability endowments of those at the bottom of the
distribution to see how this impacts educational choices and outcomes. Such improvements
are produced by early intervention programs.28 Increasing cognitive endowments positively
impacts all outcomes, while increasing non-cognitive endowments mostly impacts smoking
and health outcomes.
Our paper proceeds in the following way. Section 2 presents our model. Section 3
presents economically interpretable treatment effects (rates of return) that can be derived
from it. Section 4 discusses identification. Section 5 discusses the data analyzed and
presents unadjusted associations and regression-adjusted associations between different levels

25

See, e.g., Borghans et al. (2008); Heckman et al. (2006b); Almlund et al. (2011).
Our estimates of the causal effects of education do not require that we separately isolate the effects of
individual cognitive and non-cognitive endowments on outcomes, just that we control for them as a set.
27
See, e.g., Griliches (1977) and Card (1999, 2001).
28
Heckman et al. (2013a).
26

11

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

of education and the outcomes analyzed in this paper. Section 6 reports our estimated
treatment effects and interprets them. Section 7 uses the estimated model to address two
policy-relevant questions. Section 8 tests a key identifying assumption. Section 9 compares
our estimates to those derived from alternative methodological approaches such as OLS and
matching. Section 10 concludes.

2

Model

This paper estimates a multistage sequential model of educational choices with transitions
and decision nodes shown in Figure 1. Let J denote a set of possible terminal states. At
each node there are only two possible choices: remain at j or transit to the next node (j + 1
if j ∈ {1, . . . , s − 1}). Dj = 0 if a person at j does not stop there and goes on to the next
node. Dj = 1 if the person stops at j for j =
6 0. D0 = 1 opens an additional branch of the
decision tree. A person may remain a dropout or get the GED.29 For D0 = 1, we define
the attainable set as {0, G}. Thus, in the lower branch (D0 = 1), agents can terminate as
a dropout (D0 = 1, DG = 1) or as a dropout who gets a GED certificate (D0 = 1, DG = 0).
Dj ∈ D is the set of possible transition decisions that can be taken by the individual over the
decision horizon. Let S = {G, 0, . . . , s} denote the set of stopping states with S = s if the
agent stops at s ∈ S(Ds = 1 for s ∈ S\{0, G}). Define s as the highest attainable element in
S in the ordered subset {0, . . . , s̄}. We assume that the environment is time-stationary and
decisions are irreversible.30
Qj = 1 indicates that an agent gets to decision node j and acquires at least the education
associated with j. Qj = 0 if the person never gets there. QG = 1 if the agent drops out
of high school and faces the GED option. The history of nodes visited by an agent can be
described by the collection of the Qj such that Qj = 1. Observe that Ds = 1 is equivalent to
29

The GED is a test high school dropouts can take to earn state-issued high school equivalency credentials.
For strong evidence on the nonequivalence of GEDs to high school dropouts, see Heckman et al. (2014).
30
Versions of this model are also analyzed in Cunha et al. (2007), Heckman and Navarro (2007), and
Heckman et al. (2016).

12

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

S = s for s ∈ {1, . . . , s} and Ds = 1 if Dj = 0, ∀j ∈ S\{s̄}.31 Finally, D0 = 1 and DG = 0 is
equivalent to S = G.
Figure 1: A Multistage Dynamic Decision Model

te Four-Year College Graduate
a
u

1
e
at
u
d

0

HS

D
Co o No
lle t A
ge tt
e

r
Fo op O
ur
-Ye ut o
ar f
Co
lle

ge

nd

Dr
Hi op
gh Ou
Sc t o
ho f
ol

Some College

High School Graduate

a
Gr

GED

ED

tG
Ge

G

2.1

nd e
tt e lleg
A o
C

d
ra
G
2 D

Re
Dr ma
op in
ou
t

Uncertified
High School Dropout

A Sequential Decision Model

The decision process at each node is assumed to be characterized by an index thresholdcrossing property:

Dj =




 0 if Ij ≥ 0 


for Qj = 1,

j ∈ J = {G, 0, . . . , s − 1}


 1 otherwise 


31

For notational convenience, we assign Dj = 0 for all j > s.

13

(3)

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

where Ij is the agent’s perceived value at node j of going on to the next node. The requirement
Qj = 1 ensures that agents are able to make the transition at j by conditioning on the
population eligible to make the transition.
Associated with each final state s ∈ S is a set of Ks potential outcomes for each agent
with indices k ∈ Ks . We define the Ỹsk as latent variables that map into potential outcomes
Ysk :


 Ỹ k
s
k
Ys =

 1 (Ỹsk ≥ 0)

if

Ysk

is continuous





for k ∈ Ks , s ∈ S.

(4)


if Ysk is a binary outcome 

The outcome variables may be in levels, logs, or other transformations. Using the switching
regression framework of Quandt (1958, 1972), the observed outcome Y k for a k common
across all decision nodes is

Yk =


X


Ds Ysk  (1 − D0 ) + Y0k DG + YGk (1 − DG ) D0 .

(5)

S\{0,G}

2.2

Parameterizations of the Decision Rules and Potential Outcomes for Final States

Following a well-established tradition in the treatment effect and structural literatures, we
approximate Ij using a separable model:

Ij = φj (Z) −
|{z}

ηj , j ∈ J ,
|{z}

(6)

Observed Unobserved
by analyst by analyst

where Z is a vector of variables observed by the analyst, components of which determine the
transition decisions of the agent at different stages, and ηj is unobserved by the analyst. A
separable representation of the choice rule is an essential feature of LATE (Vytlacil, 2002)
and is often invoked in dynamic discrete choice models (Blevins, 2014).

14

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

This specification of agent decision-making is quite agnostic. It does not impose forwardlooking behavior. Agents may be myopic or time-inconsistent and may be confronted by
surprises. Because we do not impose particular expectation formation assumptions, we are
not tied to a particular set of assumptions about agent rationality. A drawback of this
approach is that we cannot identify ex ante versions of the economic parameters we estimate.
Outcomes are also assumed to be separable:

Ỹsk = τsk (X) +
|{z}

Usk ,
|{z}

k ∈ Ks ,

s ∈ S,

(7)

Observed Unobserved
by analyst by analyst

where X is a vector of observed determinants of outcomes and Usk is unobserved by the
analyst.32 Separability of the unobserved variables in the outcome equations is often invoked
in the structural literature but is not strictly required in the structural or discrete choice
literatures.33

2.3

Assumptions about the Unobservables

Central to our main empirical strategy is the existence of a finite dimensional vector θ of
unobserved (by the economist) endowments that generate all of the dependence across the ηj
and the Usk . We assume that
ηj = −(θ 0 λj − νj ), j ∈ J

(8)

Usk = θ 0 αks + ωsk , k ∈ Ks , s ∈ S,

(9)

and

where νj is an idiosyncratic error term for transition j. ωsk represents an idiosyncratic error
term for outcome k in state s.
32

In our model, X and Z can vary by decision or outcome depending on the specification of functions
and φj (Z). See Table 1 for details.
Moreover, we can condition on observable covariates X.

τsk (X)
33

15

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Conditional on θ, X, Z, choices and outcomes are statistically independent. Controlling
for this set of variables eliminates selection effects. If the analyst knew θ, X, Z, he/she could
use matching to identify the model.34
The standard “random effects” approach in the structural literature treats θ as a nuisance
variable and does not interpret it.35 Our approach is to proxy θ using multiple interpretable
measurements of it. We correct for errors in the proxy variables. The measurements facilitate
the interpretation of θ. We develop this intuition further in Section 4, after presenting the
rest of our model.
We array the νj , j ∈ J into a vector ν = (νG , ν0 , ν1 , . . . , νs−1 ), and the ηj into η =
(ηG , η0 , . . . , ηs−1 ). Array the ωsk into a vector ωs = (ωs1 , . . . , ωsKs ). Array the Usk into vector
Us = (Us1 , . . . , UsKs ), and array the Us into U = (UG , U0 , . . . , Us̄ ).
Letting “⊥⊥” denote statistical independence, we assume that, conditional on X

νj ⊥⊥ νl ,
ωsk ⊥⊥ ωsk0 ,
ωs ⊥⊥ ν,

∀l 6= j

l, j ∈ J

∀s 6= s0

∀k

∀s ∈ S

(A-1a)
(A-1b)
(A-1c)

θ ⊥⊥ Z

(A-1d)

(ωs , ν) ⊥⊥ (θ, Z),

∀s ∈ S.

(A-1e)

Assumption (A-1a) maintains independence of the shocks affecting transitions; (A-1b)
assumes independence of shocks across all states; (A-1c) assumes independence of the shocks
to transitions and the outcomes; (A-1d) assumes independence of θ with respect to the
observables; and (A-1e) assumes independence of the shocks with the factors θ and Z.
Versions of assumptions (A-1d) and (A-1e) play fundamental roles in the structural dynamic

34
35

See Carneiro et al. (2003).
See, e.g., Keane and Wolpin (1997); Rust (1994); Adda and Cooper (2003); Blevins (2014).

16

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

discrete choice literature.36 Any dependence postulated across the ω and ν can be captured
by introducing factors in θ.

2.4

Measurement System for Unobserved Factors θ

We allow for the possibility that θ cannot be measured precisely, but that it can be proxied
with multiple measurements. We correct for the effects of measurement error in the proxy. We
link θ to measurements, and adjoin measurement equations to choice and outcome equations,
making θ interpretable.
Let M be a vector of NM measurements on θ. They may consist of lagged or future
values of the outcome variables or additional measurements.37 The system of equations
determining M is
wM = Φ(X, θ, e),

(10)

where X are observed variables, θ are the factors, and
 


 M1   Φ1 (X, θ, e1 ) 

 .  
..
,
..  = 
M =
.

 


 

MNM
ΦNM (X, θ, eNM )
where we array the ej into e = (e1 , . . . , eNM ). We assume, in addition to the previous
assumptions that, conditional on X,
ej ⊥⊥ el ,
and

j 6= l,

j, l ∈ {1, . . . , NM }

e ⊥⊥ (X, Z, θ, ν, ω).

(A-1f)
(A-1g)

For the purpose of identifying treatment effects, we do not need to identify each equation
of system (10). We just need to identify the span of θ that preserves the information on θ in
36

For example, the widely-used “types” assumption of Keane and Wolpin (1997) postulates conditional
independence between choices and outcomes conditional on types (θ) that operate through the initial
conditions of their model.
37
See, e.g., Abbring and Heckman (2007); Schennach et al. (2012).

17

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

(10). That is sufficient to produce conditional independence between choices and outcomes.38
However, in this paper we estimate equation system (10) to enhance interpretability.

3

Defining Returns/Causal Effects of Education

A variety of ex post counterfactual outcomes and associated treatment effects can be generated
from our model. There is no single “causal effect” of education. The causal effects we analyze
can be used to predict the effects of changing education levels through different policies
for people of different backgrounds and abilities. They allow us to improve on the “effects”
reported in the literature on instrumental variables to understand the effectiveness of policies
for different identifiable segments of the population, and the benefits to people at different
margins of choice. These effects are defined for different conditioning sets and thought
experiments. Our dynamic model suggests a new range of treatment parameters that do not
arise in models with binary treatments. This section makes precise the notions of returns to
education discussed in Section 1.
In principle, we could define and estimate a variety of causal effects, many of which are not
plausible. For example, many empirical economists would not find estimates of the effect of
fixing (manipulating) Dj = 0 if Qj = 0 to be credible (i.e., the person for whom we fix Dj = 0
is not at the decision node to take the transition).39 In the spirit of credible econometrics,
we define such treatment effects conditional on Qj = 1. This approach blends structural and
treatment effect approaches. Our causal parameters recognize agent heterogeneity and are
allowed to differ across different subsets of the population.
The person-specific treatment effect Tjk for outcome k for an individual selected from the
population Qj = 1 with characteristics X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, making a decision at node j
between going on to the next node or stopping at j, is the difference between the individual’s
38

See, e.g., Heckman et al. (2013b).
The distinction between fixing and conditioning traces back to Haavelmo (1943). White and Chalak
(2009) use the terminology “setting” for the same notion. For a recent analysis of this crucial distinction, see
Heckman and Pinto (2015).
39

18

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

outcomes under the two actions:

Tjk [Y k |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ] := (Y k |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 0)
− (Y k |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1). (11)

The random variable (Y k |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 0) is the outcome at node j
for a person with characteristics X = x, Z = z, θ = θ from the population that attains node
j (or higher), Qj = 1, and for whom we fix Dj = 0 so they go on to the next node. They may
choose to go even further. Random variable (Y k |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1)
is defined for the same population but forces persons with those characteristics not to transit
to the next node.
We present population-level treatment effects based on (11). We focus our discussion
on means, but we also discuss distributional counterparts for all of the treatment effects
considered in this paper.

3.1

Direct Effects and Continuation Values

A principal contribution of this paper is the definition and estimation of treatment effects
that take into account the direct effect of moving to the next node of a decision tree, plus the
benefits associated with the further schooling that such movement opens up. The associated
mean treatment effect is the difference in expected outcomes arising from changing a single
educational decision in a sequential schooling model and tracing through its consequences,
accounting for the dynamic sequential nature of schooling.
Person-specific treatment effects at node j can be decomposed into two components. The
k
first component is the direct effect of going from j to j + 1: DEjk = Yj+1
− Yjk , the effect

often featured in the literature on the returns to schooling when comparing schooling levels
j + 1 and j (Becker, 1964). The second component is the continuation value of going beyond

19

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

j + 1 for persons with D0 = 0 (the upper branch of Figure 1), which is
s−(j+1)
k
Cj+1

:=

X

" r
Y

r=1

l=1

#
k
k
(1 − Dj+l ) (Yj+r+1
− Yj+r
).40

The continuation value for the lower branch of Figure 1 (D0 = 1) is defined for the
attainable set {0, G}. G is the only option available to a high school dropout in that branch.
In the following, we analyze the upper branch of Figure 1. The analysis for the lower branch
is similar.
At the individual level, the total effect of fixing Dj = 0 on Y k is decomposed into
k
Tjk = DEjk + Cj+1
.

(12)

The associated population level average treatment effect at node j inclusive of continuation
values, conditional on Qj = 1, is
AT Ejk

Z
:=

Z
...

E(Tjk [Y k |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ]) dFX,Z,θ (x, z, θ | Qj = 1),

(13)

which can be decomposed into direct and continuation value components.
Integrating over the X, Z, θ, conditioning on Qj = 1, the component of (13) due to the
population continuation value at j + 1 is

k
EX,Z,θ (Cj+1
)

 X
s−1 n
k
= EX,Z,θ
E(Yl+1
− Ylk |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, Ql+1 = 1, Fix Qj+1 = 1)
l=j+1

· P r(Ql+1 = 1|X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, Qj = 1, F ix Qj+1


o
= 1) |Qj = 1 , (14)

where Qs = 1 if S = s.
We can also define conditional (on X, Z, θ) population distributions of total effects as in

40

The relationship between this notion of continuation values and the definition used in the dynamic
discrete choice literature is explored in Web Appendix A.3.

20

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Heckman et al. (1997):41

P r(Tjk < tkj |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ, Qj = 1)

(15)

and the population counterpart, integrating over X, Z, θ, which can be further decomposed
into the distributions of direct effects and of continuation values.42
Because we do not specify or attempt to identify choice-node-specific agent information
sets, we can only identify ex post treatment effects. Hence, we can identify continuation
values associated with choices, but cannot identify option values. A benefit of this more
agnostic approach is that it does not impose specific decision rules or assumptions about agent
expectations. Our model allows for irrationality, regret, and mistakes in agent decision-making
associated with maturation and information acquisition and allows us to test the validity of
certain assumptions commonly made about agent expectations.

3.2

Average Marginal Treatment Effects

In order to understand the economic returns to an additional unit of schooling for persons
at the margin of indifference at each node of the decision tree of Figure 1, we estimate the
Average Marginal Treatment Effect (AMTE).43 It is the average effect of transiting to the
next node for individuals at or near the margin of indifference between the two nodes:
AM T Ejk

ZZZ
:=

h 
i
E Tjk Y k |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ dFX,Z,θ (x, z, θ̄ | Qj = 1, |Ij | ≤ ε),

(16)

where ε is an arbitrarily small neighborhood around the margin of indifference.44 These
effects are inclusive of all consequences of taking the transition at j, including the possibility
41

See Abbring and Heckman (2007) for a review of the literature.
The modifications for the unordered case require that we define these terms over the admissible options
available for D0 = 1 or D0 = 0.
43
See Carneiro et al. (2010, 2011).
44
Note that the limit of (16) as ε → 0 is not well-defined without further assumptions. This is the so-called
“Borel paradox” discussed in this context in Carneiro et al. (2010). We avoid this problem by assuming a
functional form for the distribution of ε.
42

21

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

of attaining final schooling levels well beyond j.45 AMTE defines causal effects at well-defined
and empirically identified margins of choice. It is the proper measure of the ex post marginal
gross benefit for evaluating the gains from moving from one stage of the decision tree to the
next for those at that margin of choice. In general, it is distinct from LATE, which is not
defined for any specific margin of choice, and generally does not estimate E(ρ) or E(ρ|S = s),
and includes the effects on outcomes for transitions induced by instruments beyond any
schooling level at which the instrument operates.46 Since we identify the distribution of Ij ,
we can identify the characteristics of agents in the indifference set, something not possible
using LATE.47
The population distribution counterpart of AMTE is defined over the set of agents for
whom | Ij |≤ ε, which can be generated from our model: P r(Tjk < tkj |Qj = 1, |Ij | ≤ ε).
Distributional versions can be defined for all of the treatment effects considered in this section.

3.3

Policy-Relevant Treatment Effects

The policy-relevant treatment effect (PRTE) is the average treatment effect for those induced
to change their choices in response to a particular policy intervention. Let Y k (p) be the
aggregate outcome under policy p for outcome k. Let S(p) be the final state selected by
an agent under policy p. The policy-relevant treatment effect from implementing policy p
compared to policy p0 for outcome k is:
k
P RT Ep,p
0 :=

ZZZ

E(Y k (p0 ) − Y k (p)|X = x, Z = z, θ = θ)dFX,Z,θ (x, z, θ|S(p) 6= S(p0 )), (17)

where S(p) 6= S(p0 ) denotes the set of the characteristics of people for whom attained states
differ under the two policies. In general, it is different from AMTE because the agents affected
by a policy can be at multiple margins of choice. PRTE is often confused with LATE. In
45

One might also define a version of this treatment effect for two adjacent states ignoring continuation
values.
46
See Heckman and Vytlacil (2007a) and Carneiro et al. (2010). The LATE can correspond to people at
multiple margins. See Angrist and Imbens (1995) and Heckman et al. (2016).
47
Note that the indifference set may contain multiple margins, as in Heckman and Vytlacil (2007b) and
Heckman and Urzúa (2010).

22

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

general, they are different unless the proposed policy change coincides with the instrument
used to define LATE.48

3.4

Differences Across Final Schooling Levels

Becker’s original approach to estimating returns to schooling (1964) focused on the upper
branch of Figure 1 and reported estimates from pairwise comparisons of returns at final
schooling levels. He defines returns to education as the gains from choosing between a terminal
base state and a terminal final schooling level, implicitly assuming that the probabilities of
all intervening transitions in Equation (2) are 1. Following Becker, but controlling for θ,
Z, and X, the mean gain for the subset of the population that completes one of the two
adjacent schooling level S ∈ {s, s0 } is:

k
AT Es,s
0

ZZZ
:=

E(Ysk0 − Ysk |X = x, Z = z, θ = θ) dFX,Z,θ (x, z, θ | S ∈ {s, s0 }).

(18)

Unlike (13), this parameter ignores continuation values.
Conditioning in this fashion recognizes that the characteristics of people not making
either final choice could be far away from the population making one of those two choices,
and hence, might be far away from having any empirical or policy relevance.49 One can also
compute parameters of AT Es,s0 for other conditioning sets, such as S = s0 (treatment on
the treated). We report estimates of different versions of these treatment effects in the Web
Appendix A.14.1.

48

See Carneiro et al. (2011) for an empirical example. The differences between the two parameters can be
substantial as we show in Heckman et al. (2016).
49
The estimated differences in treatment effects for the conditional and total populations are not large for
outcomes associated with the decision to enroll in college, but are substantial for the choice to graduate from
college. See Web Appendix A.14.2.

23

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

3.5

May 19, 2016

Decomposing Observed Differences in Outcomes into Selection Bias, Sorting Gains, and Average Treatment Effects

Using our model, we interpret “ability bias” (really selection bias) and sorting on gains using
the traditional Becker-Chiswick-Mincer model (1) and its extensions as a benchmark. To
simplify the exposition, we focus on the upper branch of Figure 1 (D0 = 0) and analyze
continuous outcomes.50
There are two basic models used in the empirical literature estimating returns to schooling.
One version studies outcomes and selection bias in terms of pairwise final schooling levels
(s0 , s) attained by agents (Ds0 + Ds = 1), s0 6= s. It is defined for the population at one of
these two terminal schooling states. It does not include terminal values beyond s. Another
version studies gains and ability bias in terms of benefits associated with attaining (and
possibly exceeding) given schooling levels (Qj = 1). This includes continuation values. In the
text, we develop both widely-used versions.
The effect of additional schooling starting at s0 and stopping at s is captured by Ysk −Ysk0 =
ρks0 ,s .51 This is the direct gain of going from s0 to s. It does not include any gains from
transitions beyond s:

ρks0 ,s = Ysk − Ysk0 = τsk (X) − τsk0 (X) + θ 0 (αks − αks0 ) + ωsk − ωsk0 .
In this notation we may write the outcome Y k relative to base state Y0k as
Y k = Ysk0 +

X

ρks0 ,s Ds .

(19)

s∈S

This is a version of (1) where schooling is discretized at final schooling attainment levels:
S = s if Ds = 1. E(ρks0 ,s ) is one version of the returns to schooling compared to benchmark
50

The analysis for discrete outcomes is straightforward.
Note that Ysk can be log outcomes as in (1). We can also formulate the outcomes in terms of latent
variables.
51

24

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

s0 defined for the entire population.
Except for knife-edge cases, if λs 6= 0, dependence between Ds and ρks0 ,s is generated if
either τsk0 (X) 6= τsk (X), or αks0 6= αks , or both.52 Sorting on gains (correlation between ρks0 ,s
and Ds ) may not appear in empirical estimates if agents are sorting on gains beyond s and
not on direct effects (i.e., sorting on components of Rs,i as defined in (2)). Only in the case
where there is no continuation value can we conclude from empirical estimates that absence
of sorting effects defined in this fashion implies absence of sorting on potential future gains.
The traditional Griliches (1977) analysis of returns to schooling ignores sorting on gains and
only considers ability bias. Assuming analysts condition on X (in levels and in interactions
with Ds ), sorting gains arise only if αks − αks0 6= 0 and λs 6= 0. Even if αks − αks0 = 0, as long
as αks0 6= 0, ability bias will arise in estimating the mean of the gains ρks0 ,s in (19), provided
λs 6= 0.53
Note that the choice of a base state matters for estimating sorting gains in the general
case where the magnitude of αks − αks0 changes depending on the base state selected. Some
representations may generate sorting gains that are absent from other representations with
different base states.54
Within this framework, there are several meaningful ways to decompose the observed
difference in outcomes between those at j who go on to S = j + 1. The observed difference

52

Notice that even if there is no such dependence, some agents may still choose to go beyond s because of
later gains in outcomes.
53
For a given level of s, selection bias is defined as E(Ysk0 |Ds = 1) − E(Ysk0 |Ds0 = 1), the mean difference
in baseline outcomes for persons who stop at S = s compared to those who stop at S = s0 .
54
The extension of this analysis to more general model (5) with the GED is straightforward.

25

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

can be decomposed as follows:

k
|S = j + 1] − E[Yjk |S = j]
E[Yj+1
|
{z
}
Observed difference

k
− Yjk |S = j + 1] + E[Yjk |S = j + 1] − E[Yjk |S = j]
= E[Yj+1
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Treatment on the treated T Tj,j+1

k
− Yjk |S ∈ {j, j + 1}]
E[Yj+1
|
{z
}

=

Selection bias SBj,j+1
from base state j

+

Pairwise average treatment effect AT Ej,j+1
for people in conditioning set {j,j+1}
k
k
E[Yj+1
− Yjk |S = j + 1] − E[Yj+1
− Yjk |S ∈ {j, j + 1}] + E[Yjk |S = j + 1] − E[Yjk |S = j] .55
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Sorting gains SGj,j+1

Selection bias SBj,j+1

(20)

Note that the ATE parameter depends on the distributions of characteristics of X and
θ for persons at node j, as do the sorting on gains and selection bias parameters. These
components can be further decomposed into selection on observed variables and selection on
unobserved ability components θ, and the ability components can be further decomposed
into cognitive and non-cognitive components.
These decompositions focus on gains up to final schooling states. They compare observed
differences across pairs of final schooling levels. The empirical literature on the returns to
schooling also compares the observed differences in outcomes between persons at a given
node (Qj = 1) who make a particular schooling transition with those who do not make that
transition.
Thus, we can decompose the observed gain from going to j + 1 from j for those at
j (Qj = 1) into a gain for those who take the transition (Dj = 0) and a selection bias term
(the difference in the mean outcomes between those who would have gone on (Dj = 0), but are
stopped at j (Fix Dj = 1), and those who chose not to go on). We can further decompose the
treatment on the treated parameter into a node-specific ATE (the mean difference between
55

Appendix A.15.1 gives the exact decomposition for our specific functional forms.

26

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

those for whom Qj = 1 where we fix Dj = 0 and we fix Dj = 1, respectively), and a “sorting
gains” term which is the difference between the node-specific treatment on the treated term
and the node-specific ATE.
In Web Appendix A.15.3, we decompose the values of being at j into components associated
with stopping at j and continuing beyond j where, for the upper branch of Figure 1 (D0 = 0),
k

Y =

Y0k

+

s̄
X

ρkj−1,j Qj ,

(21)

j≥1

k
where ρkj−1,j = Yjk − Yj−1
. The expected future gain for a person at j (≥ 1) is

Ej

s̄
X

!
ρkl−1,l Ql |Qj = 1

l>j

=

s̄
X



Ej (ρkl−1,l |Ql = 1)P (Ql = 1|Qj = 1) ,

j ≥ 1,

l>j

where the conditioning D0 = 0 is kept implicit.56
Analogous to decomposition (20), we can decompose the observed difference between
those with Dj = 0 and those with Dj = 1, i.e., the observed difference between those that
do and do not make a particular transition conditional on making that transition. E(ρkj,j+1 )
is the expected incremental gain of proceeding to the next stage. For the upper branch

56

The more general expression incorporating D0 is presented as Equation (A.10) in the Web Appendix.

27

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

(D0 = 0), we may write for the k th outcome at node j:
E[Y k |Dj = 0, Qj = 1] − E[Y k |Dj = 1, Qj = 1]
|
{z
}
Observed difference

= E[Y k |Dj = 0, Qj = 1] − E[Y k |Dj = 0, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1]
{z
}
|
Dynamic treatment on the treated for those at j

+ E[Y k |Dj = 0, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1] − E[Y k |Dj = 1, Qj = 1]
|
{z
}
Selection bias for those at j

= E[Y k |Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 0] − E[Y k |Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1]
|
{z
}
ATE for those at j






 E[Y k |Dj = 0, Qj = 1] − E[Y k |Dj = 0, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1] 

+
 


− E[Y k |Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 0] − E[Y k |Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1] 

{z
}
|
TT - ATE: Sorting gain at j for those who transit to j+1

+ E[Y k |Dj = 0, Qj = 1, F ix Dj = 1] − E[Y k |Dj = 1, Qj = 1] .
|
{z
}

(22)

Selection bias

The node-specific ATE is defined for the population at Qj = 1 and considers either forcing
population members to stay at j, or moving the entire group from j to j + 1 (i.e, Fix Dj = 1
and Fix Dj = 0, respectively). The sorting gain is the average net gain beyond ATE to those
who actually take the transition (Dj = 0).

4

Identification and Model Likelihood

The treatment effects defined in Section 3 can be identified using alternative empirical
approaches. The main approach used in this paper exploits the fact that, conditional on
θ, X, Z, outcomes and choices are statistically independent where X and Z are observed
and θ is not. If θ were observed, one could condition on θ, X, Z and identify the model of
Equations (3)–(9) and the treatment effects that can be generated from it. We use factor
model (10) to proxy θ using measurements M .

28

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Under the conditions presented in Heckman et al. (2016), we can non-parametrically
identify the model of Equations (3)–(7) including the distribution of θ, as well as the
Φ functions and the distribution of e (which can be interpreted as measurement errors).
Effectively, we match on proxies for θ and correct for the effects of measurement error (e) in
creating the proxies. Such corrections are possible because with multiple measures on θ we
can identify the distribution of e.57 We can identify treatment effects even though we do
not isolate individual factors. We only need that the factors θ are spanned by M , not that
Equations (10) are separately identified.58
Another approach to identification uses instrumental variables which, if available, under
the conditions presented in Heckman et al. (2016) can be used to identify the structural
model (3)–(9) without invoking the factor structure (8) and (9) or the postulated conditional
independence assumptions.
The precise parameterization and the likelihood function for the model we estimate is
presented in Web Appendix A.4. While, in principle, it is possible to identify the model nonparametrically, in this paper we make parametric assumptions in order facilitate computation.
We subject the estimated model to rigorous goodness-of-fit tests which the model passes.59

5

Our Data, A Benchmark OLS Analysis of the Outcomes We Study, and Our Exclusion Restrictions

We estimate our model on a sample of males extracted from the widely-used National
Longitudinal Sample of Youth (NLSY 79).60 Before discussing estimates from our model, it is
informative to set the stage for what follows and present adjusted and unadjusted associations
57

Under linear specifications for (10), we can directly estimate the θ and use factor regression methods.
See, e.g., Heckman et al. (2013a), Heckman et al. (2016), and the references cited therein.
58
As noted in Heckman et al. (2011b), we do not need to solve classical identification problems associated
with estimating equation system (10) in order to extract measure-preserving transformations of θ on which
we can condition in order to identify treatment effects. In the linear factor analysis literature these are the
classical rotation and normalization problems.
59
See Web Appendix A.5.
60
Web Appendix A.2 presents a detailed discussion of the data we analyze and our exclusion restrictions.

29

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

between the outcomes we study and schooling. Figure 2 presents estimated linear regression
relationships between different levels of schooling relative to high school dropouts and the
four outcomes analyzed in this paper: wages, log present value of wages (or PV of wages),
health limitations, and smoking.61 These are least squares regressions using the regressors
indicated at the base of the figure, including our proxies for ability. They do not separate
out the roles of X and θ in contributing to the causal and selection bias components of the
observed differences. Least squares estimates of this form are commonly reported in the
literature that investigates the effects of schooling controlling for X, Z, θ.
The black bars in each panel show the unadjusted mean differences in outcomes for
persons at the indicated levels of educational attainment compared to those for high school
dropouts. Higher ability is associated with higher earnings and more schooling. However, as
shown by the grey bars in Figure 2, adjusting for family background and adolescent measures
of ability attenuates, but does not eliminate, the estimated least squares estimates of the
effects of education.
Figure 2 shows that controlling for proxied ability substantially reduces the observed
differences in earnings across educational groups. These regression estimates suggest, but do
not identify, substantial causal effects which we report below.
Entering θ as a regressor is a traditional way to control for ability bias. It eliminates
the ability bias emphasized by Griliches (1977). If there is sorting on gains that depend on
X and θ, this approach over-controls for those variables that are components of the causal
effect of treatment on the treated as defined in (20).62 Figure 2 reports traditional measures
of regression-adjusted causal effects of schooling. At the same time, such regressions do not
discriminate among the components of (20) which have different causal interpretations. In
Web Appendix A.17.2, we compare the OLS pairwise causal effects implicit in the estimates
reported in Figure 2 with the estimates from our version of a structural model discussed

61

Adjustments are made through linear regression. This decomposition uses high school dropout as the
base category (s0 ).
62
See also the decompositions in (A.7).

30

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

below.63
It is sometimes claimed that a linear-in-years-of-schooling model fits the data well.64 The
white bar in Figure 2 displays the OLS-adjusted effect of schooling controlling for years of
completed schooling as in Equation (1).65 The white bars in all figures show that, even after
controlling for years of schooling, the educational indicators still play an important role. OLS
estimates of Mincer specification (1) do not precisely describe the data. There are effects of
schooling beyond those captured by a linear years-of-schooling specification.66

63

The OLS estimates do not identify treatment on the treated parameters. They are in rough agreement
with ATEs except for the log present value of earnings.
64
See, e.g., Card (1999, 2001). Heckman et al. (2006a) dispute this claim.
65
Mis-measurement of schooling is less of a concern in our data, as the survey asks numerous educational
questions every year which we use to determine an individual’s final schooling state.
66
Using our estimated model, we find, however, that population ATEs are well described by a linear-inschooling specification. See Web Appendix A.8.

31

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Figure 2: Observed and Adjusted Benefits from Education
Log PV of wages
1
.8
.6
0

0

.2

.4

Gains over Dropouts

.6
.4
.2

Gains over Dropouts

.8

Log Wages

High School

Some College

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

College

High School

Background Controls
BG, Abil, and HGC

Some College

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

−.1
−.3

−.2

Gains over Dropouts

−.2
−.3
−.4
−.5
−.6

Gains over Dropouts

−.1

0

Health Limits Work

0

Daily Smoking

College
Background Controls
BG, Abil, and HGC

High School

Some College

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

College

High School

Background Controls
BG, Abil, and HGC

Some College

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

College
Background Controls
BG, Abil, and HGC

Notes: The bars represent the coefficients from a regression of the designated outcome on dummy variables for educational
attainment, where the omitted category is high school dropout. Regressions are run adding successive controls for background
and proxies for ability. Background controls include race, age in 1979, region of residence in 1979, urban status in 1979,
broken home status, number of siblings, mother’s education, father’s education, and family income in 1979. Proxies for ability
are average score on the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) tests and ninth grade GPA in core subjects
(language, math, science, and social science). See the discussion surrounding Table 1 (below) and Web Appendix A.2 for
additional details. “Some College” includes anyone who enrolled in college, but did not receive a four-year college degree. The
white bars additionally control for highest grade completed (HGC). Source: NLSY79 data.

5.1

Control Variables and Exclusion Restrictions

As previously noted, identification of our model and the associated treatment effects does
not depend exclusively on conditional independence assumptions associated with our factor
model.67 Node-specific instruments can non-parametrically identify treatment effects without
invoking the full set of conditional independence assumptions.68 We have a variety of exclusion
restrictions that affect choices but not outcomes. Table 1 documents the control variables
67
68

See Carneiro et al. (2003).
See Heckman et al. (2016).

32

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

(X) and the exclusion restrictions (components of Z not in X) used in this paper. Our
instruments are traditional in the literature that estimates the causal effects of education.69
Table 1: Control Variables and Instruments Used in the Analysis
Control Variables
Race
Broken Home
Number of Siblings
Parents’ Education
Family Income (1979)
Region of Residencea
Urban Statusa
Ageb
Local Unemploymentc
Local Long-Run Unemployment
Instruments (Exclusion Restrictions)
Local Unemployment at Age 17d
Local Unemployment at Age 22e
College Present in County 1977f
Local College Tuition at Age 17g
Local College Tuition at Age 22h

Measurement Equations
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Choice
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Outcomes
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

Notes: a Region and urban dummies are specific to the age that the measurement, educational choice, or outcome occurred.
b Age in 1979 is included as a cohort control. We also included individual cohort dummies which did not change the results.
c For economic outcomes, local unemployment at the time the outcome is measured. d This is an instrument for choices at
nodes 0 and 1. It represents opportunity costs at the time schooling decisions are made. e This is an instrument for the choice
at node 2. f Presence of a four-year college in the county in 1977 is constructed from Kling (2001) and enters the choice to
enroll and the choice to graduate from college. g Local college tuition at age 17 only enters the college enrollment graduation
decisions. h Local college tuition at age 22 only enters the college completion equation. The measurement system includes the
arithmetic reasoning, coding speed, paragraph comprehension, word knowledge, mathematical knowledge, and numerical
operations sub-tests of the ASVAB, 9th grade GPA in math, English, science, and social studies, and early risky and reckless
behavior. We assume ASVAB only loads on the cognitive factor. See Web Appendix Section A.2 for details.

69

For example, presence of a nearby college or distance to college is used by Cameron and Taber (2004),
Kling (2001), Carneiro et al. (2013), Cawley et al. (1997), Heckman et al. (2011a), and Eisenhauer et al.
(2015b). Local tuition at two- or four-year colleges is used as an instrument by Kane and Rouse (1993),
Heckman et al. (2011a), Eisenhauer et al. (2015b), and Cameron and Taber (2004). Local labor market
shocks are used by Heckman et al. (2011a) and Eisenhauer et al. (2015b).

33

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

6

May 19, 2016

Estimated Causal Effects

In this section of the paper, we move beyond OLS analyses of causal effects of schooling
and present the estimated causal effects of schooling from our model. Since the model is
non-linear and multidimensional, in the main body of the paper we only report the treatment
effects derived from it.70 We randomly draw sets of regressors from our sample and a vector
of factors from the estimated factor distribution to simulate the reported treatment effects.71
Section 6.1 presents estimated treatment effects across final schooling levels. These
are based on Equation (18) and extend Becker (1964) by controlling for observed and
proxied unobserved variables. Section 6.2 presents the main empirical analysis of this paper.
We estimate dynamic treatment effects, inclusive of continuation values. We analyze the
contribution of continuation values, sorting on gains, and selection bias to measured differences
in education across levels. Section 6.3 analyzes the effects of cognitive and non-cognitive
endowments on estimated treatment effects. Section 6.4 presents estimates of distributions of
treatment effects. Section 6.5 examines the implications of our analysis for the validity of
the Becker-Chiswick-Mincer model. Section 6.6 summarizes our analysis. In the text of our
paper, we focus on the transitions in the upper branch of Figure 1, although our model is
estimated over both branches.

6.1

The Estimated Average Causal Effect of Educational Choices
by Pairwise Final Schooling Levels

We first present estimates of average treatment effects AT Es−1,s (18) for the four outcomes
studied in this paper at final schooling level s compared to final schooling level s − 1.72 They
ignore continuation values.
The shaded regions labeled “Observed” in Figure 3 are the raw differences found in our

70

Parameter estimates for individual equations are reported in Web Appendix A.6.
We randomly draw an individual and use their full set of regressors.
72
This is Expression (18) for the case s0 = s + 1.
71

34

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

data. The estimated average causal effects (displayed in the light blocks) are large and
statistically significant for all outcomes except for the log PV wages for graduating high
school (compared to dropping out).73 For example, the leftmost bar in panel 3a can be
interpreted as follows: while high school graduates make on average 24 log points higher
wages than high school dropouts, we find that the average causal effect of graduating high
school is on average 12 log points for the same population.
Web Appendix A.14.1 reports traditional treatment effects (treatment on the treated,
treatment on the untreated, as well as the ATEs displayed in Figure 3). Web Appendix A.15.2
presents estimates of decomposition (20) for all four outcomes. The decompositions show
substantial gains for high-ability persons who graduate college. A large component of the
observed difference is properly attributed to selection bias for most outcomes.74

73

For that group, the delay in receiving high school wage rates is not sufficiently compensated by higher
wage rates.
74
For a comparison of the treatment effects implicit in Figure 2 with those implicit in Figure 3, see Web
Appendix A.17.2, Tables A71–A74. For most outcomes, the agreement is rather close, except for the ln PV
of wages.

35

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Figure 3: Causal Versus Observed Differences by Final Schooling Level
(compared to next lowest level)

Log PV Wages

.4

0

−.2

.05

0

.2

Average TE

.15
.1

Average TE

.2

.25

.6

Log Wages

High School

Some College

College

High School

Some College
Node

Node
Observed
p < 0.05

Causal Component
p < 0.01

Observed
p < 0.0 5

.1
.05
0
−.15

−.1

−.05

Average TE

0
−.1

Average TE

−.2
−.3

Causal Component
p < 0.01

3D. Decomposition of Schooling Effects
Health Limits Work

.1

3C. Decomposition of Schooling Effects
Daily Smoking

College

High School

Some College
Node
Observed
p < 0.0 5

College

High School

Causal Component
p < 0.01

Some College
Node
Observed
p < 0.05

College
Causal Component
p < 0.01

Notes: These figures report pairwise treatment effect (18) for the indicated schooling nodes. Each bar compares the mean
outcomes from a particular schooling level j and the next lowest level j − 1 defined for the set of persons who complete
schooling at j − 1 or j. The “Observed” bar displays the observed differences in the data. The “Causal Component” bar
displays the estimated average treatment effect to those who get treated (ATE) for the indicated group. The difference
between the observed and causal treatment effect is attributed to the effect of selection and ability. Selection includes sorting
on gains. The error bars and significance levels for the estimated ATE are calculated using 200 bootstrap samples. Error bars
show one standard deviation and correspond to the 15.87th and 84.13th percentiles of the bootstrapped estimates, allowing
for asymmetry. Significance at the 5% and 1% levels is shown by open and filled circles on the plots, respectively.

6.2

Dynamic Treatment Effects

A major contribution of this paper is the estimation of dynamic treatment effects that include
continuation values. These are defined for populations that achieve a node (Qj = 1) which
includes people who might go beyond j and even j + 1. Specifically, we calculate the average

36

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

gains to fixing Dj = 0 (and possibly going beyond j + 1) compared to those at j (Qj = 1)
who stop at j (Dj = 1). See Equation (11) for the precise expression. Figure 4 plots these
treatment effects by the level of educational decision faced by the agent. These treatment
effects are also broken down into those for low-ability and high-ability populations using
the ability categories defined at the base of the figure. The figure also reports AMTE for
individuals at the margin of indifference at each transition.75
There are large and statistically significant average causal effects of education for all wage
outcomes.76 Disaggregating by ability, the effects are strong for high-ability people who enroll
in college. They are especially strong for those who graduate college. We find little to no
evidence of any benefit of graduating college for low-ability individuals.77 In fact, the point
estimates are negative, albeit imprecisely estimated. Although there are wage rate benefits to
low-ability people for enrolling in college (Figure 4A), the benefits in terms of the log present
value of wages are minimal. For these people, the wage benefits of attending college barely
offset the lost work experience and earnings from attending school.
At all levels of education, the estimated AMTE is substantial: there are marginal benefits
to additional education at every transition node for individuals at or near the margin of
indifference for that transition. The marginal benefits are close to (but generally somewhat
below) the average benefits. This is consistent with diminishing benefits of educational
expansion.78 For people at all margins, there are benefits to taking the next transition that
are especially pronounced for high school graduation. There are unrealized potential gains in
the current system.
We probe more deeply in the Web Appendices. In A.14.2, we present a variety of treatment
effects, including treatment on the treated (TT), treatment on the untreated (TUT), and
the average treatment effect defined for the entire population, and not just for those at a
75

We define the margin of indifference to be || Ij /σj ||≤ 0.01, where σj is the standard deviation of Ij .
Across all outcomes, the GED has no benefit.
77
These estimates are imprecisely determined, in part, because there are few low-ability persons in this
category.
78
A notable exception is for the AMTE for log PV of wages for high school graduation, for which the
marginal benefits greatly exceed the average benefits.
76

37

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

particular node in our decision tree. This enables us to examine the extent of sorting on
gains. In A.15.3, we go further and decompose observed differences in the data into average
treatment effects, sorting gains, and selection bias (Equation (22)).
Broadly speaking, for wage outcomes we find sorting on gains for college graduation. This
arises primarily from the gains to high-ability people documented in Figure 4. We find the
reverse pattern for high school graduation: negative sorting for graduating high school that
is especially pronounced for log present value of our earnings.79 Consistent with our analysis
of AMTE, there are unrealized gains available in the system for a policy of promoting high
school graduation for low-ability individuals. For all wage outcomes, there are substantial
selection effects, ranging from 50–70% of the observed differences.
The story is different for the estimated educational causal effects on non-market outcomes.
We first discuss smoking. There are strong average causal effects on reducing smoking. They
are particularly strong for graduating high school for low-ability individuals. Nonetheless,
there are substantial negative average causal effects from education on smoking for all nodes.
There is little evidence of sorting on gains. Unlike the evidence for wages, there is substantially
less evidence of selection bias at any transition.
The evidence for “Health Limits Work” indicates strongly beneficial causal effects for
high school graduation, and weak—but generally precisely determined—causal effects for
college graduation, which essentially vanish for low-ability persons. There is little evidence of
causal effects of attending some college. There is no evidence of sorting on gains. Selection
bias is a strong component of observed differences.

79

TUT > ATE > TT.

38

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Figure 4: Treatment Effects of Outcomes by Decision Node
E(Y k |Fix Dj = 0, Qj = 1) − E(Y k |Fix Dj = 1, Qj = 1)

4B. Treatment Effects: Log PV Wages

Graduate HS
AMTE
ATE (high)

Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node
ATE
p < 0.05

.1
−.2

−.1

0

Average TE

.1
−.1

0

Average TE

.2

.2

.3

.3

4A. Treatment Effects: Log Wages

Graduate Coll.

Graduate HS

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

Graduate Coll.
ATE (low)
p < 0.01

4D. Treatment Effects: Health Limits Work

Graduate HS
AMTE
ATE (high)

Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node
ATE
p < 0.05

−.2

−.1

0

Average TE

0
−.2
−.4

Average TE

.1

.2

.2

4C. Treatment Effects: Daily Smoking

Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node

Graduate Coll.

Graduate HS

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

AMTE
ATE (high)

Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node
ATE
p < 0.05

Graduate Coll.
ATE (low)
p < 0.01

Sorting on Ability
D1 : Dropping from HS vs. Graduating from HS
D2 : HS Graduate vs. College Enrollment
D3 : Some College vs. Four-Year College Degree

Low Ability
0.31
0.22
0.13

High Ability
0.31
0.38
0.51

Notes: The nodes in the table correspond to the next stage of the transition analyzed. Thus, “Graduate HS” refers to the
decision node of whether or not the agent will graduate high school, and refers to the base state of not graduating high school.
The error bars and significance levels for the estimated ATE Equation (13) are calculated using 200 bootstrap samples. Error
bars show one standard deviation and correspond to the 15.87th and 84.13th percentiles of the bootstrapped estimates,
allowing for asymmetry. Significance at the 5% and 1% level are shown by hollow and black circles on the plots, respectively.
The figure reports various treatment effects for those who reach the decision node, including the estimated ATE conditional
on endowment levels. The high- (low-) ability group is defined as those individuals with cognitive and socio-emotional
endowments above (below) the median in the overall population. These categories are not mutually exclusive, as some people
may be high-ability in one dimension but low-ability in another. The table below the figure shows the proportion of
individuals at each decision (Qj = 1) that are high- and low-ability. The larger proportion of the individuals are high-ability
and a smaller proportion are low-ability in later educational decisions. In this table, final schooling levels are highlighted using
bold letters.

39

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health
6.2.1

May 19, 2016

Continuation Values

We next decompose the node-specific average treatment effects, just discussed, into continuation value components. Figure 5 presents (in the white bars) the estimated continuation
value components, while the bars behind the white boxes are the full treatment effects from
Figure 4. We only display continuation values for nodes where these are possible.
For all outcomes except “Health Limits Work,” there are large continuation values for
high-ability individuals. While returns to high school are roughly the same across ability
levels, the mechanisms producing these effects are different. The benefits for low-ability
persons come through direct values. The benefits for high-ability persons come through
continuation values. For most nodes and treatment effects, the continuation values are
statistically significant as indicated by the “x” in Figure 5.80

80

Note that if direct effects are negative, continuation values may be larger than treatment effects.

40

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Figure 5: Dynamic Treatment Effects:
Continuation Values and Total Treatment Effects by Node

5B. Total Effect and Continuation Value:
Log PV Wages

0

0

.05

Average TE
.1
.2

Average TE
.1
.15

.2

.3

5A. Total Effect and Continuation Value:
Log Wages

Graduate HS

Enroll in College

Graduate HS

Decision Node
AMTE
Cont. Value

ATE
p < 0.05

Enroll in College
Decision Node

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

ATE (high)
p < 0.05 for CV=0

AMTE
Cont. Value

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

ATE (high)
p < 0.05 for CV=0

5D. Total Effect and Continuation Value:
Health Limits Work

Graduate HS

−.2

−.4

−.3

−.15

Average TE
−.1
−.05

Average TE
−.2
−.1

0

0

5C. Total Effect and Continuation Value:
Daily Smoking

ATE
p < 0.05

Enroll in College

Graduate HS

Decision Node
AMTE
Cont. Value

ATE
p < 0.05

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

Enroll in College
Decision Node

ATE (high)
p < 0.05 for CV=0

AMTE
Cont. Value

ATE
p < 0.05

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

ATE (high)
p < 0.05 for CV=0

Notes: High-ability individuals are those in the top 50% of the distributions of both cognitive and socio-emotional
endowments. Low-ability individuals are those in the bottom 50% of the distributions of both cognitive and socio-emotional
endowments. The error bars and significance levels for the estimated ATE are calculated using 200 bootstrap samples. Error
bars show one standard deviation and correspond to the 15.87th and 84.13th percentiles of the bootstrapped estimates,
allowing for asymmetry. Significance at the 5% and 1% level are shown by hollow and black circles on the plots, respectively.
Statistical significance for continuation values at the 5% level are shown by “x.” Section 3 provides details on how the
continuation values and treatment effects are defined.

6.3

The Effects on Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Endowments on
Treatment Effects

Disaggregating the treatment effects for “high-” and “low-” endowment θ individuals in
Figure 4 is a coarse approach. A byproduct of our analysis is that we can determine the
contribution of cognitive and non-cognitive endowments (θ) to the explanation of estimated
41

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

treatment effects. We can decompose the overall effects of θ into their contribution to the
causal effects at each node and the contribution of endowments to attaining that node. We
find substantial contributions of θ to each component at each node.
To illustrate, the panels in Figure 6 display the estimated average treatment effect of
getting a four-year degree (compared to stopping with some college) for each decile pair of
cognitive and non-cognitive endowments.81,82 Treatment effects, in general, depend on both
measures of ability. Moreover, different outcomes depend on the two dimensions of ability
in different ways. For example, the treatment effect of graduating college is increasing in
both dimensions for the present values of wages, but the reductions in health limitations with
education depend mostly on cognitive endowments.

81

Web Appendix A.7 reports a full set of results across all nodes.
These figures show average benefits by decile over the full population, rather than for the population
that reaches each node.
82

42

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Figure 6: Average Treatment Effect of Graduating from a Four-Year College by
Outcome

B. PV Wages
y - y PV of Income

0.3
0.1

De

9

2

7

6

8

Dec

0.35
0.4

3

5

4

7

6

8

9 10

Cog
Decile of

0.3

nitive

0.1

0.3
0.4
0.25

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.15

0.1

0

0.1

0

0

0.2

1

0.2

0.1

2

0.3
0.2
0.2

0.15
0.15

0

0
-0.1

0.05

0.05
-0.2
5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

Decile of Cognitive

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5

y - y Work Limited by Health

y - y Smoker

0
1

0
-0.1
-0.2

9

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
10

1

cile8 7 6
of S 5 4
oci 3 2 1
o-E
mo

1

2

3

tion

4

7

6

8

9 10

Cogni
Decile of
5

tive

0.2
0.15

0

-0.1
0.15

-0.2

0.1
0.05

-0.3
5

6

7

8

9

10

Decile of Cognitive

0

0.1

-0.2

1

-0.1

4

0.05

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

De

9

cile8 7 6
of S 5 4
oci 3 2 1
o-E
mo
tio

1

2

3

4

5

7

6

Decile of

8

9 10

e
Cognitiv

0.2

0.35

0.15

0.3

0.1
0.25

0.05
0

0.2

-0.05

0.15

-0.1
0.1

-0.15
0.05

-0.3
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

0

0.05

-0.2
-0.25
1

Decile of Socio-Emotional

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Decile of Cognitive

0

0.2

0.3

0.15
0.25

0.1
0.05

0.2

0
0.15

-0.05
-0.1

0.1

-0.15
0.05

-0.2
-0.25
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Decile of Socio-Emotional

Notes: Each panel in this figure studies the average effects of graduating with a four-year college degree on the outcome of
interest. The effect is defined as the differences in the outcome between those with a four-year college degree and those with
some college. For each panel, let Ysome college and Yfour-year degree denote the outcomes associated with attaining some college
and graduating with a four-year degree, respectively. For each outcome, the first figure (top) presents
E(Yfour-year degree − Ysome college |dC , dSE ) where dC and dSE denote the cognitive and socio-emotional deciles computed
from the marginal distributions of cognitive and socio-emotional endowments. The second figure (bottom left) presents
E(Yfour-year degree − Ysome college |dC ) so that the socio-emotional factor is integrated out. The bars in this figure display, for a
given decile of cognitive endowment, the fraction of individuals visiting the node leading to the educational decision involving
graduating from a four-year college. The last figure (bottom right) presents E(Yfour-year degree − Ysome college |dSE ) and the
fraction of individuals visiting the node leading to the educational decision involving graduating from a four-year college for a
given decile of socio-emotional endowment.

6.4

0

Decile of Socio-Emotional

1

0.2

y - y Work Limited by Health

0.25
0

Fraction

Fraction

0.3
0.1

0
1

1

0.25

0

y - y Smoker

0.3

0

y - y Smoker

0.35
0.1

3

10

nal

al

2

9

0

-0.3

1

8

D. Health Limits Work

0.1

10

7

Decile of Cognitive

C. Smoking

De

6

Decile of Socio-Emotional

Distributions of Treatment Effects

One benefit of our approach over the standard IV approach is that we can identify the
distributions of expected treatment effects—a feature missing from the standard treatment

43

0

Fraction

4

Fraction

3

-0.1

0

0

2

0

0.1

0.05

-0.1
-0.2

0

y - y Work Limited by Health

1

0.15

0.1

0.1
-0.1

Fraction

0.25
0.2

y - y PV of Income

0.3
0.3

1

1

0.25

Fraction

Fraction

0

0.3

y - y Log-wages

0.35

0.2

1

nal

al

0.3

9

cile8 7 6
of S 5 4
oci 3 2 1
o-E
mo
tio

9 10

nitive
ile of Cog

5

4

Fraction

1

3

tion

0

0

10

cile8 7 6
of S 5 4
oci 3 2 1
o-E
mo

y - y Log-wages

0.1
-0.1

0

De

0.2

1

-0.1
-0.2
10

0.3

0

0

0.4

1

1

0

0.2

y - y PV of Income

y - y Log-wages

A. (log)Wages

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

effect literature. Figure 7 plots the distribution of gains for persons who graduate from
college (compared to attending college but not attaining a four-year degree) along with the
mean treatment effects.83
The graphs provide a nice summary of our main findings for all dynamic treatment
effects for college graduation. There are strong causal effects for all outcomes. There is also
substantial heterogeneity among persons. Sorting on gains is pronounced for wage outcomes
but less so for health and smoking. This is consistent with the analysis in Appendix A.15.3,
where we report estimates of sorting on gains.
A byproduct of our analysis is that we can test the rank-invariance of counterfactual
outcomes across states. The assumption of rank invariance is the basis for the numerous
analyses based on quantile treatment effects.85 It implies that the Spearman correlations are
1 across any pair of counterfactual states. In our simulations, we find that the Spearman
correlations are large but are also not 1. They are between 0.70 and 0.85 for log wages, 0.60
and 0.90 for present value of wages, and notably smaller for smoking and health limitations.86
Rank invariance is an especially poor assumption for those outcomes.

83

Web Appendix A.9 reports a full set of distributions of treatment effects for all outcomes. Expectations
are computed over the idiosyncratic error terms (ωsk ).84 Variation in the expected treatment effect comes
from the variation in observed variables (X) and the unobserved endowments (θ).
85
See, e.g., Bitler et al. (2006).
86
See Web Appendix Tables A22–A25.

44

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Figure 7: Distributions of Expected Treatment Effects: College Graduation
Distribution of Expected TEs
Coll. Grad. on PV Wage

.5

Treatmen Effect
1
2

Treatmen Effect
1
1.5

2

3

2.5

Distribution of Expected TEs
Coll. Grad. on Log Wage

ATE

−.5

ATT

0

0

ATUT

0

.5

TE

TT

−.5

1

0

.5

TE

TUT

TT

1

1.5

TUT

Distribution of Expected TEs
Coll. Grad. on Health Limits Work

0

0

1

1

Treatmen Effect
2
3

Treatmen Effect
2
3

4

4

5

Distribution of Expected TEs
Coll. Grad. on Smoking

−1

−.5

0
TE

.5
TT

1

−.5

TUT

0
TE

.5
TT

TUT

Notes: Distributions of treatment effects including continuation values for those who reach the educational choice. The
vertical lines represent the average treatment effects (ATE, ATT, and ATUT) for each of the distributions.

6.5

Taking Stock of the Becker-Chiswick-Mincer Model

We have tested many features of the widely-used model of Equation (1) to determine its
robustness. Some features of Mincer model (1) are broadly consistent with our estimated
structural model. While OLS-regression-adjusted versions are not linear in years of schooling
(see the evidence in Web Appendix A.8), our estimated ATEs are roughly consistent with
linearity for most outcomes.
The correlation between ρi and Si is a centerpiece of the modern IV literature.87 It varies
across transitions (see Web Appendix A.13). However, ρi turns out to be node-specific (ρs,s0 ,i )
87

This is the correlated random coefficient model. See Heckman and Vytlacil (1998).

45

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

and not the same across transitions.
Sorting on gains, measured either for specification as in (19) (COV (ρs,s0 , Ds ) 6= 0), or
for specification as in (21) (COV (ρj−1,j , Qj ) 6= 0), reveals that there is positive sorting on
wage gains only at the higher levels of education. Our estimated correlation patterns are
consistent with our evidence on sorting gains presented in Web Appendix A.15.

6.6

Summarizing Our Analysis of Causal Effects of Education

In this section and in our Web Appendix, we have analyzed a variety of economically
interpretable treatment effects. We reach the following broad conclusions.
(1) There are substantial causal benefits for all outcomes analyzed from education, except
for GED certification.
(2) Continuation values are an important component of causal effects for most outcomes
except health limits work.
(3) There are substantial benefits from graduating high school that are especially strong
for the less able, many of whom currently do not graduate. This suggests strong gains from
programs promoting high school graduation.
(4) For the wage outcomes we study, there is evidence on sorting on gains from graduating
college for high-ability persons.88 There are no causal effects of college graduation for
low-ability persons. College graduation is not for all.
(5) There are strong benefits of education for those at the margin of indifference at all
nodes. These are largely direct effects with little contribution from continuation values.
(6) We estimate strong causal effects for the non-monetary outcomes studied. They are
particularly strong for high school graduation. There is little evidence of sorting on gains
in either non-monetary outcome examined. Continuation values are largely absent for our
measure of health. For smoking, continuation values are most pronounced among higher88

Part of the relationship between ability and returns to college could operate through college quality. For
example, Dillon and Smith (2015) show that ability is an important determinant of college quality and that
college quality improves wages even after controlling for ability.

46

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

ability persons. Selection bias is less empirically important for smoking, but is substantial
for health limits work.

7

Policy Simulations from Our Model

Using our model, it is possible to conduct a variety of counterfactual policy simulations, a
feature not shared by standard treatment effect models. We achieve these results without
imposing strong assumptions on the choice model. We consider two policy experiments: (i)
a tuition subsidy; and (ii) an increase in the cognitive and non-cognitive endowments of
those at the bottom of the endowment distribution. The first policy experiment is similar
to what is estimated by LATE only in the special case where the instrument in LATE
corresponds to the exact policy experiment. The second policy experiment is of interest
because early childhood programs boost these endowments (Heckman et al., 2013a). Neither
set of counterfactuals generated can be estimated from instrumental variable estimands. We
ignore general equilibrium effects in these simulations.

7.1

Policy-Relevant Treatment Effects

Unless the instruments correspond to policies, IV does not identify policy-relevant treatment
effects. The PRTE allows us to identify who would be induced to change educational choices
under specific policy changes, and how these individuals would benefit on average. As an
example of the power of our methodology, we simulate the response to a policy intervention
that provides a one standard deviation subsidy to early college tuition (approximately $850
dollars per year of college). Column 1 of Table 2 presents the average treatment effect
(including continuation values) in our estimated model for those who are induced to change
education levels by the tuition subsidy. Since we do not find evidence that college tuition
affects high school graduation rates, the subsidy only induces high school graduates to change
their college enrollment decisions and does not affect high school graduation decisions. Those

47

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

induced to enroll may then go on to graduate with a four-year degree.89 Columns 2 and 3 of
Table 2 decompose the PRTE into the average gains for those induced to enroll and then go
on to earn four-year degrees and the average gains for those who do not. For the most part,
the PRTE is larger for those who go on to earn four-year degrees.
Figure 8 shows which individuals are induced to enroll in college within the deciles of
the distribution of the unobservable in the choice equation for node 2,90 conditional on
Q2 = 1 (the node determining college enrollment). These are the unobserved components of
heterogeneity acted upon by the agent but unobserved by the economist.
The policy induces some individuals at every decile to switch, but places more weight
on those in the middle deciles of the distribution. The figure decomposes the effect of those
induced to switch into effects for those who go on to graduate with four-year degrees and
effects for those who do not. Those induced to switch in the top deciles are more likely to go
on to graduate with a four-year college degree.
Table 2: PRTE: Standard Deviation Decrease in Tuition
PRTE
Log Wages
PV Log Wages
Health Limits Work
Smoking

Four-Year Degree

0.125 (0.023) 0.143
0.129 (0.03) 0.138
-0.036 (0.022) -0.025
-0.131 (0.029) -0.166

(0.027)
(0.033)
(0.021)
(0.030)

No Four-Year Degree
0.114
0.123
-0.043
-0.108

(0.027)
(0.028)
(0.023)
(0.030)

Notes: The table shows the policy-relevant treatment effect (PRTE) of reducing tuition for the first two years of college by a
standard deviation (approx. $850 per annum). The PRTE is the average treatment effect of those induced to change
educational choices
of the policy:
RRR as ak result
k
P RT Ep,p
E(Y (p0 ) − Y k (p)|X = x, Z = z, θ = θ)dFX,Z,θ (x, z, θ|S(p) 6= S(p0 )). Column 1 shows the overall PRTE.
0 :=
Column 2 shows the PRTE for those induced to enroll by the policy who then go on to complete four-year college degrees.
Column 3 shows the PRTE for individuals induced to enroll but who do not complete four-year degrees.

89

Models were estimated that include tuition as a determinant of the high school graduation decision.
However, the estimated effects of tuition on high school graduation are small and statistically insignificant. We
do not impose the requirement that future values of costs affect current educational choices. This highlights
the benefits of our more robust approach. We do not impose the requirement that agents know and act on
publicly available information.
90
The unobservable is the bundle η1 = −(θ 0 λ1 − ν1 ).

48

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

0

.05

.1

.15

Figure 8: PRTE: Who Is Induced to Switch?

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Deciles of η1
Enrolled (Graduates)

Enrolled (Does Not Graduate)

Notes: The figure plots the proportion of individuals induced to switch from the policy that lay in each decile of η2 , where
η1 = −(θ 0 λ1 − ν1 ). η1 is the unobserved component of the educational choice model. The deciles are conditional on Q1 = 1,
so η2 for individuals who reach the college enrollment decision. The bars are further decomposed into those that are induced
to switch that then go on to earn four-year degrees and those that are induced to switch but do not go on to graduate.

The $850 subsidy induces 12.8% of high school graduates who previously did not attend
college to enroll in college. Of those induced to enroll, more than a third go on to graduate
with a four-year degree. For outcomes such as smoking, the benefits are larger for those who
graduate with a four-year degree. The large gains for marginal individuals induced to enroll is
consistent with the empirical literature, that finds large psychic costs are necessary to justify
college schooling choices, and the failure of agents to respond to strong monetary incentives.
Using the estimated benefits, we can determine if the monetary gains in the present value
of wages at age 18 is greater than the $850 subsidy.91 Given a PRTE of 0.13 for log present
value of wage income, the average gains for those induced to enroll is $36,401 in year 2000
dollars. If the subsidy is given for the first two years of college, then the policy clearly leads
to monetary gains for those induced to enroll. If the subsidy is also offered to those already
enrolled, the overall monetary costs of the subsidy is much larger because it is given to more
than 8 students previously enrolled for each new student induced to enroll (dead weight).
91

However, a limitation of our model is that we can only estimate the monetary costs and do not estimate
psychic costs.

49

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

7.2

May 19, 2016

Boosting Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Endowments

Using simulation methods, it is possible to construct counterfactual policy simulations
unrelated to any particular set of instruments. For example, some early childhood programs
have been shown to have lasting impacts on the cognitive and non-cognitive endowments
of low-ability children (see Heckman et al., 2013a). We simulate two policy experiments:
(i) increasing the cognitive endowment of those in the lowest decile; and (ii) increasing the
non-cognitive endowment of those in the lowest decile.92
The panels of Figure 9 show the average gains for increasing the cognitive or non-cognitive
endowments of those in the lowest decile of each ability. Increased cognition helps individuals
across the board. Increasing socio-emotional endowments has a smaller effect on labor market
outcomes but has substantial effects on health.93

92

The details of how these simulations were conducted are presented in Web Appendix A.11. Our model
does not address general equilibrium effects of such a change in the endowment distribution.
93
We present additional policy simulations in Web Appendix A.11.

50

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Figure 9: Policy Experiments

.2
.15
.05

.1

Average TE

.04
.02

0

−.02

0

Average TE

.06

.25

9B. Policy Experiment: Log PV Wages
(improving bottom decile of skills)

.08

9A. Policy Experiment: Log Wages
(improving bottom decile of skills)

Cognitive

Socio−Emotional

Cognitive

−.02
−.06

−.04

Average TE

−.02
−.03

Cognitive

−.08

−.05

−.04

Average TE

−.01

0

9D. Policy Experiment: Daily Smoking
(improving bottom decile of skills)

0

9C. Policy Experiment: Health Limits Work
(improving bottom decile of skills)

Socio−Emotional

Socio−Emotional

Cognitive

Socio−Emotional

Notes: This plot shows the average gains for those in the bottom deciles of cognitive ability (left) and socio-emotional ability
(right), from an increase in the endowment.

8

Testing the Two-Factor Assumption

Throughout this paper, we have assumed that selection of outcomes occurs on the basis
of a two-component vector θ, where the components can be proxied by our measures of
cognitive and non-cognitive endowments. An obvious objection to this approach is that
there may be unproxied endowments that affect both choices and outcomes that we do not
measure. For example, one could imagine that a component of the idiosyncratic error terms

51

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

in the educational choices (νj ) represent taste for schooling. This could generate correlations
between the unobservables in the different educational choices and bias our results.
In order to test for the presence of a third factor that influences both choices and
outcomes, we test whether the simulated model fits the sample covariances between Y k and
Dj , j = 1, . . . , s, k = 1, . . . , 4. If an important third factor common to both outcome and
choice equations has been omitted, the sample fit should be poor. In fact, we find a good fit.
Cunha and Heckman (2016) estimate a related model using the same data source. They
find that a three-factor model explains wages and present value of wages. Two of their factors
correspond to the factors used in this paper. Their third factor improves the fit of the wage
outcome data but does not enter agent decision equations or affect selection or sorting bias.
Our evidence is consistent with their findings.

9

Comparisons with Simple Treatment Effect Estimators

In this paper, we have exploited the assumption of conditional independence of outcomes
and choices given X, Z, θ. This raises the question of how similar our results would be if we
had used simple matching and regression methods.
Table 3 presents two sets of estimates for the models discussed in detail at the base of
the table. The first four columns of numbers are node-specific linear-regression estimators of
Equation (11), using as regressors the background variables reported in Table 1 but not the
“exclusion restriction” variables. The first column of estimates come from a model without
any control for θ. The estimates for the other three models control for θ in various ways as
noted at the base of Table 3.
We use two versions of nearest-neighbor matching estimators based on the full set of
control variables listed in Table 1. Details of the matching procedures are given at the base
of Table 3 and in Web Appendix A.18.
52

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Table 3: Average Treatment Effects - Comparison of Estimates from Our
Model to Those from Simpler Methods
Linear Regression
HS Grad.
Wages
SE
PV-Wage
SE
Smoking
SE
Health-Limits-Work
SE
Coll. Enroll
Wages
SE
PV-Wage
SE
Smoking
SE
Health-Limits-Work
SE
Coll. Grad
Wages
SE
PV-Wage
SE
Smoking
SE
Health-Limits-Work
SE

OLS
0.205
(0.025)
0.380
(0.030)
-0.327
(0.028)
-0.178
(0.022)
OLS
0.223
(0.023)
0.221
(0.027)
-0.177
(0.026)
-0.085
(0.020)
OLS
0.210
(0.032)
0.243
(0.037)
-0.209
(0.032)
-0.085
(0.024)

OLS-P
0.073
(0.026)
0.213
(0.031)
-0.246
(0.029)
-0.115
(0.024)
OLS-P
0.121
(0.024)
0.109
(0.029)
-0.138
(0.028)
-0.037
(0.022)
OLS-P
0.146
(0.034)
0.163
(0.040)
-0.171
(0.035)
-0.069
(0.026)

OLS-F
0.155
(0.025)
0.318
(0.030)
-0.281
0.028
-0.151
(0.023)
OLS-F
0.186
(0.024)
0.176
(0.028)
-0.165
(0.027)
-0.066
(0.021)
OLS-F
0.184
(0.033)
0.208
(0.038)
-0.195
(0.033)
-0.078
(0.025)

Matching
OLS-FI
0.159
(0.035)
0.277
(0.041)
-0.301
0.041
-0.150
(0.033)
OLS-FI
0.190
(0.023)
0.171
(0.027)
-0.170
(0.028)
-0.057
(0.021)
OLS-FI
0.185
(0.035)
0.228
(0.037)
-0.192
(0.035)
-0.077
(0.026)

NNM(3)-F
0.098
(0.037)
0.196
(0.053)
-0.260
(0.058)
-0.048
(0.029)
NNM(3)-F
0.177
(0.029)
0.188
(0.030)
-0.129
(0.029)
-0.029
(0.022)
NNM(3)-F
0.173
(0.041)
0.191
(0.039)
-0.132
(0.039)
-0.048
(0.026)

PSM-F
0.132
(0.051)
0.226
(0.058)
-0.271
(0.060)
-0.095
(0.036)
PSM-F
0.207
(0.031)
0.226
(0.032)
-0.144
(0.058)
-0.042
(0.029)
PSM-F
0.143
(0.051)
0.269
(0.042)
-0.161
(0.039)
-0.051
(0.027)

Model
ATEkj *
0.094
(0.056)
0.173
(0.059)
-0.263
(0.056)
-0.108
(0.042)
ATEkj
0.134
(0.025)
0.137
(0.029)
-0.139
(0.028)
-0.037
(0.022)
ATEkj
0.114
(0.037)
0.171
(0.040)
-0.172
(0.043)
-0.064
(0.031)

Notes: We estimate the ATE inclusive of continuation values for each outcome and and educational choice using a variety of
methods. All models are estimated for populations that reach the node being analyzed (Qj = 1), inclusive of those who go on
to further schooling in order to make them comparable to the ATE from our model that includes continuation values
(Equation (21)). All OLS models use the full set of controls listed in Table 1. “OLS” estimates a linear model using a
schooling dummy (Qj+1 ), and controls (Y = Qj+1 bj + X 0 β + ). “OLS-P” estimates a linear model using a schooling dummy,
a vector of controls, and three measures of abilities arrayed in a vector A: summed ASVAB scores, GPA, and an indicator of
risky behavior (Y = Qj+1 bj + X 0 β + A0 α + ). All models ending in “-F” are estimated using Bartlett factor scores (Bartlett,
1937, 1938) estimated using our measurement system, but using the built-in routine for estimating factor models in STATA
via maximum likelihood, not accounting for schooling at the time of the test. “OLS-F” estimates the model
Y = Qj+1 bj + X 0 β + θˆ0 α +  where θ̂ are the Bartlett factor scores described above. “OLS-FI” is similar to “OLS-F” except
that Qj+1 is interacted with the X and θ̂ allowing the coefficients on the controls and abilities to vary by education level.
“NNM(3)-F” is the estimated treatment effect from nearest-neighbor matching with 3 neighbors. Neighbors are matched on
their Bartlett cognitive factor, Bartlett non-cognitive factor, and an index constructed from their observed characteristics (Z)
generating choices as described in Web Appendix A.18. “PSM-F” presents the estimated average treatment effect from
propensity score matching where propensity scores are estimated using Bartlett cognitive factors, Bartlett non-cognitive
factors, the full set of control variables, and the full set of node-specific instruments. “ATEkj ” presents the estimated average
treatment effect from the model presented in this paper (inclusive of continuation value), corresponding to Equation (13).

53

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

The OLS estimates differ greatly from model estimates when there is no adjustment for
ability. Controlling for ability has substantial effects on the estimated average treatment
effects. Across schooling nodes, all of the estimates that control for θ are “within the ball park”
of the estimates produced from our model, although some discrepancies are substantial. This
is good news for applied economists mainly interested in using simple methods to estimate
node-specific average treatment effects. However, these simple methods do not estimate
decision rules, do not enable analysts to estimate AMTE and PRTE, or address many of the
other questions addressed in this paper.94

10

Summary and Conclusion

Gary Becker’s pioneering research on human capital launched a large and active industry
estimating causal effects and returns to schooling. Multiple methodological approaches have
been used to secure these estimates ranging from reduced-form treatment effect methods to
fully structural methods. Each methodology has its benefits and limitations.
The early literature on human capital ignored the dynamics of schooling choices. This
paper develops and estimates a robust dynamic model of schooling and its causal consequences
for earnings, health, and smoking. Our model recognizes the sequential dynamic nature
of educational decisions. We borrow features from both the reduced-form treatment effect
literature and the structural literature. Our estimated model passes a variety of goodness-of-fit
and model specification tests.
We allow agents to be irrational and myopic in making schooling decisions. Hence, we
can use our model to test some of the rationality and information processing assumptions
maintained in the dynamic discrete choice literature on education.
We use our dynamic choice model to estimate causal effects arising from multiple levels
of schooling rather than just the binary comparisons typically featured in the literature on
94

Table A70 of the Web Appendix compares OLS estimates of dynamic treatment effects and continuation
values with our model estimates. The OLS estimates are “within ballpark” for smoking and health limits
work, but they are wide off the mark for wages and PV wages.

54

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

treatment effects and in many structural papers.95 By estimating a sequential model of
schooling in a unified framework, we are able to analyze the ex post returns to education
for people at different margins of choice and analyze a variety of economically interesting
policy counterfactuals. We are able to characterize who benefits from education for a variety
of market and non-market outcomes.
We decompose the benefits of schooling at different levels into direct components and
indirect components arising from continuation values. We estimate substantial continuation
value components of graduating high school and completing college for high-ability individuals.
For them, schooling opens up valuable options for future schooling. Standard estimates
of the benefits of education based only on direct components of dynamic treatment effects
underestimate the full benefits of education. For low-ability individuals, there are substantial
direct effects of graduating high school, but little continuation value.
Without imposing rationality, we nonetheless find evidence consistent with it. We find
positive sorting into schooling based on gains, especially for higher schooling levels. Schooling
has strong causal effects on earnings, health, and healthy behaviors. Both cognitive and
non-cognitive endowments affect schooling choices and outcomes at each level of schooling.
We link the structural and matching literatures using conditional independence assumptions. We investigate how simple methods used in the treatment effect literature perform in
estimating average treatment effects.96 They roughly approximate our model estimates of average treatment effects, provided we condition on endowments of cognitive and non-cognitive
skills. However, these simple methods do not identify the treatment effects for persons at the
margins of different choices (the average marginal treatment effects).97 We test the empirical
foundations of the Mincer model and find it wanting. A richer specification of the schooling
earnings decision is warranted to generate empirically supported estimates of causal effects.
We use our estimated model to conduct two policy experiments. We determine the groups
95

See, e.g., Willis and Rosen (1979).
IV estimates are very different from our model estimates. See Heckman et al. (2016).
97
We can roughly approximate continuation values using simple methods. See Table A70 in the Web
Appendix.
96

55

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

that benefit from a tuition reduction policy and what those benefits are. We also examine
how the impact of boosts in cognitive and non-cognitive skills affects educational choices and
outcomes.
Our analysis enriches the pioneering analysis of Becker (1964). The early research on
human capital was casual about agent heterogeneity. It ignored selection bias and sorting
gains from schooling. Later work by Griliches (1977) focused on selection bias (“ability bias”),
but ignored sorting gains. In this paper, we quantify both components of outcome equations.
We find evidence of selection bias at all levels of schooling for all outcomes and sorting gains
at higher levels of schooling for wage outcomes.
Our findings thus support the basic insights of Becker (1964). Schooling has strong causal
effects on market and non-market outcomes. Both cognitive and non-cognitive endowments
affect schooling choices and outcomes. People sort into schooling based on realized incremental
gains.

56

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

References
Abbring, Jaap H., and James J. Heckman, 2007. “Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs,
Part III: Distributional Treatment Effects, Dynamic Treatment Effects, Dynamic Discrete
Choice, and General Equilibrium Policy Evaluation.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6B,
edited by James J. Heckman, and Edward E. Leamer, chap. 72. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science B. V., pp. 5145–5303.
Adda, Jérôme, and Russell W. Cooper, 2003. Dynamic Economics: Quantitative Methods
and Applications. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Almlund, Mathilde, Angela Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Tim Kautz, 2011. “Personality Psychology and Economics.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education, vol. 4,
edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Wößmann, chap. 1. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, pp. 1–181.
Altonji, Joseph G., 1993. “The Demand for and Return to Education When Education
Outcomes Are Uncertain.” Journal of Labor Economics 11 (1):48–83.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Guido W. Imbens, 1995. “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation
of Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 90 (430):431–442.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffan Pischke, 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Arcidiacono, Peter, and Robert A. Miller, 2011. “Conditional Choice Probability Estimation
of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity.” Econometrica
7 (6):1823–1868.
Bamberger, Gustavo, 1987. “Occupational Choice: the Role of Undergraduate Education.”
Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business.
57

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Bartlett, Maurice S., 1937. “The Statistical Conception of Mental Factors.” British Journal
of Psychology 28 (1):97–104.
———, 1938. “Methods of Estimating Mental Factors.” Nature 141:609–610.
Becker, Gary S., 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of
Political Economy 70 (5, Part 2):9–49.
———, 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference
to Education. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1st edn.
Becker, Gary S., and Barry R. Chiswick, 1966. “Education and the Distribution of Earnings.”
American Economic Review 56 (1/2):358–369.
Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes, 2006. “What Mean Impacts
Miss: Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments.” American Economic Review
96 (4):988–1012.
Blevins, Jason R., 2014. “Nonparametric Identification of Dynamic Decision Processes with
Discrete and Continuous Choices.” Quantitative Economics 5 (3):531–554.
Borghans, Lex, Angela L. Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Bas ter Weel, 2008. “The
Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources 43 (4):972–
1059.
Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman, 1993. “The Nonequivalence of High School
Equivalents.” Journal of Labor Economics 11 (1, Part 1):1–47.
———, 2001. “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and White
Males.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (3):455–499.
Cameron, Stephen V., and Christopher Taber, 2004. “Estimation of Educational Borrowing
Constraints Using Returns to Schooling.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (1):132–182.
58

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Card, David, 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. 3A, edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter, and David Card, chap. 30. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science B.V., pp. 1801–1863.
———, 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric
Problems.” Econometrica 69 (5):1127–1160.
Carneiro, Pedro, Karsten Hansen, and James J. Heckman, 2003. “Estimating Distributions of
Treatment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement of the
Effects of Uncertainty on College Choice.” International Economic Review 44 (2):361–422.
Carneiro, Pedro, James J. Heckman, and Edward J. Vytlacil, 2010. “Evaluating Marginal
Policy Changes and the Average Effect of Treatment for Individuals at the Margin.”
Econometrica 78 (1):377–394.
———, 2011. “Estimating Marginal Returns to Education.” American Economic Review
101 (6):2754–2781.
Carneiro, Pedro, Costas Meghir, and Matthias Parey, 2013. “Maternal Education, Home
Environments, and the Development of Children and Adolescents.” Journal of the European
Economic Association 11 (S1):123–160.
Cawley, John, Karen Conneely, James J. Heckman, and Edward J. Vytlacil, 1997. “Cognitive
Ability, Wages, and Meritocracy.” In Intelligence, Genes, and Success : Scientists Respond
to The Bell Curve, edited by Bernie Devlin, Stephen E. Fienberg, Daniel P. Resnick, and
Kathryn Roeder, chap. 8. New York: Springer Verlag, pp. 179–192.
Comay, Yochanan, Arie Melnik, and Moshe A. Pollatschek, 1973. “The Option Value
of Education and the Optimal Path for Investment in Human Capital.” International
Economic Review 14 (2):421–435.
Cunha, Flávio, and James J. Heckman, 2016. “Decomposing Trends in Inequality in Earnings
into Forcastable and Uncertain Components.” Forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics.
59

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Cunha, Flávio, James J. Heckman, and Salvador Navarro, 2007. “The Identification and
Economic Content of Ordered Choice Models with Stochastic Cutoffs.” International
Economic Review 48 (4):1273–1309.
Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney, 2010. “Understanding Differences in Health
Behaviors by Education.” Journal of Health Economics 29 (1):1–28.
Dillon, Eleanor Wiske, and Jeffrey Andrew Smith, 2015. “The Consequences of Academic
Match between Students and Colleges.” IZA Discussion Paper 9080, Institute for the Study
of Labor, Bonn.
Dothan, Uri, and Joseph Williams, 1981. “Education as an Option.” The Journal of Business
54 (1):117–139.
Eckstein, Zvi, and Kenneth I. Wolpin, 1989. “The Specification and Estimation of Dynamic
Stochastic Discrete Choice Models: A Survey.” Journal of Human Resources 24 (4):562–598.
Eisenhauer, Philipp, James J. Heckman, and Stefano Mosso, 2015a. “Estimation of Dynamic
Discrete Choice Models by Maximum Likelihood and the Simulated Method of Moments.”
International Economic Review 56 (2):331–357.
Eisenhauer, Philipp, James J. Heckman, and Edward J. Vytlacil, 2015b. “Generalized Roy
Model and Cost-Benefit Analysis of Social Programs.” Journal of Political Economy
123 (2):413–433.
Geweke, John, and Michael Keane, 2001. “Computationally Intensive Methods for Integration
in Econometrics.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 5, edited by James J. Heckman, and
Edward E. Leamer, chap. 56. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B. V., pp. 3463–3568.
Griliches, Zvi, 1977. “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems.”
Econometrica 45 (1):1–22.

60

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Grossman, Michael, 2000. “The Human Capital Model.” In Handbook of Health Economics,
vol. 1, edited by Anthony J. Culyer, and Joseph P. Newhouse, chap. 7. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science B. V., pp. 347–408.
Haavelmo, Trygve, 1943. “The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous Equations.”
Econometrica 11 (1):1–12.
Heckman, James J., 1981. “The Empirical Content of Alternative Models of Labor Earnings.”
Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
———, 2001. “Micro Data, Heterogeneity, and the Evaluation of Public Policy: Nobel
Lecture.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (4):673–748.
———, 2008. “Econometric Causality.” International Statistical Review 76 (1):1–27.
———, 2010. “Building Bridges Between Structural and Program Evaluation Approaches to
Evaluating Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature 48 (2):356–398.
Heckman, James J., Pedro Carneiro, and Edward Vytlacil, 2011a. “Estimating Marginal
Returns to Education.” American Economic Review 101 (6):2754–2871.
Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Tim Kautz, editors, 2014. The Myth of
Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi, 2016. “Dynamic
Treatment Effects.” Journal of Econometrics 191 (2):276–292.
Heckman, James J., Hidehiko Ichimura, and Petra E. Todd, 1998. “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies 65 (2):261–294.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd, 2006a. “Earnings Functions, Rates
of Return and Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond.” In Handbook of the

61

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Economics of Education, vol. 1, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, and Frank Welch, chap. 7.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 307–458.
———, 2008. “Earnings Functions and Rates of Return.” Journal of Human Capital
2 (1):1–31.
Heckman, James J., and Salvador Navarro, 2007. “Dynamic Discrete Choice and Dynamic
Treatment Effects.” Journal of Econometrics 136 (2):341–396.
Heckman, James J., and Rodrigo Pinto, 2015. “Causal Analysis after Haavelmo.” Econometric
Theory 31 (1):115–151.
Heckman, James J., Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter A. Savelyev, 2013a. “Understanding the
Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult
Outcomes.” American Economic Review 103 (6):2052–2086.
Heckman, James J., Susanne M. Schennach, and Benjamin Williams, 2011b. “Matching with
Error-Laden Covariates.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of
Economics.
———, 2013b. “Matching on Proxy Variables.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of
Chicago, Department of Economics.
Heckman, James J., Jeffrey A. Smith, and Nancy Clements, 1997. “Making the Most Out
Of Programme Evaluations and Social Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in
Programme Impacts.” Review of Economic Studies 64 (4):487–535.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzúa, 2006b. “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor
Economics 24 (3):411–482.
Heckman, James J., and Sergio Urzúa, 2010. “Comparing IV With Structural Models: What
Simple IV Can and Cannot Identify.” Journal of Econometrics 156 (1):27–37.
62

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Heckman, James J., Sergio Urzúa, and Edward J. Vytlacil, 2006c. “Understanding Instrumental Variables in Models with Essential Heterogeneity.” Review of Economics and Statistics
88 (3):389–432.
Heckman, James J., and Edward J. Vytlacil, 1998. “Instrumental Variables Methods for
the Correlated Random Coefficient Model: Estimating the Average Rate of Return to
Schooling When the Return Is Correlated with Schooling.” Journal of Human Resources
33 (4):974–987.
———, 1999. “Local Instrumental Variables and Latent Variable Models for Identifying
and Bounding Treatment Effects.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
96 (8):4730–4734.
———, 2005. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects and Econometric Policy Evaluation.”
Econometrica 73 (3):669–738.
———, 2007a. “Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part I: Causal Models, Structural
Models and Econometric Policy Evaluation.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6B, edited
by James J. Heckman, and Edward E. Leamer, chap. 70. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.
V., pp. 4779–4874.
———, 2007b. “Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part II: Using the Marginal
Treatment Effect to Organize Alternative Economic Estimators to Evaluate Social Programs
and to Forecast Their Effects in New Environments.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6B,
edited by James J. Heckman, and Edward E. Leamer, chap. 71. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science B. V., pp. 4875–5143.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist, 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local
Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 62 (2):467–475.
Kane, Thomas J., and Cecilia E. Rouse, 1993. “Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year

63

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

Colleges: Is a Credit a Credit and Do Degrees Matter?” Working Paper 4268, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Keane, Michael P., and Kenneth I. Wolpin, 1997. “The Career Decisions of Young Men.”
Journal of Political Economy 105 (3):473–522.
Kling, Jeffrey R., 2001. “Interpreting Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Returns to
Schooling.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 19 (3):358–364.
Lochner, Lance, 2011. “Non-Production Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good
Citizenship.” Working Paper 16722, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Manski, Charles F., 2004. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica 72 (5):1329–1376.
McMahon, Walter W., 2000. “Externalities, Non-Market Effects, and Trends in Returns
to Educational Investments.” In The Appraisal of Investments in Educational Facilities.
Paris: European Investment Bank/OECD, pp. 51–83.
———, 2009. Higher Learning, Greater Good. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Mincer, Jacob, 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia University
Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.
Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic, 2013. “Making College Worth It: A Review of
Research on the Returns to Higher Education.” Working Paper 19053, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Oreopoulos, Philip, and Kjell G. Salvanes, 2011. “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of
Schooling.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (1):159–184.
Quandt, Richard E., 1958. “The Estimation of the Parameters of a Linear Regression
System Obeying Two Separate Regimes.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
53 (284):873–880.
64

The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings and Health

May 19, 2016

———, 1972. “A New Approach to Estimating Switching Regressions.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 67 (338):306–310.
Rust, John, 1994. “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes.” In Handbook of
Econometrics, vol. 4, edited by Robert F. Engle, and Daniel L. McFadden, chap. 51. New
York, NY: North-Holland, pp. 3081–3143.
Schennach, Susanne M., Halbert White, and Karim Chalak, 2012. “Local Indirect Least
Squares and Average Marginal Effects in Nonseparable Structural Systems.” Journal of
Econometrics 166 (2):282–302.
Stange, Kevin M., 2012. “An Empirical Investigation of the Option Value of College
Enrollment.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (1):49–84.
Vytlacil, Edward J., 2002. “Independence, Monotonicity, and Latent Index Models: An
Equivalence Result.” Econometrica 70 (1):331–341.
Weisbrod, Burton A., 1962. “Education and Investment in Human Capital.” Journal of
Political Economy 70 (5, Part 2: Investment in Human Beings):106–123.
White, Halbert, and Karim Chalak, 2009. “Settable Systems: An Extension of Pearl’s Causal
Model with Optimization, Equilibrium, and Learning.” Journal of Machine Learning
Research 10:1759–1799.
Willis, Robert J., and Sherwin Rosen, 1979. “Education and Self-Selection.” Journal of
Political Economy 87 (5, Part 2):S7–S36.

65

