                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




UNDERSTANDING THE IMPROVEMENT IN DISABILITY FREE LIFE EXPECTANCY IN
                   THE U.S. ELDERLY POPULATION

                                        Michael Chernew
                                        David M. Cutler
                                         Kaushik Ghosh
                                       Mary Beth Landrum

                                       Working Paper 22306
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22306


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2016




This research was funded by the National Institute on Aging (P01AG005842) and Pfizer. We are
grateful to Jonathan Skinner for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22306.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Michael Chernew, David M. Cutler, Kaushik Ghosh, and Mary Beth Landrum. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding the Improvement in Disability Free Life Expectancy In the U.S. Elderly Population
Michael Chernew, David M. Cutler, Kaushik Ghosh, and Mary Beth Landrum
NBER Working Paper No. 22306
June 2016
JEL No. I1,I31

                                          ABSTRACT

Understanding how healthy lifespans are changing is essential for public policy. This paper
explores changes in healthy lifespan in the U.S. over time and considers reasons for the changes.
We reach three fundamental conclusions. First, we show that healthy life increased measurably in
the US between 1992 and 2008. Years of healthy life expectancy at age 65 increased by 1.8 years
over that time period, while disabled life expectancy fell by 0.5 years. Second, we identify the
medical conditions that contribute the most to changes in healthy life expectancy. The largest
improvements in healthy life expectancy come from reduced incidence and improved functioning
for those with cardiovascular disease and vision problems. Together, these conditions account for
63 percent of the improvement in disability-free life expectancy. Third and more speculatively, we
explore the role of medical treatments in the improvements for these two conditions. We estimate
that improved medical care is likely responsible for a significant part of the cardiovascular and
vision-related extension of healthy life.


Michael Chernew                               Kaushik Ghosh
Harvard Medical School                        NBER
Dept. of Health Care Policy                   1050 Massachusetts Ave.
180 Longwood Avenue                           Cambridge, MA 02138
Boston, MA 02115                              ghoshk@nber.org
and NBER
chernew@hcp.med.harvard.edu                   Mary Beth Landrum
                                              Harvard Medical School
David M. Cutler                               Department of Health Care Policy
Department of Economics                       180 Longwood Avenue
Harvard University                            Boston, MA 02115-5899
1875 Cambridge Street                         landrum@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
       Understanding how healthy lifespans are changing over time is central to public policy.

For example, policies such as increasing the age of eligibility for Social Security or Medicare

only make sense if healthy life expectancy is increasing for the vast bulk of the population.

Accurate measurement of healthy life expectancy is thus essential in the welfare evaluation of

such policies. Moreover, a good deal of medical spending is predicated on the idea that more

intensive treatment improves quality-adjusted life expectancy. Measuring the relationship

between medical advances and healthy life expectancy thus contributes to our understanding the

value of medical advance and may provide insights to the causes of, and perhaps persistence of

improvements in healthy life expectancy.

       Data on life expectancy are easy to obtain, but data on healthy life expectancy are more

difficult. To a great extent, this is because there is no single measure of good or bad health

commonly accepted in the literature. Our past work (Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum, 2014), along

with much of the literature, focuses on disabled and non-disabled life expectancy. We define

disability as an indicator for whether an individual has an impairment with any Activity of Daily

Living (ADL) or Instrumental Activity of Daily Living (IADL). We calculate the number of

years a person turning 65 in different years can expect to live with and without a disability.

       Our previous study shows that disability free life expectancy has increased significantly

at older ages in the United States. Between 1992 and 2005, for example, life expectancy

increased by 0.7 years. Disability-free life expectancy increased by 1.6 years; disabled life

expectancy fell by 0.9 years. Other results have reached similar conclusions about increases in

disability-free life expectancy over time (Crimmins et al. 1989, 1997, 2001, 2009, Manton et al.

2008, Cai and Lubitz, 2007). However, other work that defines healthy life expectancy based on

presence of disease have come to an opposite conclusions finding that length of life with disease



                                                 1
has increased (Crimmins and Beltrán, 2011). This is consistent with findings from our previous

work and others that while disease prevalence has increased, disability conditional on disease has

declined (Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum, 2014, Freedman et al. 2007, Crimmins et al., 1993, 1997,

2004; Manton et al., 1993, 1997, 2001, 2006). However, little research has examined why

disability-free life expectancy has increased so greatly, and in particular, what role medical

advance may have played in this.

       We address these issues in this paper. Our analysis has three specific goals. First, we

calculate disabled and disability-free life expectancy for a longer period than has been done

previously. Our past research examined data from 1992 to 2005. In this paper, we extend the

analysis to 2008. This by itself does not change the conclusions materially, but the additional

three years does encompass an era of relatively low growth in medical spending, so it is

important to note that even with slow medical care cost increases, disability-free life expectancy

kept increasing.

       Second, we examine which medical conditions are associated with the greatest additions

to disability-free life expectancy. We decompose both mortality and disability into 15 medical

conditions, ranging from acute but recoverable diseases such as heart disease and vision

impairment, to chronic degenerative conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s

disease, to chronic but non-fatal conditions such as arthritis and diabetes. Our central finding is

that the vast bulk of the increase in disability-free life expectancy is due to improvements in

acute, recoverable conditions – two in particular: heart disease and vision problems.          The

prevalence of serious heart disease has declined over time, and for both conditions, people with

the condition are in better health than they were formerly.




                                                 2
       Our third goal is the most speculative: we seek to understand how much improvements in

medical care have contributed to the health improvements associated with heart disease and

vision problems. This analysis is the most speculative because we do not have great causal

identification. We can observe trends in treatments and health, but we do not have an ideal way

to turn these trends into causal statements. To make a stab at the causal question, we use two

methodologies. In the case of cardiovascular disease, we combine trends in treatments over time

with clinical trial evidence on the impact of different treatments on mortality and disability. The

specific estimates are those used in the IMPACT mortality model, which we parameterize to the

elderly population we study. Our results show that use of effective treatments has improved at a

rate that the clinical literature suggests would have led to roughly half the health improvements

that we observe. Most of the treatment improvements are pharmaceutical – cholesterol-lowering

agents and anti-hypertensives are the major ones, but some are surgical as well.

       In the case of vision, we focus primarily on increased use of cataract surgery. Fewer

people have vision impairments in the late 2000s than did in the early 1990s, and this seems

proximately related to the increased use of cataract surgery over time. The clinical literature

does not suggest a meaningful impact of cataract surgery on health-related quality of life.

However, using data on individual transitions between more and less disabled states, we show

significant benefits of cataract surgery on both vision and disability trends. People who receive

cataract surgery are less likely to experience adverse disability trends than people who do not

receive cataract surgery, controlling for the prior year’s level of vision impairment. We thus

conclude that it is likely that growing use of cataract surgery explains some of the improvement

in health over time.




                                                3
       The outline of the paper is as follows. In the first section, we examine the overall trends

in mortality and disability. Section 2 shows the changes in disability-free and disabled life

expectancy. In section 3, we estimate the impact of medical conditions and demographic

variables on disability. In Section 4, we calculate the disability-free and disabled life expectancy

by disease. Section 5 examines the pharmaceutical and surgical interventions that may have

caused the declines in major cardiovascular events and mortality. Section 6 examines the factors

responsible for improvements in vision problem. Finally, in section 7 we discuss our findings

and conclude.



I.     Health Trends Among the Elderly

Life Expectancy

       Life expectancy is a function of mortality rates. The mortality data are standard mortality

rates from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). The data on disability comes from

the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS), sponsored by Center for Medicare and

Medicaid services (CMS).

       Life expectancy in most developed countries increases regularly and it has continued to

do so in recent years. Figure 1 shows the trend in life expectancy in the United States at 65

years of age between 1992 and 2008. Over this period, life expectancy increased by 1.3 years

(17.5 to 18.8), or nearly one year per decade. Relative to our earlier analysis, which ended in

2005, life expectancy increased by another 0.6 years between 2005 and 2008. Some of this

increase is anomalous, given the unusual drop in life expectancy in 2005. Even taking out this

year, however, life expectancy increases show no sign of slowing down, even in an era where

medical spending increases were very low (Cutler and Sahni, 2013; Hartman et al., 2015).



                                                 4
       For our analysis in this paper, we care about mortality by cause in addition to overall

mortality. Cause of death is reported on each death record. On death certificates, the attending

physician must write what the underlying cause of death was and what other dominant

conditions, if any, led to the immediate cause of death. These causes are not believed to be

entirely accurate due to reporting bias (Lakkireddy et al. 2004; Ravakhah, K., 2006; Wexelman

et al. 2013). Death is declared when the heart stops, and thus a larger number of deaths are

attributed to heart disease than is likely true. Nonetheless, it is not obvious that this will bias

trends in mortality reporting over time. Without any better alternative, we utilize the national

data on the causes of death data available from the NCHS.

       Death codes change over time, and so the mortality rate by cause changes for that reason.

Prior to year 1999, deaths were classified by the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth

Revision (ICD–9-CM), and from 1999 onward the causes of death are classified by the

International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD–10-CM). We use comparability

ratio for the cause of death between ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM to compare causes of death in

different periods. Comparability ratios for the broad aggregates of death that we examine are

very close to unity.

       We look at 15 specific causes of death. These causes are defined to match the MCBS.

We find the closest mortality cause for the questions that people are asked about directly in the

MCBS (e.g., “Has a doctor (ever) told [you/(SP)] that (you/he/she) had a myocardial infarction or

heart attack?”). Generally, these causes are commonly reported, but not always. For example,

the MCBS asks about vision problems. The closest NCHS category is death from “diseases of

the eye and adnexa”, which is generally not reported separately. We group the 15 causes into

several categories, based on organ system: cardiovascular disease (ischemic heart disease and



                                                5
stroke); cancer (4 specific sites and all other); central nervous system (Alzheimer’s disease and

Parkinson’s disease); diseases of the respiratory system; musculoskeletal disease (broken hip,

rheumatoid arthritis, and non-rheumatoid arthritis); diabetes; and diseases of the eye and adnexa.

       Many chronic diseases have low mortality but nonetheless contribute to deaths in other

ways. For example, very few people have diabetes as the primary cause of death, but diabetes

contributes to heart disease, kidney disease, and other conditions that kill many. A richer model

would account for this disease causality, relating chronic diseases to other diseases that

ultimately kill them. We do not do that here.

       Figure 2 shows the NCHS mortality rates per 100,000 (age-sex adjusted) by disease for

two periods: 1991-1994 and 2006-2009. Each data point is age and sex adjusted to the population

in 2000. Within each interval, we take a simple average of death rates in each of the four years.

The age-sex-adjusted deaths rates for cardiovascular diseases have the biggest decline (-618),

followed by cancer (-83). Of the cancers we can attribute, one of the biggest reductions is in

cancer of the trachea, bronchus, and lung – a cause strongly associated with tobacco use.

However, mortality from other cancers is declining as well, and preventive efforts and medical

treatments likely play a role in declining cancer mortality (Cutler, 2008).

       Deaths from diseases of the central nervous system increased the most by 170, with

Alzheimer’s disease being particularly important. Death from respiratory disease and diabetes

increased as well.

        Later in the paper, we translate these changes in mortality into changes in life

expectancy, using standard cause deletion techniques. To find the increase in life expectancy

from one cause, we hold constant death rates from every other cause and change death rates for

only the cause we are considering. This step involves an important assumption – that the change



                                                 6
in death from one cause does not affect death from other causes. As an example of this, if

medical treatment for smokers with cardiovascular disease improves, we might expect age and

sex adjusted mortality rates for cancers caused by tobacco use to increase. Absent more detailed

knowledge of interactions among causes of death, we make the independence assumption.



Disability

       To measure disability, we use data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey

(MCBS). The MCBS, sponsored by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), is a

nationally representative survey of aged, disabled, and institutionalized Medicare beneficiaries

that over-samples the very old (aged 85 or older) and disabled Medicare beneficiaries. Since we

are interested in health among the elderly, we restrict our sample to the population aged 65 and

older. A number of surveys have measures of disability in the elderly population (Freedman

et al., 2004); including the National Health Interview Study and the Health and Retirement

Study. Still, the MCBS has a number of advantages relative to these other surveys. First, the

sample size is large, about 10,000 to 18,000 people annually. In addition, the MCBS samples

people regardless of whether they live in a household or a long-term care facility or switch

between the two during the course of the survey period. Third, the set of health questions is very

broad, encompassing health in many domains.         Fourth, and importantly, individuals in the

MCBS have been matched to Medicare death records. As a result, we can measure death for

over 250,000 person-year observations, even after they have left the survey window.

       The MCBS started as a longitudinal survey in 1991. In 1992 and 1993, the only

supplemental individuals added were to replace people lost to attrition and to account for newly

enrolled beneficiaries. Beginning in 1994, the MCBS began a transition to a rotating panel



                                                7
design, with a four year sample inclusion. About one-third of the sample was rotated out in

1994, and new members were included in the sample. The remainder of the original sample was

rotated out in subsequent years. We use all interviews that are available for each person from the

start of the survey in 1991 through 2009.

       The MCBS has two samples: a set of people who were enrolled for the entire year (the

Access to Care sample) and a set of ever-enrolled beneficiaries (the Cost and Use sample). The

latter differs from the former in including people who die during the year and new additions to

the Medicare population. The primary data that we use are from the health status questionnaire

administered in the fall survey, which defines the Access to Care sample. We thus use the

Access to Care data. We date time until death from the exact date at which the Access to Care

Survey was administered to the person.

           To account for demographic changes in the Medicare population over this period, we

adjust survey weights so that the MCBS population in each year matches the population in the

year 2000 by age, gender, and race. All of our tabulations are weighted by these adjusted

weights.

       MCBS is matched to death records available in the Medicare denominator files. As a

result, we can measure death for all beneficiaries, even after they have left the survey. The death

dates are available through 2012. For each individual interviewed between 1991 and 2009, we

can determine if they died in the next 12 months or survived that period, died between 12-24

months or not, 24 and 36 months or not, or survived at least 36 months.

       Trends in the distribution of time until death are shown in Figure 3.The share of the

population that is within one year of death is declines from approximately 5.5% in 1991 to 4.5%

in 2009, reflecting the overall reduction in mortality. The share of the population 1-2 years from



                                                8
death and 2-3 years from death declines as well. Correspondingly, the share of the population

that is 3 or more years from death increased by about 0.18 percentage points annually, also

shown in Figure 3.

       The MCBS asks a number of questions about a respondent’s ability to function and

independently perform basic tasks, shown in Table 1. Six questions are asked about each of

ADL and IADL limitations. The prevalence of each impairment is also shown in the same table.

The most common ADL impairment is difficulty walking, experienced by one-quarter of the

population.   The most common IADL impairment is doing heavy housework, which is

experienced by one-third of the elderly population.

       Figure 4 shows the trends in ADL and IADL limitations from 1991-2009. We show the

annual rate in the figure and (in the legend) report the annual percentage point changes between

1991-1994 and 2006-2009 in each impairment. People reporting ADL difficulties in bathing

declined the most, by 0.35 percentage points annually. Other ADL difficulties also declined over

the 18 years: walking (0.34 percentage point annual decline); going in or out of bed or chairs

(0.30 percentage point decline); dressing (0.23 percentage point decline); using the toilet (0.16

percentage point decline); and eating (0.11 percentage point decline annually).

       Among IADL limitations, doing heavy housework (like scrubbing floors or washing

windows) showed the biggest decline 1991-2009 (7 percentage points overall and 0.41

percentage points annually). Again, this decline is significantly greater in the period between

1991and 1998 than later.

       The disability metric we use is the share of the population that reports any ADL or IADL

limitation. Using this definition, disability was 49.5% in 1991-1994 and declined roughly by 7

percentage points between 1991-94 and 2006-2009, or 0.5 percentage points annually.



                                                9
       This pattern of declining disability is found in most previous studies using multiple

nationally representative surveys (Freedman et al., 1998, 2002, 2004; Schoeni et al., 2001; and

Cutler, 2001a, 2001b). For example, a working group analyzing trends in disability from the

early 1980s to 2001 across five national data sets found a consistent 1% to 2.5% annual decline

in ADL disability during the mid to late 1990s (Freedman et al., 2004, Chen and Sloan, 2015). A

sharp decline in walking problems and heavy housework between 1992 and 1998 is also reported

in some other studies (Crimmins, 2004).

       That said, the literature is not entirely uniform. Crimmins (2004) reported that trends in

ADL disability is not consistent across studies (Crimmins et al., 2001; Crimmins et al., 1997;

Liao et al. , 2001; Manton et al., 2001; Schoeni et al., 2008). Further, an update from the working

group (Freedman et al., 2012) found declines in IADL and ADL disability only among those

ages 85 and over between 2000 and 2008.

       To measure lifetime disability, we need to know disability by time until death. A decline

in disability matters less for healthy life expectancy if it occurs at the very end of life than if it

represents a sustained period prior to death. To understand the change in disability by time until

death, we use the same time windows used in Figure 3: < 12 months to death, 12- 24 months to

death, 24-36 months to death, and >36 months to death.

       Figure 5 shows the trend in disability by time until death. This figure is similar to that in

our earlier paper (Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum, 2014), but updating the data through 2009. The

vast bulk of the reduction in disability is among people a few years away from death. People who

are more than 36 months away from death showed an annual decline of 0.5 percentage points

between 1991-94 and 2006-09. Disability is high and has remained so for people within one

year of death; about 80 percent of this population is disabled, and that has not changed over time.



                                                 10
       The reduction in disability farther away from death implies that there is a compression of

morbidity into the period just before death (Cai and Lubitz., 2007; Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum,

2014). In the next section, we combine the NCHS period life tables and MCBS disability data to

calculate disability-free and disabled life expectancy.



II.    Disability-free and disabled life expectancy

       In this section, we extend our previous research (Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum, 2014) and

include some more recent years of data to measure the changes in disability-free and disabled life

expectancy.

       The starting point for our analysis is the standard measure of life expectancy:

       LE(a) =    ∑ { Pr [ Survive a
                   S
                                                      + 0.5 * Pr [ Die at a + s | Alive a ]}   (1)
                                       + s | Alive a ]  


Starting at age a, every (probabilistic) year that the average person survives adds one year to life

expectancy. A person who dies in a year is assumed to live half the year, and thus adds half that

amount to life expectancy.

       To account for disability, we modify equation (1). For those in the last year of life, we

weight the half-year they expect to live by the share of the people in that half year who are not

disabled. Similarly, we weight the years lived by those one year away from death, two years

away from death, three years away from death, and more than three years away from death by

the share of population in those intervals who are not disabled. Adding this up over all future

ages yields disability-free life expectancy. Disabled life expectancy is the difference between

total life expectancy and disability-free life expectancy.

       We can form disability-free life expectancy and disabled life expectancy for any year in

which we have mortality and disability data. To match our results above, we estimate these

                                                 11
values using life tables in two periods: 1992 and 2008. The life expectancy data from the NCHS

life tables are from those exact years. The disability data from MCBS are from 1991-94 and

2006-09. Although, disability data is available for individual years, we used the combined

sample to provide estimates that are more reliable using bigger sample size.

       We present all of our calculations for a person aged 65 in those years. Relative to our

calculations in the previous section, we make one additional refinement. Where our aggregate

trends were on an age-adjusted basis, here we need to disaggregate disability by age and time

until death. Rather than calculating means across single-year age by time-until-death cells, which

would involve many small cells and sometimes unstable results, we instead use regression

analysis to smooth disability rates by age and time until death. Specifically, we estimate a

regression model relating disability to 10 age-sex dummy variables (65-69 male, 65-69 female,

70-74 male, 70-74 female, etc.), and time to death dummy variables. We estimate this regression

separately for pooled 1991-94 data and pooled 2006-09 data. We use these regression results to

predict disability rates for each person and then average predictions by single year of age. We

match these to life tables in 1992 and 2008 and calculate disability-free and disabled life

expectancy.

       Figure 6 shows the trend in total life expectancy, disability-free life expectancy, and

disabled life expectancy for the overall population at age 65 in 1991-94 and 2006-09. Life

expectancy at age 65 was 17.5 years in 1992. Reflecting the fact that about half the elderly

population is disabled, about half of those years were disabled. As noted earlier, life expectancy

increased by 1.3 years between 1992 and 2008. The increase in disability-free life expectancy

was greater than the total increase in life expectancy – 1.8 years in total. The residual was a

reduction in disabled life expectancy of 0.5 years. Thus, according to both metrics (the change in



                                               12
disabled life expectancy as well as the share of life that is spent disability-free), morbidity is

being compressed into the period just before death.

        These results are consistent with our early findings (Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum, 2014).

In our previous research, we found that for a typical person aged 65, life expectancy increased by

0.7 years between 1992 and 2005. Disability-free life expectancy increased by 1.6 years, while

disabled life expectancy fell by 0.9 years. In the last three years, then, disability free life

expectancy increased by 0.2 years, although the disabled life expectancy increased by 0.4 years.

        In the next section, we examine the prevalence of self-reported diseases in the MCBS and

how medical conditions affect disability.



III.    Medical conditions affecting disability

        There is an extensive literature documenting the medical conditions that have the greatest

impact on mortality and morbidity in older Americans. The Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and

Risk Factors study (US Burden of Disease Collaborators, 2013) examined 291 diseases and

injuries to identify the leading contributors to morbidity and mortality in the US. This effort is

the most exhaustive report. Ischemic heart disease, lung cancer, stroke and chronic lung disease

were the largest contributors to mortality, while musculoskeletal and mental illness were major

contributors to disability. However, few results are reported by age group, and many of the top

conditions are less relevant in elderly populations (for example, road injuries). Other studies

looking at the burden of diseases include Wang et al. (2012), Salomon et al. (2012), and Murray

et al. (2012).

        Landrum, Stewart, and Cutler (2008) used data from the National Long-Term Care

Survey and found that the probability of being disabled because of the cardiovascular disease fell



                                                13
from 9.4 percent in 1989 to 8.0 percent in 1999. Landrum, Stewart, and Cutler (2008) also

examined the onset of disability attributable to medical conditions as coded in the Medicare

claims and compared these results to respondents’ self-report of the cause of their disability.

Because of their high prevalence and strong association with disability onset, they found that

arthritis, dementia, and cardiovascular disease were the most important contributors to disability.

Several studies have examined respondents’ self-reported cause of their disability in national

surveys (Landrum, Stewart and Cutler, 2008; Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum, 2014; Martin et al.,

2010). Arthritis, back pain, heart disease, diabetes, mental illness and vision problems are the

most common reported causes. Similar patterns are documented in all studies: cardiovascular

disease, diabetes, lung disease and Alzheimer’s are a major contributor to death and disability,

while musculoskeletal, mental illness and vision problems are major contributors to morbidity.

Cancer remains a major source of mortality but is relatively minor in its contribution to

disability.

        The MCBS asks extensive medical condition questions, which we use to classify

diseases. The questions are generally of the form, “Has a doctor (ever) told [you/(SP)] that

(you/he/she) had a myocardial infarction or heart attack?” The first set of health questions is

about medical events the person has experienced. These include cancers (lung cancer, breast

cancer, prostate cancer, colorectal cancer, and other cancer); cardiovascular conditions (heart

disease, stroke), diseases of the central nervous system (Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s

disease), musculoskeletal problems (rheumatoid arthritis, non-rheumatoid arthritis, broken hip),

pulmonary disease, diabetes and vision problems. The prevalence of these conditions is asked

about, not the incidence rate.




                                                14
       Trends in age-sex adjusted disease prevalence are reported in Table 2. The prevalence of

self-reported breast and prostate cancer is increasing respectively at 0.04 and 0.13 percentage

points annually. Breast and prostate cancer screenings are increasingly common among the

elderly and are mostly paid for by Medicare. Thus, the likelihood of early detection and

treatment of these cancers may be becoming more common. Cardiovascular disease prevalence

has declined markedly, including both ischemic heart disease (0.44 percentage point decline

annually) and stroke (0.03 percentage point decline annually). Alzheimer’s disease is increasing

by 0.07 percentage points annually. There has been an increase in the prevalence of non-fatal

disease over time, as more people report non-rheumatoid arthritis (0.18 percentage points

annually) and particularly diabetes (0.51 percentage points point annually). People reporting

vision problems have declined substantially (0.91 percentage points annually). The prevalence of

pulmonary disease has also increased (0.17 percentage points annually).

       To determine the impact of each disease on disability, we relate disability in the early

time period of the sample (1991-94) and the later time period (2006-09) to demographic and

medical factors using a linear probability model:

       Disabilty it = β D ,t * Demographics it + β C,t * Medical Conditions it + ε it ,   (2)

where i denote individuals, and t denotes the period (1991-94 or 2006-09). Demographics

include 10 age-sex dummy variables and time to death dummy variables. Individuals may show

up multiple times in the regression, depending on how frequently they are interviewed. For

accurate standard errors, this should be accounted for. In the regression, we have clustered by

individual id and reported the robust standard errors

       Table 3 shows the results of the regression. Columns 1 and 2 in show the average

prevalence and regression coefficients obtained by regressing disability on demographic


                                                  15
variables for the 1991-1994 period. Columns 3 and 4 show the same results for 2006-2009. Both

the demographic and clinical covariates are strongly associated with disability. Older age is

associated with higher disability, although this relationship decreased slightly over our study

period. People are less disabled the further away they are from death. All of the clinical

covariates are associated with higher disability rates, as we would expect. In most cases, the

coefficients are smaller in 2006-2009 cohort suggesting that these conditions are less disabling

over time. Two exceptions are Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s which are more strongly

associated with disability in the later time period.

       We perform an Oaxaca decomposition to understand how much of the reduction in

disability can be explained by changes in the prevalence of the covariates versus changes in the

impact of covariates on disability (the coefficients). The Oaxaca decomposition is reported in the

last three columns of the table. The first column in the Oaxaca decomposition shows the change

in disability due to change in the impact of covariates (coefficients), holding prevalence constant

at its 1991-94 level. The next column shows the change in disability due to change in prevalence,

holding the impact of each coefficient constant at 1991-94 level. The final column shows the net

change.

       Between 1991-94 and 2006-09, disability decreased by 7.4 percentage points. Out of that,

5.6 percentage points is associated with a change in the impact of covariates on disability, and

the remaining 1.8 percentage points is due to change in prevalence holding the impact constant.

The biggest contributors to the total disability decline are cardiovascular disease (2.5 percentage

points) and vision problems (1.7 percentage points). Both the prevalence of cardiovascular

diseases decreased (explaining 0.8% of disability decline) as well as its impact on disability

(explaining 1.7%). Vision problems remained equally disabling in the later period, but declined



                                                  16
in prevalence. Cancers (0.3 percentage points) and musculoskeletal diseases (0.5 percentage

points) both have declined marginally. In contrast, Alzheimer’s disease (0.5 percentage points)

and diabetes (0.9 percentage points) have increased disability points.

       Even given these conditions, people are less disabled further away from death. Among

the time to death dummies (12-24 months, 24-36 months, >36 months), >36 months have the

biggest decline in disability (about 5 percentage points). The disability changes attributed to the

time to death dummy variables are mostly factors that remained unexplained. This may include

medical conditions not captured in the MCBS, environmental factors (ramps, disability

accessible buildings), changes in living conditions (married, assisted living), other medical

treatments, or unmeasured changes in the severity of conditions that are occurring over time.

Understanding these other factors is an important issue for future research.



IV.    Disability-free and disabled life expectancy by disease

       The results in the previous section show us which diseases are affecting disability. In this

section, we calculate disability-free and disabled life expectancy by disease.

       To calculate the disability-free life expectancy by disease, we used a simulation method

based on regression coefficients reported in Table 3. For each disease, we simulate the impact of

changes in the disease prevalence and impact on disability by changing the prevalence and

coefficient for that particular disease in the 1991-94 data to its 2006-2009 level. We then

repredict disability by age and time until death using the new coefficients and disease

probabilities. In performing this simulation, we add one additional wrinkle, allowing the disease

prevalence to vary by age group. We match the disease prevalence by 10 age-sex groups (65-69

male, 65-69 female, 70-74 male, 70-74 female, etc.).



                                                17
       On the demographic side, all age-sex dummy variables are adjusted to 2000 level. So, the

only other variable for which we did the simulation are the time to death dummy variables. We

simulated these variables all at once, i.e. we changed the coefficients and prevalence rates of all

time to death variables to their 2006-2009 level jointly, and then re-predicted disability.

       Once we have the change in disability due to each disease, we combine this with the

change in life expectancy due to that disease, using the methodology described in the previous

section. The result is a calculation of the change in disability-free and disabled life expectancy

due to each disease.

       Figure 7 shows the change in disability-free and disabled life expectancy resulting from

changes in each medical condition. Adding across all conditions, disability-free life expectancy

increased by 1.8 years and disabled life expectancy decreased by 0.5 years. These are the same

as in Figure 6, though these estimates are derived by adding across all conditions and thus could

differ from the estimates in Figure 6 because of covariance effects.

       The biggest increase in disability-free life expectancy is from cardiovascular disease

(0.85 years). Roughly 50% of the increase in disability-free life expectancy is from the

cardiovascular disease, primarily heart disease. However, improvements in survival in those

with cardiovascular disease also led to a modest increase in disabled life expectancy. Consistent

with previous literature (Landrum, Stewart Cutler, 2008) cancer remains a major source of

mortality and contributes modestly to disability. Improvements in survival rates among those

with cancer led to an increase in disability-free life expectancy of about 0.23 years. Vision

problems show a significant impact on disability-free life expectancy (0.28 years). There is no

increase in life expectancy from vision impairment, so all of this change comes from a reduction

in disabled life expectancy.



                                                 18
       Increased prevalence and impact of diseases of the central nervous system (Alzheimer’s

and Parkinson’s) have reduced disability- free life expectancy by 0.13 years. The diseases of the

central nervous system are very important as they have significant impacts on both morbidity and

mortality. For diabetes, the disability-free life expectancy declined by 0.2 years.

       The penultimate bar of the figure shows the impact of causes of death we have not

separately delineated. These residual causes of death have a small aggregate effect on disability-

free life expectancy. The final bar shows the unexplained change in disability for those 3 or

more years from death, which translates into 0.65 years of disability-free life expectancy and –

since this is not associated with any mortality reduction – a reduction in disabled life expectancy

of the same amount.

       Overall, the most important gains in disability free life expectancy are from

cardiovascular disease and vision problems. In the next two sections, we explore the factors that

may have caused the decline in mortality and morbidity for these two conditions. We examine

the importance of medicines and revascularization in preventing primary and secondary

cardiovascular events. We also explore the impact of surgical procedures like cataract surgery on

improving vision problem and its impact on vision related measurements and quality of life.



V.     Pharmaceutical and surgical interventions in reducing cardiovascular incidence,

mortality, and morbidity

       The question we address in this section is how much of the reduction in cardiovascular

mortality can be explained by increased use of medications and procedures. Previous research

has shown for conditions such as musculoskeletal problems and circulatory disorders, higher

rates of surgery are plausibly related to reduced disability (Cutler, 2005). There are also studies



                                                 19
showing how pharmaceutical agents play an important role in the prevention of cardiovascular

disease (Downs et al., 1998; Weisfeldt et al., 2007). Other studies have found that the deaths

from cardiovascular disease have greatly declined among the elderly in the United States over

the past decades (Rosen et al., 2007; Wilmot et al., 2015). We examine how these trends are

related.

           We have two measures of cardiovascular disease: ischemic heart disease and stroke.

Ischemic heart disease happens when there is reduced blood flow to the heart. Acute myocardial

infarction or heart attack is the most serious form of ischemic heart disease, when the blood flow

to the heart is abruptly interrupted, causing part of the heart muscle to die. A stroke happens

when poor blood flow to the brain or a hemorrhage in the brain leads to death of part of the

brain. Historically, heart attack and strokes are a major cause of death in the United States.

           Figures 8 and 9 show more detail on death from these two causes. The mortality rate for

ischemic heart disease has declined significantly over time (Figure 8), from an age-adjusted rate

of 1,250 per 100,000 in 1992-94 to 749 per 100,000 in 2006-09 (p<0.001). The decline was

significantly greater from 2001-09 (35%) than prior to 2001 (17%). Figure 9 shows the trends

in stroke mortality. Stroke mortality also declined significantly over time, from an age-adjusted

rate of 357 per 100,000 in year 1992-94 to 240 per 100,000 in 2006-09 (p<0.001). Again, the

reduction was greater after 2001 (31%) than before (6%).

           Understanding how medical treatments or other changes influence these trends is

challenging. The natural econometric technique is to relate receipt of the technology to reduced

mortality. This is problematic, however, because receipt of different therapies is not random.

For example, people who are more severely ill are more likely to receive more intensive

technologies.      Those same people are also more likely to die. Thus, receipt of intensive



                                                 20
technologies is often associated with higher mortality in a cross-section, even if the technology is

actually effective.

       A natural solution to the endogeneity problem is to instrument for technology receipt. In

preliminary analysis, we spent some time evaluating potential instruments, including area-level

treatment rates and their changes. However, there were no characteristics of areas or their

changes that led to plausible instruments for technology receipt.

       As a result, we follow a different path. We use the IMPACT model (Ford et al., 2007;

Capewell et al. 1999; Capewell et al., 2010) to gauge the impact of treatment trends on mortality

among U.S. adults 65 years and older between 1992 and 2009. The IMPACT model is a

multistate model explaining coronary heart disease mortality. The model divides the population

into two groups: patients receiving medical and surgical treatments for heart disease and those

who are not. It then estimates the contribution of treatment and risk factor changes (smoking,

high systolic blood pressure, elevated total blood cholesterol, obesity, diabetes and physical

inactivity) to mortality. Within each disease state, clinical literature is used to parameterize the

impact of different treatments and risk factors on mortality. The model was developed for the

population as a whole (ages 25-84); we parameterize the model to estimate the causes of

mortality reduction in the elderly.

       The rates of medical and surgical treatments and risk factors are calculated using various

data sources, including NHDS (National Hospital Discharge Survey), Medicare data, MCBS and

NHANES (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey), following the methodology of

Ford et al. (2007) . Similarly, we follow the assumptions of Ford et al. (2007) in assuming that

the proportion of treated patients actually taking medication is 100% among hospitalized




                                                21
patients, 70% among symptomatic patients in the community, and 50% among asymptomatic

patients in the community.

       We start by presenting general trends in risk factors and the use of medications among

the population overall, and for those with prior heart disease. We use data from NHANES, which

measures cardiovascular risk factors such as total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, blood pressure,

body mass index, Hemoglobin A1c, body mass index, and smoking status. We use several years

of data: 1988-1994 and biennial data from 1999-2000 through 2011-2012. Table 4 reports the

trend in cardiovascular risk factors. As is well known, the elderly population has become more

obese over time. Even still, total cholesterol levels have decreased in both men and women, and

HDL cholesterol (good cholesterol) has increased. This is quite plausibly a result of greater

statin use. Systolic blood pressure has also been decreasing marginally in both men and women.

The prevalence of diabetes has increased in both men and women, and the prevalence of high

HbA1c levels has increased.

       Since smoking and obesity are the two most significant risk factors for cardiovascular

disease, we focus on them in some detail. Figure 10 shows the trends in smoking and obesity in

the elderly Medicare population from the MCBS survey. Obesity has increased markedly over

time, while smoking has declined.     Stewart et al. (2009) found that if past obesity trends

continued unabated, the negative effects on the health of the U.S. population will increasingly

outweigh the positive effects gained from declining smoking rates.

       The elderly population is now treated more aggressively to control cardiovascular risk.

Statins are one well-known example. Statins help reduce the level of low-density lipoproteins

(LDL) in the blood and also help with modulation of oxidative stress (Beltowski, 2005) that may

eventually lead to heart attack. Antihypertensive drugs include beta-blockers, angiotensin-



                                               22
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), and diuretics.

Aspirin use is also increasingly common. Literature suggests that low-dose aspirin helps reduce

cardiovascular disease incidence and recurrence.

       Figure 11 shows the trends in the use of these medications in the elderly community

population, and Figure 12 shows similar trends among patients with ischemic heart disease. The

data on medication usage is from the Prescribed Medicine Events file in the MCBS that contains

cost and utilization of prescribed medicines for the community population. Statin usage

increased the most (2.5 percentage points annually in the population without IHD), though the

use of beta-blockers (1.5 percentage points annually) and ACE inhibitors (1.7 percentage points

annually) also increased markedly. The use of diuretics increased marginally (0.2 percentage

point annually). Aspirin is available over the counter and thus is not in the prescribed medicine

file. We obtain usage in the earlier time period (1992-94) from NHANES III, with later data

from the 2007 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). We used a linear interpolation to fill

in the intermediate years. For this reason, we show the plots for aspirin use in dotted lines. Use

among the population with non-IHD increased even more rapidly. In addition, procedure rates

increased rapidly in the IHD population with a 2.0 percentage point annual increase in primary

percutaneous interventions (PCI).

       To estimate the impact of these changes on cardiovascular disease mortality, we first

calculate the difference between the observed and expected number of deaths from ischemic

heart disease in 2009. Compared to what would have happened had age-specific mortality rates

remained constant at its 1992 level, the decline in age-adjusted death rate resulted in 228,910

fewer deaths from ischemic heart disease in 2009. This is shown in the first row of Table 5.




                                               23
       The remaining rows of Table 5 shows how this reduction in mortality distributes across

treatments and risk factors. All told, the IMPACT model estimates that about half of reduced

ischemic heart disease mortality (51%) is a result of improved treatment, about slightly less than

half is a result of improved risk factors (44%), and a small share is unexplained (5%).

Improvement in inpatient treatments only explained 8% of improvement. However, secondary

prevention after MI had major effects, particularly, statins (9%), warfarin (1%), beta-blockers

(11%), and ACE-inhibitors (6%). Primary prevention was also a major contributor, including

statins for lipid reduction (8%) and hypertension treatment (4%). The impact of other treatments

was smaller.

       Considering risk factor changes, the biggest changes were reduced total cholesterol

(30%) and blood pressure (22%). These are each separate from treatment in that the estimated

decline in blood pressure and cholesterol is among those who do not report taking medication.

That said, the Ford et al. (2007) study does not adjust its estimate of population trends among the

non-treated for the fact that increased numbers of people – likely with high levels of cholesterol

and blood pressure – are being treated. Thus, it is possible that selection effects contribute to the

magnitude of the risk factor estimates, making these estiamtes overstated. Smoking reduction

contributed 8%, while increased BMI and diabetes led to 19% more deaths. Overall, these

findings are close to Ford’s 2007 study for the adult population aged 25-84, which found a 47%

reduction due to treatment and 44% due to risk factors.

       Using the IMPACT model, we simulated the annual impact of treatment and risk factor

changes for ischemic heart disease mortality rates between 1992 and 2009. Figure 13 shows the

results. The red line shows the conterfactual mortality rate per 100,000 if the mortality rate by

age remained constant at its 1992 level and only the population totals changed. The blue line



                                                 24
shows the actual mortality trend in ischemic heart disease between 1992 and 2009. The green

line shows the simulated effect of treatment and improvements in risk factors combined on

mortality. The fact that the simulated mortaltiy tracks the actual mortality shows that the model

as a whole fits very well. The purple line divides the total effect found by the model into a

treatment component (the upper part) and a risk factor component (the lower part). Almost all of

the changes in the 1990s are due to treatment; those after 2000 are a mix of treatment and risk

factor changes. Figures 14 and 15 show the effect of individual medications and risk factors on

mortality. Between 1992 and 2009, increased use of statins for primary and secondary prevention

saved roughly 48,000 lives. Increased use of ace inhibitors and beta-blockers in IHD patients

saved another 43,000 lives. Other studies have found similar impact of greater satin use. For

example, Grabowski et al. (2012) found that statin therapy reduced low-density lipoprotein levels

by 18.8%, which translated into roughly 40,000 fewer deaths.

       One central question is how these mortality changes are related to the overall

improvement in disability-free life expectancy we noted above. Linking these two estimates is

not completely straightforward, as the disability-free life expectancy estimates include changes

in both disability and mortality, while the IMPACT model includes mortality only.             To

understand how these mortality changes contribute to the overall improvement in disability-free

life expectancy, we need to understand whether the improvement in mortality is accompanied by

a reduction in disability or whether it keeps more people alive in a disabled state. The former

would add much more to disability-free life expectancy than the latter.

       By and large, the interventions shown to be important in reducing mortality are those that

reduce the incidence of adverse events and enable improved functioning after an event, not just

prolong survival for those who are very disabled. This is shown directly in the 12% of reduced



                                               25
deaths accounted for by primary prevention – generally associated with fewer acute events – and

indirectly in the secondary prevention after a heart attack.       For example, statins and anti-

hypertensive agents decrease cardiovascular symptoms in addition to reducing heart attacks and

strokes. Still, to be conservative, we assume that medical treatments reduce mortality and the

prevalence of acute cardiovascular events, but leave unaffected disability for those who have had

a cardiovascular event. We model this empirically as treatment affecting mortality and the

prevalence of disease, but not disability conditional on having ischemic heart disease.

       Considering only the reduction in mortality and cardiovascular disease prevalence yields

an increase in disability free life expectancy of 0.53 years between 1992 and 2008 (compared to

0.73 years including changes in disability conditional on ischemic heart disease as well, as

shown in Figure 7). If half of this is a result of medical treatments, this yields an increase of

0.26 years associated with medical advance. This is a very large increase; by itself, it accounts

for 15 percent of the total increase in disability-free life expectancy over this time period.

Figure 16 shows the impact of cardiovascular disease treatment on disability free life

expectancy.

       The obvious follow-up question is whether these benefits exceed the cost of the therapies.

Costing out the impact of the treatment changes is somewhat complex because the lifetime costs

of any therapy include what people will suffer who do not die of cardiovascular disease. For this

reason, we defer the cost-effectiveness calculation for future research.



VI.    Vision impairment in the elderly population

       We now conduct an analysis of possible factors that may explain the change in disability-

adjusted life expectancy associated with vision impairment. The trend in having a current vision



                                                 26
problem is shown in Figure 17. Current vision problems have declined from about 40 percent of

the elderly population to about 25 percent.       This decline has been noted in other studies

(Freedman and Martin 1998; Cutler 2001; Freedman et al. 2007; Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum,

2014).

         There are several reasons why people may have vision problems, and thus several

treatments for them. The most prevalent source of vision problems in the elderly is cataracts, a

condition in which the lens of the eye becomes progressively opaque. Most cataracts are a

natural process of aging. Other possible causes of vision impairment include glaucoma, diabetic

retinopathy, and macular degeneration. (Kasper, 1989).

         Cataract surgery is the most treatment for cataracts in the U.S. Figure 17 also shows the

percentage of people who have had cataract surgery in the elderly Medicare population. This is

from a self-reported question the first year that an individual is in the survey. Self-reported

cataract surgery increased from 20% to 33%. The decline in current vision problems looks like a

mirror image of increase in cataract surgery, both in number (16% decline vs. a 13% increase)

and in timing. It is thus plausible that people are reporting fewer vision problems as a result of

greater use of cataract surgery.

         For comparison, the bottom line of the figure shows treatment for macular degeneration,

measured by claims for macular degeneration drugs. This is also increasing over time, though

the rates are much lower.

         The question is whether the increased use of cataract surgery can explain the reduction in

vision impairment, and thus reduced disability. We started in the same way as for cardiovascular

disease, in particular by examining the literature on the impact of cataract surgery on disability.

Table 6 contains a brief literature review of studies documenting vision changes and broader



                                                 27
changes in health-related quality of life after cataract surgery. The first part of the table shows

clear evidence that cataract surgery results in fewer vision problems.               Studies show

improvements in Snellen visual acuity, improvements in self-reported trouble with vision and

also improvements in VF-14 scores and NEI-VFQ25 scores in a period 4-6 months after cataract

surgery.

       Despite these improvements in vision, however, studies of health-related quality of life,

shown in the lower panel of the table, indicate no significant change in periods after cataract

surgery. This is true for measures such as the Euroqual-5D (EQ-5D), the SF-12, and the SF-36.

This result is confusing, since the evidence presented earlier shows that vision problems are a

significant cause of disability. That said, none of these survey instruments are a perfect match

for our measure of ADL and IADL disability.

       To better understand the impacts of cataract surgery on vision problems and disability,

we look at trends in vision problem reporting and disability within individuals who have and

have not received cataract surgery. The idea is that if cataract surgery changes the trend in vision

degredation over time, this might be apparent by following individual health trends. Of course,

such an effect is not guaranteed to be found. For example, if people who have cataract surgery

are at the poor end of the vision distribution, their vision might deteriorate even if cataract

surgery prevents a more rapid deterioration. Conversely, if the non-vision health of people who

receive cataract surgery is better, their health transitions may have been relatively better even

without the cataract surgery. This is the endogeneity issue noted above. In the case of vision,

we do not have a disease model we can use for validation.

       Our regressions for vision impairment are of the form:

       VIit = βC*Cataractit + βD*Demogsit + βM*Medicalit + βS*Socialit + βV*VIit-1 + εit, (3)
                 Surgery                      Conditions      Factors

                                                28
where VI is the degree of vision impairment (ordered, as described below) and VIit-1 is a set of

dummy variables representing the answers in the prior year of the survey. Cataract Surgeryit is a

dummy variable indicating a claim for cataract surgery between the previous interview date and

the current interview date (interviews are generally in the fall). Demographics include age-sex

dummy variables and a time trend. We also control for four groups of medical conditions:

chronic disabling (Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and pulmonary), recoverable acute events (ischemic

heart disease, stroke and broken hip), non-fatal chronic conditions (diabetes and arthritis), and

cancer.

          Social factors may influence disability as well. We address this with dummy variables

for whether the person is married, and whether they live alone. The latter variable is partly

endogenous – people who are less healthy may not be able to live alone; the former is plausibly

more exogenous.

          Since 2002, the MCBS has asked about three levels of vision impairment: No vision

problem, a little vision problem, and a lot of vision problem. We order them in that fashion

(healthiest is 0 and a lot of vision problems is 2) and estimate an ordered probit model. Prior to

2002, the MCBS also included a category for whether the individual was blind. The share of

people reporting blindness is small, so we include this with the group reporting a lot of vision

problems.      Because the relationship between past vision impairment and current vision

impairment may change in the year that the survey questionnaire changes, however, we omit data

from 2002 from the regression.

          We estimate a separate but similar model for disability. In this case, we form an ordered

variable for no disability, IADL disability only, 1-2 ADLs, and 3+ ADLs (in this case, from 0 to




                                                 29
3, where higher numbers indicate worse health). We also include dummies for lagged disability

status and lagged vision impairment as independent variables.

       To measure cataract surgery during the course of our sample, we use MCBS fee-for-

service Cost and Use data (recall that self-reports of cataract surgery receipt are asked only in the

first year of the survey). Eligible CPT codes include simple cataract surgery (66984), complex

cataract surgery (66982), removal of lens material (66840, 66850, 66852, 66920, 66930, 66940),

and intracapsular cataract surgery (66983).

       The results of the two regressions are reported in Table 7. The model for vision

impairment is in the left panel, and the model for disability is in the right panel. Each model

estimates the coefficients on the indicated variables and a series of cut points for the different

variables; we report the coefficient estimates but not the cut point estimates. The fit of the vision

impairment model is reasonable, with a pseudo-R2 of 19%. All the variables have expected signs

and most are statistically significant. The cataract surgery dummy variable is negative and

significant (p<0.001) indicating an improvement in reporting of vision problem in people having

cataract surgery. To interpret the magnitude of the coefficient, we repredicted the probability of

having no vision problem, a little vision problem, and a lot of vision problems for those who

received cataract surgery under the counterfactual that they had not received surgery. The

predicted impact of cataract surgery for no vision problem rises from 59.4% to 62.0%, a little

vision problem falls from 29.3% to 27.9%, and the probability of having a lot of vision problems

falls from 11.3% to 10.1%.

       As expected, difficulty with vision increases with age and diseases – the non-fatal chronic

conditions (arthritis, diabetes) have the biggest impact on vision acuity. Also interestingly, there




                                                 30
is no trend in vision impaiment for married people, but vision worsens for people who are living

alone.

         The right columns of the table examine the impact of cataract surgery on disability. The

model fit is again reasonable, with a pseudo-R2 of 30%. A good share of this is a result of the

fact that disability does not change greatly over time, and we include prior year’s disability in the

model. The cataract surgery dummy is also negative and significant (p<0.001), implying a

reduction in the extent of disability after cataract surgery. Again, to better interpret the

coefficient, we repredicted the probability of the various levels of disability for those who

received cataract surgery if they had not received surgery. The predicted probability of having

no limitations falls 55.5% to 52.0%, the predicted probability of an IADL limitation only

increases from 14.3% to 14.9%, the predicted probability of having 1-2 ADL limitations

increases from 18.8% to 20.2%, and the predicted probability of having 3+ ADL limitations

increases from 11.4% to 12.9%.

         One way to gauge the magnitude of these coefficients is to compare them with other

variables. We focus on two other malleable variables: marital status and living alone. Married

people have better trends in health than unmarried people. Roughly speaking, the impact of

being married is twice the impact of having cataract surgery. Also interestingly, those living

alone have improved health over time. We suspect this is a result of selection; those with

materially worse health will move in with relatives or move to an institution. The correlation

between cataract surgery and each of these variables is small; the coefficient on cataract surgery

is essentially unchanged controlling for marital status and living arrangements. This lends some

support to the idea that the coefficient on cataract surgery is picking up the true effect of medical

care changes, not just other attributes of the individual.



                                                  31
       A second way to gauge the magnitude of this coefficient is to consider its implication for

the time series. As Figure 17 shows, the share of people receiving cataract surgery increased by

13 percentage points over our time series.       If each cataract surgery operation reduces the

probability of being disabled by 3.5 percentage points, the implied reduction in disability is 0.5

percentage points. Table 3 shows that disability fell by 1.7 percentage points due to fewer vision

impairments. Thus, the increase in cataract surgery explains 27% of the improved health related

to vision impairment over time. This translates into 0.08 years gain in disability-free life

expectancy due to increase in cataract surgery, or roughly 5% of the total increase in disability-

free life expectancy.

        Even this estimate, while large, is likely to be an underestimate, as cataract surgery may

explain the trend in vision and thus disability in years beyond its receipt. Thus, we conclude that

cataract surgery has an important impact on disability trends over time.



VII.   Conclusion

       Our analysis of disability-free life expectancy yields three important conclusions. First,

we show that over the 1991-2009 period, disability-free life expectancy rose and disabled life

expectancy declined. These results mirror our earlier findings, but extend the years for which we

have this information.

       Second, we identify the diseases that contribute most to the improvement in disability-

free life expectancy. Quantitatively, the largest contributions come from cardiovascular disease

and vision problems.     Cardiovascular disease contributes to both mortality and morbidity

improvements; the impact of vision impairment is entirely through morbidity.           Our results

attribute 63 percent of the improvement in disability-free life expectancy to these two conditions.



                                                32
       Third, and more speculatively, we consider the factors that lead to improvements in these

conditions. For neither condition can we do the type of rigorous empirical research that would

identify a population effect with a very high degree of reliability.              Nonetheless, our

methodologies have strengths. In the case of cardiovascular disease, we use a well-validated

model to identify the role of medical treatments versus social factors in improved health. These

results show that a bit under half of the mortality reduction from cardiovascular disease is a

result of improved medical treatments, translating into about 0.26 years of disability-free life, or

roughly 15 percent of the overall increase in disability-free life expectancy.

       Our results on vision problems are less certain, since no validated models for vision

impairment exist that are comparable to those for cardiovascular disease. The major medical

treatment change for people with vision impairment over this time period is the increased use of

cataract surgery. Cataracts are the primary source of vision impairment in the elderly population,

and cataract surgery has diffused widely.       Our results on within-person changes in vision

impairment and disability show that receipt of cataract surgery is associated with improved

vision and disability trends. We estimate that one-quarter of the reduction in disability due to

poor vision results from greater use of cataract surgery. This translates into about 5 percent of the

overall increase in disability-free life expectancy. The result on improved vision after cataract

surgery mirrors the clinical literature. The finding of reduced disability is novel; studies have not

shown a very large improvement in disability after cataract surgery. It is unclear if the difference

in results is due to our larger sample sizes, to having measures more focused on disability, or to a

tendency to perform cataract surgery in the healthiest members of the population. To the extent

that these findings are not driven by selection, however, they indicate real and large benefits of

diffusion of cataract surgery.



                                                 33
       The important question raised by our results is to identify the other contributors to

improved population health over time. There are some conditions that our data do not ask about

– mental illness and musculoskeletal issues (back pain, for example) - that have been shown to

be major contributors to disability in other studies (US Burden of Disease Collaborators, 2013).

Other data that have information on these conditions would be a valuable addition to what we

present here.

       In addition, recent work has documented a slowdown or even reversal of improvements

in morbidity and mortality in more recent periods, particularly in the near elderly (Martin et al.,

2010, Chen and Sloan, 2015, Case and Deaton, 2015). Moreover, improvements in health have

been concentrated in high socioeconomic populations (Chetty et al., 2016). The combination of

medical, social, and environment factors that have led to better health is a major topic for future

research.




                                                34
                                          References

Beltowski, J. (2005). Statins and Modulation of Oxidative Stress. Toxicology Mechanisms and
      Methods, 15(2), 61-92.

Cai, L., and Lubitz, J. (2007). Was There Compression of Disability for Older Americans From
        1992 to 2003? Demography, 44(3), 479-495.

Capewell, S., Morrison, C. E., and McMurray, J. J. (1999). Contribution of modern
      cardiovascular treatment and risk factor changes to the decline in coronary heart disease
      mortality in Scotland between 1975 and 1994. Heart, 81(4), 380-386.

Capewell, S., Ford, E. S., Croft, J. B., Critchley, J. A., Greenlund, K. J., and Labarthe, D. R.
      (2010). Cardiovascular risk factor trends and options for reducing future coronary heart
      disease mortality in the United States of America. Bulletin of the World Health
      Organization Bull World Health Org, 88(2), 120-130.

Case, A., & Deaton, A. (2015). Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-
       Hispanic Americans in the 21st century. Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences, 112(49), 15078-15083.

Castells, X., Comas, M., Alonso, J., Espallargues, M., Martínez, V., García-Arumí, J., and
        Castilla, M. (2006). In a randomized controlled trial, cataract surgery in both eyes
        increased benefits compared to surgery in one eye only. Journal of Clinical
        Epidemiology, 59(2), 201-207.

Chen, Y., and Sloan, F. A. (2015). Explaining Disability Trends in the U.S. Elderly and Near-
      Elderly Population. Health Services Research, 50(5), 1528-1549.

Chetty, R., Stepner, M., Abraham, S., Lin, S., Scuderi, B., Turner, N., Bergeron, A., Cutler, D.
       (2016). The Association Between Income and Life Expectancy in the United States,
       2001-2014. JAMA, 315(16), 1750.

Crimmins, E. M. (2004). Trends in the Health of the Elderly. Annual Review of Public Health,
      25(1), 79-98.

Crimmins, E. M., Saito, Y., and Ingegneri, D. (1989). Changes in Life Expectancy and
      Disability-Free Life Expectancy in the United States. Population and Development
      Review, 15(2), 235.

Crimmins, E.M. and Ingegneri, D. (1993). Trends in Health Among the American Population, in
      Bartlett, D., and Rappaport, A.M., editors, Demography and Retirement: The 21st
      Century, Westport, CT: Praeger, 225–42.

Crimmins, E. M., Saito, Y., and Ingegneri, D. (1997). Trends in Disability-Free Life Expectancy
      in the United States, 1970-90. Population and Development Review, 23(3), 555.


                                              35
Crimmins, E. M., Saito, Y., and Reynolds, S. L. (1997). Further Evidence on Recent Trends in
      the Prevalence and Incidence of Disability among Older Americans from Two Sources:
      The LSOA and the NHIS. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences
      and Social Sciences, 52B(2).

Crimmins, E. M., and Saito, Y. (2001). Trends in healthy life expectancy in the United States,
      1970–1990: Gender, racial, and educational differences. Social Science and Medicine,
      52(11), 1629-1641.

Crimmins, E. M., Hayward, M. D., Hagedorn, A., Saito, Y., and Brouard, N. (2009). Change in
      Disability-Free Life Expectancy for Americans 70 Years Old and Older. Demography,
      46(3), 627-646.

Crimmins E.M., and Beltrán H. (2011). Mortality and Morbidity Trends: Is There Compression
      of Morbidity? Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 66B(1), 75-86.

Cutler, D. M. (2001a). The reduction in disability among the elderly. Proceedings of the
       National Academy of Sciences, 98(12), 6546-6547.

Cutler, D. M. (2001b). Declining Disability Among The Elderly. Health Affairs, 20(6), 11-27.

Cutler, D. M. (2003). Disability and the Future of Medicare. New England Journal of Medicine,
        349(11), 1084-1085.

Cutler, D. M. (2005). Intensive Medical Technology and the Reduction in Disability. Analyses in
        the Economics of Aging, 161-184.

Cutler, D. M. (2008). Are We Finally Winning the War on Cancer? Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 22(4), 3-26.

Cutler, D.M., Ghosh, K., and Landrum, M. B. (2014). Evidence for Significant Compression of
        Morbidity In the Elderly U.S. Population. In Wise, D., editor, Discoveries in the
        Economics of Aging, 21-50

Cutler, D. M., Landrum, M. B., and Stewart, K. A. (2009). Intensive Medical Care and
       Cardiovascular Disease Disability Reductions. In Cutler, D., and Wise, D., editors,
       Health At Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences of Declining Disability Among the
       Elderly, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 191-222.

Cutler, D. M., and Sahni, N. R. (2013). If Slow Rate Of Health Care Spending Growth Persists,
        Projections May Be Off By $770 Billion. Health Affairs, 32(5), 841-850.

Downs, J. R., Clearfield, M., Weis, S., Whitney, E., Shapiro, D. R., Beere, P. A., Langendorfer
      A., Stein, E.A., Kruyer, W., Group, F. T. (1998). Primary Prevention of Acute Coronary
      Events With Lovastatin in Men and Women With Average Cholesterol Levels. JAMA,
      279(20), 1615.

                                              36
Ford, E. S., Ajani, U. A., Croft, J. B., Critchley, J. A., Labarthe, D. R., Kottke, T. E., Giles,
       W.H., Capewell, S. (2007). Explaining the Decrease in U.S. Deaths from Coronary
       Disease, 1980–2000. New England Journal of Medicine, 356(23), 2388-2398.

Foss, A. J. (2006). Falls and health status in elderly women following second eye cataract
       surgery: A randomized controlled trial. Age and Ageing, 35(1), 66-71.

Freedman, V. A., and Martin, L. G. (1998). Understanding trends in functional limitations
      among older Americans. American Journal of Public Health, 88(10), 1457-1462.

Freedman, V. A., Martin, L. G., and Schoeni, R. F. (2002). Recent Trends in Disability and
      Functioning Among Older Adults in the United States. JAMA, 288(24), 3137.

Freedman, V. A., Crimmins, E. M., Schoeni, R. F., Spillman, B. C., Aykan, H., Kramarow, E.,
      Land, K., Lubitz, J., Marton, K., Martin, L.G., Shinberg, D., Waidmann, T. (2004).
      Resolving Inconsistencies in Trends in Old-Age Disability: Report From a Technical
      Working Group. Demography, 41(3), 417-441.

Freedman, V. A., Schoeni, R. F., Martin, L. G., & Cornman, J. C. (2007). Chronic Conditions
      and the Decline in Late-Life Disability. Demography, 44(3), 459-477.

Freedman, V. A., Spillman, B. C., Andreski, P. M., Cornman, J. C., Crimmins, E. M.,
      Kramarow, E., Lubitz, J., Martin, L.G., Merkin, S.S., Schoeni, R.F., Seeman, T.E.,
      Waidmann, T. A. (2013). Trends in Late-Life Activity Limitations in the United States:
      An Update From Five National Surveys. Demography, 50(2), 661-671.

Groessl, E. J., Liu, L., Sklar, M., Tally, S. R., Kaplan, R. M., and Ganiats, T. G. (2012).
       Measuring the impact of cataract surgery on generic and vision-specific quality of life.
       Quality of Life Research, 22(6), 1405-1414.

Grabowski, D. C., Lakdawalla, D. N., Goldman, D. P., Eber, M., Liu, L. Z., Abdelgawad, T.,
      Kuznik, A., Chernew, M.E., Philipson, T. (2012). The Large Social Value Resulting
      From Use Of Statins Warrants Steps To Improve Adherence And Broaden Treatment.
      Health Affairs, 31(10), 2276-2285.

Hartman, M., Martin, A. B., Lassman, D., & Catlin, A. (2015). National Health Spending In
      2013: Growth Slows, Remains In Step With The Overall Economy. Health Affairs, 34(1),
      150-160.

Javitt J.C., Brenner M.H., Curbow B., Legro M.W., Street D.A. (1993). Outcomes of cataract
        surgery: improvement in visual acuity and subjective visual function after surgery in the
        first, second, and both eyes. Archives of Ophthalmology 111(5):686-91.

Kasper R.L. (1989). Eye problems of the aged. In Reichel, W., editor, Clinical Aspects of Aging,
       3rd Edition. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins; 445-453.



                                               37
Lakkireddy, D. R., Gowda, M. S., Murray, C. W., Basarakodu, K. R., & Vacek, J. L. (2004).
       Death certificate completion: How well are physicians trained and are cardiovascular
       causes overstated? The American Journal of Medicine, 117(7), 492-498.

Landrum, M. B., Stewart, K. A., and Cutler, D. M. (2008). Clinical Pathways to Disability. in
      Cutler, D., and Wise, D., editors, Health at Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences of
      Declining Disability Among the Elderly, 151-188.

Liao, Y., Mcgee, D. L., Cao, G., and Cooper, R. S. (2001). Recent Changes in the Health Status
       of the Older U.S. Population: Findings from the 1984 and 1994 Supplement on Aging.
       Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 49(4), 443-449.

Mangione, C. M. (1994). Improved Visual Function and Attenuation of Declines in Health-
      Related Quality of Life After Cataract Extraction. Archives of Ophthalmology, 112(11),
      1419.

Manton, K. G., Corder, L. S., and Stallard, E. (1993). Estimates of Change in Chronic Disability
      and Institutional Incidence and Prevalence Rates in the U.S Elderly Population From the
      1982, 1984, and 1989 National Long Term Care Survey. Journal of Gerontology, 48(4),
      S153-66.

Manton, K. G., Corder, L., and Stallard, E. (1997). Chronic disability trends in elderly United
      States populations: 1982-1994. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 94(6),
      2593-2598.

Manton, K. G., and Gu, X. (2001). Changes in the prevalence of chronic disability in the United
      States black and nonblack population above age 65 from 1982 to 1999. Proceedings of
      the National Academy of Sciences, 98(11), 6354-6359.

Manton, K. G., Gu, X., and Lamb, V. L. (2006). Change in chronic disability from 1982 to
      2004/2005 as measured by long-term changes in function and health in the U.S. elderly
      population. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(48), 18374-18379.

Manton, K. G., Gu, X., & Lowrimore, G. R. (2008). Cohort Changes in Active Life Expectancy
      in the U.S. Elderly Population: Experience From the 1982-2004 National Long-Term
      Care Survey. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
      Sciences, 63(5).

Martin, L. G., Schoeni, R. F., and Andreski, P. M. (2010). Trends in Health of Older Adults in
       the United States: Past, Present, Future. Demography, 47(S), S17-40.

Martin, L. G., Freedman, V. A., Schoeni, R. F., and Andreski, P. M. (2010). Trends In Disability
       And Related Chronic Conditions Among People Ages Fifty To Sixty-Four. Health
       Affairs, 29(4), 725-731.




                                              38
Murray, C. J., and Lopez, A. D. (1997). Regional patterns of disability-free life expectancy and
      disability-adjusted life expectancy: Global Burden of Disease Study. The Lancet,
      349(9062), 1347-1352.

Murray, C. J., Vos, T., Lozano, R., et al. (2012). Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 291
      diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the Global
      Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2197-2223.

Owsley, C., Mcgwin, G., Scilley, K., Meek, G. C., Seker, D., and Dyer, A. (2007). Impact of
      cataract surgery on health-related quality of life in nursing home residents. British
      Journal of Ophthalmology, 91(10), 1359-1363.

Ravakhah, K. (2006). Death Certificates Are Not Reliable: Revivification of the Autopsy.
      Southern Medical Journal, 99(7), 728-733.

Rosen, A. B., Cutler, D. M., Norton, D. M., Hu, H. M., and Vijan, S. (2007). The Value Of
       Coronary Heart Disease Care For The Elderly: 1987-2002. Health Affairs, 26(1), 111-
       123.

Salomon, J. A., Wang, H., Freeman, M. K., Vos, T., Flaxman, A. D., Lopez, A. D., and Murray,
      C. J. (2012). Healthy life expectancy for 187 countries, 1990–2010: A systematic analysis
      for the Global Burden Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2144-2162.

Schoeni, R. F., Freedman, V. A., and Wallace, R. B. (2001). Persistent, Consistent, Widespread,
      and Robust? Another Look at Recent Trends in Old-Age Disability. The Journals of
      Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 56(4), S206-18.

Schoeni, R. F., Martin, L. G., Andreski, P. M., and Freedman, V. A. (2005). Persistent and
      Growing Socioeconomic Disparities in Disability Among the Elderly: 1982–2002.
      American Journal of Public Health, 95(11), 2065-2070.

Schoeni, R. F., Freedman, V. A., and Martin, L. G. (2008). Why Is Late-Life Disability
      Declining? The Milbank Quarterly, 86(1), 47-89.

Steinberg E.P., Tielsch J.M., Schein O.D. et al. (1994). National study of cataract surgery
       outcomes: variation in 4‐month postoperative outcomes as reflected in multiple outcome
       measures. Ophthalmology 101(6):1131-40.

Stewart, S. T., Cutler, D. M., and Rosen, A. B. (2009). Forecasting the Effects of Obesity and
       Smoking on U.S. Life Expectancy. New England Journal of Medicine, 361(23), 2252-
       2260.

US Burden of Disease Collaborators. (2013). The State of US Health, 1990-2010. Burden of
     Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors. JAMA, 310(6), 591.




                                               39
Wang, H., Dwyer-Lindgren, L., Lofgren, K. T., Rajaratnam, J. K., Marcus, J. R., Levin-Rector,
      A., Levitz, C.E., Lopez, A.D., Murray, C. J. (2012). Age-specific and sex-specific
      mortality in 187 countries, 1970–2010: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of
      Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2071-2094.

Weisfeldt, M. L., and Zieman, S. J. (2007). Advances In The Prevention And Treatment Of
       Cardiovascular Disease. Health Affairs, 26(1), 25-37.

Wexelman, B. A., Eden, E., & Rose, K. M. (2013). Survey of New York City Resident
      Physicians on Cause-of-Death Reporting, 2010. Preventing Chronic Disease Prev.
      Chronic Dis.

Wilmot, K. A., O’Flaherty, M., Capewell, S., Ford, E. S., & Vaccarino, V. (2015). Coronary
      Heart Disease Mortality Declines in the United States From 1979 Through 2011: Clinical
      Perspective. Evidence for Stagnation in Young Adults, Especially Women
      Circulation, 132(11), 997-1002.




                                             40
Figure 1: Life expectancy in the US at age 65

 19.0
                                                                                                                                      18.8
                                                                                                                              18.6
                                                                                                                      18.5
 18.5                                                                                          18.4    18.4
                                                                                       18.2                   18.2
                                                                               18.1

 18.0                                                                  17.9
                                                        17.8
                                                17.7            17.7
         17.5                           17.5
 17.5                    17.4   17.4
                 17.3



 17.0

                                                            1.3 years gain in LE
 16.5



 16.0
         1992    1993   1994    1995    1996    1997    1998   1999    2000    2001    2002   2003    2004    2005    2006    2007   2008


Note: Data are from the Vital Statistics of the United States from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS). The annual life tables published by NCHS give life expectancy for the United States by age, gender and race.




                                                                        41
   Figure 2: NCHS causes of death for people aged 65 years and older: Mortality rates per 100,000 (age-sex adjusted)


                    Diseases of the eye and adnexa

                                     Broken Hip              Musculoskeletal disease
                        Non- Rheumatoid Arthritis                         -4
                             Rheumatoid Arthritis
                                                                                   Respiratory
                 Diseases of the respiratory system                                    64

                               Parkinson's disease
                                                                      Central Nervous System
                               Alzheimer's disease                             170

                                 Diabetes mellitus               Diabetes
                                                                  17


  Malignant neoplasms of colon, rectum and anus
                  Malignant neoplasm of prostate                                       Cancer
                    Malignant neoplasm of breast                                         -83
Malignant neoplasms of trachea, bronchus and lung
                                 All Other Cancers

                                           Stroke                                                                     Cardiovascular
                            Ischemic heart disease                                                                        -618

                                                      0       200      400     600        800      1,000     1,200     1,400    1,600
                                                          1991-1994    2006-2009

   Note: Data are from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). The change in death rate
   is for two time periods 1991-1994 and 2006-2009.



                                                                            42
                             Figure 3: Population distribution by time until death in elderly Medicare beneficiaries

                                              9%                                                                                                             87%



                                                                                                                                                             86%
                                              8%
One, two, or three years of death (percent)




                                                                                                                                                                   More than three year to death (percent)
                                                                                                                                                             85%
                                              7%

                                                                                                                                                             84%
                                                                                                                                  Annual % point change
                                                                                                                                  reported in label
                                              6%                                                                                  parenthesis (1991-94
                                                                                                                                  vs. 2006-09)
                                                                                                                                                             83%


                                              5%
                                                                                                                                                             82%



                                              4%                                                                                                             81%
                                                   1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                                                     < 12 months (-0.07%)     12 - 24 months (-0.06%)        24 -36 months (-0.05%)        > 36 months (0.18%)


                             Note: Data are from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey and Medicare denominator files linked to MCBS, 1991-2009. Reported
                             statistics is weighted to the population distribution by age, sex, and race in 2000.


                                                                                                        43
      Figure 4: ADL and IADL limitations in elderly Medicare beneficiaries


                                                              ADL limitations
40%                                                                                                                    Annual % point
                                                                                                                       change reported
                                                                                                                       in parenthesis
35%                                                                                                                    (91-94 vs. 06-09)


30%


25%
                                                                                                                       a_walk (-0.34%)

                                                                                                                       a_bath (-0.35%)
20%
                                                                                                                       a_transfer (-0.30%)

15%                                                                                                                    a_dress (-0.23%)

                                                                                                                       a_toilet (-0.16%)
10%
                                                                                                                       a_eat (-0.11%)

5%


0%
        1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009


      Note: Data are from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, 1991-2009 and are weighted to the population distribution by age, sex, and
      race in 2000.



                                                                         44
Figure 4: ADL and IADL limitations in elderly Medicare beneficiaries (Contd.)


                                                             IADL limitations
                                                                                                                        Annual % point
 45%                                                                                                                    change reported
                                                                                                                        in parenthesis
                                                                                                                        (91-94 vs. 06-09)
 40%


 35%
                                                                                                                       ia_heavy (-0.41%)
 30%
                                                                                                                       ia_shop (-0.35%)
 25%
                                                                                                                       ia_light (-0.28%)

 20%
                                                                                                                       ia_meal (-0.22%)

 15%
                                                                                                                       ia_money (-0.20%)

 10%                                                                                                                   ia_tele (-0.23%)

  5%


  0%
        1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Note: Data are from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, 1991-2009 and are weighted to the population distribution by age, sex, and
race in 2000.



                                                                   45
Figure 5: ADL/IADL disability by time until death in elderly Medicare beneficiaries

 90%                                                                                                               Annual % point
                                                                                                                   change reported
                                                                                                                   in parenthesis
                                                                                                                   (91-94 vs. 06-09)

 80%
                                                                                                                < 12 months (-0.15%)



 70%
                                                                                                                12 - 24 months (-0.12%)



 60%
                                                                                                                24 -36 months (-0.25%)



 50%
                                                                                                                Overall (-0.48%)



 40%
                                                                                                                > 36 months (-0.46%)



 30%
       1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Note: Data are from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey and Medicare denominator files linked to MCBS, 1991-2009 and are
weighted to the population distribution by age, sex, and race in 2000.


                                                                 46
Figure 6: Trend in disabled and disability-free life expectancy at age 65




 20                                                                                                       Total    1.3

 18                                                                                                               -0.5

 16
                                                                                                    8.1
 14
                                   8.6
 12

 10                                                                                                               1.8

  8

  6
                                                                                                   10.7
                                   8.9
  4

  2

  0
                               1991-1994                                                         2006-2009
                                            Disability-free Lifeyears       Disabled Lifeyears

Note: The figure combines life expectancy data from the NCHS with imputed disability rates by age and time until death from MCBS
data linked to Medicare.



                                                                   47
Figure 7: Change in disabled and disability-free life expectancy at age 65 by disease (1991-94 vs 2006-2009)


                       -0.46                                   1.79                               TOTAL


                                            0.73             0.25          Cardiovascular         Ischemic Heart Disease
                                                                                                  Stroke

                                                                                                  Lung Cancer
                                                                                                  Colon Cancer
                                                            Cancer                                Prostate Cancer
                                                                                                  Breast Cancer
                                                                                                  All Other Cancer
                                                                                                  Broken Hip
                                                         Musculoskeletal                          Non-Rhemotoid Arthrithis
                                                                                                  Rhemotoid Arthrithis
                                                                                                  Parkinson's
                                                     Central Nervous System                       Alzhiemer's

                              -0.2 0.2                                                            Diabetes
                                                                                                      Diseases of Respiratory system
                            -0.27   0.28                                                          Diseases of the eye and adnexa (vision problem)
                                    0.02                                                              All other conditions
                    -0.65                  0.65                                                       Unexplained
 -1.00         -0.50            0.00              0.50              1.00          1.50         2.00


                                                                Disability Free     Disabled


  Note: The figure combines life expectancy data from the NCHS combined with causes of death data and imputed disability rates by age
  and time until death from MCBS data linked to Medicare.

                                                                             48
Figure 8: IHD mortality rates per 100,000 (age-sex adjusted) in elderly Medicare beneficiaries

 1,400   1,253 1,266 1,230 1,217
                                 1,193 1,162
                                             1,137 1,123
 1,200                                                   1,085 1,046
                                                                     1,016 971
 1,000                                                                                     899     874
                                                                                                           814
                                                                                                                   759     738
   800                   17% decline in IHD mortality                                                                              685
                             (1992 vs. 2001)
   600
   400                                                                                35% decline in IHD mortality
                                                                                          (2001 vs. 2009)
   200
     0
         1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Figure 9: Stroke mortality rates per 100,000 (age-sex adjusted) in the elderly Medicare beneficiaries



   400           360    361    367    366    361   352
          351                                             345    342    329    322
   350                                                                               305
                                                                                             284
   300                                                                                               266     253     245     238
   250                        6% decline in Stroke mortality                                                                         226
                                  (1992 vs. 2001)
   200
                                                                                           31% decline in Stroke mortality
   150
                                                                                                (2001 vs. 2009)
   100
    50
     0
         1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

   Note: Data are from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics on Causes of Death and
   micro data on mortality available at the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                      49
Figure 10: Smoking and obesity prevalence in elderly Medicare beneficiaries

 28%

 26%

                                                                                                                         25%
 24%

 22%

 20%
                                                                                                    Annual % point change
 18%                                                                                                reported in parenthesis
                                                                                                    (91-94 vs. 06-09)

 16%
        15%

 14%

 12%    13%


 10%                                                                                                                     9%


  8%
        1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                                           Current smoker (-0.25%)        Obesity (0.69%)


Note: Data are from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey and Medicare denominator files linked to MCBS, 1991-2009 and are weighted to
the population distribution by age, sex, and race in 2000.


                                                                     50
Figure 11: Trends in cardiovascular medication usage in elderly Medicare beneficiaries

 80%
                                                                                                 Annual % point change
                                                                                                 reported in parenthesis
 70%
                                                                                                 (91-94 vs. 06-09)

 60%


 50%


 40%


 30%


 20%


 10%


  0%
        1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
              Aspirin (2%)        Diuretics (0.2%)        Statins (2.5 %)       ACE or ARB (1.7%)           Beta Blockers (1.5%)


Note: Data on medication usage (statins, ACE or ARB, Beta-blockers, and diuretics) is from Prescribed Medicine Events in the MCBS data. Rates
are adjusted to population by age, sex, and race in 2000. The aspirin usage from the 1992-94 period is from NHANES III and the later period is
from literature based on the 2007 MEPS. The intermediate years are linear interpolations.




                                                                     51
Figure 12: Trends in medication usage in ischemic heart disease patients in elderly Medicare beneficiaries

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%

 30%

 20%                                                                                                        Annual % point change
                                                                                                            reported in parenthesis
 10%                                                                                                        (91-94 vs. 06-09)


  0%
        1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                                   Aspirin (1%)              Statins (4%)              Beta-Blockers (3%)
                                   ACE or ARB (2%)           Diuretics (1%)            Primary PCI (2%)


Note: Data on medication usage (statins, Beta-blockers, ACE or ARB, diuretics) is from Prescribed Medicine Events in the MCBS data. Rates are
adjusted to population by age, sex, and race in 2000. Aspirin usage for the earlier period is from NHANES III and the later year is from MEPS.
The intermediate years are linear interpolations. Primary PCI usage is from 5% Medicare sample for people hospitalized for Ischemic Heart
Disease (410.X – 414.X). Primary PCI is defined as having a PCI on the same day or the next day of an ischemic heart disease hospitalization.




                                                                     52
Figure 13: Ischemic heart disease mortality rates per 100,000: Actual vs. simulated in elderly Medicare beneficiaries



                                   1,300


                                   1,200
                                                                                                                   Treatment effect
     Mortality Rates per 100,000




                                   1,100


                                   1,000


                                    900                                                                                 Risk factor effect

                                                   Counterfactual (rates per 100,000 at 92 mortality)
                                    800            Treatment Effect only
                                                   Ischemic Heart Disease mortality (Actual)
                                    700            Treatment + Risk Factor (Total Effect Simulated)


                                    600
                                           1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009




Note: Data are from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics on Causes of Death and the US Census
of population. The line with squares shows the counterfactual mortality rate per 100,000 if the mortality rate by age remained at 1992 level and
only the population has changed. The line with diamonds shows the actual mortality rate. The line with triangles shows the simulated effect of
treatment and improvements in risk factors combined on mortality. The line with X’s shows the impact of treatment only on mortality.


                                                                                               53
Figure 14: Estimated deaths prevented or postponed in the elderly United States population: Treatment effect in elderly
Medicare beneficiaries
                                                       1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                                                  0

                                              -5,000
   Number of deaths prevented or postponed




                                             -10,000

                                             -15,000

                                             -20,000

                                             -25,000

                                             -30,000         Anti-hypertensive treatments (non-IHD cohort)

                                                             Statins + Warfarin (primary prevention in non-IHD cohort)
                                             -35,000
                                                             IHD ( ICD9 410.XX- 414.XX) hospitalized cohort (Aspirin, Beta-blockers, ACE
                                             -40,000         inhibitors Resuscitation, Primary PCI and CABG)
                                                             Statins + Warfarin (IHD cohort)
                                             -45,000


Note: The figure shows the effect of individual medication on mortality. The treatment effects are calculated using data from NHDS, MCBS,
Medicare and other sources cited in Ford et al. (2007). For example, between 1992 and 2009, the increased use of statins for primary and
secondary prevention saved roughly 48,000 lives. Increased use of Ace inhibitors and beta-blockers in ischemic heart disease patients saved
roughly 43,000 lives.




                                                                                                               54
Figure 15: Estimated deaths prevented or postponed by risk factor changes in elderly Medicare beneficiaries



                                             40,000

                                             25,000
   Number of deaths prevented or postponed




                                             10,000

                                              -5,000

                                             -20,000

                                             -35,000

                                             -50,000

                                             -65,000

                                             -80,000
                                                         1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

                                                       Diabetes    BMI      Physical inactivity   Smoking   Systolic Blood Pressure   Total Cholesterol


Note: Figure 15 shows the effect of individual risk factors on mortality. The risk factors are calculated using data from NHANES and MCBS and
Ford et al, (2007). For example, between 1992 and 2009, roughly, 58,000 deaths were prevented due to lower total cholesterol, and 51,000 deaths
prevented due lower systolic blood pressure. On the other hand, increased incidence of diabetes and BMI caused roughly 43,000 additional deaths.




                                                                                                   55
Figure 16: Impact of treatments on changes in disability-free life expectancy at age 65

                                                 2.00
                                                                                                          1.43    1.79
                                                 1.80
   Disability Free Life Expectancy gain(years)




                                                 1.60

                                                 1.40

                                                 1.20

                                                 1.00

                                                 0.80

                                                 0.60

                                                                                       0.08
                                                 0.40
                                                                 0.26
                                                 0.20

                                                 0.00
                                                        Ischemic Heart Disease   Vision Treatment        Other    Total
                                                             Treatments

Note: The figure combines life expectancy data from the NCHS with imputed disability rates by age and time until death from MCBS data
linked to Medicare.




                                                                                                    56
Figure 17: Cataract surgery and vision problems in the elderly Medicare beneficiaries
 45%
                                                     Annual % point change reported in parenthesis (1992-94 vs. 2007-09)
40%


35%


30%


25%


20%


15%


10%


 5%


 0%
       1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

                 Current vision problem (-0.91%)        Cataract Surgery (0.82%)         Macular degeneration (0.13%)


Note: Data are from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey and Medicare denominator files linked to MCBS, 1991-2009 and are
weighted to the population distribution in 2000 by age, sex, and race.




                                                                   57
                 Table 1: Health Status Questions in the MCBS, 1991-2009

Num Question                                                                      Prevalence

Activities of Daily Living Says difficulty doing by himself/herself because of health or
physical problem

 1     Bathing or showering                                                             15%
 2     Going in or out of bed or chairs                                                 15%
 3     Eating                                                                           5%
 4     Dressing                                                                         10%
 5     Walking                                                                          26%
 6     Using the toilet                                                                 8%


Instrumental Activities of Daily Living: Difficulty doing the following activities by
yourself, because of health or physical problem

 7     Using the telephone                                                              10%
 8     Doing light housework (like washing dishes, straightening up, or light           16%
       cleaning)
  9    Doing heavy housework (like scrubbing floors or washing windows)                 34%
 10    Preparing own meals                                                              14%
 11    Shopping for personal items                                                      18%
 12    Managing money (like keeping track of expenses or paying bills)                  11%


Disability (Any ADL / IADL Difficulty)                                                  45%

Note: Tabulations are from the MCBS Access to Care sample for 1991-2009 and restricted to
elderly Medicare beneficiaries. We use sample weights adjusted to a constant year 2000
population by age, gender, and race. This table is based on 251,872 person-year observations.




                                              58
              Table 2: Self-Reported Medical Event Questions in the MCBS


                                                                  Annual % point change
 Num      Ever told have                        Prevalence         (1991-94 to 2006-09)

          Cancer
   1      Lung Cancer                              0.9%                     0.02%
   2      Breast Cancer                            4.4%                     0.04%
   3      Prostate Cancer                          3.4%                     0.13%
   4      Colorectal Cancer                        2.5%                    -0.04%
   5      Other Cancer                             7.0%                    -0.13%

          Cardiovascular disease
   6      Ischemic heart disease                   25.6%                   -0.44%
   7      Stroke                                   11.2%                   -0.03%

          Central Nervous System
   8      Alzheimer’s disease                      5.2%                     0.07%
   9      Parkinson’s disease                      1.6%                    -0.01%

          Musculoskeletal disease
  10      Rheumatoid Arthritis                     10.4%                   -0.11%
  11      Non-Rheumatoid Arthritis                 46.0%                    0.18%
  12      Broken hip                                4.1%                   -0.11%

  13      Pulmonary disease                        14.0%                    0.17%

  14      Diabetes                                 18.7%                    0.51%

   15       Vision problems                          31.4%                   -0.91%
Note: Tabulations are from the MCBS Access to Care sample for 1991-2009 and restricted to
the elderly Medicare beneficiaries. We use sample weights adjusted to the year 2000 population
by age, gender, and race. This table is based on 251,872 person-year observations.




                                                 59
           Table 3: Regressions Explaining Disability in elderly Medicare beneficiaries

                                                                             Oaxaca Decomposition
                                       Coeffs.               Coeffs.      Effect of    Effect of
                                      (Robust               (Robust      Change in    Change in
                           Prev.     Std. Err.)   Prev.    Std. Err.)      Beta           X         Net
                           91-94       91-94      06-09      06-09       X*DBETA      BETA*DX      Effect

Total                                                                      -5.6%        -1.8%      -7.4%

Central Nervous System                                                     0.3%         0.2%       0.5%
ALZHEIMERS                 4.7%    0.25 (0.01)    5.8%    0.28 (0.01)      0.1%         0.2%       0.4%
PARKINSONS                 1.8%    0.18 (0.02)    1.6%    0.24 (0.02)      0.1%         0.0%       0.1%

Cardiovascular disease                                                     -1.7%        -0.8%      -2.5%
ISCHEMIC HEART
DISEASE                   29.5%    0.11 (0.01)    22.9%   0.06 (0.01)      -1.5%        -0.7%      -2.2%
STROKE                    11.3%    0.16 (0.01)    10.9%   0.14 (0.01)      -0.2%        -0.1%      -0.3%

Pulmonary disease

PULMONARY                 13.3%    0.14 (0.01)    15.9%   0.13 (0.01)     -0.02%        0.4%       0.3%

Diabetes                  16.2%    0.11 (0.01)    23.8%   0.12 (0.01)      0.1%         0.9%       0.9%

Musculoskeletal disease                                                    -0.3%        -0.2%      -0.5%
RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS                 12.3%    0.22 (0.01)    10.7%   0.20 (0.01)      -0.3%        -0.4%      -0.6%
NONRHEUMATOID
ARTH                      43.5%    0.13 (0.01)    46.2%   0.12 (0.01)      -0.2%         0.4%       0.2%
BROKEN HIP                 5.2%    0.13 (0.01)     3.5%   0.16 (0.01)       0.2%        -0.2%      -0.1%

Cancer
                                                                           -0.3%       -0.03%      -0.3%
LUNG CANCER               0.7%     0.09 (0.03)    1.1%     0.08 (0.02)      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
BREAST CANCER             4.2%     0.04 (0.02)    4.8%     0.00 (0.01)     -0.2%        0.0%       -0.1%
PROSTATE CANCER           2.2%     0.02 (0.02)    4.1%    -0.01 (0.01)     -0.1%        0.0%        0.0%
COLORECTAL
CANCER                    2.9%     0.03 (0.02)    2.3%    0.03 (0.02)       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
OTHER CANCER              8.4%     0.05 (0.01)    6.5%    0.05 (0.01)      -0.1%        -0.1%      -0.2%

Vision Problem
VISION PROBLEM            38.4%    0.13 (0.01)    24.7%   0.13 (0.01)      0.1%         -1.7%      -1.7%




                                                     60
                                             Table 3 (continued)

                                                                                   Oaxaca Decomposition
                                         Coeffs.                   Coeffs.     Effect of   Effect of
                                        (Robust                   (Robust      Change in   Change in
                           Prev.       Std. Err.)     Prev.      Std. Err.)      Beta         X         Net
                           91-94         91-94        06-09        06-09       X*DBETA     BETA*DX       Effect
Time to death                                                                   -4.5%         -0.4%      -4.9%
12 - 24 months            5.5%       -0.04 (0.01)     4.8%      -0.04 (0.01)      0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
24 -36 months             5.4%       -0.04 (0.01)     4.6%      -0.07 (0.01)     -0.1%         0.0%      -0.1%
> 36 months               83.6%      -0.19 (0.01)    86.2%      -0.24 (0.01)     -4.4%        -0.5%      -4.9%


Other demographics                                                               0.9%         0.0%        0.9%

Male 70 to 74 years     11.9%        0.01 (0.01)    11.9%       0.00 (0.01)     -0.1%         0.0%       -0.1%
Male 75 to 79 years      9.5%        0.06 (0.01)     9.5%       0.04 (0.01)     -0.2%         0.0%       -0.2%
Male 80 to 84 years      5.6%        0.14 (0.01)     5.6%       0.13 (0.01)     -0.1%         0.0%       -0.1%
Male 85 years +          3.8%        0.28 (0.02)     3.8%       0.22 (0.01)     -0.2%         0.0%       -0.2%
Female 65 to 69         12.7%        0.10 (0.01)    12.7%       0.08 (0.01)     -0.3%         0.0%       -0.3%
Female 70 to 74         14.5%        0.12 (0.01)    14.5%       0.09 (0.01)     -0.4%         0.0%       -0.4%
Female 75 to 79         13.1%        0.19 (0.01)    13.1%       0.15 (0.01)     -0.5%         0.0%       -0.5%
Female 80 to 84          9.2%        0.28 (0.01)     9.2%       0.22 (0.01)     -0.5%         0.0%       -0.5%
Female 85 years +        9.1%        0.37 (0.01)     9.1%       0.35 (0.01)     -0.2%         0.0%       -0.2%
Constant                100.0%       0.27 (0.01)    100.0%      0.30 (0.01)      3.3%         0.0%        3.3%
Note: The table is a decomposition of changes in the measure of disability indicated in the columns. We estimate
equations of the form: Dit = Xitβt + εit, for two time periods: 1991-1994 and 2006-09. The table shows Oaxaca
decomposition, the predicted percentage point change in Dit resulting from changes in the X variables,
decomposed into demographics and condition prevalence, and changes in the β’s, decomposed into those for
conditions, those for demographics, and the constant term. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.




                                                           61
   Table 4: Prevalence of Cardiovascular Risk Factors in NHANES Subjects Aged ≥ 65 years During years and
                 Medicare Enrolled 1988-1994, 1999-2000, 2001-2004, 2005-2008 and 2009-2012


                                          Men                                        Women

                          1988-   1999-   2001-   2005-      2009-   1988-   1999-   2001-   2005-    2009-
                          1994    2000    2004    2008       2012    1994    2000    2004    2008     2012
Age                        73      73      74      73         73      74      74      74      74       74
Diabetes                  12%     14%     18%     20%        22%     12%     14%      17%    19%      20%
HbA1c > 6.5%              11%     13%     12%     13%        15%     10%     10%      10%    12%      13%
Current smoker            14%     12%      9%      9%         7%     11%      9%      6%      6%       6%
Systolic blood pressure   139     138     134     134        132     142     147      142     140     136
Total cholesterol         209     202     194     181        178     231     224      216     207     205
HDL cholesterol            46      47      48      49         50      56      57      61      60       60
Body Mass Index            26      28      28      29         28      27      28      28      28       29
Notes: The table combines NHANES 2001-02 and 2003-04; NHANES 2005-06 and 2007-08; and NHANES 2009-10
and 2011-12.




                                                        62
Table 5: IMPACT Mortality Model Estimated Deaths Prevented or Postponed in the Elderly
United States population in 2009

                                                                    Number of       Percent of
                                                                     deaths        total change
TOTAL CHANGE RELATIVE TO EXPECTATIONS                                -228,910


TREATMENTS                                                           -117,521          51%
Ischemic heart disease hospitalization (Aspirin, Beta-blockers,
ACE inhibitors, Primary PCI and CABG)                                -18,158            8%

Secondary Prevention after MI
    Aspirin                                                           -2,399            1%
    Beta-blocker                                                     -25,476           11%
    ACE inhibitor                                                    -12,752            6%
    Statins                                                          -19,827            9%
    Warfarin                                                          -2,195            1%
    Rehabilitation                                                    -9,299            4%


Secondary prevention after CABG or PTCA (Aspirin, Beta-               -2,270            1%
blockers, ACE inhibitor, Statins, Rehabilitation)

Chronic angina (CABG, Angioplasty, Aspirin, Statins)                   1,268            -1%

Antihypertensive for hypertension treatment                           -8,895            4%

Statins for lipid reduction treatment                                -17,538            8%


RISK FACTORS                                                         -100,511          44%
Smoking prevalence (%)                                                -19,299            8%
Systolic blood pressure (mm Hg)                                       -51,270          22%
Total cholesterol (mmol/liter)                                        -68,787          30%
Physical inactivity (%)                                                -3,924            2%
Body mass index (BMI)                                                  13,254           -6%
Diabetes prevalence (%)                                                29,515          -13%

Note: In the risk factor calculations, for systolic blood pressure, the number of deaths excludes
people receiving treatment for hypertension and for total cholesterol. Risk factor estimates are
from NHANES. The treatment data comes from several sources including NHDS, Medicare data,
MCBS and some other studies.




                                                    63
 Table 6: Effectiveness and Use of Cataract Surgery on vision problems and
                                  disability

Findings                                              Study

Vision Problems
Improvement in Snellen visual acuity                  Steinberg et al. (1994)
                                                      Mangione et al. (1994)
                                                      Javitt et al. (1993)

Improvement in self-reported trouble with vision      Steinberg et al. (1994)

Improvements in VF-14 score                           Steinberg et al. (1994)
                                                      Owsley et al. (2007)
Improvements in NEI-VFQ25 score                       Groessl et al. (2013)

Health Related Quality of Life (HRQOL)

EQ-5D shows insignificant change                      Foss et al. (2006)

SF-12 shows insignificant change                      Castells et al. (2006)

No significant impact on SF-36 physical functioning      Mangione et al. (1994)
                                                         Owsley et al. (2007)
Snellen visual acuity test is decimal acuity with 1.0 representing 20/20 vision.
VF-14 is a method for assessing the quality of the visual function of those with
cataracts in daily living from the patient’s viewpoint, developed in 1994 by
Steinberg et al.
VFQ-25 is the product of an item-reduction analysis of the longer field test
version of the survey called the 51-item National Eye Institute Vision Function
Questionnaire (NEI-VFQ).
EQ-5D is a standardized instrument for use as a measure of health outcomes.
SF-12 is a short form 12 health survey was developed for the Medical Outcomes
Study (MOS).
SF-36 is a 36-item, patient-reported survey of patient health commonly used to
determine the cost-effectiveness of medical treatments.




                                       64
             Table 7: Vision problem acuity and disability states in the elderly
                                    Ordered Probit model
                                                Vision problem                Disability
                                                        Robust                     Robust
                                              Coef.    Std. Err.          Coef.   Std. Err.
Cataract surgery receipt (t-1 to t)          -0.092      0.024           -0.126     0.021

Year trend                                      -0.026        0.001       -0.004        0.001
Age 70-74 Male                                   0.009        0.023       0.042         0.023
Age 75-79 Male                                   0.139        0.023       0.175         0.024
Age 80-84 Male                                   0.171        0.023       0.359         0.024
Age 85+ Male                                     0.213        0.025       0.593         0.024
Age 65-69 Female                                 0.103        0.026       0.163         0.027
Age 70-74 Female                                 0.091        0.022       0.172         0.022
Age 75-79 Female                                 0.147        0.022       0.298         0.022
Age 80-84 Female                                 0.208        0.022       0.434         0.022
Age 85+ Female                                   0.217        0.022       0.675         0.022
Non-White                                       -0.017        0.014       0.035         0.012
Married                                          0.019        0.013       -0.214        0.011
Living Alone                                     0.042        0.013       -0.190        0.011

Ischemic Heart disease                           0.117        0.010        0.102        0.009
Stroke                                           0.127        0.013        0.307        0.012
Alzheimer’s disease                             -0.250        0.020        0.671        0.018
Parkinson's disease                              0.129        0.031        0.416        0.031
Broken hip                                       0.044        0.019        0.268        0.019
Pulmonary disease                                0.117        0.012        0.205        0.011
Diabetes                                         0.135        0.011        0.213        0.010
Arthritis                                        0.208        0.010        0.168        0.009
Cancer                                           0.052        0.011        0.056        0.010

A little vision problem (previous year)         1.086         0.010        0.057        0.010
A lot of vision problem (previous year)         1.954         0.021        0.143        0.016

IADL limitation only (previous year)             ---           ---         0.891        0.012
1 -2 ADL limitations (previous year)             ---           ---         1.437        0.013
3+ ADL limitations (previous year)               ---           ---         2.746        0.022
N                                                        109,728                   109,728
Pseudo-R2                                             0.188                      0.303
Note: Data are from the MCBS Cost and Use sample for 1992-2009 and use sample weights
adjusted to a constant year 2000 population by age, gender, and race. The ordinal dependent
variable for vision problem is: no vision problem, a little vision problem, and a lot vision of
problem. The ordinal dependent variable for disability is no IADL/ADL limitations, IADL
limitations only, 1-2 ADL limitations and 3+ ADL limitations.




                                           65
