                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INTER VIVOS TRANSFERS OF OWNERSHIP IN FAMILY FIRMS

                                       James R. Hines Jr.
                                        Niklas Potrafke
                                         Marina Riem
                                       Christoph Schinke

                                      Working Paper 22301
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22301


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2016




We would like to thank Sebastian Escobar, Ben Lockwood, Dirk Schindler, Thomas Stratmann,
Agnes Strauss, Liya Palagashvili, the participants of CESifo Public Sector Economics conference
(Munich 2016), European Association of Law and Economics (Vienna 2015), Congress of the
International Institute of Public Finance (Dublin 2015) and Public Choice Society Meetings (San
Antonio 2015), and seminars at the ifo Institute, Paris School of Economics, University of
Michigan, Swiss Economic Institute at the ETH Zurich, Centre for Business Taxation at Oxford
University, University of Bayreuth, and University of Munich for their helpful comments. We are
grateful to the Foundation of Family Businesses, on whose behalf we conducted a survey on
inheritances, inter vivos transfers, and transfer taxation (the Inheritance and Gift Tax Survey –
IGTS) among owners of family firms in February and March 2014. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by James R. Hines Jr., Niklas Potrafke, Marina Riem, and Christoph Schinke. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inter Vivos Transfers of Ownership in Family Firms
James R. Hines Jr., Niklas Potrafke, Marina Riem, and Christoph Schinke
NBER Working Paper No. 22301
June 2016
JEL No. D22,D31,H24

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the determinants of inter vivos (lifetime) transfers of ownership in German
family firms between 2000 and 2013. Survey evidence indicates that owners of larger firms, and
firms with strong current business conditions, transfer ownership at higher rates than others.
When a firm’s self-described business condition improves from “normal” to “good” the
likelihood of an inter vivos transfer increases by 46 percent. Inter vivos transfer rates also rose
following a 2009 reform that reduced transfer taxes. These patterns suggest that transfer taxes
significantly influence rates and timing of inter vivos ownership transfers.


James R. Hines Jr.                               Marina Riem
Department of Economics                          Ifo Institute
University of Michigan                           Poschingerstr. 5, D-81679 Munich
343 Lorch Hall                                   Germany
611 Tappan Street                                riem@ifo.de
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER                                         Christoph Schinke
jrhines@umich.edu                                Ifo Institute
                                                 Poschingerstr. 5, D-81679 Munich
Niklas Potrafke                                  Germany
Ifo Institute                                    schinke@ifo.de
Poschingerstr. 5, D-81679 Munich
Germany
potrafke@ifo.de
1. Introduction
Successful family firms are commonly transferred from one generation to the next. Suc-
cession occurs naturally at an owner’s death, but may also be planned in advance with
inter vivos (during life) transfers. Business conditions, family considerations, and estate,
gift, and inheritance taxes all have the potential to influence the timing and extent of
inter vivos transfers. And these transfers, in changing ownership, may affect the opera-
tions and productivities of family firms.


This paper considers the determinants of inter vivos transfers of assets in German fami-
ly firms. The analysis is based on unique survey data covering the years 2000-2013.
The evidence indicates that inter vivos ownership transfers are most common in larger
firms and those with strong business conditions. Furthermore, inter vivos transfers rose
following a German tax reform in 2009 that reduced transfer taxes.5


The difficulty of obtaining data has limited the number of empirical studies of inter vi-
vos transfers of family firms. Scholars find that macroeconomic conditions - especially
financial factors such as the inability to find financial resources to liquidate the possible
exit of heirs, the market environment, or increased competition – appear to influence
succession plans of family firms (De Massis et al. 2008, Vozikis et al. 2012). While
firms are typically the focus of the theory and empirical interest, the units of observation
in most data sets are households rather than firms. Empirical studies indicate that trans-
fer taxes influence behavior,6 and that the amount of inter vivos transfers depends on
the incomes of parents and children (Bernheim et al. 2004, Joulfaian 2004, 2005, Hrung
2004, Villanueva 2005, McGarry 1999, Arrondel and Laferrère 2001, Stark and Zhang
2002). Taxpayers forego substantial savings by not making inter vivos transfers that
fully exploit annual gift tax exemptions (Poterba 2001, McGarry 2001, 2013, Joulfaian
and McGarry 2004). Another strand of related literature considers bequest motives (Ko-
tlikoff 1988, Modigliani 1988, Gale and Scholz 1994, Laitner and Ohlsson 2001, Ar-
5
    See Schinke (2016) on how the tax reform influenced inter vivos transfers to different types of recipi-
     ents including the core family, other close relatives, and unrelated recipients.
6
    On inheritance and inter vivos transfer taxation and legislation see e.g. Gale et al. (2001), Ellul et al.
     (2010), Hines (2010, 2013), Kopczuk (2009, 2013a,b), Wrede (2014).




                                                                                                            2
rondel and Masson 2006, Kopczuk 2007, Ameriks et al. 2011). Wealth transfers from
one generation to the next may be accidental or intentional, with inter vivos transfers
relatively clear cases of intentional choices.


Firm owners have better information on the business situations of their firms than do
outsiders such as external investors, banks or tax authorities. These information asym-
metries can influence a firm’s financing and investment decision (Leland and Pyle
1977, Myers and Majluf 1984, Miller and Rock 1985). In a similar vein, decisions on
ownership structure may depend on the firm’s business situation as perceived by the
firm owner. A firm’s self-assessed current business situation is likely to offer infor-
mation on firm value that is not contained in balance sheet variables. Balance sheets are
backward looking, whereas the assessment of a firm’s business situation by its owner
reflects soft information and expectations about future developments. As a result, it is
valuable to consider the relationship between a firm’s self-assessed business situation
and any transfers of firm ownership to the next generation.


The paper’s analysis of inter vivos transfers of assets in family firms is based on data
that include evidence from a survey conducted among German family firms on inher-
itances, inter vivos transfers and taxation. The data include Germany’s most important
business cycle and firm survey information that serve as the foundation of the Ifo Busi-
ness Climate Index, Germany’s leading business cycle indicator. The new survey data
include information on the years when firms made inter vivos ownership transfers.
These data are matched with Ifo business survey data, which include information on
how firm owners assess the current economic situation, business expectations, whether
firm activity is constrained, and many other firm-specific characteristics. The data in-
corporate balance sheet information from external sources (Amadeus Bureau van Dijk
and Hoppenstedt Firmeninformationen GmbH), and cover the years 2000 to 2013.
Business survey and balance sheet data are pre-processed and provided by the Econom-
ics and Business Data Center (EBDC), Munich.




                                                                                       3
German tax authorities generally base their assessments of the values of transferred
firms on average revenues over three business years prior to transfer.7 Consequently,
new information for the current business year, which is available only to firm owners,
reveals likely future changes in taxable values and thereby affects incentives to make
current inter vivos transfers.


The results indicate that when a firm’s self-described business situation improves, for
example, from “normal” to “good,” then the chance of an inter vivos transfer rises by 46
percent. The reason for this timing may be that owners of firms with strong business
situations anticipate higher tax valuations in the future, and therefore accelerate owner-
ship transfers as part of prudent tax planning.

2. Inter Vivos Transfers and Family Firms
Despite the importance of estate planning and the availability of simple methods of tax
avoidance, the evidence suggests that wealthy people make surprisingly few inter vivos
transfers, thereby foregoing substantial potential tax savings (McGarry 2001, 2013).
Empirical studies describe many factors that influence inter vivos transfers. Inheritance
and gift taxes affect the timing of transfers, typically encouraging inter vivos transfers
compared to bequests (Bernheim et al. 2004, Joulfaian 2004). Capital gain taxes can be
offsetting considerations, since the favorable tax treatment of appreciated assets held
until death can create some situations in which taxpayers benefit from avoiding inter
vivos transfers (Poterba 2001, Joulfaian 2005). The composition of household wealth
also influences the chance of making inter vivos transfers. When wealth is held in illiq-
uid forms, such as private business, households are less likely to make inter vivos trans-
fers than when wealth was held in more liquid forms (Poterba 2001). The amount of
inter vivos transfers also increases with the lifetime income of parents (Poterba 2001,
Hrung 2004): an additional dollar of parental lifetime income appears to increase inter
vivos transfers by 0.7 cents in Germany and by 1.2 cents in the United States (Villanue-
va 2005). Another issue is the allocation of inter vivos gifts among heirs. Empirical
studies indicate that parents make greater inter vivos transfers to children with lower

7
    See § 201 subsection two of the valuation law (Bewertungsgesetz).




                                                                                        4
incomes than to other children (McGarry 1999, 2016). The appeal of this type of redis-
tribution is very intuitive, though as a theoretical matter there are models with the oppo-
site prediction, that parents would make greater inter vivos transfers to children with
higher incomes than to children with lower incomes (Stark and Zhang 2002).


Family firms may be special cases due to tacit knowledge on the part of the founder or
successor (Cabrera-Suárez et al. 2001, Kanniainen and Poutvaara 2007). Studies often
find that family firms outperform other firms (Anderson and Reeb 2003). Following
ownership succession, firms whose incoming CEOs are related to the departed CEO or
firm founder tend to underperform relative to firms with new CEOs who are not related
to firm insiders (Pérez-González 2006, Bennedsen et al. 2007, Grossman and Strulik
2010, Molly et al. 2010).


Owners of family firms may make provisions for succession during their lifetimes. In
some situations there are incentives to purchase life insurance that will provide liquidity
when estate taxes are due (Holtz-Eakin et al. 2001).8 Several studies examine the suc-
cession planning of family businesses (e.g. Sharma et al. 1997, 2003). Sharma et al.
(2003) find that even in cases where owners of family firms wanted to preserve their
firms, the need to find successors did not induce succession planning. Succession plan-
ning appears to start only when trusted successors are available. Vozikis et al. (2012)
predict that financial factors such as limited internal financial resources (high opportuni-
ty costs of obtaining external financing, inability to sustain transfer tax burdens, low
capital stocks, and high earnings variability) impede succession planning. De Massis et
al. (2008) describe potential obstacles to a smooth succession. These obstacles include
private family conflicts (e.g. low ability or motivation of potential successors, family
rivalries, and absence of mutual trust), financial issues (e.g. tax burdens or financial
resources that are inadequate to liquidate possible exit of heirs) or changes in the eco-

8
    In the absence of sufficient life insurance coverage, liquidity problems driven by estate tax liabilities
may force heirs of family firms to sell business assets (Astrachan and Tutterow 1996, Brunetti 2006,
Houben and Maiterth 2011).




                                                                                                           5
nomic environment of the firm (decline in business performance, loss of key customers,
decreasing business scale). The willingness of offspring to join family firms correlates
positively with business size (Stavrou 1999).


There are substantial transaction costs associated with transferring ownership of a fami-
ly firm (Bjuggren and Sund 2005). Rates of ownership transfers are likely to be sensi-
tive to changes in estate, gift and inheritance taxes, such as the 2004 abolition of trans-
fer taxes in Sweden. Bjuggren and Sund (2001) describe the role of the legal system in
facilitating smooth transition of family firms from one generation to the next.

3. German Inheritance and Gift Taxes
Germany does not tax estates, but it does tax receipt of inheritances and inter vivos
gifts. Tax rates rise with the amount of gift or inheritance received, and rates are condi-
tioned on the closeness of any family connection between those who give and those who
receive. The lowest tax rates and highest exempt amounts apply to gifts to spouses, fol-
lowed successively by children, grandchildren, other close relatives, and finally by all
others. The German government grants special tax relief for transfers of family business
assets, this favorable tax treatment intended to preserve jobs in family businesses. For
this purpose, business assets include agricultural and forestry assets and privately held
shares in corporations when the owner holds more than 25% of the shares. Inter vivos
transfers are subject to the same tax rules as inheritances.


Until 2008, business assets were assessed at tax values that were typically considerably
lower than market values, the outcome of tax practices rather than explicit exemptions
for family firms (Houben and Maiterth, 2011). In addition, there was a statutory tax
exemption of €225,000 for transfers of business assets in family firms, and the remain-
ing taxable amount was reduced by 35%.


Since 2009, business assets have been assessed at estimated market values. Firms with
fewer than 20 employees can be transferred tax free. Owners of larger firms can choose
between two types of tax relief, of which the first reduces the taxable amount of busi-
ness assets by 85%. To be eligible for this relief, no more than 50 percent of business


                                                                                         6
assets may consist of non-operating assets such as leased real estate, securities or cultur-
al property; firm owners must commit to keeping the firm in business for at least five
years; and the sum of wages and salaries over the following five years must be at least
400 percent of an historical average. An additional tax allowance of €150,000 may ap-
ply to the remaining 15 percent of business assets if this value is small. The second op-
tion is even more generous, exempting 100 percent of business assets, but can be chosen
only if non-operating assets constitute no more than 10 percent of total business assets;
the firm stays in business for at least seven years; and the sum of wages and salaries
over the following seven years is at least 700 percent of an historical average.


Transfers of any business assets that remain after tax relief and exemptions, together
with other assets such as real estate and financial assets, are subject to gift and inher-
itance taxation. Personal tax exemptions apply, e.g. €400,000 for a transfer from parent
to child (€205,000 until 2008). Tax exemptions can be used every ten years, making
inter vivos transfers an effective instrument for reducing taxes. Tax rates are progressive
and vary between 7% and 50%, depending on the degree of kinship between transferor
and beneficiary, and the type of property transferred. Transfers to close relatives such as
children are subject to lower rates of tax than transfers to more distant relatives such as
cousins, which in turn are subject to lower rates of tax than transfers to unrelated indi-
viduals; furthermore, transfers of business assets are taxed at the low rates applicable to
transfers to children, regardless of the beneficiary.


For example, consider a firm worth €15 million with over 20 employees that the owner
transfers inter vivos to a child in 2010. Using the 85% tax relief option, business assets
of only €2.25 million are subject to taxation at the time of the transfer. Deducting the
personal tax exemption of €400,000, the taxable transfer is €1.85 million. At a tax rate
of 19%, the gift tax due is €351,500.




                                                                                          7
4. Analytical Framework

It is useful to consider the effects of transfer taxes on incentives to transfer ownership of
family firms. This section analyzes aspects of these incentives created by changing eco-
nomic and legal environments.




4.1 Timing of Ownership Transfers
Let qt denote a family firm’s true value at time t, and st denote the signal of firm value

observed by the tax authority and other outsiders. The original owner’s (flow) after-tax
return at time t of maintaining ownership is given by v  qt  , whereas the after-tax return

is w  qt  if successors own the firm. These returns can differ if ownership affects firm

performance or if the same return is taxed at different rates if received by different po-
tential owners. In the absence of transfer tax considerations families would choose to
transfer ownership in period t only if                                   . Transfer taxes complicate this
decision.


A family chooses inter vivos transfers to maximize the present value  , given by:
                                 ∗                                                  ∗               ∗
(1)                                                 ∗                                       ∗   ,       ,
in which r is the decision maker’s discount rate, t* is the date of ownership transfer,
                ∗                                                    ∗
and     ∗   ,       is the transfer tax imposed in period                on a transfer of a family firm with
observable value            ∗   . Time is an argument of the transfer tax function because tax laws
vary over time, so the tax obligation associated with a transfer of a firm with a given
observable value is time-dependent.


Differentiating with respect to t* produces:
                    ∗                                            ∗           ∗, ∗       ∗               ∗, ∗
(2)                     ∗
                                     ∗         ∗         ∗   ,               ∗          ∗               ∗      .

The right side of equation (2) is the (undiscounted) value of slightly delaying ownership
transfer at time t*, so an optimizing decision maker solving for an interior solution with
continuous variables transfers the firm at time t* only if this expression equals zero.


                                                                                                                   8
The first two terms on the right side of equation (2) are familiar from the transfer deci-
sion in the absence of taxation, and have the intuitive property that delaying transfer is
more attractive the greater is the difference between v  qt*  and w  qt*  . Indeed, if v  qt* 

exceeds w  qt*  to a sufficient degree at all times t, then the decision maker never trans-

fers ownership of the firm until it becomes absolutely necessary (such as at the death of
the original owner). Such situations arise if the original owner is a much more produc-
tive owner/manager of the firm than is the potential successor, at least as evaluated by
the relevant decision maker (who is commonly the original owner).


The third through fifth terms on the right side of equation (2) capture the tax effects of
delaying ownership transfer. The third term is the product of the discount rate and the
tax cost of transfer, and reflects simply that delaying the incursion of a given tax liabil-
ity reduces its present value. The fourth term on the right side of equation (2) is the
product of the marginal tax rate and the change in the taxable value of a family firm. A
rising taxable value reduces the attractiveness of delaying a transfer, since with a posi-
tive marginal tax rate it is clearly better to transfer ownership of a firm when it is valued
at €50 million than when it is valued at €100 million. Conversely, if a firm is declining
in value then there is a tax benefit associated with delaying transfer. Notably, if the tax-
able value of a firm rises at the discount rate, and tax obligations are scalar functions of
taxable transfers, then the third and fourth terms on the right side of equation (2) sum to
zero. Consequently, other considerations equal, taxable firm values that rise faster than
the discount rate are associated with accelerated transfers, whereas taxable values that
rise more slowly than the discount rate are associated with delayed transfers.


The fifth term on the right side of equation (2) is the change over time in the tax due on
the transfer of a firm of given taxable value. If tax rates are rising, then this term reflects
that it is costly to delay ownership transfers; and conversely, if tax rates are falling, then
it is beneficial to delay transfers.




                                                                                                   9
Optimal ownership transfers incorporate all of these considerations. A local maximum

at time t* is characterized by a positive value of       ∗   just prior to t*, a zero value at t*,

and a negative value immediately following t*. These properties reflect changing rela-
tive productivities of original owners and successors together with changing degrees to
which tax liabilities evolve over time. One of the tax considerations may be that the
decision maker anticipates that the taxable value of the firm will rise more or less slow-
ly than the discount rate.

4.2 Taxable and Market Values of Family Business Property
Taxable values need not coincide exactly with actual values as understood by firm own-
ers. The tax authority obtains signals of firm value that are largely accurate but may not
incorporate recent information that has not yet been revealed in profitability or other
objective measures. In order to capture the tax authority’s information acquisition pro-
cess it is useful to consider a model in which the true value of a family firm at time tˆ is
given by:

(3)                                                          ,

in which ztˆ is a vector of observable variables at time tˆ , tˆ is a date-specific coefficient

vector, and ut is a time t innovation, the value of which is known to firm owners but not

necessarily to the tax authorities. ztˆ and tˆ are assumed to be common knowledge. In the

formulation of equation (3), the true firm value is a function of observable considera-
tions captured in z and also a function of factors that are unknown to outsiders.


The signal of firm value available to the tax authority at time tˆ is stˆ , given by:

(4)                                                                     .

In this formulation stˆ differs from the true value qtˆ in that the calculation of stˆ attaches

linearly declining weight to more recent draws of ut , starting a period of time  prior to

the present. This corresponds to the tax authority not having the same information as
taxpayers about recent developments that affect the firm value, with the least weight
attaching to the most recent developments.



                                                                                               10
In the model expressed by equation (4), and for unchanging values of z and  , the tax
authority’s signal of firm value evolves according to:

(5)                                                         .

Equation (5) implies that if recent draws of ut are positive, then st increases over time,

reflecting that the tax authority only gradually incorporates the most recent information
in its valuation of the firm. This most recent information, the cumulative draws of ut be-

tween time tˆ   and time tˆ , might also be described as the current business conditions
of the firm. When current business conditions are favorable then the tax authority will
gradually revise upward its valuation of the firm, whereas when current business condi-
tions are unfavorable the tax authority will gradually revise downward its valuation of
the firm.


It is useful to consider the application of the model of firm valuation in equations (3)-(5)
to optimal ownership transfer characterized in equation (2). If tax laws are unchanging
              ∗,
then          ∗         0 and the fifth term on the right side of (2) disappears. It follows from

(5) that if current business conditions are favorable,                    0 which, given that
       ∗, ∗
                   0, should encourage earlier transfers of ownership. It is worth bearing in
       ∗


mind that           ∗   0 characterizes local optima, of which there may be more than one, and

that discrete changes in tax laws or business conditions may produce situations in which
there are discrete jumps in the value of ownership transfers.



5. Data and Descriptive Statistics

5.1 Data
We conducted a survey on inheritances, inter vivos transfers, and transfer taxation (the
Inheritance and Gift Tax Survey – IGTS) among owners of family firms in February




                                                                                              11
and March 2014. We first asked participants in the monthly Ifo business survey whether
they considered themselves to be family firms.9 The Ifo business survey is conducted
every month among 7,000 German firms, and provides the basis for the Ifo Business
Climate Index, Germany’s leading business cycle indicator. 4,660 firms identified
themselves as family firms. We then sent out the IGTS to the family firms. The re-
sponse rate was an encouraging 36%.10 Among other things, respondents provided in-
formation on years in which they made inter vivos transfers (exact amounts of transfers
are unknown) and years in which they paid gift taxes.11 Understanding the determinants
of this measure of inter vivos transfer is the focus of this study.


The IGTS data on transfers of business ownership were matched to Ifo business survey
data. The Ifo business survey includes information on the current state of business,12 the
expected development of employment, and credit conditions. Survey measures based on
the self-assessment of managers may contain more information than that embedded in
financial statement data. Survey responses related to the current state of business, for
example, may reflect not only current turnover and profit figures (Abberger et al. 2009),
but also new information, especially when requested in the second half of the year when
balance sheet information is old (Hönig 2012). Similarly, self-reported firm credit con-
ditions capture financial restrictions more comprehensively than do standard measures
such as leverage, credit ratings, and liquidity. Since our sample includes firms that are
not quoted on the stock exchange, financial restrictions can be quite important (Hönig
2012). The business survey data also include firm characteristics such as numbers of
employees, broad industry (construction, retail, manufacturing or services), the found-
ing year, and the legal form of each firm. In addition to the survey-based data, we use
balance sheet data such as total assets and total equity, based on the Amadeus Bureau

9
  A firm is defined as a family firm if most voting capital is held by one or several interconnected fami-
    lies.
10
   See Seiler (2010) on nonresponse in business surveys.
11
   The survey questions are “Have there been inter vivos transfers of assets in your firm since the year
    2000? Yes, in the year…/ no,” and “Have you paid the gift tax since the year 2000? Yes, in the year
    …/no.”
12
   The survey statement is “We evaluate our present state of business as good/satisfactory/bad.” Complete
    questionnaires are available at doi: 10.7805/ebdc-bep-2012.




                                                                                                      12
van Dijk and Hoppenstedt Firmeninformationen GmbH data bases.13 Business survey
and balance sheet data are pre-processed and provided by the Economics & Business
Data Center at the University of Munich and the Ifo Institute, Munich.14


The study uses annual data. In cases where monthly data are available, for instance from
the business survey, these data are converted to yearly frequency by computing yearly
averages. Balance sheet data are not available for all firms, and not for the year 2013.
The sample size therefore decreases considerably when including balance sheet control
variables in some regressions.


5.2 Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the subsamples of firms that did not, and those
that did, make inter vivos transfers. The total sample includes 13,706 observations of
1,654 firms. 316 firms reported one or more inter vivos transfers (358 inter vivos trans-
fers in total) since 2000. The share of firms making inter vivos transfers is thus quite
small.15 Since business assets are an illiquid form of wealth, the small share of observed
inter vivos transfers in our sample is reasonable (Poterba 2001). One variable in Table 1
is reported in categorical form: firm employment, which is measured as an integer from
0-5, with 0 corresponding to 0-19 employees, 1 corresponding to 20-49 employees, 2
corresponding to 50-249 employees, 3 corresponding to 250-999 employees, 4 corre-
sponding to 1000-4999 employees, and 5 corresponding to 5000 or more employees.
Table 2 shows pairwise correlations of the variables.


Figures 1, 2, and 3 describe the distribution of inter vivos transfers among firms in or
with different industries, legal forms, and numbers of employees. The sample includes
firms in the construction (45 inter vivos transfers), retail (88 transfers), manufacturing
(184 transfers) and services industries (41 transfers). The rhombi in Figure 1 show that

13
   See Hoenig (2009, 2010) on how survey and balance sheet data are linked.
14
   See Seiler (2012) for more information.
15
   Given asymmetries in reporting, it is likely that even fewer transfers would have been recorded if the
    survey instead asked beneficiaries about receipts of transferred business assets (Gale and Scholz
    1994).




                                                                                                      13
relative to the whole sample, inter vivos transfers are more likely to occur in the manu-
facturing, construction, and retail industries than in services. Figure 2 shows that inter
vivos transfers mostly occurred in firms operating as partnerships (46 transfers) or cor-
porations (44 transfers), but rarely in proprietorships (one transfer).16 Figure 3 shows
that most inter vivos transfers in the sample (126 transfers) are made by firms with be-
tween 50 and 249 employees. The rhombi indicate that the likelihood of making inter
vivos transfers increases with numbers of employees. While inter vivos transfers occur
in only 1.46% of firm-year observations of firms with fewer than 19 employees, they do
so in 8% of the cases of firms with more than 5000 employees.


Figure 4 shows the average current state of business of firm-year observations with and
without inter vivos transfers. The dashed line describes the average current state of
business of firms making contemporaneous inter vivos transfers (left scale). The solid
line describes the average current state of business of firms not making contemporane-
ous inter vivos transfers (left scale). The bars in the background display numbers of
inter vivos transfers made each year (right scale). Annual numbers of inter vivos trans-
fers rise over the sample period. Figure 4 indicates that firms making inter vivos trans-
fers in most years had better current business situations than firms not making inter vi-
vos transfers. The years 2000-2001, 2003, and 2005-2006 are exceptions, though the
mean current state of business of firms with inter vivos transfers is based on only 4 to
13 observations in each of those years, reflecting that information on the current state of
business is available for less than half of the reported inter vivos transfers in years prior
to 2006, and making any inference potentially subject to the influence of outliers. The
figure also suggests that the current state of business and number of inter vivos transfers
are positively correlated. For example, when the financial and economic crisis hit in
2009 and the business situation deteriorated, firms made fewer inter vivos transfers than
in preceding or subsequent years.




16
     Data on legal forms and numbers of employees are not available for the entire sample; consequently,
     Figures 1 to 3 are each based on different samples.




                                                                                                     14
Most reported transfers took place since 2010. It is impossible to rule out recall bias, in
which survey respondents are less apt to remember inter vivos transfers made years ear-
lier – though these ownership transfers are so important to owners of family firms that it
is difficult to imagine that they could possibly forget even the details of transfers during
the preceding 15 years. In a similar vein, some family firms in the sample might not
have been in existence at the start of the observation period. Another source of potential
bias is sample selection, because, by construction, the sample includes only firms that
still operated in 2014. Unsuccessful family firms disappeared from the market and can-
not be included.



6. Empirical Analysis

6.1. Empirical Strategy
The theory sketched in section 4 implies the following baseline empirical model of the
ownership transfer decision:
(6)                                Tit  1cit   2 xit   it ,

in which Tit takes the value one if firm i reports an inter vivos transfer in year t, and is

zero otherwise. The variable cit in equation (6) is the yearly average of firm i’s percep-

tion of the current business situation, measured on a scale between one (bad) and three
(good). The variable xit is a vector of firm i and year t characteristics, and 1 a scalar and

2 a vector of coefficients to be estimated. Control variables include firm sizes as meas-
ured by numbers of employees, and a dummy variable for years before the 2009 reform
of inheritance and gift taxation. It is reasonable to expect inter vivos transfers to occur
more frequently among larger firms with better current business conditions, and in years
when the tax regime favors inter vivos transfers relative to inheritances. Additional con-
trol variables include firm assets, firm equity, firm age, dummy variables for a firm’s
legal form of organization, a firm’s self-reported credit status, and its expected future
development of employment. Equation (6) is estimated as a random-effects logit model
with classical standard errors.




                                                                                           15
6.2. Results
Table 3 presents results of estimating equation (6), displayed in odds ratios, for which
an odds ratio of 1.0 implies that the associated variable has no effect on the dependent
variable, and the p-values reported in Table 3 correspond to tests of the hypotheses that
the odds ratios equal unity. The regression reported in the first column includes the cur-
rent business situation as an explanatory variable; the associated 1.439 odds ratio im-
plies that improving business conditions from “bad” to “normal” or “normal” to “good”
increases the likelihood of an inter vivos transfer by 43.9 percent. The odds ratio is sta-
tistically significant at the 1% level. The regressions reported in columns (2) to (4) in-
clude industry fixed effects, and sequentially add a dummy variable for the period be-
fore 2009, and numbers of employees (measured in six categories). The 1.456 odds ratio
in column (4) implies that when the current business situation increases by one point
(from bad to normal or normal to good), the chance of making an inter vivos transfer
increases by 45.6 percent. The 0.499 odds ratio of the dummy variable for the period
before 2009 in column (4) is smaller than one and statistically significant at the 1% lev-
el, indicating that, conditional on other variables, firms were less likely to make inter
vivos transfers before the inheritance and gift tax reform in 2009 than after the reform.
The odds ratio of the current business situation remains statistically significant at the
1% level. The odds ratio of the number of employees is larger than one and statistically
significant at the 1% level in column (4).


Table 4 presents regressions with additional independent variables. The regressions re-
ported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 4 add control variables for the firm’s expected
development of employment and credit conditions. The odds ratio of the credit condi-
tions variable is statistically significant at the 1% level, its magnitude implying that
when credit conditions are difficult, the chance of making an inter vivos transfer de-
creases by 36.6%. The regressions in columns (3) to (5) control for other firm character-
istics: firm age (in years), a firm’s legal form of organization, total assets (in logs, col-
umn 4), and total equity (in logs, column 5). The odds ratio of firm age (a variable hav-
ing a maximum value of 882 years) is statistically significant at the 5% level only in the
regression reported in column (3). The odds ratio of total assets is statistically signifi-



                                                                                          16
cant at the 1% level, and similarly, the odds ratio of total equity is statistically signifi-
cant at the 5% level; together they indicate that inter vivos transfers are more common
among larger and more valuable firms.17 Including these firm size and value variables
somewhat diminishes the statistical significance of the effect of the current business
situation, reflecting the collinearity of these variables as well as smaller sample sizes.
As noted in section 4.2, good current business situations affect expected future firm
value but may not be yet captured in current taxable value. Because firm characteristics
are not available for the full sample, the number of observations in columns (3) to (5) of
Table 4 (including firm age and size) is much smaller than the number of observations
in the regressions in Table 3. The regression reported in column (6) includes a linear
and quadratic time trend to control for whether firms made inter vivos transfers more
frequently in recent years. The estimated odds ratio of the squared trend is statistically
significant at the 5% level, suggesting that transfers have been more frequent recently;
inclusion of time trend variables does not change the estimated positive effects of firm
size and the current state of business.


The regression results indicate that better current business situations are associated with
greater likelihoods of inter vivos transfers. The association persists when controlling for
the 2009 tax reform, industry, firm size, and firm value. This pattern is consistent with
firm owners having inside knowledge about a firm’s current business situation that is
not yet fully captured in taxable value for transfer tax purposes. As a result, when the
current business situation is good, a firm’s valuation for transfer tax purposes is likely to
increase in the future, creating an incentive to accelerate asset transfers. In addition,
when a firm’s business situation is good, the firm owner perceives the firm to be more
successful in the future than when the business situation is bad, and possibly less needy
of the value provided by maintaining original ownership. Anticipating the need at some
point to pass on a successful firm to the next generation is likely to influence tax plan-
ning and encourage immediate transfers of business assets.


17
  These specifications, and indeed the available data, do not distinguish between wealth effects (Poterba
 2001, Hrung 2004, Villanueva 2005) and ownership effects (more valuable firms have more owners and
 therefore more potential donors).



                                                                                                      17
6.3. Robustness Tests
Tables 5 and 6 present results of additional regression specifications intended to explore
the robustness of the results appearing in Table 3.


Unobserved firm-specific characteristics (such as the presence of a qualified successor
or the age of the owner) may be correlated with the regressors. It is possible to control
for unobserved firm-specific characteristics by estimating fixed effects models that ex-
ploit only the within variation of the explanatory variables. Fixed effects estimation of
nonlinear panel data is possible for the logit model, but not for the probit model. Col-
umn (1) of Table 5 reports the results of a fixed-effects logit model, which are con-
sistent with inferences based on the results reported in Table 3. Among firms making at
least one inter vivos transfer during the observation period, inter vivos transfers are 46.1
percent more likely to occur when the current state of business is good than when the
current state of business is normal.


Columns (2) and (3) of Table 5 present the results of estimating random-effects probit
and OLS models, instead of the baseline random-effects logit model. The results remain
qualitatively unchanged. Columns (4) and (5) display the results of logit estimation of
the determinants of inter vivos transfers before and after the 2009 reform; in both time
periods the likelihood of asset transfer is positively associated with the current state of
business. The regression reported in column (1) of Table 6 restricts the sample to firms
making at most one inter vivos transfer over the observation period, with results that
closely resemble those for the whole sample reported in column (4) of Table 3. The re-
gression reported in column (2) of Table 6 uses data only for firms not older than 250
years, thereby dropping seven of the observations used in the regression reported in col-
umn (3) of Table 4. The results are almost identical, with the current state of business
continuing to be associated with asset transfers, though the odds ratio of firm age is not
statistically significant.


The regression reported in column (3) of Table 6 addresses the potential endogeneity of
the current state of business variable by using its first lag rather than the contemporane-



                                                                                         18
ous value. The estimated odds ratio diminishes in magnitude but remains statistically
significant. The regression reported in column (4) drops this lagged variable and instead
uses the first lead, as a result of which the estimated odds ratio becomes statistically
insignificant.


The positive association between the current state of business and the likelihood of inter
vivos transfers may depend on whether firm owners transfer assets in excess of exempt
amounts. The regression reported in column (5) of Table 6 replaces the dependent vari-
able by a variable that assumes the value one when firms report an inter vivos transfer in
a given year and a transfer tax payment in the same year or during the following three
years, and zero otherwise.18 While this specification produces a larger estimated odds
ratio of the current state of business, the smaller sample size also produces a larger ac-
companying standard error, so the odds ratio lacks statistical significance. Thus the data
do not support a conclusion that there is a statistically significant effect of the current
state of business on the likelihood of taxed inter vivos transfers. Several other specifica-
tion checks produce results consistent with inferences drawn from the evidence present-
ed in Tables 3 – 6, and the Appendix considers issues with selective responses to the
survey.19




7. Conclusion
Policymakers are understandably concerned about the potential effect of transfer taxes
on the liquidity of family firms and the resulting viability of ongoing business opera-
tions. One way to address liquidity issues is to encourage inter vivos giving, so that
firms choose when to transfer ownership rather than relying on mortality. The results in

18
   13 percent of inter vivos transfers were accompanied by a tax payment in the same year or during the
   following three years (see Table 1).
19
   Replacing the current state of business variable with 0-1 dummies for either good or bad business con-
   ditions (two separate specifications) and replacing the number of employees variable by dummy varia-
   bles for each category of number of employees produces results very similar to those reported in Table
   3, as does estimation of standard errors in the Table 3 baseline regressions using bootstrap and jack-
   knife procedures or using standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the individual
   level (Huber/White/sandwich standard errors – see Huber 1967 and White 1980).




                                                                                                      19
this paper indicate that ownership succession is more likely when market conditions are
good, which is consistent with tax avoidance and with a desire to transfer ownership of
better-performing assets. It may also be the case that when the business situation is
good, firm owners have the time and resources to tackle the (not urgent) problem of
succession planning.


These patterns suggest that, for a given firm value, intergenerational transfer taxation
imposes greater burdens on underperforming firms than on firms that perform well.
Well performing firms are more likely to make inter vivos transfers of business assets,
which are generally tax favored and can be timed to maximize tax advantage. If an un-
derperforming firm does not manage to prepare for succession in advance, the inher-
itance tax burden at the moment of the owner’s death will be larger than the tax burden
of an otherwise-similar well performing firm, the assets of which were transferred dur-
ing lifetime. The desirability of distinguishing tax burdens in this way may depend on
the impact of transfer taxes on the activities of well performing and poorly performing
firms, about which currently very little is known.




                                                                                     20
References

Abberger, K., Birnbrich, M., and C. Seiler (2009). Der "Test des Tests" im Handel -
     eine Metaumfrage zum ifo Konjunkturtest. ifo Schnelldienst 62 (21), 34-41

Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Laufer, S., Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2011). The Joy of Giving or
    Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care Aversion from
    Bequest Motives. Journal of Finance 66(2): 519-561.

Anderson, R.C., Reeb, D.M. (2003). Founding-Family Ownership and Firm Perfor-
     mance: Evidence from the S&P 500. Journal of Finance 58(3): 1301-1328.

Arrondel, L., Laferrère, A. (2001). Taxation and Wealth Transmission in France. Jour-
     nal of Public Economics 79(1): 3-33.

Arrondel, L., Masson, A. (2006). Altruism, Exchange or Indirect Reciprocity: What Do
     the Data on Family Transfers Show? In: Kolm, S. and Ythier, M. (ed.): Handbook
     of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity. Elsevier.

Astrachan, J.H., Tutterow, R. (1996). The Effect of Estate Taxes on Family Business:
     Survey Results. Family Business Review 9(3): 303-314.

Bennedsen, M., Meisner Nielsen, K., Perez-Gonzalez, F., Wolfenzon, D. (2007). Inside
     the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance.
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2): 647-691.

Bernheim, B.D., Lemke, R.J., Scholz, J.K. (2004). Do Estate and Gift Taxes Affect the
     Timing of Private Transfers? Journal of Public Economics 88(12): 2671-2634.

Bjuggren, P., & Sund, L. (2001). Strategic Decision Making in Intergenerational Suc-
     cessions of Small and Medium-Size Family-Owned Businesses. Family Business
     Review, 14, 11-23.

Bjuggren, P., & Sund, L. (2005). Organization of Transfers of Small and Medium-Sized
     Enterprises within the Family: Tax Law Considerations. Family Business Review,
     18, 305-319.

Brunetti, M.J. (2006). The Estate Tax and the Demise of the Family Business. Journal
     of Public Economics 90(10-11): 1975-1993.

Cabrera-Suárez, K., De Saà-Pérez, P., García-Almeida, D. (2001). The Succession Pro-
     cess from a Resource- and Knowledge-Based View of the Family Firm. Family
     Business Review 14(1): 37-48.

De Massis, A., Chua, J. H., & Chrisman, J. J. (2008). Factors Preventing Intra-Family
    Succession. Family Business Review, 21, 183-199.



                                                                                   21
Ellul, A., Pagano, M., Panunzi, F. (2010). Inheritance Law and Investment in Family
      Firms. American Economic Review 100(5): 2414-2450.

Gale, W.G, Scholz, J.K. (1994). Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of
      Wealth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(4): 145-160.

Gale, W.G., Hines, J.R., Jr., Slemrod, J.B. (2001). Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation.
      Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Grossmann, V., Strulik, H. (2010). Should Continued Family Firms Face Lower Taxes
     than Other Estates? Journal of Public Economics 94(1-2):87-101.

Hines, J.R., Jr. (2010). Taxing Inheritances, Taxing Estates. Tax Law Review 63(1):
     189-207.

Hines, J.R., Jr. (2013). Income and Substitution Effects of Estate Taxation. American
     Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 103(3): 484-488.

Holtz-Eakin, D., Phillips, J.W.R., Rosen, H.S. (2001). Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and
     Small Business. Review of Economics and Statistics 83(1): 52-63.

Hönig, A. (2009). The New EBDC Dataset: An Innovative Combination of Survey and
     Financial Statement Data. CESifo Forum 10(4): 62-63.

Hönig, A. (2010). Linkage of Ifo Survey and Balance-Sheet Data: The EBDC Business
     Expectations Panel & the EBDC Business Investment Panel. Schmollers Jahrbuch
     – Journal of Applied Social Science Studies 130(4): 635-642.

Hönig, A. (2012). Financing Restrictions Revisited - Is there a Role for Taxation and
     Internal Funds? Mimeo, University of Nuremberg.

Houben, H., Maiterth, R. (2011). Endangering of Businesses by the German Inheritance
    Tax? An Empirical Analysis. Business Research 4(1): 32-46.

Hrung, W.B. (2004). Parental Net Wealth and Personal Consumption. Journal of Eco-
     nomic Behavior & Organization 54(4): 551-560.

Huber, P. J. (1967), The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates Under Nonstand-
     ard Conditions. Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical
     Statistics and Probability 221–233.

Joulfaian, D. (2004). Gift Taxes and Lifetime Transfers: Time Series Evidence. Journal
      of Public Economics 88(9-10): 1917-1929.

Joulfaian, D. (2005). Choosing between Gifts and Bequests: How Taxes Affect the Tim-
      ing of Wealth Transfers. Journal of Public Economics 89(11-12): 2069-2091.



                                                                                     22
Joulfaian, D., McGarry, K. (2004). Estate and Gift Tax Incentives and Inter Vivos Giv-
      ing. National Tax Journal 57(2): 429-444.

Kanniainen, V., Poutvaara, P. (2007). Imperfect Transmission of Tacit Knowledge and
     Other Barriers to Entrepreneurship. Comparative Labor Law and Policy Journal
     28(4): 675-694.

Kopczuk, W. (2007). Bequest and Tax Planning: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4): 1801-1854.

Kopczuk, W. (2009). Economics of Estate Taxation: A Brief Review of Theory and
    Evidence. Tax Law Review 63(1): 139-157.

Kopczuk, W. (2013a). Incentive Effects of Inheritances and Optimal Estate Taxation.
    American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 103(3): 472-477.

Kopczuk, W. (2013b). Taxation of Intergenerational Transfers and Wealth. In Alan J.
    Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein and Emmanuel Saez, eds. Handbook of
    Public Economics, Volume 5. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 329-390.

Kotlikoff, L.J. (1988). Intergenerational Transfers and Savings. Journal of Economic
      Perspectives 2(2): 41-58.

Laitner, J., Ohlsson, H. (2001). Bequest Motives: A Comparison of Sweden and the
      United States. Journal of Public Economics 79(1): 205-236.

Leland, H.E., Pyle, D.H. (1977). Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and
     Financial Intermediation. Journal of Finance 32(2): 371-387.

McGarry, K. (1999). Inter Vivos Transfers and Intended Bequests. Journal of Public
    Economics 73(3): 321-351.

McGarry, K. (2001). The Cost of Equality: Unequal Bequests and Tax Avoidance.
    Journal of Public Economics 79(1): 179-204.

McGarry, K. (2013). The Estate Tax and Inter Vivos Transfers over Time. American
    Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 103(3): 478-483.

McGarry, K. (2016). Dynamic Altruism: Inter Vivos Transfers from Parents to Chil-
    dren. Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Miller, M.H., Rock, K. (1985). Dividend Policy under Asymmetric Information. Jour-
      nal of Finance 40(4): 1031-1051.

Modigliani, F. (1988). The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Saving in
    the Accumulation of Wealth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 2(2): 15-40.



                                                                                    23
Molly, V., Laveren, E., Deloof, M. (2010). Family Business Succession and Its Impact
     on Financial Structure and Performance. Family Business Review 23(2): 131-147.

Myers, S.C., Majluf, N.S. (1984). Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
     Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have. Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics 13(2): 187-221

Pérez-González, F. (2006). Inherited Control and Firm Performance. American Eco-
     nomic Review 96(5): 1559-1588.

Poterba, J. (2001). Estate and Gift Taxes and Incentives for Inter Vivos Giving in the
      US. Journal of Public Economics 79(1): 237-264.

Schinke, C. (2016). Inter Vivos Transfers and the 2009 German Transfer Tax Reform.
     Mimeo, ifo Institute.

Seiler, C. (2010). Dynamic Modelling of Nonresponse in Business Surveys. Ifo Working
      Paper No. 93.

Seiler, C. (2012). The Data Sets of the LMU-ifo Economics & Business Data Center –
      A Guide for Researchers. Schmollers Jahrbuch – Journal of Applied Social Sci-
      ence Studies 132(4): 609-618.

Sharma, P., Chrisman, J. J., & Chua, J. H. (1997). Strategic Management of the Family
     Business: Past Research and Future Challenges. Family Business Review, 10(1).

Sharma, P., Chrisman, J. J., & Chua, J. H. (2003). Succession Planning as Planned Be-
     havior: Some Empirical Results. Family Business Review, 16(1).

Stark, O., Zhang, J. (2002). Counter-Compensatory Inter-Vivos Transfers and Parental
      Altruism: Compatibility of Orthogonality? Journal of Economic Behavior & Or-
      ganization 47(1): 19-25.

Villanueva, E. (2005). Inter Vivos Transfers and Bequests in Three OECD Countries.
      Economic Policy 20(43): 505-565.

Vozikis, G. S., Liguori, E. W., Gibson, B. & Weaver, K. M. (2012). Reducing the Hin-
     dering Forces in Intra-Family Business Succession. American Journal of Econom-
     ics and Business Administration, 4(1), 94-104.

White, H. (1980), A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
     Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity. Econometrica 48(4), 817–838.

Wrede, M. (2014). Fair Inheritance Taxation in the Presence of Tax Planning. Journal
    of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 51(C), 12-18.




                                                                                   24
Appendix


Because the study relies on survey data, response behavior may raise sample selection
issues. Firms making inter vivos transfers could be overrepresented in the sample since
the topic of the questionnaire is inheritance, inter vivos gifts, and their taxation. Firms
unfamiliar with the inheritance and gift tax law because they did not experience a suc-
cession or did not make inter vivos transfers may have been less likely to participate
because they did not think they had anything to contribute to the survey. Appendix Ta-
ble 1 compares family firms responding to the IGTS to firms not responding. T-tests
reported in Appendix Table 1 indicate that the means of credit conditions and firm age
are not statistically different in the two subsamples. Firms responding to the survey had
a somewhat worse current state of business and expected development of employment
than firms not responding (2.07 and 2.10; 1.98 and 2.00). Firms responding to the sur-
vey tend to be somewhat smaller than non-response firms as measured by log total as-
sets and log total equity (14.58 and 14.87; 13.12 and 13.41). A chi-squared test does not
reject the null hypothesis that response behavior is independent of the federal state with-
in Germany (p-value of 0.51, see Figure 5), but chi-squared tests indicate that response
behavior varies with numbers of employees, industry, and legal form. Firms responding
to the survey tend to have fewer employees than firms choosing not to respond.20 The
results of the chi-squared tests and t-tests notwithstanding, there is little evidence that
sample selection is an important issue in interpreting the results, since differences be-
tween the subsamples are small and the categorical variables assume multiple values in
both of the subsamples. Furthermore, there is little reason to expect self-classification as
a family firm in the Ifo Business Climate Survey to be prone to sample selection, since
firms answered this question prior to learning the topic of the IGTS.




20
     Firm size is correlated with industry and legal form: firms in the retail and the services industries have,
      on average, fewer employees than firms in the construction and manufacturing industries, and firms
      operating as proprietorships have, on average, fewer employees than firms operating as corporations or
      partnerships.




                                                                                                            25
Figure 1: Industry and inter vivos transfers




                                                200




                                                                                                                                                                            3.5
                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                          150
                              Number of inter vivos transfers




                                                                                                                                                                            2.5     2
                                                                                                                                                                              Percent
                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                            1
                              50




                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                Construction                   Retail                    Manufacturing          Services industry

                                                                                    Firm-year observations with inter vivos transfers (left scale)
                                                                                    Inter vivos transfers ratio (right scale)



Note: The shaded bars depict numbers of firm-year inter vivos transfers (left scale) by industry, whereas the rhombi
denote ratios (right scale) of these transfers to total firm-year observations in each industry.



Figure 2: Legal form and inter vivos transfers




                                                                                                                                                                               3.5
                                    50




                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                  40
                  Number of inter vivos transfers




                                                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                      30




                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                        20




                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                  Proprietorships                Partnerships (unlimited liability)      Corporations (limited liability)


                                                                                    Firm-year observations with inter vivos transfers (left scale)
                                                                                    Inter vivos transfers ratio (right scale)



Note: The shaded bars depict numbers of firm-year inter vivos transfers (left scale) by legal form of business, where-
as the rhombi denote ratios (right scale) of these transfers to total firm-year observations of firms with each legal
form.




                                                                                                                                                                                           26
Figure 3: Firm size and inter vivos transfers




                                                                      150




                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                 7
                                                      Number of inter vivos transfers




                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                                                                                                                 3  4
                                                         50




                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                        0-19   20-49           50-249           250-999            1000-4999   5000 and more
                                                                                                               Number of employees

                                                                                                Firm-year observations with inter vivos transfers (left scale)
                                                                                                Inter vivos transfers ratio (right scale)



Note: The shaded bars depict numbers of firm-year inter vivos transfers (left scale) by firm size as measured by num-
bers of employees, whereas the rhombi denote ratios (right scale) of these transfers to total firm-year observations
among firms of each size category.



Figure 4: Business conditions and inter vivos transfers
                 good




                                                                                                                                                                               80
  Average current state of business




                                                                                                                                                                               Number of inter vivos transfers
                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
              normal




                                                                                                                                                                               20          40
                 bad




                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                      2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

                                                     Number of inter vivos transfers (right scale)

                                      Average current state of business by year (left scale) of firm-year observations...
                                                     ... without inter vivos transfers                            ... with inter vivos transfers




Note: The shaded bars depict numbers of inter vivos transfers (right scale) each year. The solid line is the average
current state of business of firms without contemporaneous inter vivos transfers, and the dashed line is the average
current state of business of firms with contemporaneous inter vivos transfers.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 27
Appendix Figure 1: Response rates and firm characteristics

              Number of employees                                                                                           Federal state




                                                                                                                       25
       40




                                                                              Chi-squared 92.14                                                                                                            Chi-squared 14.21
                                                                              Prob > Chi-squared 0.0000***                                                                                                 Prob > Chi-squared 0.5098




                                                                                                                       20
       30




                                                                                                                       15
    Percent




                                                                                                             Percent
      20




                                                                                                                       10
       10




                                                                                                                       5
       0




                                                                                                                       0
                     0-19           20-49        50-249      250-999      1000-4999   5000 and more                            BE    SH      HH     HB     NI   NW   RP     HE    BW    BY      SL   MV   BB     ST    SN       TH

                                              Non-response                Response                                                                               Non-response                        Response




              Industry                                                                                                      Legal form
       40




                 Chi-squared 11.25



                                                                                                                       60
                 Prob > Chi-squared 0.0104*                                                                                    Chi-squared 9.25
                                                                                                                               Prob > Chi-squared 0.0098**
       30




                                                                                                                       40
    Percent




                                                                                                             Percent
      20




                                                                                                                       20
       10
       0




                                                                                                                       0




                     Construction             Retail          Manufacturing      Services industry                                       Proprietorships             Partnerships (unlimited)          Corporations (limited)

                                              Non-response                Response                                                                               Non-response                        Response




Note: The figure presents distributions of IGTS survey respondents and non-respondents by size (numbers of employees), federal state within Germany, industry, and legal form of
operation. The figures display results of a Pearson chi-squared test that response behavior is independent of numbers of employees / federal state / industry / legal form.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics
                                   Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Min.   Max.        Source
No inter vivos transfers
Inter vivos transfers              13348   0.00      0.00       0      0          - see below -
Current state of business          13348   2.01      0.57       1      3
Construction                       13348   0.13      0.33       0      1
Retail                             13348   0.26      0.44       0      1
Manufacturing                      13348   0.37      0.48       0      1
Services industries                13348   0.24      0.43       0      1
Expected development of            13341   1.95      0.34       1      3
employment
Number of employees (cat.)         10337   1.33      1.07       0      5
Credit conditions                  8259    0.31     0.46        0      1
Proprietorship                     4301    0.08      0.27       0      1
Partnership                        4301    0.36      0.48       0      1
Corporation                        4301    0.56      0.50       0      1
Firm age (years)                   3792    40.01    45.59       0     882
Total assets (log)                 3025    14.86    1.87        7     21
Total equity (log)                 2797    13.57    2.10        6     21
Inter vivos transfers
Inter vivos transfers               358    1.00      0.00       1      1
Current state of business           358    2.13      0.56       1      3
Construction                        358    0.13      0.33       0      1
Retail                              358    0.25      0.43       0      1
Manufacturing                       358    0.51      0.50       0      1
Services industries                 358    0.11      0.32       0      1
Expected development of             358    2.00      0.34       1      3
employment
Number of employees (cat.)          324    1.77      1.07       0      5
Credit conditions                   278    0.17     0.38        0      1
Proprietorship                      91     0.01      0.10       0      1
Partnership                         91     0.51      0.50       0      1
Corporation                         91     0.48      0.50       0      1
Firm age (years)                    87     56.74    98.87       0     880
Total assets (log)                  68     15.75     2.12       8     21
Total equity (log)                  67     14.36    2.56        8     21
Inter vivos transfer with trans-    358    0.13      0.34       0      1
fer tax payment
Total sample
Inter vivos transfers              13706   0.03      0.16       0      1     Own collection (In-
                                                                              heritance and Gift
                                                                                 Tax Survey)
Current state of business          13706   2.01      0.57       1      3     Ifo business survey
Construction                       13706   0.13      0.33       0      1     Ifo business survey
Retail                             13706   0.26      0.44       0      1     Ifo business survey
Manufacturing                      13706   0.38      0.48       0      1     Ifo business survey
Services industries                13706   0.24      0.42       0      1     Ifo business survey
Expected development of            13699   1.95      0.34       1      3     Ifo business survey
employment
Number of employees (cat.)         10661   1.35      1.07       0      5     Ifo business survey
Credit conditions                  8537    0.30      0.46       0      1     Ifo business survey
Proprietorship                     4392    0.08      0.27       0      1          Amadeus/
                                                                                 Hoppenstedt
Partnership                        4392    0.36      0.48       0      1          Amadeus/
                                                                                 Hoppenstedt
Corporation                            4392         0.56         0.50          0          1           Amadeus/
                                                                                                    Hoppenstedt
Firm age (years)                       3879        40.38         47.48         0        882           Amadeus/
                                                                                                    Hoppenstedt
Total assets (log)                     3093        14.88         1.88          7         21           Amadeus/
                                                                                                    Hoppenstedt
Total equity (log)                     2864        13.58         2.12          6         21           Amadeus/
                                                                                                    Hoppenstedt
Inter vivos transfer with trans-       13706        0.01         0.06          0          1       Own collection (In-
fer tax payment                                                                                   heritance and Gift
                                                                                                     Tax Survey)

Note: The top panel of the table presents descriptive statistics for firm-year observations in which there are no inter
vivos transfers; the middle panel presents descriptive statistics for firm-year observations in which there are positive
inter vivos transfers; and the bottom panel presents descriptive statistics for all firm-year observations. The variable
“Inter vivos transfers” takes the value one if there is an inter vivos transfer, and zero otherwise. “Current state of
business” takes the value 1 for firms that describe their business conditions as “bad,” takes the value 2 for firms that
describe their business conditions as “satisfactory,” and takes the value 3 for firms that describe their business condi-
tions as “good” (monthly survey responses are converted to yearly averages). “Construction,” “Retail,” “Manufactur-
ing,” and “Services Industries” are dummy variables that take the value one if a firm is active in the respective indus-
try and zero otherwise. “Expected development of employment” takes the value 1 for firms that expect the number of
employees to “decrease,” takes the value 2 for firms that expect the number of employees to “not change,” and takes
the value 3 for firms that expect the number of employees to “increase” (monthly survey responses are converted to
yearly averages). “Number of employees” takes the value 0 for firms with 0-19 employees, 1 for firms with 20-49
employees, 2 for firms with 50-249 employees, 3 for firms with 250-999 employees, 4 for firms with 1000-4999
employees, and 5 for firms with 5000 or more employees. “Credit conditions” takes the value 1 for firms that de-
scribe their credit status as “financially constrained,” and zero otherwise. “Propietorship,” “Partnership,” and “Corpo-
ration” are dummy variables that take the value one if a firm has the respective legal form, and zero otherwise. “Firm
age” is measured in years. “Total assets (log)” is the natural logarithm of total firm assets. “Total equity (log)” is the
natural logarithm of outstanding firm equity value. “Inter vivos transfers with transfer tax payment” takes the value
one if there is an inter vivos transfer with accompanying gift tax payment, and zero otherwise.




                                                                                                                      30
Table 2: Correlation matrix of regression variables
                                Inter vivos   Current state     Expected    Number of   Credit condi-   Firm age    Total
                                              of business     development   employees      tions                    assets
                                                               of employ-     (cat.)                                (log)
                                                                  ment
Current state of business         0.033***
Expected development of            0.024**      0.548***
employment
Number of employees               0.071***      0.116***        0.022*
(cat.)
Credit conditions                 -0.054***    -0.286***       -0.215***    -0.087***
Firm age (years)                   0.052**     -0.117***       -0.077***     0.201***      -0.018
Total assets (log)                0.069***      0.072***         0.024       0.793***     -0.150***     0.403***
Total equity (log)                 0.057**      0.073***        0.049**      0.705***     -0.172***     0.350***   0.880***
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                              31
Table 3: Determinants of inter vivos transfers: Baseline regressions

                                  (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)
                              Inter vivos          Inter vivos          Inter vivos           Inter vivos
                               transfers            transfers            transfers             transfers
Current state of busi-         1.439***             1.516***             1.420***              1.456***
ness                            (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)               (0.000)
Pre estate and gift tax                                                   0.543***             0.499***
reform 2009                                                               (0.000)              (0.000)
Number of employees                                                                            1.453***
(cat.)                                                                                         (0.000)
Industry Fixed Effects                  No                  Yes                  Yes             Yes
Observations                          13706               13706                 13706          10661
Groups                                1654                 1654                 1654            1639
Pseudo R2                           0.00437               0.0187               0.0276          0.0351
Chi-squared                           14.48                62.09                91.41           101.9
Prob > Chi-squared                  0.000141             1.05e-12             3.40e-18       9.89e-20
Log likelihood                       -1650.3             -1626.5               -1611.9        -1399.7
Note: The table presents results of estimating random-effects odds ratio logit models of the likelihood of
inter vivos business asset transfers. “Pre estate and gift tax reform 2009” is a dummy variable taking the
value 1 for years prior to 2009 and zero otherwise. “Industry fixed effects” are dummy variables for retail,
manufacturing, services industries, construction being the reference category. The table reports test results
based on classical standard errors; the p-values in parentheses are for tests of no effect of independent
variables on odds ratios of inter vivos transfers (corresponding to coefficients of 1.00). The chi-squared
test statistic reflects a test that all independent variable coefficients equal 1.00.
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                            32
Table 4: Additional determinants of inter vivos transfers

                       (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)
                   Inter vivos    Inter vivos     Inter vivos    Inter vivos    Inter vivos    Inter vivos
                    transfers      transfers       transfers      transfers      transfers      transfers
Current state of     1.374**       1.444***        2.212***         1.495*         1.538*       1.359***
business             (0.012)        (0.002)         (0.001)        (0.097)        (0.079)        (0.004)
Pre estate and       0.502***       0.568***        0.630*         0.962          0.940           1.385
gift tax reform      (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.064)        (0.885)        (0.816)         (0.200)
2009
Number of            1.451***       1.498***        1.148                                       1.472***
employees            (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.269)                                      (0.000)
(cat.)
Expected de-          1.187
velopment of         (0.400)
employment
Credit condi-                       0.634***
tions                               (0.007)
Firm age                                           1.003**         1.000          1.001
                                                   (0.018)        (0.909)        (0.730)
Proprietorship                                      0.165*         0.000          0.000
                                                   (0.080)        (1.000)        (1.000)
Corporation                                         0.694          0.797          0.715
                                                   (0.149)        (0.406)        (0.216)
Total assets                                                      1.284***
(log)                                                             (0.003)
Total equity                                                                     1.183**
(log)                                                                            (0.020)
Linear time                                                                                       0.971
trend                                                                                            (0.735)
Squared time                                                                                     1.011**
trend                                                                                            (0.027)
Industry Fixed             Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes
Effects
Observations             10659             8407           2798           2590            2378      10661
Groups                    1639             1222            625            748             706       1639
Pseudo R2                0.0354           0.0419         0.0492         0.0458          0.0386     0.0434
Chi-squared               102.6            101.9          31.85          27.47           22.43      125.9
Prob > Chi-            3.11e-19         1.02e-19       0.0000990       0.00117         0.00762   1.97e-23
squared
Log likelihood          -1399.3          -1163.4         -307.7         -285.9          -279.3    -1387.7
Note: The table presents results of estimating random-effects odds ratio logit models of the likelihood of
inter vivos business asset transfers. “Pre estate and gift tax reform 2009” is a dummy variable taking the
value 1 for years prior to 2009 and zero otherwise. The reference category of the dummy variables “Pro-
prietorship” and “Corporation” is “Partnership.” “Industry fixed effects” are dummy variables for retail,
manufacturing, and services industries, construction being the reference category. The table reports test
results based on classical standard errors; the p-values in parentheses are for tests of no effect of inde-
pendent variables on odds ratios of inter vivos transfers (corresponding to coefficients of 1.00). The chi-
squared test statistic reflects a test that all independent variable coefficients equal 1.00.
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


                                                                                                       33
Table 5: Alternative inter vivos transfer specifications I
                              (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)                   (5)
                            FE Logit      RE Probit      RE OLS        RE Logit: before      RE Logit: after
                                                                         tax reform           tax reform
Current state of busi-       1.461**       0.161***      0.010***          1.394*               1.522***
ness                         (0.010)       (0.000)       (0.000)           (0.090)              (0.001)
Pre estate and gift tax     0.497***      -0.286***      -0.019***
reform 2009                 (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
Number of employees                        0.161***      0.011***            1.138               1.611***
(cat.)                                     (0.000)       (0.000)            (0.233)              (0.000)
Industry Fixed Effects            No           Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes
Observations                     3255        10661           10661             4501                 6160
Groups                            316         1639            1639              769                 1639
Pseudo R2                                    0.0344         0.00334          0.00613               0.0405
Within R2                      0.0264
Chi-squared                      40.66        99.76           82.14            5.555                79.68
Prob > Chi-squared            1.48e-09      2.81e-19        1.29e-15           0.235              9.80e-16
Log likelihood                  -748.9      -1400.8                           -450.0               -944.2
Note: The table presents results of estimating models of the likelihood of inter vivos business asset trans-
fers. Column (1) presents the result of a fixed effects logit odds ratio specification; columns (1), (4) and
(5) report test results based on classical standard errors, with p-values in parentheses for tests of no effect
of independent variables on odds ratios of inter vivos transfers (corresponding to coefficients of 1.00).
Column (2) presents the result of a random effect probit specification in which the dependent variable
takes the value 1 for firm-years in which there is an inter vivos transfer, and zero otherwise; the column
reports estimated classical standard errors. Column (3) presents the result of a random effects OLS speci-
fication in which the dependent variable takes the value 1 for firm-years in which there is an inter vivos
transfer, and zero otherwise; the column reports estimated Huber/White/sandwich standard errors. Col-
umns (4) and (5) present results of random-effects odds ratio logit models of the likelihood of inter vivos
business asset transfers, with the sample restricted to years prior to 2009 in the column (4) regression, and
restricted to years after 2008 in the column (5) regression. “Pre estate and gift tax reform 2009” is a
dummy variable taking the value 1 for years prior to 2009 and zero otherwise. “Industry fixed effects” are
dummy variables for retail, manufacturing, and services industries, construction being the reference cate-
gory. The chi-squared test statistic reflects a test that the independent variables jointly have no effect.
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                            34
Table 6: Alternative inter vivos transfer specifications II

                               (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)                 (5)
                           RE Logit:        RE Logit:         RE Logit:        RE Logit:          RE Logit:
                            Inter vi-     Firm age<250       Lag state of     Lead state of      Inter vivos
                            vos<=1                            business          business       transfers with
                                                                                                 transfer tax
                                                                                                   payment
Current state of            1.429***         2.209***                                                1.549
business                    (0.003)          (0.001)                                                (0.133)
Pre estate and gift         0.519***           0.625*          0.492***         0.582***           0.940
tax reform 2009             (0.000)           (0.062)          (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.846)
Number of employ-           1.373***           1.151          1.475***          1.357***          1.727***
ees (cat.)                  (0.000)           (0.278)          (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.001)
Firm age                                       1.003
                                              (0.332)
Proprietorship                                 0.166*
                                              (0.081)
Corporation                                    0.699
                                              (0.164)
Lagged current state                                           1.444***
of business                                                    (0.001)
Lead current state of                                                             1.166
business                                                                         (0.220)
Industry Fixed Ef-               Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes
fects
Observations                   10309            2791              9600             9038             10661
Groups                          1607            624               1614             1612              1639
Pseudo R2                      0.0264         0.0454             0.0381           0.0221           0.0466
Chi-squared                     62.99          29.03              101.1           49.29              26.24
Prob > Chi-squared            1.11e-11       0.000313          1.47e-19         6.52e-09           0.0002
Log likelihood                -1160.0          -305.2           -1277.3          -1089.7            -268.2
Note: The table presents results of estimating random-effects odds ratio logit models of the likelihood of
inter vivos business asset transfers. The sample used in the column (1) regression is restricted to firms
making at most one inter vivos ownership transfer over the sample period. The sample used in the column
(2) regression is restricted to firms that have been in operation for fewer than 250 years. The dependent
variable in the regression reported in column (5) is constructed based only on inter vivos transfers that are
accompanied by positive gift tax liability. “Lagged current state of business” is the one year lag of “cur-
rent state of business.” “Lead current state of business” is the one year lead of “current state of business.”
“Pre estate and gift tax reform 2009” is a dummy variable taking the value 1 for years prior to 2009 and
zero otherwise. The reference category of the dummy variables “Proprietorship” and “Corporation” is
“Partnership.” “Industry fixed effects” are dummy variables for retail, manufacturing, and services indus-
tries, construction being the reference category. The table reports test results based on classical standard
errors; the p-values in parentheses are for tests of no effect of independent variables on odds ratios of
inter vivos transfers (corresponding to coefficients of 1.00). The chi-squared test statistic reflects a test
that all independent variable coefficients equal 1.00.
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                             35
Appendix Table 1: Survey response behavior
                                     Non-response             Response           Test statistic (differ-
                                                                                         ence)
Current state of business                  2.10                 2.07                     0.03*
N                                         3003                  1657                    (0.042)
Expected development of em-                2.00                 1.98                     0.02**
ployment
N                                         3003                  1657                    (0.009)
Credit conditions                          0.26                  0.27                    -0.01
N                                         2180                  1224                    (0.347)
Firm age                                  40.16                 38.09                     2.07
N                                         1983                  1113                    (0.187)
Total assets (log)                        14.87                 14.58                   0.29***
N                                         1812                  1020                    (0.000)
Total equity (log)                        13.41                 13.12                   0.29***
N                                         1733                   975                    (0.001)
Note: The table presents numbers and mean values of responses to questions about firm characteristics,
distinguishing respondents by whether or not they participated in the Inheritance and Gift Tax Survey
(IGTS). Observations in the “Non-response” column represent firms not participating in the IGTS; obser-
vations in the “Response” column represent firms that did participate in the IGTS. Rows denoted “N”
indicate numbers of firm-year observations of firms providing the specified information. Test statistics
and p-values correspond to standard t-tests of differences between respondents and non-respondents in
mean values of firm characteristics.




                                                                                                      36
