                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         TOURISM AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
                          EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO'S COASTLINE

                                           Benjamin Faber
                                           Cecile Gaubert

                                        Working Paper 22300
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22300


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 2016, Revised January 2018




We are grateful to Treb Allen, Costas Arkolakis, David Atkin, Lorenzo Caliendo, Arnaud Costinot,
Klaus Desmet, Dave Donaldson, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Penny Goldberg, Gordon Hanson, Pete Klenow,
Marc Muendler, Natalia Ramondo, Stephen Redding, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare and participants at
multiple conferences and seminars for helpful comments. Nicholas Li and Jose Vasquez-Carvajal provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Benjamin Faber and Cecile Gaubert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Tourism and Economic Development: Evidence from Mexico's Coastline
Benjamin Faber and Cecile Gaubert
NBER Working Paper No. 22300
June 2016, Revised January 2018
JEL No. F15,F63,O24

                                           ABSTRACT

Tourism is a fast-growing services sector in developing countries. This paper combines a rich
collection of Mexican microdata with a quantitative spatial equilibrium model and a new
empirical strategy to study the long-term economic consequences of tourism both locally and in
the aggregate. We find that tourism causes large and significant local economic gains relative to
less touristic regions that are in part driven by significant positive spillovers on manufacturing. In
the aggregate, however, these local spillovers are largely offset by reductions in agglomeration
economies among less touristic regions, so that the national gains from trade in tourism are
mainly driven by a classical market integration effect.


Benjamin Faber
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
697A Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
benfaber@econ.berkeley.edu

Cecile Gaubert
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
687 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
cecile.gaubert@berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
    A conventional view in the literature on economic growth and development is that the produc-
tion of traded goods is subject to dynamic productivity improvements, whereas the services sector
is perceived to be more stagnant.1 In line with this view, the locus of agglomeration economies is
generally assumed to be the manufacturing sector, rather than services. This asymmetry has im-
portant implications for the growth strategies of developing countries, and whether they should
prioritize the development of traded goods producing sectors. At the same time, there is relatively
little empirical evidence on the economic consequences of the development of the services sector
in developing countries, and whether the reallocation of factors of production into services can
give rise to adverse long-term effects both locally and in the aggregate.2
    This paper sets out to study the economic consequences of tourism, a fast-growing services
sector in developing countries. Tourism involves the export of otherwise non-traded local ser-
vices by temporarily moving consumers across space, rather than shipping goods. This form of
trade has become an important channel of globalization. Tourism exports of developing countries
have grown at an average annual rate of 11 percent over the period 1982-2012. In the past decade,
they exceeded manufacturing exports for 40 percent of developing countries, and agricultural ex-
ports for half of them. Unsurprisingly in this context, tourism has attracted widespread policy
attention.3
    Our study is based on the empirical context of Mexico, a country where tourism has grown
to become an important economic force starting in the 1950s and 60s. Since the development of
tourism in Mexico has been driven by both international and domestic tourism flows, we set out to
study the consequences of both cross-border and inter-regional tourism integration, and decom-
pose the gains from tourism into an international and domestic component. Given the historical
context, our theoretical framework incorporates tax-financed government investments that facil-
itate the development of tourism. It also explicitly captures the possibility that the development
of the services sector due to tourism may have adverse long-run consequences by introducing
different sources of local production externalities. By altering the scale of production across sec-
tors, both locally and in the aggregate, tourism can have different implications for productivity.
If, following the standard assumption, agglomeration economies mainly operate within the man-
ufacturing sector, the aggregate gains from tourism can be diminished or over-turned compared
to the neoclassical gains from tourism trade. On the other hand, if spillovers also operate at the
cross-sector level, that is from the development of services to traded goods, then the gains from
tourism can be reinforced. Building on the tools developed in single-sector frameworks, we de-
velop a model and methodology to investigate these cross-sectoral interactions, and quantify their
implications both at the local level and in the aggregate.

    1 This view is in the tradition of Baumol (1967). See e.g. Herrendorf et al. (2014) for a review of the recent literature,
and McMillan & Rodrik (2011) for an analysis in the context of developing countries.
    2 See for example Copeland (1991) for an early theoretical discussion of tourism as a potential “Dutch disease”.
    3 Figures are based on UNCTAD statistics (http://unctad.org/en/pages/Statistics.aspx). See e.g. Hummels (2007)

for estimates of air transport costs over time, and Hawkins & Mann (2007) for a a review of tourism policies.


                                                              1
    In answering these questions, the paper contributes to the growing empirical literature that
exploits within-country variation to credibly identify the effects of economic shocks on relative
regional economic outcomes (e.g. Autor et al. (2013), Mian & Sufi (2009), Topalova (2010)). While
certainly of interest in its own right, this approach generally does not allow to shed light on the
corresponding aggregate implications, as those are being soaked up by the constant term or by
time fixed effects. This shortcoming is particularly acute when the objective is to estimate long-
run effects, as workers over time are mobile to arbitrage away regional variation in real incomes.4
To make progress on this trade-off, we combine an empirical analysis that exploits within-country
variation with a quantitative spatial equilibrium model. This allows us to explore the aggregate
implications that are consistent with the observed local effects, and to quantify the underlying
channels.
    At the center of the analysis lies the construction of a rich collection of microdata. We assemble
a database containing: i) municipality-level hotel revenues, employment, population, wages and
output by sector from the Mexican Censos Economicos in 1998 and 2008 and the Mexican pop-
ulation censuses in 2000 and 2010; ii) a long time series of population census data for consistent
spatial units going back to 1921; iii) a GIS database including remote sensing satellite data at a
resolution of 30x30 meter pixels covering roughly 9,500 km of Mexican coastline during the 1980s
and 90s; iv) local public finance data on investments in tourism development at the municipality-
level; and v) panel data on bilateral tourism exports and relative prices covering 115 countries
over the period 1990-2011.
    Armed with this database, the analysis proceeds in two parts. In the first part, we provide
empirical evidence on the local effects of tourism activity on current-day municipality-level pop-
ulation, employment, local GDP by sector of activity and Mincerized wages. Tourism in Mexico
has had more than half a century to materialize into today’s observed distribution of regional
economic outcomes. In this context, our empirical strategy aims to exploit cross-sectional varia-
tion to capture the long-term effects of tourism exposure on relative regional economic outcomes.
To do so convincingly, we exploit geological, oceanographic and archaeological variation in lo-
cal tourism attractiveness across the Mexican coastline. We take inspiration from the tourism
management literature arguing that variation in tourism activity is to a large extent determined
by the presence and quality of a specific set of local natural and cultural characteristics (Weaver
et al. (2000), Leatherman (1997)). We identify a set of beach quality criteria from that literature,
such as the presence of a nearby offshore island or the fraction of onshore coastline covered by pic-
turesque white sand, that we can capture using the GIS and satellite data to construct instrumental
variables (IVs) for tourism attractiveness along the Mexican coastline. In addition, we collect data
on the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins across Mexican municipalities that we use to
construct an additional instrument.
    The identifying assumption is that the presence of islands, the fraction of coastline covered by
white sand or the presence of archaeological ruins do not affect local economic outcomes relative

    4 This limitation and the need for a more structured approach to get at general equilibrium effects has been

highlighted by, for example, Kline & Moretti (2014), Donaldson & Hornbeck (2015) and Caliendo et al. (2015a).


                                                       2
to other coastal locations except through their effect on tourism activity. We assess the validity of
this assumption in several ways. We report how point estimates are affected by the inclusion of
pre-determined municipality controls, and assess whether the different IVs, that are based on dis-
tinct sources of data and variation, yield similar estimates. We also estimate a placebo falsification
test of the IVs’ effect on municipality populations in periods before beach tourism had become a
discernible force in Mexico, verify the extent to which the IVs are correlated with current-day esti-
mates of residential amenities, and corroborate the cross-sectional results with shorter-term panel
variation exploiting a shift-share IV strategy.
   Using this design, we find that variation in local tourism activity has strong and significant
positive effects on municipality total employment, population, local GDP and wages relative
to less touristic regions. According to our preferred specification, a 10 percent increase in local
tourism revenues leads to a 2.5 percent increase in municipality total employment, and a 4 per-
cent increase in nominal municipality GDP in today’s cross-section of Mexican municipalities.
These effects are in part driven by sizable local multiplier effects on manufacturing. We find that
a 10 percent increase in local tourism revenues leads to a 3.9 percent increase in local manufactur-
ing GDP. This effect holds for manufacturing sectors that are not intensively used as inputs in the
production of tourism-related services.
   When interpreting these local effects, we document the role of public investments in local
tourism infrastructure that respond to differences in ex ante attractiveness for tourism captured
by our IVs. We also note that the observed positive effect of tourism on local manufacturing
production does not by itself provide prima facie evidence for positive productivity spillovers
from tourism development onto manufacturing. In a world with trade costs, labor mobility and
input-output linkages, the net effect of tourism development on local manufacturing is a priori
ambiguous and could be positive through neoclassical demand linkages alone. Furthermore, im-
provements in transport infrastructure could have increased local market access for manufactur-
ing producers regardless of local tourism activity. To investigate these channels and shed light on
their aggregate implications, we then turn to studying both the local and aggregate implications
of tourism development through the lens of a quantitative spatial equilibrium model. We build on
the theoretical framework developed by Allen & Arkolakis (2014), Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) and Red-
ding (2016), and extend it in several dimensions to capture the economic forces that are relevant in
our context. In addition to trade in goods and migration across regions, the model features trade
in tourism-related services via traveling consumers across regions and countries, input-output
linkages between tourism, manufacturing and non-traded services, public tax-financed capital
investments as inputs to tourism development, and local production externalities.
   We allow for manufacturing production to be subject to both within and cross-sector spillovers.
The within-sector spillover is the standard source of agglomeration economies in economic geog-
raphy models, and captures the extent to which a larger scale in local manufacturing production
is beneficial for manufacturing productivity. In its presence, reducing the scale of manufactur-
ing as the economy re-allocates factors towards services leads to adverse productivity effects in
the aggregate. This adverse effect works in the opposite direction of the neoclassical gains from


                                                  3
falling frictions to tourism trade. On the other hand, the cross-sector spillover captures the extent
to which a larger scale of the local services sector affects traded sector productivity. By increasing
local services production, the development of tourism may generate long-run positive spillovers
on traded goods production by, for example, improving access to business services for local firms,
such as finance, accounting or consulting, by loosening local credit constraints directly (through
tourism revenues), or by facilitating contacts and business networks.5 In the presence of such
cross-sectoral agglomeration economies, tourism can give rise to gains in manufacturing produc-
tivity that would not have occurred otherwise.
    To quantify these forces, we estimate the model parameters, and calibrate the model to current-
day Mexico as a reference equilibrium. In particular, we estimate the intensity of the within
and cross-sector spillovers using an approach that combines model-based indirect inference with
the exclusion restrictions of our IVs. We find that both within and cross-sector agglomeration
economies are necessary to rationalize the observed local effects of tourism on Mexican regions,
while accounting for a host of neoclassical GE linkages between tourism and manufacturing
that the model captures. In addition to the conventional within-manufacturing agglomeration
economies, we find that tourism –through its effect on the development of the local services sec-
tor– leads to positive spillovers on local traded goods production.
    Armed with the model parameters and a number of observed moments in our data, we pro-
ceed to explore general equilibrium counterfactuals. We find that tourism causes significant gains
to the average Mexican household that are in the order of 4.8 percent of household consumption
after taking into account the cost of tax-financed investments in Mexican tourism development
over the past decades. About 40 percent of these gains are driven by international tourism, and
the remainder by domestic tourism across Mexican regions. Turning to the underlying channels,
we find that about 60 percent of the observed effect on local GDP can be explained by neoclassical
forces, including the direct effect due to local tourism expenditures and indirect effects on other
sectors through migration and input-output linkages. The remainder of the local effect on GDP is
driven by gains in local manufacturing activity due to both cross and within-sector agglomeration
forces. In the aggregate, however, we find that these spillover effects contribute relatively little
(about 1/10th) to the estimated welfare gains. That is, while the presence of within and cross-
sector spillovers reinforce one another leading to the large observed re-allocations of economic
activity towards touristic regions, we find that they largely offset one another at the aggregate
level, so that the aggregate gains from trade in tourism are mainly driven by a classical market
integration effect.
    Finally, an interesting difference emerges when we focus on the gains from international-only
tourism. In this case, we find that the gains from tourism integration are somewhat dampened
compared to what they would have been in the absence of agglomeration forces. In regions rel-
atively more affected by international tourism, the reduction in the within-manufacturing scale
effect outweighs the gains from the local expansion in services. In a framework featuring both

    5 See Francois & Hoekman (2010) for a review of the link between services trade and economic performance in

other sectors.


                                                      4
within and cross-sector agglomeration forces, we find that this result is driven by differences in
the initial sectoral composition of the regions most affected by international tourism compared to
domestic tourism. As a result, the gains from opening up to international tourism in the absence
of agglomeration economies would be slightly larger (2.4 percent) compared to the gains that we
estimate (1.8 percent).
    This paper relates and contributes to the recent literature on trade and development (e.g.
Topalova (2010), Donaldson (in press), Atkin et al. (2015)). Relative to the existing literature, we
focus on tourism, an important and fast-growing but so far understudied facet of globalization
in developing countries. There is a small existing empirical literature that has analyzed cross-
country data to shed light on the determinants and consequences of tourism.6 In contrast, this
paper leverages within-country variation to estimate the long-run effects of tourism on both local
and aggregate economic outcomes. The paper also relates to the literature that studies possible
"Dutch disease" effects associated with natural resource booms by comparing regional outcomes
within countries (e.g. Caselli & Michaels (2009), Allcott & Keniston (2014)). Both the methodology
we propose and the focus on tourism as a special kind of natural resource boom differ from the
existing literature, but the economic questions are closely related.
    Methodologically, the paper follows a recent but growing literature that uses quantitative spa-
tial equilibrium models to analyze the welfare consequences of aggregate or local shocks, taking
into account the frictions to trade and mobility between regions within countries (e.g. Redding
(2016), Caliendo et al. (2014), Monte et al. (2015), Bryan & Morten (2015), Caliendo et al. (2015b),
Fajgelbaum et al. (2015), Adao et al. (2017) and Galle et al. (2014)).7 We build on the framework de-
veloped by Allen & Arkolakis (2014) and Redding (2016) and extend the model and methodology
in several dimensions to study the role of within and cross-sector agglomeration externalities, a
novel dimension in this class of quantitative frameworks. We combine the structure of the model
with observed empirical moments to identify the strength of the agglomeration forces, close to the
approach followed in a one sector model in Ahlfeldt et al. (2015). Finally, our approach combines
empirical estimates of the local effects with a more structured approach to get at general equilib-
rium effects, following recent work by Kline & Moretti (2014) and Donaldson & Hornbeck (2015).
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the background of tourism
in Mexico and the data. Section 3 presents the empirical evidence. Section 4 presents the theoret-
ical framework that guides the welfare analysis. Section 5 presents the model calibration and the
counterfactual analysis. Section 6 concludes.



   6 Eilat & Einav (2004) use panel data on bilateral tourism flows over time to estimate the effect of factors such as po-

litical risk or exchange rates on bilateral tourism demand. Sequeira & Macas Nunes (2008) use country-level panel data
to estimate the effect of tourism specialization on country growth. Arezki et al. (2009) regress average country-level
growth rates over the period 1980-2002 on a measure of tourism specialization in a cross-section of 127 countries, and
use the list of UN World Heritage sites as an instrumental variable for tourism specialization. More recently, McGregor
& Wills (2017) use variation in surfing conditions to estimate positive local effects on night-time lights.
     7 Work by Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) and Allen & Arkolakis (2016) also follow closely related approaches, but focus on

spatial equilibria within cities rather than within countries.


                                                            5
2     Background and Data
2.1     Tourism in Mexico
      According to Mexico’s national accounts, tourism activity in Mexico has grown to account
for about 10 percent of total GDP in recent years. The bulk of this activity is driven by coastal
tourism: as reported in Table 1, two thirds of total hotel revenues in Mexico are located in the 150
coastal municipalities (accounting for 14 percent of Mexico’s population). Beach tourism started
to emerge in Mexico during the 1950s and 60s, about three decades after a devastating civil war
had ended in the 1920s. By that time, the first generation of Mexican tourist destinations, such as
the colonial port city of Acapulco on the Pacific coast and the border city of Tijuana in the North,
started to emerge and to become popular in Hollywood and among the international jet set. The
next generation of Mexican destinations for beach tourism appeared during the 1970s and 80s, that
witnessed the emergence of the Yucatan peninsula (e.g. Cancun) and other popular contemporary
destinations such as Los Cabos, Ixtapa or Huatulco. As we further discuss below in Section 3.3,
tourism development in Mexico, as in many other countries, was facilitated by significant public
investments in local tourism infrastructure.
      By 2014, Mexico received 29 million foreign visitors. According to the Mexican Secretariat for
Tourism (SECTUR), this number was close to zero before the 1960s. US Americans account for
the largest share of foreign tourists in Mexico (57%), followed by Canadians (14%) and Britons
(3%). As is the case for most countries in the world, the majority of tourism activity in Mexico
today is driven by domestic inter-regional visitors rather than international ones, with a share
of roughly 80 to 20 percent in terms of revenues over recent decades according to the Mexican
tourism satellite account. In this empirical context, our analysis sets out to quantify the gains
from both domestic tourism integration across regions within Mexico and international tourism
integration across borders, and to decompose the overall effect into its domestic and international
components. Finally, tourism revenues in Mexico can be divided into different types of expen-
diture. According to the tourism satellite account, 13 percent are spent on artisanals and other
goods, and the rest of tourist expenditure goes to local services, with accommodation (hotels and
other temporary accommodation), restaurants and transportation as the three main categories.
2.2     Data
      This subsection provides a brief overview of the main datasets used in the analysis. Appendix
Table A.1 provides descriptive statistics and Figure 1 depicts the satellite and GIS data. Appendix
2 provides a more detailed description of the data and construction of variables.
      We use municipality-level data from the Censos Economicos Comerciales y de Servicios to ob-
tain local sales of hotels and other temporary accommodation (e.g. hostels) for two cross-sections
in 1998 and 2008. We combine this information with data from the Censos Economicos for the
same years on total municipality GDP, total municipality wage bill, and GDP broken up by sector
of activity. In the analysis, we interpret differences in log hotel sales across municipalities as ef-
fectively capturing proportional differences in total local tourism expenditures. The reason is that


                                                  6
the available data for other tourist expenditures, such as restaurants, do not distinguish between
sales to local residents vs visiting non-residents. The underlying assumption is that hotel sales are
a constant share of tourist expenditure. As we discuss in Section 3, we also examine this assump-
tion using available data over time and across destinations (see appendix Tables A.2 and A.10).
   We use IPUMS microdata from the Mexican Population Census in 2000 and 2010 to construct
municipality-level total population and employment, as well as individual-level wages including
information on gender, education, age and ethnicity. The IPUMS microdata provide us with 10
percent random census samples in addition to population weights that are linked to each obser-
vation. In addition to the two most recent census rounds, we use historical Mexican population
census data for the years 1921, 1930, 1940 and 1950 in order to estimate a set of placebo falsification
tests. To that end, we use INEGI’s database Archivo Historico de Localidades to construct spatial
units for the year 2010 that we can trace back consistently to 1921. The historical census database
provides us with municipality populations, but not employment.
   The analysis also uses several GIS and satellite datasets. We use the earliest high-resolution
satellite data from the Global Land Survey (GLS) 1990 dataset. The data is a consolidation of the
best-quality LandSat imagery that were taken during the period of 1987-1997 over the coast of
Mexico, at a resolution of 30x30 meter pixels and covering six different wavelength bands. When
restricted to a 2 km buffer around the Mexican shoreline, these satellite data provide us with six
raster data layers that each have approximately 52 million 30x30 meter pixels (left panel of Figure
1). We combine these satellite data with a number of additional GIS data layers that we obtain
from the geo-statistics division of INEGI. These data include the administrative shape file of mu-
nicipality boundaries for the 2010 population census, the position of the Mexican coastline, the
Mexican terrestrial transportation network for the year 2009, the location of pre-Hispanic archae-
ological ruins, and the coordinates for each island feature within the Mexican maritime territory
from the Mexican census of maritime land territory. The right panel of Figure 1 depicts the posi-
tion of islands within 5 km of the Mexican coast and the location of pre-Hispanic ruins.
   We obtain information on public investments in local tourism development at the municipal-
ity level from INEGI’s department for public finances (Estadística de Finanzas Públicas Estatales
y Municipales (EFIPEM)). This database is the most detailed available account of municipality-
level public investments for federal, state and local spending covering the period 1989-2010. For
earlier years, we complement this database with historical records that we obtain from Mexico’s
Fondo Nacional de Fomento al Turismo (FONATUR) that provide us with information on public
investments in tourism going back to the beginning of the 1960s. To estimate the tourism trade
elasticity, we use data on bilateral tourism exports from the World Bank WITS database on trade
in services. We link these data to information from the IMF on PPP rates for final consumption
goods across countries in order to empirically capture the relative price of local consumption for
origin-destination country pairs over time. The database spans the years 1990-2011 and includes
115 origin and destination countries. Appendix 2 provides further details about the database and
construction of variables.



                                                  7
3      Empirical Evidence
      This section uses the database described above to estimate the effects of tourism on municipality-
level employment, population, wages and local GDP by sector of activity in today’s cross-section
of Mexican municipalities. As well as being of interest in their own right, these moments inform
the calibration of the model and the quantification of tourism’s welfare implications and underly-
ing channels in Sections 4 and 5.
3.1      Empirical Strategy
      Tourism in Mexico has had more than half a century to materialize into today’s observed re-
gional economic outcomes. In this context, our aim is to exploit cross-sectional variation to capture
tourism’s long-term economic consequences on local economic outcomes across Mexican munic-
ipalities.8 To estimate the effect of differences in local tourism revenues on relative outcomes in
today’s cross-section of Mexican municipalities, we estimate the following baseline specification:


                             log (ynt ) = αct + β log ( HotelSalesnct ) + α0 Xnt + enct                                   (1)

      where n indexes municipalities, c indexes coastal versus non-coastal municipalities and t in-
dexes census years. In our baseline specification, we regress the two most recent cross-sections of
municipality-level outcomes, ynt , in 2000 and 2010 for outcomes computed using the population
censuses, and in 1998 and 2008 for outcomes computed using the Censos Economicos, on the log
of municipality hotel sales in 1998 and 2008, a vector of pre-determined municipality controls, Xnt ,
and coast-by-period fixed effects.9 To address concerns about auto-correlated error terms for the
same municipality over time, we cluster standard errors at the municipality level.10
      As discussed above, we address the lack of data for total local tourism expenditure by making
the assumption that accommodation constitutes a roughly constant share of tourist expenditures.
Though we cannot directly verify this assumption in the cross-section of municipalities, we can
use available Mexican time series data to assess it. Appendix Table A.2 documents that accom-
modation expenses accounted for on average 13 percent of total Mexican tourist expenditure over
the period 2003-2013, with very little variation over time. A related concern is that hotel revenues
relate differently to total local tourism expenditure in a way that is correlated with our IVs that we
discuss below. We return to this question in the robustness analysis below.
      The coefficient β captures the total derivative of tourism’s local effect on the outcome ynt . This
      8 Tosee this more clearly, consider a specification of long differences: log y2010                   − log y1950
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     n              n        =
αc + β log HotelSales2010      − log HotelSales1950
                                                    
                          n                      n      + en . Without discernible variation in tourism pre-1960 (setting
HotelSales1950  to a constant close to zero), this can be re-written as in (1): log y2010   = α0 c + βlog HotelSales2010
                                                                                                                          
           n                                                                           n                               n     +
enc + log y1950
                 
             n     , with the identifying assumption that our IVs are unrelated to economic outcomes before tourism
emerges. As discussed in detail below, we further assess this exclusion   restriction in several ways.
    9 We use the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation, log HotelSales                          2
                                                                                                             1/2 
                                                                                     nct + HotelSalesnct + 1        , in order
not to throw away variation from municipalities in places with zero hotel sales. In practice, this does not affect the
estimates since the identifying variation in our IV estimation stems from coastal municipalities that except for three
instances in the two cross-sections have no reported zeroes for hotel sales. As discussed below, we also report results
without this transformation, or after assigning the log of 1 to values of zero.
   10 Clustering instead at the state-level or the state-by-year level leads to slightly smaller standard errors.



                                                              8
includes both the direct effect of variation in local tourism sales (holding all else constant), as well
as the indirect effects through, for example, increased demand for inputs from other sectors, im-
migration or changes in local productivity due to spillovers.11 The empirical analysis below and
the quantitative model then allow us to shed light on, and decompose the channels underlying
the estimated total derivatives β.
                                b The main concern for causal identification of this total effect in
(1) is that municipalities with higher hotel sales are also subject to other local unobserved factors
that affect both tourism activity as well as economic outcomes. For example, economically vibrant
municipalities could report higher tourism sales because of business travel, better transport links
or skilled labor with foreign language skills. Conversely, tourism could locate in remote locations
with cheaper land prices for building hotel resorts. In contrast, it could also be that tourist re-
sorts follow a specific set of natural and cultural amenities that are largely unrelated to economic
outcomes, except through tourism activity.
    To investigate which of these scenarios is the case in our empirical setting, we propose the fol-
lowing empirical strategy that proceeds in several steps. In the first step, we include an additional
set of pre-determined municipality controls and report how this affects the OLS estimates of β.
In the baseline specification, Xnct includes the log distance to Mexico City, the log distance to the
closest stretch of the US border and the log municipality area. These geographical controls are
aimed to address concerns that larger municipalities that are located close to the main domestic or
foreign economic centers have both higher tourism sales as well as more economic activity on the
left hand side of specification 1. We then report how the estimate of β is affected after addition-
ally including dummies for state capitals, historical cities12 , colonial ports, and the logarithm of
the average annual temperature and the average annual precipitation. Reporting point estimates
before and after adding these controls helps us document the extent to which variation in local
tourism activity within a given coast-by-year cell may be correlated with a number of observable
pre-determined confounding factors that also affect local economic outcomes.
    In the second step, we construct a number of instrumental variables for log ( HotelSalesnct ). We
take inspiration from the tourism management literature (e.g. Weaver et al. (2000), Leatherman
(1997)) arguing that tourism activity is to a large extent determined by the quality of a set of very
specific local natural and cultural amenities. We identify two criteria for touristic beach quality
that we can empirically capture along the roughly 9500 km of Mexican coastline using our GIS
database: i) the presence of a nearby offshore island; and ii) the fraction of coastline covered by
white sand beaches. In addition, we collect data on the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological
ruins across Mexican municipalities to construct a third instrumental variable.
    The first instrumental variable that we construct is whether or not a coastal municipality has
access to an offshore island within 5 km of its coastline.13 This measure is aimed at capturing both
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                          j
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                     dlog(ynt )                  ∂log(ynt )                  ∂log(ynt )           dlog Xnt
   11 The   estimated total derivative is βb =   dlog( HotelSalesnt )
                                                                        =   ∂log( HotelSalesnt )
                                                                                                   + ∑ jJ           j
                                                                                                                            ×   dlog( HotelSalesnt )
                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                            ∂log Xnt
                                                                                                                                     j
The first term is the direct effect of local tourism, holding all other J determinants unchanged. The Xnt are J other
determinants of the local outcome ynt that are affected by tourism, such as e.g. local manufacturing production.
   12 Following INEGI’s definition of cities with a population above 20k in 1930.
   13 Our island and beach IVs have no variation across non-coastal municipalities (we set them to a constant of zero for



                                                                 9
scenic beauty, as well as the availability of popular beach activities, such as snorkeling around
the island or taking a boat trip to the offshore beaches. To measure offshore islands, we use the
Mexican census of maritime land territory conducted by the INEGI. To assess the sensitivity of the
5 km cutoff, we alternatively report results using islands within 10 km of the shoreline.
      The second instrumental variable is aimed at capturing the presence of picturesque white sand
beaches along the Mexican coastline. Because an explicit specification of what constitutes an at-
tractive stretch of beach in Mexico has not been formulated in the remote sensing literature, we
proceed by binding our hands to the best existing ranking of Mexican beaches that we could
find. That ranking refers to the “Eight Best Beaches of Mexico” published by the ranking analyt-
ics company U.S. News and World Report.14 We take these top-ranked beaches and construct a
municipality-level beach quality measure using the historical satellite data. For each of the eight
beaches, we start by computing the wavelength ranges for each of the six different LandSat sen-
sors computed across the 30 m pixels covering the beach. We then classify all 30 m pixels within
100 m of the Mexican shoreline into zeroes and ones depending on whether they fall within these
reference wavelength ranges. Using this information, we construct the fraction of pixels that is
covered by either of these eight types of high quality beaches. To assess the sensitivity to the 100
m range, we also report results using a 200 m distance from the shoreline.
      For the third IV, the geo-statistics division at INEGI provided us with the location of pre-
Hispanic archaeological ruins in Mexico that we depict in Figure 1. Using this information, we
construct a municipality-level indicator whether an archaeological site is present. The identifying
assumption is that the presence of nearby offshore islands, a higher fraction of coastline covered
by white sand beaches or the presence of pre-Hispanic ruins affect municipality-level economic
outcomes relative to other coastal locations only through their effect on local tourism activity. To
assess this assumption, we report the IV point estimates both before and after including addi-
tional pre-determined municipality controls, and test whether the island IV, the beach IV and the
archaeological ruins IV –which rely on distinct datasets and sources of variation along the Mex-
ican coastline (Figure 1)– yield similar point estimates of the effect of tourism on local economic
outcomes. As we discuss in detail below, we also report a number of additional robustness checks.
3.2     Estimation Results
Municipality Employment and Population                      We begin by estimating the effect of differences in
local tourism activity on municipality-level total employment and population. We report the re-
sults of specification (1) above in OLS, the reduced form (outcomes on IVs) and the second-stage
IV point estimates of β. b Viewed through the lens of a spatial equilibrium with labor mobility,

inland regions). Given specification (1) features coast-by-period fixed effects, it follows that the identifying variation is
purely within the coastal municipality group. For these two IVs, including the full sample of Mexican municipalities
increases power when estimating additional municipality controls in Xnct . As a robustness check in Table A.14, we
also allow the controls to have heterogeneous effects among coastal and non-coastal regions as discussed below.
    14 In their description (http://travel.usnews.com/Rankings/Best_Mexico_Beaches/), they write: "To help you find

the ideal Mexican destination for sunbathing on the sand and splashing in the waves, U.S. News considered factors like scenery,
water clarity, crowd congestion, and nearby amenities. Expert insight and user votes were also taken into account when creating
this list of the country’s best beaches." The 8 beaches are Playa del Carmen, Tulum, Cozumel, Cancun, Acapulco, Mazatlan,
Puerto Vallarta and Los Cabos.


                                                              10
these are two of the most informative long-term local economic outcomes: over time, workers
respond to changes in local economic outcomes by moving to places with better prospects. By
a revealed preference argument, location choices are thus directly informative about differences
in the underlying attractiveness of regions.15 We estimate specification (1) with log employment
or log population on the left-hand side that we construct from the Mexican census microdata for
2000 and 2010. Table 2 presents the OLS, reduced-form and IV estimation results both separately
for each of the three IVs and using them jointly.
    The OLS point estimate of the effect of tourism on municipality employment is statistically
significant at the 1 percent level and changes little before and after including the full set of mu-
nicipality controls. Given that the vast majority of Mexican tourism is beach-oriented and located
along the coastline, and the fact that our baseline specification includes coast-by-period fixed ef-
fects, one interpretation of the OLS results is that tourism in Mexico is to a large extent determined
by a specific set of natural and cultural amenities, such as beaches or archaeological sites, that ap-
pear not be strongly correlated with some of the obvious observable and pre-determined control
variables that also affect local economic outcomes.
    To further assess these results, columns 3-10 present the reduced form and IV estimates. As
for the OLS, the IV estimates of the effect of tourism on municipality total employment change
little before and after including the full set of controls for each of the three IVs as well as when
using them jointly. The IV point estimates are slightly larger compared to the OLS in the full
specifications, and the three IVs yield similar point estimates as documented by the p-value of
the over-identification test in columns 9 and 10. The likeliest explanation for why the IV point
estimates are slightly higher than the OLS estimates is the concern of measurement error in our
measure of local tourism activity, which relies on reported establishment revenues in the survey
questionnaires of the Censos Economicos for 1998 and 2008.
    The results suggest that local tourism activity has a strong and significant positive effect on
total municipality employment relative to other coastal regions. The elasticity is estimated to be
0.25 in the full specification with all three instruments in column 10, suggesting that a 10 percent
increase in local tourism activity in 1998 and 2008 on average leads to an increase in total mu-
nicipality employment of on average 2.5 percent in 2000 and 2010 respectively. Columns 11 and
12 of Table 2 report the estimation results of the IV specification using the instruments jointly on
log municipality total population instead of total employment. The point estimate is about 0.045
below the point estimate for employment, suggesting that a 10 percent increase in local tourism
expenditure leads to an increase of 2 percent in total population.16
Municipality Wage Bill, GDP by Sector and Wages To further investigate the channels under-
lying the positive effects on local employment and population, we explore tourism’s impact on
local production. Table 3 reports the OLS, reduced-form and IV estimation results of the effect
   15 More  formally, see equation (12) in the spatial equilibrium model of Section 4.
   16 The  small difference in tourism’s effect on population relative to total employment can be due to demographics
(e.g. differences in the age profile and family size of the workforce), labor force participation as well as commuting. In
our model, we abstract from these adjustment margins and use information on total local employment to capture the
regional effects on the workforce and economic activity.


                                                           11
on the municipality-level total wage bill (labor income), GDP, GDP by sector of economic activity
and Mincerized wages. Tourism has a strong and significant positive effect on local aggregate
labor income and GDP. According to the IV point estimates in the full specification with three
instruments, a 10 percent increase in local tourism revenues leads to 4.8 percent increase in the
local wage bill, and a 4 percent increase in local GDP. Given tourism only accounts for on average
roughly 10 percent of total GDP in Mexico (and about 20 percent among coastal municipalities),17
these results suggest strong multiplier effects on the local economy. Using the 20 percent figure,
tourism would have a direct effect on local GDP that is about half of the observed effect (2 percent
for a 10 percent increase in tourism).18
    In support of a multiplier effect, we find significant positive effects of tourism on local man-
ufacturing GDP. A 10 percent increase in local hotel revenues leads to an increase in local man-
ufacturing GDP of 3.9 percent. We return to the decomposition of the estimated total effect on
local GDP in Section 5.2, after taking into account input-output linkages and spillovers. The point
estimate on local agriculture is also positive, but smaller and not significant at conventional levels
in the IV estimation. The last two columns of Table 3 report OLS and IV estimates of the effect
of local tourism expenditure on average municipality Mincerized wages, after flexibly controlling
for observable differences in local workforce composition (age, education, gender and ethnicity
using the microdata of the Mexican population censuses). We find that a 10 percent increase in
local tourism revenues leads to an increase of 0.45 percent in local nominal wages.
Robustness        We address two potentially remaining concerns. First, maybe the previous robust-
ness checks missed omitted variables that are both correlated with the instruments conditional
on controls, and affect local economic outcomes. Second, islands, whiter beaches or archaeolog-
ical sites could affect the local economy not just through their effect on local tourism, but also
by directly influencing the residential choice of Mexicans relative to other coastal locations. Even
though we sought to be careful in constructing our IVs to capture a very particular set of features
of the local environment that are arguably specific to tourism, it could be the case that the IVs have
a significant direct amenity effect on local employment and populations relative to other coastal
locations.
    In Table 4 and appendix Tables A.4-A.10, we further assess these concerns in six different
ways.19 First, appendix Table A.4 reports additional robustness tests against omitted variable

   17 As discussed in Section 2, local tourism shares are not directly observable in the data and based on the assumption

that hotel expenditures account for on average roughly 15 percent of total tourism expenditure.
   18 See Footnote 11. In the case of log total GDP as the outcome, the direct effect is approximately equal to the share
                                                                                         ∂log( GDPnt )
of tourism in local GDP since tourism output is part of the sum of local GDP (i.e.   ∂log(TourismGDPnt )
                                                                                                        ≈ TourismGDP
                                                                                                              GDPnt
                                                                                                                      nt
                                                                                                                         ).
    19 We also report additional checks in appendix Tables A.11-A.15. Table A.11 confirms that the estimation results

are not sensitive to using the IHS transformation, since the identifying variation stems from differences across coastal
municipalities, that except for three instances report non-zero hotel revenues. Table A.12 reports results after replacing
hotel revenues with number of tourists. Table A.13 uses additional information from the 100 percent census samples
to confirm that the 10 percent samples do not give rise to sparseness concerns at the municipality level. Table A.14 first
confirms that the identifying variation for the island and beach IVs is purely driven by coastal municipalities, and then
reports close to identical point estimates after allowing all municipality controls to be interacted with the coastal region
dummy. Table A.15 addresses the concern that the first stage F-statistic drops from 17.56 to 15.3 when including the
full set of controls in the joint IV specification in columns 10 and 12 in Table 2. To this end, we compare 2SLS estimates


                                                            12
bias. In columns 2-4, we find little support for the concern that our IV estimates may be driven by
correlations with sea accessibility (flat terrain vs coastal cliffs) or local fishery potential (measured
by primary ocean productivity). In column 5, we find little sensitivity to excluding the origin mu-
nicipalities of the top-ranked beaches. In the final two columns, we find that doubling the cutoff
values for island proximity or coastline ranges does not affect the point estimates.
    Second, we run a placebo falsification test on the identical sample of municipalities during a
period before beach tourism had become a discernible force in Mexico. This involves the construc-
tion of a long time series of population census data for consistent spatial units for the years 1921,
1930, 1940 and 1950, in addition to the two most recent rounds of population census data 2000
and 2010 that we use in our baseline regressions. As discussed in the data section, the historical
census database provides us with municipality populations, but not employment. Table 4 reports
the results of these specifications.20 We report the results across two panels, that deal in different
ways with the fact that not all municipalities reported non-zero populations for all census rounds
between 1921-2010. The first panel is based on the same strategy as for log hotel sales above, and
uses the IHS transformation on the left-hand side in order to not ignore zero populations. The
second panel replaces zero population values with the log of 1, instead. We report results both
before and after controlling for access to road infrastructure in 1940, as a way to check robustness
to controlling for pre-existing differences in remoteness.
    For all three IVs, we find slightly negative but insignificant point estimates of the effect on
municipality populations before 1960, and a significant positive effect afterward. The estimates
on the geographical municipality controls, and controls for pre-existing access to infrastructure
are estimated with similar precision in both periods, giving some reassurance against the concern
that the historical census population data could simply be more noisy than the more recent data.
These results suggest that the oceanographic, geological and archaeological variation that we use
to construct instruments for tourism attractiveness are unlikely to capture locational fundamentals
that directly enter Mexican location choices along the coastline in a discernible way.
    Third, we address the potentially remaining concern that while Mexicans may not have cared
about white sand beaches, islands or ruins when deciding where to live and work in the 1950s,
their tastes may have evolved over time so that by 2000 these IVs pick up significant direct amenity
effects relative to other coastal locations. To this end, we verify in today’s cross-section of munici-
palities to what extent our model-based estimates of local amenities that we discuss in Section 5.1
–essentially local population residuals left unexplained by spatial variation in real incomes– are
significantly related to the presence of islands, the fraction of white sand coverage or the presence
of pre-Hispanic ruins. Appendix Table A.5 reports the estimation results. Consistent with the find-
ings of the placebo falsification test above, we find that current-day estimates of local amenities are

using both IVs to limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) estimates. As the LIML estimator has been found
to be more robust to weak instrument bias, the fact that the reported LIML point estimates are slightly higher provides
reassurance against this concern.
   20 One potential caveat for the ruins IV is that it is possible that not all archaeological sites had been discovered

pre-1960s. We include the basic set of geographical controls used in the previous tables rather than the complete set, as
some of the controls were arguably not pre-determined in the early census periods.


                                                           13
not significantly correlated with the instruments.21 Related to this, we also check the sensitivity
of the IV estimates to the inclusion of a comprehensive list of controls for differences in the local
crime and security environment. This exercise is useful to judge the extent to which the observed
positive effect of tourism on total employment and population could be mediated by an improve-
ment of local security due to tourism, which is a specific type of local amenity. Reassuringly, as
reported in appendix Table A.7, we find that the point estimates remain close to unchanged, while
several of the crime controls (e.g. homicides, assaults, extorsions per capita) enter significantly
and with the expected negative sign.
    Fourth, we verify whether the positive effect of our IVs on local populations in today’s cross-
section of regions is driven by economically active Mexicans rather than pensioners, as another
way to differentiate between economic incentives due to tourism versus a correlation between the
IVs and local attractiveness for residents. As reported in appendix Table A.8, we find that the pos-
itive effect of the instruments on the number of municipality immigrants who are economically
active is significantly less positive and close to zero among retired migrants.
    Fifth, the results up to this point have been based on cross-sectional variation with the aim
to capture the long-run effects of tourism exposure (since the 1950s) on regional economic out-
comes in Mexico. In our final set of results, we corroborate the causal interpretation of our IV
strategy using shorter-term variation that is based on panel data. To this end, we exploit the
long time series of municipality population data 1921-2010 described in Section 2 to estimate the
differential effect of decadal changes in tourist arrivals to Mexico across coastal municipalities
with or without nearby islands, higher or lower fractions of white sand coverage, and with or
without pre-Hispanic ruins. To do so convincingly, we propose a shift-share IV strategy. In OLS,
we interact the cross-sectional IVs with the number of tourist arrivals to Mexico after including
municipality and coast-by-period fixed effects. In the IV regressions, we then instrument for the
number of tourist arrivals to Mexico with the log average air fare paid by US airline passengers (in
constant US dollars). As reported in appendix Table A.9, we find that inflows of tourists to Mexico
have a significantly more positive effect on local populations for municipalities with higher (in-
strumented) tourism potential relative to other coastal municipalities.22 This result holds for all
three IVs, and is robust to flexibly controlling for differences in trends after interacting the full set
of municipality controls discussed above with census year fixed effects. These findings provide
additional corroborating evidence in support of our IV identification strategy.
    Finally, we also investigate to what extent measurement error in the relationship between hotel
sales and total tourist expenditures could be systematically related to the instruments. In partic-
ular, we would over-estimate (under-estimate) the true causal effect of tourism on local economic
outcomes if accommodation constituted a smaller (larger) fraction of tourist expenditure in places

   21 The point estimates are -.0238 (.323) for the island IV, .0997 (2.958) for the beach IV and .183 (.365) for the ruins IV.

We also verify that the model-based measures of local amenities are correlated with direct measures, such as weather,
greenness, crime, car congestion and access to inland bodies of water or the ocean, as reported in appendix Table A.6.
   22 In particular, we find that a 10 percent increase in the arrival of tourists to Mexico leads to 1.7, 0.3 and 0.7

percentage point higher population growth for, respectively, municipalities with a nearby island, a 1 sd higher fraction
of white sand coverage, and the presence of pre-Hispanic ruins relative to other beach locations.


                                                              14
with islands, nicer beaches or archaeological sites, since the IVs would be positively (negatively)
correlated with measurement error in the residual term. Related to this, it would be natural to
assume that the share of professional travelers in local hotel revenues is lower among attractive
beach destinations. To the extent that local expenditures of professional travelers should not be
counted as tourism expenditure on the right-hand side of (1), this could lead to under-estimating
the true causal effect of tourist expenses on local economic outcomes. Since our analysis is mainly
based on comparing beach destinations along the coastline, rather than comparing e.g. Mexico
City to Cancun, the latter concern would seem somewhat less likely.
      To further assess these questions, we use available data on the composition of tourist expenses
and the share of hotel nights booked for professional vs leisure travel across different destinations
that we obtain from EuroStat. Related to the first question, we find in appendix Table A.10 that
the accommodation share of tourist expenditures does not systematically differ across destinations
with higher or lower fractions of coastal tourism (positive point estimate close to zero). Related
to the second question, we find that destinations with higher shares of coastal tourism have sig-
nificantly lower shares of professional travel, as expected. We also confirm that this relationship
becomes insignificant with a point estimate close to zero after we include a dummy for predomi-
nantly coastal destinations (defined as destinations with three quarters of coastal tourism or more
(40% of sample)). Taken together, these results suggest that the use of hotel sales as a measure
of local tourism activity is unlikely to give rise to measurement error that is also systematically
related to the three types of IVs we exploit.
      In summary, the additional results discussed above provide some further reassurance that our
IV strategy captures a specific set of shifters to local tourism attractiveness that do not appear to
have discernible direct effects on local populations, or to be correlated with other omitted vari-
ables affecting local economic outcomes or measurement error in tourism sales. In addition to the
analysis presented here, we also quantitatively assess the sensitivity of the estimated gains from
tourism to potentially remaining concerns about the exclusion restriction as part of the counter-
factual analysis in Section 5.1.4.
3.3     Discussion
      The previous subsection presents evidence that tourism activity has led to significant increases
in local total employment and population relative to less touristic regions in Mexico. Underlying
these results, we find significant positive effects on local GDP and wages, as well as sizable pos-
itive multiplier effects on manufacturing production. We now provide additional evidence to
narrow down the interpretation of these local effects, and to inform the structure of the model in
the following section.
Role of Public Investments and Infrastructure           As in many countries, Mexico’s tourism sector
has developed with the help of significant public investments in tourism infrastructure both at the
federal and local levels of government since the 1960s. At the federal level, Mexico’s FONATUR
has invested in the creation of seven planned tourism centers between the 1960s and 2010: Can-



                                                   15
cun, Los Cabos, Ixtapa, Huatulco, Loreto and more recently Nayarit and Cozumel.23 Federal
investments in planned centers through FONATUR and its predecessors account for slightly more
than 90 percent of the current stock of public investment in tourism in Mexico.24 The first wave
of these investments were targeted to raise foreign reserves for the Mexican central bank in the
1960s and 70s, and the objective was to create tourism centers in coastal destinations with the
most promising natural and cultural potential for tourism development.25 In addition to federal
investments through FONATUR, both state and municipality governments have made additional
investments in the development and promotion of local tourism, accounting for the remainder of
public spending targeted at the tourism sector.
    These public investments have mainly taken two forms. The first are investments in local pub-
lic capital and infrastructure that are specific to the tourism sector, such as building museums and
monuments, tourist information centers, restoring historical buildings and structures, develop-
ing the marina, and spending on tourism promotion and advertising campaigns. The second are
investments in transport infrastructure, such as roads and airports, that were mainly targeted at
government-planned tourism centers through FONATUR starting from the 1960s.
    Against this background, we can investigate the extent to which ex ante differences in tourism
attractiveness, captured by our IVs, have been followed by and endogenous policy response of
public investments targeted at the development of the tourism sector. These results serve to docu-
ment the role of government policy in facilitating the development of tourism in Mexico. In turn,
they help inform the model that we develop in the next section to interpret the observed local
effects and quantify the gains from tourism.
    To this end, we use the historical database on Mexican federal and local government invest-
ments, and construct a measure of the installed public capital stock of investments in tourism de-
velopment across municipalities in the 1998 and 2008 cross-sections. We also use geo-referenced
information on government-planned tourism centers, airports and the Mexican terrestrial trans-
portation network (all roads and railways) that we obtain from INEGI’s geo-statistics division. As
reported in Table 5, we find that the stock of public investment in tourism is positively affected
by our IVs for tourism attractiveness. In line with this, higher tourism attractiveness also leads to
closer distances to planned tourism centers, better access to transport infrastructure, and reduced
transport travel times on the full Mexican road and railway network to other municipalities in
Mexico and border crossings to the US.
    These findings inform the model that we develop in the next section in two ways. First, we
model tax-financed public investments as inputs to the development of the tourism sector. This
allows us to take into account the role of the government, and to quantify the gains from tourism
net of costly tax-financed public investments. Second, it could also be the case that public in-

   23 FONATUR was created in 1974 by merging two previous agencies INFRATUR and FOGATUR. After the end of

our sample period in 2010, FONATUR more recently invested in two additional planned projects: Marinas Turisticas
and Playa Espiritu.
   24 Appendix 2 provides a more detailed description.
   25 For some interesting background on this, the New York Times published an article on 05 March in 1972 titled:

“Why the Computer Chose Cancun”.


                                                       16
vestments in tourism affect economic outcomes not just through their effect on increased local
tourism activity, but also directly by improving access to infrastructure and reducing trade costs
for the local manufacturing sector. To provide a first empirical check on such direct effects, we
report in appendix Table A.16 the extent to which the IV point estimates of the local effects of
tourism change after either excluding or controlling for distance to government-planned tourism
centers, that were the target of transport investments and account for more than 90 percent of
overall public spending on tourism development in the data. The fact that the point estimates
are not noticeably reduced after excluding the bulk of public investments suggests that the local
effects of higher ex ante tourism attractiveness operate mainly through increased local tourism ac-
tivity, rather than additional direct effects due to the endogenous increase in public investments in
tourism.26 To further investigate and re-visit this channel in the quantification, we will also allow
for tourism development to lead to an endogenous reduction in trade costs that we quantify in the
data following Table 5, and test the extent to which this additional channel affects the estimation
of the gains from tourism and local agglomeration forces, as we discuss below.
Tourism Input Demand The second question is to what extent the positive multiplier effect on
traded sector production may be driven by a subset of manufacturing sectors that are used inten-
sively as local inputs for tourism-related services. As reported in appendix Table A.17, we break
up the 21 three-digit manufacturing sectors into above and below-median intensity of touristic
input use among traded industries. In particular, we construct two different measures. The first
is based on the three-digit level total requirement coefficients from the 2007 Mexican input output
tables. We use the total (direct and indirect) input requirement coefficients for the hotel sector
across the 21 manufacturing sectors, and divide these sectors into above and below the median.27
Alternatively, to better capture sectors that tourists demand directly –rather than solely relying on
what the hotel sector uses as inputs in the Mexican IO tables–, we also construct a second measure
of tourism’s input intensity: the Mexican tourism satellite account splits up total tourist tradable
consumption into five 3-digit sectors. These are (in decreasing order of importance): the food in-
dustry, artisanal products (part of other manufacturing), pharmaceuticals (part of chemical indus-
try), clothing industry, and printed media (part of printing industry). We use these five sectors as
our second binary measure of traded sectors which may be used intensively by the tourism sector.
    As reported in appendix Table A.17, we find that, as expected, sectors more intensively used in
tourism are slightly more strongly affected by variation in local tourism activity. At the same time,
   26 Formally,                                                       dlog( HotelSalesnt )
                                                                                       ∂log( HotelSalesnt )        ∂log( HotelSalesnt )
                  the total derivative of the first stage is:          dAttractivenessnt∂Attractivenessnt + ∂log(PublicInvestmentnt ) ×
                                                                                             =
dlog(PublicInvestmentnt )                                                                     dlog(ynt )                   ∂log(ynt )
    dAttractivenessnt     , while the total derivative         of the second-stage is: dlog( HotelSales         = ∂log( HotelSales           +
                                                                                                     nt )                             nt )
        ∂log(ynt )           dlog(PublicInvestmentnt )                                                      dlog(ynt )
∂log(PublicInvestmentnt )
                           × d∂log  ( HotelSalesnt )
                                                       . The   fact that the IV point estimates dlog( HotelSales ) remain un-
                                                                                                                       nt
changed after excluding the bulk of public spending in Table A.16 suggests that while public investments respond as a
function of higher ex ante tourism attractiveness, their effect on local outcomes operates mainly through the increase in
tourism activity they were intended to bring about. In line with this, in earlier versions of this paper we also confirmed
that the IV point estimates remain stable after including a comprehensive set of measures for access to infrastructure
as controls on the right-hand side. The advantage of the approach above is that it provides a simple and transparent
empirical check that does not run into concerns about adding several endogenous (“bad”) control variables.
   27 The two most intensively used input sectors are chemical products and petroleum/carbon-based products (both

used in building hotels and resorts), and the two least used input sectors are leather products and the food industry.


                                                                     17
the positive multiplier effects remain sizable and statistically significant in sectors with below-
median tourism input intensity. These results suggest that part of the positive effect of tourism
on local traded goods production may be driven in part by better market access for local input
suppliers to tourism. To reflect this finding in our quantification, we allow for input-output link-
ages between tourism related services and all other sectors of the local economy in the theoretical
framework that follows.

4     Theoretical Framework
      With these empirical results in hand, we now lay out a spatial equilibrium framework, whose
main objectives are twofold. First, the estimation of the model allows us to shed light on the ag-
gregate implications of tourism that are consistent with the local effects that we estimate in the
previous section. Since we exploit within-country variation, our empirical estimates are by con-
struction based on relative effects and cannot directly speak to aggregate effects of tourism. This
limitation is particularly acute because tourism has had more than five decades to affect regional
economic outcomes in the Mexican context: as we report above, local populations and employ-
ment strongly respond to differences in tourism activity, suggesting that the regional welfare dif-
ferentials brought about by tourism activity have been smoothed over time.
      Second, the model allows us to shed additional light on the underlying channels. The pre-
vious section suggests that tourism has strong positive effects on local economic activity, both
directly and indirectly, i.e. through its effect on manufacturing production. To what extent are
these multiplier effects a sign of possible productivity spillovers between the development of the
local services sector through tourism and traded goods production? The answer is a priori unclear,
as this result could be driven by neoclassical local demand effects alone: local population, input
demand from the tourism sector and public investment increase, improving local demand and
trade market access of local manufacturers. Furthermore, to the extent that these multiplier effects
do in fact reflect productivity spillovers, it is also a priori unclear whether such localized effects
on manufacturing may be offset in the aggregate by a decrease in agglomeration forces among
non-touristic regions of the country. These questions naturally feed back into the welfare evalua-
tion of tourism in the aggregate: depending on the sign and magnitude of within and cross-sector
agglomeration forces, the aggregate gains from tourism can either be magnified or diminished
compared to the conventional neoclassical gains from market integration in tourism.
      We outline the theoretical framework in what follows, and Section 5.1 describes the model cal-
ibration and presents the counterfactual analysis. Appendix 3 provides additional details about
the structure of the model.
4.1     Model Setup
      The theoretical framework is a spatial equilibrium model in the spirit of Allen & Arkolakis
(2014) and Ahlfeldt et al. (2015), with multiple sectors and input-output linkages as in Caliendo
et al. (2014). It adapts the framework in three dimensions that capture important features of our
empirical context. First, in addition to trade in manufacturing goods and labor mobility, it allows


                                                  18
for trade in tourism-related services through consumers who can travel to destination regions and
consume non-traded tourism services on their trips. Second, the development of the local tourism
sector is made possible by government investments in tourism infrastructure. These investments
are financed by a federal tax.28 Third, in addition to the traditional within-sector source of agglom-
eration economies, the model features local cross-sector spillovers between the services sector and
manufacturing.
    In the model, regions within Mexico differ ex ante in three dimensions: their level of produc-
tivity for manufacturing goods, their level of attractiveness for tourism, and their level of local
amenities for residents. Regions trade goods with each other and the rest of the world, and host
international and domestic tourists that spend part of their income outside of their region of res-
idence. Regions in the world are indexed by n ∈ 1, ..., N. Workers are mobile within Mexico.
                                                        Ln
The share of workers in each Mexican region,            LM   for n ∈ M, is an endogenous outcome. For
simplicity, we do not model intra-country heterogeneity for countries other than Mexico, whose
population is exogenously given and equal to Ln for n ∈ M. The model is static and aims at
capturing the long-run steady-state of the economy.29
Household Preferences          Each worker supplies one unit of labor inelastically. They earn labor
income wn , which is taxed at rate ι by the government to finance public investments. Workers
derive utility from the consumption of a bundle of goods and services as well as from the local
amenities of the region where they live, subject to idiosyncratic preference shocks. The utility of a
worker living in region n of her country is:

                                           Un (ω ) = ε n (ω )Cn Bn Len ,                                       (2)

where Cn is the consumption bundle of goods and services, Bn is the exogenous amenity differ-
ences between regions, and term Len allows for that amenity to respond endogenously to how
populated the region is. This aims to capture, in a reduced-form way, the notion that more pop-
ulated regions can be either more congested, leading to a decrease in the utility of local residents
(if e ≤ 0), or more attractive, as the concentration of population gives rise endogenously to better
local amenities (e.g. more sources of entertainment, variety in consumption, etc). Finally, each
worker ω has a set of idiosyncratic preferences ε n (ω ) for living in different regions n of her coun-
try. They are drawn from a Frechet distribution with mean 1 and dispersion parameter κ. Workers
within Mexico choose to live in the region that maximizes their utility, so that worker ω’s utility
is U (ω ) = maxn∈M ε n (ω )Cn Bn Len .
    Workers consume a bundle of local non-traded services (Cs ), traded tourism-related services




  28 Fajgelbaum   et al. (2015) develop a spatial equilibrium that features taxation and public investment by local
governments. Here taxation and investments are made by the national government.
   29 To provide corroborating evidence, appendix Table A.18 documents that our instruments do not lead to

systematically different local effects in 2010 compared to 2000 economic outcomes.


                                                        19
(CT ) and traded manufacturing goods (CM ), according to the following preferences:30

                                                   ρ −1     ρ −1
                                                                     ρ−ρ 1 !α MT                   αs
                                          1           ρ        ρ                      1
                              Cn =                 CM,n + CT,n                           CS,n                  ,                                          (3)
                                        α MT                                          αS

    where the elasticity of substitution between tourism-related services and manufacturing goods
is ρ > 1, and α MT + αS = 1. Workers spend a constant share of their income on local services.31
We write PM,n the price of the composite manufacturing good, and PT,n the price of the bundle of
tourism-related services for a consumer located in region n. The composite traded price index for
                                                                                         1
                                                                             1− ρ   1 − ρ 1− ρ
the bundle of manufactured goods and tourism services is then PMT,n = PM,n + PT,n              , and
                                                                                                                                               1− ρ
                                                                                                                                              PM,n
the share of total spending in region n on manufactured goods is α MT χn , where χn ≡                                                          1− ρ   .
                                                                                                                                             PMT,n
    Each worker has idiosyncratic preferences for the various destinations she could visit as a
tourist, and makes a discrete choice of a region among all possible destination regions, including
abroad. We make the following timing assumption: workers first set up their budget and the share
of income they spend on tourism based on the expected utility derived from tourism. Then, their
idiosyncratic preference draws are revealed and they choose their destination.32 The utility that a
worker ω who lives in region n derives from visiting region i is:

                                                             Ai q T,i aiT (ω )
                                               CT,n (ω ) =                     ,                                                                          (4)
                                                                   tni
    where q T,i is the quantity of tourism services she consumes in region i, Ai is a tourism at-
tractiveness shifter for each destination i, aiT (ω ) is an idiosyncratic preference shock for region i
drawn from a Frechet distribution with shape parameter β and mean 1, and tni is a utility cost that
tourists from origin region n incur when visiting region i. It captures travel costs from the region
of residence to the region visited, as well as other potential barriers to tourism, such as cultural
differences between regions or language barriers. Given the properties of the Frechet distribution,
region n-workers’ expected utility derived from tourism is:
                                         "
                                             N           #1/β
                                                 Ak q T,k β
                                   CT,n = ∑                     ,
                                           k =1
                                                  tnk

and the corresponding price index for tourism services for travelers from region n is PT,n ≡
h                           i− β1
  ∑kN=1 Ak (tnk p T,k ) − β       , where p T,k is the price of tourism in destination region k. In turn, the
                                                                          "                                   ρ    αT
                                                                                    ρ −1          ρ −1
                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                             ρ −1
                                                                                      ρ             ρ
                                                                              β M CM,n    + β T CT,n                               αs
   30 More                                                                                                                    CS,n
             generally, the demand function can be parametrized as                                                                         , but the prefer-
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                          α MT                     
                                                                                                                              αS


ence weights β M and β T that capture the relative strength of consumer tastes for each good are not separately identified
from difference in productivity between these two sectors, so we normalize these weights to 1. The calibrated produc-
tivities in each sector should therefore be understood as capturing both a productivity effect as well as demand weights.
    31 This is consistent with the interpretation of this local spending as housing expenditure. For example, Davis &

Ortalo-Magné (2011) show that housing expenditure constitutes a nearly constant fraction of household income.
    32 The timing assumption is convenient to solve the model. In particular, it leads to expressions isomorphic to

assuming CES demand.


                                                             20
share of region n workers who visit region i (and the share of tourism spending by region n work-
ers that is spent in region i) is:
                                                          Ai (tni p T,i )− β
                                              λni =                             .
                                                      ∑nk=1 Ak (tnk p T,k ) − β
    We now turn to the supply side of the economy. There are three sectors, indexed by j: tourism
services (j = T), local non-traded services (j = S), and manufacturing (j = M). We also index
labor, used as an input to production, using L.
Tourism Services        The production of tourism services requires some investment in tourism cap-
ital (e.g. tourist information centers, museums, restorations, marketing costs to attract tourists).
The government uses tax revenue to finance the provision of this local tourism capital, which
enters as a productivity shifter in the production of tourism services.33 Tourism services are then
produced under perfect competition by combining local labor, local services and a composite man-
                                                                                                    j
ufacturing input, according to the production function q T,n = ZT,n ∏ j∈ L,M,S m Tj,n νT , where ZT,n is
the productivity of tourism services in region n, m Tj,n is the input use of input j in the production of
                                          j
tourism in region n, and ∑ j∈ L,M,S νT = 1.34 The local productivity of tourism services is improved
by public investment according to:
                                                              o (1− α G )
                                                 ZT,n = ZT,n                GnαG                                    (5)
           o captures exogenous differences between regions, and G is government spending
    where ZT,n                                                    n
to build tourism capital in region n. This investment in local tourism infrastructure Gn is financed
by an income tax ι levied on all workers in Mexico. The unit cost of production of tourism services
provided in region n is:

                                                                  L                    j
                                                      Ψ T (wn )νT ∏ j∈ M,S Pj,nT
                                                                                   ν

                                          c T,n =            o1−αG αG
                                                                                                                    (6)
                                                            ZT,n  Gn
                             j
                              j
    where Ψ T = ∏ j∈ L,M,S νT −νT is a constant. Given perfect competition, this is also the lo-
cal price of tourism services, p T,n , faced by tourists when they visit region n. In the calibration,
                       β
we refer to fAi = Ai Z as the tourism attractiveness shifter in region i, which captures both a
                           T,i
productivity and an amenity shifter. It follows that tourism trade shares can be written as:
                                                                      − β
                                                        ν L νTM νTS
                                                  
                                                Ai tni wi T PM,i
                                                f                PS,i
                                      λni =                 L    M    S
                                                                           ,                                        (7)
                                            ∑kN=1 A
                                                  fk tnk wνT PνT PνT − β
                                                            k M,k S,k




   33 Equivalently,  public investment could be modeled as shifting local tourism amenities An . The two formulations
are isomorphic, as demand and productivity shifters for tourism play symmetric roles and are not separately identified.
   34 We revisit the assumption of perfect competition in Appendix 4.6, where we allow for positive rents in the tourism

sector, part of which can be repatriated by multinational investors.


                                                             21
    and the price index for tourism services is:
                                                       "                                                      #− β1
                                                               N
                                                                                  ν L νTM νTS
                                                                                                 
                                       PT,n ≡                 ∑ Afk          tnk wk T PM,k PS,k       −β
                                                                                                                      .                              (8)
                                                              k =1

Manufacturing Production                 Intermediate varieties from a continuum x ∈ [0, 1] are produced in
each region, combining inputs to production indexed by j ∈ { L, S, M}. A competitive local sec-
tor aggregates intermediate varieties and sells this composite to i) local final consumers, ii) local
intermediate producers in manufacturing and tourism who use it as an input to their production,
and iii) the Mexican government who uses it to build a local tourism capital.
                                                                                                                                                j
    The production function for intermediate varieties is constant returns to scale (∑ j∈ L,M,S νM =
                                                                                j
                                                 M ( x )νM , where q
1), with: q M,n ( x ) = Mn zn ( x ) ∏ j∈ L,M,S m j,n                 M,n ( x ) is the quantity of the intermedi-
                        M is the input use of input j for manufacturing production, M is the
ate variety produced, m j,n                                                          n
local productivity in manufacturing, common to all varieties in region n, and zn ( x ) is the variety
x-specific efficiency in region n drawn from a Frechet distribution with shape parameter θ and
                            −θ
mean 1: F (z) = e−Z . It will prove convenient to define the unit cost of the local input bundle
                                                                                         L                j
                                                                                                      ν
for manufacturing in region n as c M,n = Ψ M (wn )νM ∏ j∈ M,S Pj,nM , where Ψ M is a constant35 and Pj,n
is the unit cost of input j. Firms incur an iceberg trade cost τni to ship the manufacturing good
from region i to region n. Firms behave competitively and therefore price at unit cost. A perfectly
competitive local sector aggregates these varieties into a composite manufacturing good. They
source across regions and countries and purchase intermediate varieties from the lowest cost sup-
plier. The composite manufacturing good is a CES aggregate of individual varieties x ∈ [0, 1] with
elasticity of substitution σM and price index PM,n :
                            Z                 σM −1
                                                                σ σM−1                               Z                            1−1σ
                                                                     M                                                                  M
                Q M,n =          q M,n ( x )    σM
                                                          dx                    ;            PM,n =           p M,n ( x )1−σM dx            ,

                                                c         τ
    where p M,n ( x ) = mini∈1...N { MM,iz (nix) } as local aggregators in region n source from the lowest
                                                    i i
cost region. Given the properties of the Frechet distribution that governs local efficiency levels,
the share of manufacturing spending that region n spends on goods produced in region i is:

                                                                        (τni c M,i )−θ Miθ
                                                     πni =                                    ,                                                      (9)
                                                                     ∑kN=1 (τnk c M,k )−θ Mkθ
    and the price index for the composite manufacturing good in region n is:
                                                                "                                     #− 1θ
                                                                          N
                                           PM,n = K1                     ∑ (τnk c M,k )−θ Mkθ                   .                                   (10)
                                                                         k =1

                          1−1σ
where K1 = Γ( θ −σθM +1 )       M
                                  is a constant.



                                      −ν j
                                       j  M
  35 Specifically,   Ψ M = ∏ j∈ L,M,S νM     .


                                                                                    22
Agglomeration Forces         We allow for the presence of different sources of local production exter-
nalities. In particular, the productivity of a region for manufacturing goods Mn can be endogenous
to the level of local economic activity. This externality can stem from the level of economic activ-
ity in the manufacturing sector ( L M,n ) and/or the level of economic activity in the services sector
( LST,n = LT,n + LS,n ). In both cases, local productivity increases with the size of economic activity
with a constant sector-specific elasticity (denoted respectively γ M and γS ), so that:


                                             Mn = Mno L M,n
                                                         M  γ S γ
                                                            LST,n ,                                         (11)

      where Mno is the exogenous component of local productivity. This expression captures in a
reduced-form way the channels through which local tourism expenditures can have positive or
negative effects on traded goods production in the long run, beyond their neoclassical demand
linkages. For example, it has been argued that tourism could act as a special case of the "Dutch
disease", shifting activity into stagnant services sectors and away from manufacturing with higher
potential for productivity growth. Expression (11) allows for tourism to have such adverse long-
term consequences if, for example, γ M > 0 but γS = 0. In that case, the development of tourism at-
tracts workers away from manufacturing, a sector in which scale matters for productivity, causing
a decrease in productivity. On the other hand, tourism could give rise to productivity spillovers
that would not have materialized otherwise –if, for example, γS > 0 while γ M = 0. There are
a number of channels through which the development of tourism can a priori lead to positive
spillovers on the manufacturing sector. For example, the development of tourism can improve the
provision of local business services, such as finance, accounting or consulting. Tourism revenues
can also directly loosen the credit constraints of local firms. Alternatively, tourism could lead to
a better-trained local workforce, spur more entrepreneurship by offering business opportunities,
or facilitate domestic and international business networks through increased travel activity. All of
these effects are summarized by the parameter γS .
Local Non-Traded Services          Finally, local services are produced and consumed by local resi-
dents. They are produced using local labor with constant returns to scale and productivity Rn , so
              wn 36
that PS,n =   Rn .    Since Rn is not identified independently from the level of local amenities Bn in
what follows, we choose to normalize Rn = 1 and interpret Bn as indicating a combination of the
level of local amenities and the productivity of local non-traded services.
4.2    Equilibrium
      Mexican workers choose in which region to live within Mexico. Given the properties of the
Frechet distribution and the workers’ utility maximization problem in (2), the share of workers




   36 These services can be interpreted as housing. Formally, modeling housing as in e.g. Redding (2016) leads to

isomorphic expressions.


                                                       23
who choose to live in region n ∈ M can be expressed as:
                                            α MT κ̃
                                           wn
                            Ln       Bn PMT,n

                           LM
                               =                α MT κ̃ , for n ∈ M,                                                                   (12)
                                              wk
                                 ∑k∈M Bk PMT,k

      where we define
                                                                           κ
                                                                κ̃ ≡            .
                                                                         1 − κe
Note that here, as for welfare below, the parameters κ and e enter only through their combined
effect in κe. The three market clearing conditions for the manufacturing goods market, the tourism
services market and the market for local services lead to the following system of 3 × N equations.
For all regions i ∈ (1, ..., N ), and using the index j = T for the tourism sector:


                                                                                                   νjM
                                                                                                                          !
                                            N
                               L
                    wi Li,M = νM            ∑      α MT wn (1 − ι) Ln χn +                 ∑       νjL
                                                                                                         wn Ln,S + Gn          πni         (13)
                                           n =1                                           j∈ T,M
                                            N
                    wi L T,i = νTL         ∑ α MT wn (1 − ι) Ln (1-χn )λni                                                                 (14)
                                           n =1
                                                                          νjS
                    wi LS,i = αS wi (1 − ι) Li +                 ∑        νjL
                                                                                wi Li,S                                                    (15)
                                                                j∈ T,M

      Finally, the government budget balance condition is:37

                                                           ∑ Gn = ∑ ιLn wn                                                                 (16)
                                                            M              M

      Equations (9)-(16) define an equilibrium of the economy. There could be a priori multiple such
equilibria. We come back to this point below.
4.3     Welfare Impact of Tourism Development
      The model lends itself naturally to welfare analysis. We use as a measure of welfare in a re-
gion the average utility level enjoyed by workers who live there. In any given spatial equilibrium,
because of the free mobility of workers and the properties of the Frechet distribution, this level of
welfare is equalized across all Mexican regions. Given the workers’ utility maximization problem
in (2), this common welfare level can be expressed as:

                "                                     α MT κe# κe1                                          α MT
                                                 wk                                                       wn              −1
   UM = K2          ∑         Bk (1 − ι)
                                                PMT,k
                                                                          = K3 Bn (1 − ι)
                                                                                                         PMT,n
                                                                                                                         Ln κ̃ , ∀n ∈ M,   (17)
                    k∈M
                                                                                                                                     1
      where the constant K2 equals Γ( κ −κ 1 ) LeM and the constant K3 equals Γ( κ −κ 1 )−1 LM
                                                                                             κ
                                                                                               . Welfare
   37 We  assume for simplicity that aggregate trade is balanced in Mexico. In the data, Mexico runs a very small trade
deficit. The model can be readily adapted to account for this aggregate deficit in the spirit of Dekle et al. (2007) and
Caliendo & Parro (2014). We have experimented with this specification, allocating the aggregate deficit to regions in
proportion to local GDP, and found that results remain stable when accounting for this deficit.


                                                                         24
is a power mean, across all Mexican regions, of a measure of local utility that includes local real
income, net of taxes, and local amenities.
    To quantify the welfare gains brought about by tourism in Mexico, we run the following
thought experiment. We compare the level of welfare in Mexico in the current equilibrium to
what it would be in a counterfactual equilibrium were tourism would be absent, all else equal. By
doing so, we propose a measure of what would be the welfare losses that Mexicans would incur
without the tourism sector. For ease of exposition, we then report the inverse of this measure as
the “gains from tourism”, with a slight abuse of terminology.
Counterfactual Equilibria          To create this counterfactual equilibrium, we model a world with the
exact same exogenous determinants as in the current-day baseline equilibrium, except that we
assume that the Mexican government does not provide investments in the required tourism cap-
ital, so that tourism productivity is zero in all regions of Mexico. This shuts down both domestic
and international tourism in Mexico. This approach provides a natural measure of the gains from
tourism, ceteris paribus. In particular, it nets out from the gains from tourism the cost of deploying
tourism infrastructure incurred by Mexican tax payers through the government. In the counterfac-
tual equilibrium without tourism, there are no taxes levied on Mexican workers to finance tourism
infrastructure. This force, ceteris paribus, tends to push real incomes up in the counterfactual equi-
librium without tourism.38 Finally, since mobile workers relocate and arbitrage away differences
in welfare across regions, the difference in welfare between these two equilibria is identical across
all Mexican regions, irrespective of their level of exposure to tourism.
    In order to study the impact of international tourism alone, we then consider a second counter-
factual equilibrium. We assume that there are prohibitive travel frictions to international tourism,
but that there is still inter-regional tourism within the borders of Mexico, and we compute the
welfare changes between the current and this counterfactual equilibrium. In this second counter-
factual, we assume that without international tourism, tourism investments by the government
and the corresponding tax ι are scaled down in proportion to the relative size of international
tourism to total tourism in the baseline equilibrium.39 In both counterfactuals, we assume that all
other exogenous fundamentals of the economy stay unchanged between equilibria.
    To solve for these counterfactual equilibria, we follow the methodology introduced by Dekle
et al. (2007) and generalized to spatial equilibria in Caliendo et al. (2014) and Redding (2016), and
express the equilibrium conditions of the model in changes relative to their baseline values. Ap-
pendix 3 describes the system of equations. This system allows us to solve for a counterfactual
equilibrium of the economy corresponding to a change in tourism investment, as captured by a
change in the income tax ι̂ = 0, and/or by a change in travel frictions tc
                                                                         ni , given the parameters of

   38 An  alternative approach would be to evaluate the gains from trade in tourism relative to a counterfactual
equilibrium in which all travel frictions are prohibitively high. The counterfactual change from today’s observed level
of tourism to tourism autarky would be identical in all respects to the approach we adopt here, except for not taking
account of the cost of public investments.
    39 That is:

                                             cn = ∑n∈M wn Ln (1-χn ) (∑i∈M λni ) .
                                        ι̂ = G
                                                   ∑nN=1 wn Ln (1-χn ) (∑i∈M λni )



                                                          25
                j0
the model (νj , α MT , αG , β, θ, ρ, κe) for j, j0 ∈ L, M, S, T and the values of the endogenous variables
(πnj , λnj , χn , wn , L M,n , LT,n , LS,n , Gn ) in the baseline equilibrium.
    In the presence of within and cross-sector spillovers and input-output linkages, the unique-
ness of the equilibrium is not guaranteed.40 To evaluate the welfare gains from tourism, we solve
for the counterfactual equilibrium that is the closest to the baseline equilibrium we observe in the
data. That is, we use the values of the variables from the current equilibrium as a starting point for
the counterfactual equilibrium. The numerical procedure that looks for the counterfactual equilib-
rium then updates the candidate value of endogenous variables based on a weighted average of
this initial guess and the new values that come out of solving the model. The procedure is iterated
until new values and initial values converge.
4.4      Role of Local Spillovers
       We close the description of the model with a discussion of how local and aggregate productiv-
ity endogenously changes between equilibria that differ in their degree of tourism development.
To that end, we can rewrite local manufacturing productivity defined in (11) as:
                                                                           γ +γ M
                                       Mn = Mno s M,n
                                                     γ
                                                   M
                                                      (1 − s M,n )γS Ln S           ,

where s M,n denotes the share of workers of region n working in manufacturing. Manufacturing
productivity responds to i) the change in local scale of economic activity, captured by the term
 γ +γ M
Ln S        (the agglomeration effect), and ii) the change in the composition of economic activity,
                             γ
                        M
captured by the term s M,n (1 − s M,n )γS (the sectoral reallocation effect). We examine these two
channels in turn.
Agglomeration Effect             Assume that there is a positive shock to the tourism sector. In regions
with high touristic attractiveness, the development of tourism tends to raise real wages and at-
tract more workers. Through the classic agglomeration effect, this increase in population density
boosts local manufacturing productivity. In the aggregate, however, increases in employment in
touristic regions are counterbalanced by decreases in employment in other areas. Since productiv-
ity responds with constant elasticity to employment changes, productivity gains in some regions
are thus offset by productivity losses in others. This is similar to Kline & Moretti (2014): the clas-
sical agglomeration channel leads to muted effects in the aggregate because the total population
is fixed.
Sectoral Reallocation Effect          Our framework gives rise to an additional sectoral reallocation ef-
                                             γ
                                     M
fect as tourism develops. Through s M,n (1 − s M,n )γS above, agglomeration spillovers operate more
strongly when both local services and manufacturing sectors are sufficiently developed in an area,
so that the manufacturing sector can benefit from both within and cross-sector spillovers. In par-
ticular, the value of the spillover parameters γS and γ M determine what this optimal balance is.
   40 The model does not fit the assumptions of gravity models of trade in Allen et al. (2014), as the tourism and the

manufacturing sectors are allowed to differ in trade elasticities. Alternatively, the proof of uniqueness of a multi-sector
multi-country trade model developed in Allen et al. (n.d.) does not directly apply here, because our model has two
additional layers: i) mobility of workers within Mexico, and ii) local productivity that is endogenous to the level of
local economic activity.


                                                            26
For example, when γS = γ M , the optimal sectoral mix to maximize agglomeration forces is an
equal balance of manufacturing and local services. In contrast, when γS = 0, local agglomeration
externalities are highest under full local specialization in traded goods production.
      A positive shock to local tourism attracts workers away from manufacturing. For non-zero
values of γS and γ M , the effect on local productivity through the re-allocation effect is a priori am-
biguous. In regions with high pre-existing shares of manufacturing, the development of tourism
is more likely to reinforce the classical agglomeration force, as the local economy moves closer to
an optimal sectoral balance. In contrast, in regions with low pre-existing shares of manufacturing
employment, the reallocation effect is more likely to work in the opposite direction of the classical
agglomeration force, as we move further from the optimal balance. Again, the values of γS and
γ M govern what this balance is.
      In the aggregate, the effect of tourism development on productivity will thus depend on the
parameter values of γS and γ M , but also on the initial distribution of activity across sectors s M,n
in each region, and how this geography is related to initial differences in local tourism attrac-
tiveness. Overall, in a framework featuring both within and cross-sector agglomeration forces,
sectoral shocks across regions can in principle give rise to positive as well as negative productiv-
ity gains, both locally and in the aggregate.

5     Calibration and Quantification
5.1     Calibration
   Adapting Redding (2016) to our setup (and in particular Proposition 6), leads to the following
                                                                 j0
data requirements for the model calibration: given parameters (νj , α MT , αG , β, θ, ρ, κe, γ M , γS ),
bilateral trade costs (τni , tni ) and regional data on wages, employment, sectoral employment
shares, and public investment in tourism (wn , Ln , L M,n , L T,n , Gn ), there exist unique values of
residential amenities (Bn ), manufacturing productivities (Mn0 ) and tourism attractiveness shifters
(An ) that are consistent with the data up to a normalization that corresponds to a choice of units
in which to measure productivity and amenities.
      The calibration of the model proceeds sequentially in three main steps. In the first step, we cal-
ibrate the model to today’s reference equilibrium corresponding to the observed level of economic
activity, trade and tourism. This allows us to recover a vector of –possibly endogenous– model-
based manufacturing productivities, Mn , and a set of local tourism shifters An . This step requires
                                                          j0
data on (wn , Ln , L M,n , L T,n , Gn ) and parameters (νj , α MT , αG , β, θ, ρ) together with a parameteri-
zation of bilateral trade costs, but does not require knowledge of the spatial labor supply elasticity
 κ ) or agglomeration parameters (γ M , γS ) . In the second and third steps of the calibration, we
(e
use the calibrated model in combination the our instrumental variable strategy from Section 3 to
estimate these parameters in turn. We describe the procedure and data below, and Appendix 4
provides additional details.
      The model is calibrated to the mean of inflation-adjusted outcomes for 2000 and 2010 as the




                                                     27
baseline period.41 In order to limit the computational requirement, we aggregate the data coming
from each of the 2455 Mexican municipalities described in the motivating evidence into a set of
300 regions. Specifically, we keep the 150 coastal municipalities unchanged, but aggregate the
interior municipalities to 150 economic centers located at the centroids of the largest 150 interior
municipalities. This aggregation is largely inconsequential for our welfare quantification, as we
discuss in Appendix 4.5 (Tables A.30 and A.31).42 For simplicity, we aggregate all countries but
Mexico into a “Rest of the World” (“RoW”) aggregate (see Appendix 4.1).
Regional Data and Measurement Error                We use nominal wage and local employment data from
the Mexican population censuses as our measures of wn and Ln .43 To measure the size of the
tourism, manufacturing and non-traded services sectors in each region, we combine information
from the Censos Economicos at the local level with aggregate data. The aggregate data we use
are the shares of total GDP represented by the tourism, manufacturing
                                                                and services sectors from
                                                                                  0
the Mexican national accounts, as well as input-output shares νss                     that we calibrate using the
2003 Mexican input-output table (see Appendix 4.2). With these data in hand, we first compute
the Cobb-Douglas share of traded services α MT and non-traded services αS in consumption that
ensures that in the aggregate the value-added share of traded and non-traded sectors match the
data. This computation involves taking into account the input-output structure of the model (see
Appendix 4.1.). We then calibrate the local shares of all sectors by region. To measure the relative
regional shares of tourism and manufacturing value added, we use manufacturing GDP which is
directly observable in all regions, and we use local hotel sales as a basis to calibrate local tourism
GDP. We scale these hotel sales with a constant factor of proportion across all regions so that, in
the aggregate, the relative size of tourism to manufacturing matches the ratio of tourism to man-
ufacturing GDP in Mexico’s national accounts data above.44 Having calibrated the relative size
of tourism in the traded sector in each region, we then compute the share of non-traded services
workers in each region, accounting again for the fact that local non-traded services are used both
for final consumption, as well as for the production of tourism and manufacturing. This procedure
allows us to calibrate ( LS,n , L T,n , L M,n ) in all Mexican regions in a way that is consistent with the
structure of the model. Finally, to allow for measurement error in the data we input to the model,
we bootstrap our whole quantification procedure after treating the regional data that we feed into
the calibration (wages, population, hotel sales and manufacturing GDP) as point estimates with a
signal-to-noise ratio of 80-20, rather than data points (see Appendix 4.4).45

   41 As discussed in Section 2, the population census data is for 2000 and 2010, while the economic census data is for

1998 and 2008.
   42 The key empirical moments we use to inform the calibration are based on variation among coastal municipalities

(similar to the regression analysis above) that are unaffected by this aggregation.
   43 To aggregate interior regions, we take the sum of employment and the employment-weighted mean of wages.
   44 For the small number of regions for which this procedure predicts an employment in the tourism sector that is

higher than the total employment in services reported in this region, we cap tourism employment at the level reported
for the services sector as a whole.
   45 This procedure allows for a relatively large degree of measurement error in the national and regional accounts.

We effectively draw regional outcomes from a normal distribution with mean equal to the observed regional values
and a 95% confidence interval of +/- 40% of that value.


                                                          28
Public Investment in Tourism To estimate the public investment in local tourism infrastructure
Gn , we use data on the municipality stock of public investment in tourism development in Mex-
ico that we convert into equivalent steady-state annual flows, consistent with our static model.
We calibrate the share αG from equation (5) using the ratio of government investment over to-
tal tourism GDP, which leads to αG = 0.057. This is close to related elasticities estimated in e.g.
Fajgelbaum et al. (2015). To calibrate the common tax level that allows to finance this public in-
vestment, we         ι = 0.5% as the share of Mexico’s GDP represented by this total annualized
            compute 
                      ∑M Gn
investment ι =         GDP    . Appendices 2 and 4.2. provides additional details about the data and
calibration.
Trade Costs for Goods and Tourism                Data on trade and tourism flows is available for interna-
tional flows. We take aggregate trade flows for manufacturing and tourism between Mexico and
RoW from the the World Bank’s WITS database for cross-country trade in goods and services.
We calibrate border frictions for trade in goods and tourism such that the model matches exactly
the aggregate trade data in manufactured goods and tourism between Mexico and the rest of the
world.46 Unfortunately, similar data is not available for intra-country flows within Mexico. We
therefore parameterize trade costs within Mexico as following a function of regional bilateral dis-
tances, as in Redding (2016):

                                                    −β
                               −θ
                              τnj = d−
                                     nj
                                       DM
                                          and tnj =d− DT
                                                    nj , for ( n, j ) ∈ M × M,

where dnj is the distance between the centroid of the two regions n and j.47 We calibrate the dis-
tance decay elasticity for trade in goods following the literature (D M = 1). For tourism trade flows,
we use the data on bilateral tourism exports described in Section 2 and Appendix 2 to estimate a
gravity equation using PPML following Silva & Tenreyro (2006) with log distance in addition to
origin-by-year fixed effects, destination-by-year fixed effects, and dummies for common border,
language, colonial ties and travel visa requirements on the right-hand side.48 As depicted in ap-
pendix Figure A.1, we find a distance elasticity for tourism trade DT = 0.96 (standard error of
0.043 clustered at the level of origin-destination pairs). To provide additional evidence whether
the lack of data on within-country tourism flows is likely to affect counterfactuals, we have also
used information on the top 5 Mexican origin states for tourism flows to three destination states
reported in an internal report by SECTUR (2011). As reported in appendix Table A.20, we find that
the calibrated model does a good job at capturing the top origin regions, providing some support
that the assumption of gravity in domestic tourism flows is a reasonable approximation.
Additional Parameters For the value of the trade elasticity for flows of goods, we use the esti-
mate θ = 6.1 from Adao et al. (2015). This estimate is also in line with other existing estimates

   46 Specifically,frictions between region n in Mexico and RoW are d−    nj
                                                                            DM
                                                                               τBorder for manufacturing, and d− DT
                                                                                                               nj t Border
for tourism. The parameters τBorder and t Border are calibrated such that values of λin and πin summed over all Mexican
regions match exactly the data for international flows.
   47 The within-region distance is normalized at the minimum of between-region distances.
   48 Data on bilateral travel visa requirements (dummy equal to 1 if no waiver for tourist visas applies) were provided

for the year 2004 by Oxford’s International Migration Institute (IMI).


                                                           29
reported in the literature (Head & Mayer, 2014). To estimate the parameter β that governs the elas-
ticity of substitution (1 + β) between destinations, we use the panel data on country-level bilateral
tourism exports as detailed in Appendix 4.2. To be conservative in our quantification of the gains
from tourism, we pick the upper bound of the estimate of the tourism trade elasticity supported
by the data (1 + β = 2.5). Finally, the value of the upper-nest elasticity of substitution between
manufacturing and tourism has to be smaller than the lower-nest value. We set it at the same level
(ρ = 2.5), again to be conservative.
5.1.1   First Step: Calibration of Regional Fundamentals
                                                                                         j0
    Using information on (wn , L M,n , LS,n , L T,n , Gn ) with parameters (νj , α MT , αG , β, θ, ρ), we cali-
brate the baseline equilibrium according to equations (9), (10), (7), (8), (13), (14) and (15). Following
Redding (2016), we invert the calibrated model to recover the unique tourism and manufacturing
shifters A
         fn and Mn (up to scale) that are consistent with the data. Using the above calibrated αG
                                          fn (= An GnβαG ) into a fundamental component An
and data on Gn , we can further decompose A
and a part driven by government investment.49 As mentioned above, in the presence of spillovers
there is a potential for multiple equilibria in the model. Conditional on the data we observe,
though, the mapping to unobserved productivities and tourism shifters is unique.50
5.1.2   Second Step: Spatial Labor Supply Elasticity
    The estimating equation for the long-run spatial labor supply elasticity is directly derived from
Equation (12) of the model:
                                                  α MT 
                                                     
                                              wn
                     log Ln = Ko + κe log                  + ξ n for n∈ M .                    (18)
                                            PMT,n
                                                       α MT 
                                                    wn
We estimate equation (18) instrumenting for log    PMT,n         with our three tourism attractive-
ness instruments that we discuss in Section 3. This addresses the concern that the OLS estimate is
likely downward-biased because it confounds variation in labor demand and supply in the esti-
mation of the supply elasticity. Moreover, measurement error in real wages would also lead to a
downward bias. As reported in appendix Table A.21, we find an IV point estimate of 6.35 that is
indeed larger than in OLS (1.91). Both estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
The IV estimate is larger than estimates of the short-run spatial labor supply elasticity that are
commonly estimated in the literature to be around 2, but signals that even from a long-run per-
spective, there are significant frictions to mobility: the elasticity is far from infinite even though
tourism has had decades to materialize into the current spatial equilibrium.51
    Finally, as discussed in Section 3, we use the above empirical strategy to construct the regional

   49 We normalize Z o to 1 as it is not separately identified from A . We also verify the extent to which the model-
                       T,n                                               n
based measures of local tourism attractiveness are correlated with our tourism IVs and the calibrated regional hotel
sales for both A fn and An . For all three IVs and hotel sales we find a statistically significant correlation as reported in
appendix Table A.19.
   50 That is, the possibility of multiple equilibria arises when conducting counterfactual analysis, not at the calibration

stage.
   51 See e.g. Fajgelbaum et al. (2015) for a discussion of the estimates of the labor supply elasticity in the literature.



                                                             30
amenity measures used as the outcome variables in the model-based robustness regressions in
Table A.5. In particular, we construct three different vectors of regional amenities. Each of them
is computed as the residual variation in local population that is left unexplained by variation in
real wages (i.e. the residual in specification (18)). We construct this variable three different times,
using specification (18), in order to exclude each of the three instruments separately when estimat-
ing κe. This ensures that we do not build in a mechanical orthogonality condition between local
amenities and our instruments when testing whether or not our instruments are correlated with
the model-based measures of the local amenities of residents.
5.1.3   Third Step: Agglomeration Forces
    To fully characterize the effect of tourism on long-run economic outcomes, we require esti-
mates of the within and cross-sector spillovers on manufacturing production (γ M , γS ). To estimate
these, we combine model-based indirect inference with the exclusion restrictions of the IV strategy
that we develop in Section 3. In particular, we derive several moment conditions that must hold
under the exclusion restrictions in a counterfactual spatial equilibrium in the absence of tourism
activity. We then simulate the model and calibrate the combination of the within and cross-sector
agglomeration elasticities such that these moments hold as close as possible through the lens of
the calibrated model.
    The exclusion restrictions of our empirical strategy above imply that each of the three IVs,
which capture different types of ex ante tourism attractiveness, are orthogonal to i) the exogenous
manufacturing productivity of places Mno , and ii) the counterfactual distribution of population in
Mexico in the absence of tourism activity.52 Using these restrictions, we define the six following
moment conditions:

                                    h          i
                                       ( j)
                                  E zn log Mno   = 0 for j∈{1, 2, 3} and                                          (19)
                                     h         i
                                         ( j)
                                   E zn log Lon = 0 for j∈{1, 2, 3} ,                                             (20)

where { Lon }n∈M denotes the (counterfactual) distribution of population in Mexico absent tourism,
                                                                        ( j)
Mno is the exogenous component of local productivity, and zn for j = 1...3 denote the beach, island
and ruins instrumental variables. We simulate a counterfactual equilibrium without tourism for
a range of candidate parameters (γ M , γS ) and compute the correlations corresponding to (19) and
(20) in the simulated model. We then identify the parameters for which these correlations are as
close as possible to zero.53
    Importantly, this procedure is based on an otherwise fully calibrated model that matches the
current-day equilibrium with tourism, but is computed here for a counterfactual equilibrium

    52 Conditional on orthogonality with respect to M o and Lo in the no-tourism counterfactual equilibrium, no
                                                          n       n
additional information would be provided by adding further orthogonality conditions (e.g. wages, GDP). As in Section
3, orthogonality is conditional on the controls used in the empirical analysis that we continue to account for.
    53 Specifically, we measure these correlations by regressing the simulated log M o and log Lo on each of the three
                                                                                       n          n
IVs, conditional on the full set of controls as in Section 3. We then minimize a loss function that is the sum of these
regression coefficients, weighted by the inverse of their standard errors. Appendix 4.3 provides additional details.


                                                          31
without tourism. When estimating the agglomeration parameters, this counterfactual accounts
and controls for all other general equilibrium forces through which tourism affects regional out-
comes, such as input-output linkages to other sectors and migration. The procedure thus identifies
the strength of cross and within-sector agglomeration forces required to fit the observed correla-
tion between regional outcomes and the instruments in today’s equilibrium reported in Section 3,
while imposing zero correlations in the no-tourism counterfactual equilibrium.
    The exclusion restrictions together with the structure of the model help us identify both the
cross-sector spillover parameter, which requires variation in LST,n , and the within-sector spillover
parameter that requires variation in L M,n . Each of the three IVs impact both LST,n and L M,n .
They impact LST,n directly through tourism. Given the structure of the model, they also impact
L M,n through spillovers and GE effects that make manufacturing employment a function of local
tourism shifters. Furthermore, the two sets of moments we define in (19) and (20) provide distinct
information to pin down the parameters. In the model, local population is a non-linear function
not only of local productivity Mno , which corresponds to the first set of moments, but also, through
GE linkages and migration, of all of the fundamentals of the calibrated economy. Figure 2 sum-
marizes these forces at work. We show graphically that the six moment conditions jointly identify
the two parameters of interest by plotting the loss function that we minimize in the procedure
across a range of candidate combinations for (γ M , γS ). We find a bowl shape with a single param-
eter combination that minimizes the loss function across the six moment conditions. To provide
further intuition on this result, we also document what the observed local effects of tourism in
today’s equilibrium would have been under alternative values of γ M and γS , as we report in the
quantification section below.
  As depicted in Figure 2, we find that the best-fitting combination of parameters to match our
                                                                    cS = .087 (s.e.: 0.034).54 The
                      M = .064 (with a standard error of 0.035) and γ
moment conditions is γc
value of the within-sector spillover is on the higher end of measures of agglomeration externalities
reported in Rosenthal & Strange (2004), but well within the range of estimates reviewed in for ex-
ample Melo et al. (2009), and somewhat lower than found in more recent studies (e.g. Adao et al.
(2017) , Peters (2017) ). Our estimated cross-sector agglomeration force has no existing references
in the literature to compare this to that we are aware of. As part of the quantification below, we
also investigate counterfactual results across a range of alternative parameter combinations.
5.1.4   Link Between Local Effects and Quantification
    As discussed in Section 3, we can at this stage also examine the implications of potential viola-
tions of the exclusion restriction in the context of the model-based quantification of the gains from
tourism. Upward or downward-biased estimates of tourism’s local effects on economic outcomes
in today’s observed equilibrium in Section 3 would lead to two potential biases in the model’s es-
timation. First, the estimate of κe from regression (18) would be biased in the same direction as the
local effects (upward or downward). Second, it would also lead to a bias of our estimate of γS in

   54 To obtain standard errors, we bootstrap the procedure accounting for sampling error in both regional data and

parameter estimates as described in Appendix 4.4.


                                                        32
the same direction, as the moment conditions in (20) would be violated. In case of upward-biased
local effects, the stronger-than-actual counterfactual population change among touristic places
would falsely load onto γS , and vice-versa in case of a downward bias. Using these insights, we
can explore the sensitivity of our counterfactual analysis to alternative parameter combinations of
κe and γS , relative to our preferred estimates as the baseline. As discussed below, we also explore
a number of additional robustness exercises.
5.2     Quantification
Gains from Tourism Table 6 presents our baseline estimates of the welfare gains from tourism,
following the methodology described in Section 4.3.55 The per-capita welfare gains brought about
by tourism amount to 4.82 percent (95% confidence interval 3.46-9.48). The development of in-
ternational tourism contributes about 40 percent of these gains (1.84 percent), with the remainder
stemming from the gains of inter-regional tourism within Mexico. As discussed in Section 4, these
gains are net of the government investments made over time to develop tourism in Mexico, as
those are accounted for in our model. In particular, there are a savings associated with moving to
a no tourism equilibrium: the counterfactual equilibrium without tourism has no public spending
on tourism, and no income tax taken on workers, contrary to the current equilibrium with trade
in tourism.56
Role of Spillovers        Table 6 decomposes these welfare results into the neoclassical gains from
tourism development, and those due to agglomeration economies. Interestingly, while the spillovers
lead to large regional re-allocations of production in Mexico (rationalizing the large observed local
effects), their aggregate effect on Mexican welfare is more muted. In particular, in the absence of
spillovers, the welfare gains from tourism development would have been 10 percent lower, at 4.45
percent.
      To guide intuition as to what feature of the data is driving our results, we study in Table 7 a
series of counterfactuals that correspond to alternative agglomeration forces. For each of these sce-
narios, Table 7 illustrates what would have been the outcome of the regression analysis of the local
effects of tourism, and the corresponding aggregate welfare gains, if the data had been generated
by the alternative parameterization of agglomeration forces, holding everything else constant. In
particular, the table reports the estimated gains from tourism alongside the point estimates of the
following regressions:

                            ^ j       j         j                     0      j
                          ∆logGDPn = αcoast + β 1 logGDPTourismn + β j Xn + en ,                                    (21)

      where the left-hand side measures model-based long-run regional changes in total GDP when
moving from a no-tourism counterfactual equilibrium to today’s spatial equilibrium. Each differ-
ent parameterization of the agglomeration economies (γ M , γS ), that we index by j here, yields a
   55 The confidence intervals account for measurement error in the regional data we feed into the calibration in Section

5.1 and sampling error in the parameter estimates that enter the first step of the model calibration, as described in
Appendix 4.4.
   56 As discussed in Section 4, in the counterfactual without international tourism, government investments are scaled

back in proportion to the calibrated share of foreign tourists across regions in the model.


                                                           33
different cross-section of regional changes in local GDP on the left-hand side. On the right-hand
side, we replicate the regression specification in (1), and instrument for local tourism GDP in to-
day’s equilibrium (which is equal to the counterfactual change in local tourism GDP in each of the
j counterfactuals) with the three IVs as previously in Section 3.57 As before, we report (21) both in
reduced form (outcome on IVs) and as second-stage IV estimates.
    Column 1 of Table 7 explores the case without any spillovers. In this case, tourism has an
effect on local GDP that is about 60 percent the size of the effect we observe in the regression
analysis (0.23 vs 0.4). The effect of tourism on local manufacturing is actually negative in this
scenario. In absence of agglomeration forces, the development of tourism increases local factor
prices, which in turn adversely affects manufacturing. It also brings about increased local market
access (through additional consumer and input demand by tourism), but this alone is insufficient
to overturn this adverse effect on traded goods production. In Column 2, we shut down the cross-
sector agglomeration force (γS = 0), but allow for relatively strong agglomeration economies
within manufacturing (γ M = 0.15). In this case, the development of tourism barely leads to an in-
crease in local GDP relative to other regions. The adverse local effect of tourism on manufacturing
described above is now reinforced by the presence of within-sector agglomeration externalities in
manufacturing. The overall welfare gains from tourism are reduced to 0.65 percent. In this case,
tourism acts as a special case of the Dutch disease. Resources are reallocated away from manu-
facturing goods production which, due to economies of scale within manufacturing, has negative
implications for manufacturing productivity. Column 3 reports the polar opposite case where only
relatively strong cross-sector spillovers are at play (γS = 0.15). The development of tourism has
a strong positive effect on local manufacturing productivity which leads to a net positive effect
on manufacturing GDP and total local GDP, significantly overshooting the effect in the reduced-
form analysis and our preferred parameterization in column 4. In the aggregate, this leads to
additional welfare benefits of the development of tourism due to a growth in manufacturing pro-
ductivity that would not have otherwise occurred. Column 4 reports the results for the best fitting
parameter values. The effect of tourism on local GDP is close to identical to what we observe
in the regression analysis. About 60 percent of the effect of tourism on GDP (0.23) is driven by
purely neoclassical channels, reported in column 1. The remainder is driven by agglomeration
and co-agglomeration effects.
    Finally, as shown in Table 6, an interesting contrast to these findings emerges when we focus
on the gains from international-only tourism. Here, we find that the welfare gains brought about
by international tourism are slightly dampened compared to what they would have been in the
absence of spillovers. This asymmetry in the role of the agglomeration forces between the gains
from tourism as a whole and the gains from international tourism relates to our discussion above
in Section 4.4. In the case of international tourism, the regions most impacted have on average a
lower share of manufacturing than the average regions impacted by domestic tourism across Mex-
   57 Inthese model-based regressions, the IV approach addresses the same types of concerns as discussed in Section 3:
the vector of tourism attractiveness shifters (An ) could be correlated with other local advantages, such as the Mn and
Bn , and in addition tourists incur a travel cost so that variation in tourism is also correlated with local market access.
To address these confounding factors in (21), we use the three IVs under the same identifying assumptions as before.


                                                            34
ican regions. Because of this, the reallocation of resources away from the manufacturing sector and
into the services sector brought about by tourism , moves the economy further away from the opti-
mal mix of sectors, from a spillover standpoint. That is, spillovers losses induced by a lower scale
in manufacturing dominate, because these regions start from an already low production point for
manufacturing. Overall, these regions have more to loose by loosing manufacturing scale than by
gaining scale in services. As a result, the estimated gains from international tourism are slightly
lower than the gains that would have occurred in the absence of agglomeration economies (1.84
vs 2.39 percent).
5.2.1   Extensions and Robustness
    In the final part of the analysis, we investigate the sensitivity of our findings to a number
of alternative modeling assumptions and parameter values. In the following, we focus on three
sets of additional results, while Appendix 4.6 presents additional results on the estimated gains
when taking into account imperfect competition in the tourism sector and repatriation of the cor-
responding profits abroad. The appendix also explores what the local welfare effects of tourism
would have been in the absence of labor mobility.
Alternative Parameter Values          We first explore the sensitivity of our estimated gains from tourism
to different assumptions about the key parameters determining the size of the estimated gains
from tourism. In particular, appendix Table A.23 reports the estimated gains from tourism across
a range of parameter combinations for the trade elasticity of tourism (β), the spatial labor sup-
ply elasticity (e
                κ ) and the cross-sector co-agglomeration force γS . All other parameters are held
constant at their values of our baseline calibration discussed above. We render a more detailed
discussion of this sensitivity analysis to Appendix 4.6, and focus here on the potential concern
that residential amenities may be correlated with the IVs. As discussed above, this violation of the
exclusion restriction would lead to upward-biased estimates of both κe and γS . Appendix Table
A.23 documents two important insights on this question. First, these biases have opposite effects
on the welfare gains from tourism: while larger values of the spatial labor supply elasticity result
in lower estimated gains from tourism, the opposite is the case for tourism’s cross-sector spillover.
Second, the analysis sheds light on the sensitivity of our point estimates: for the range of values
of κe ∈ (2.35, 6.35) and γS ∈ (0, 0.087), the welfare gains from tourism are estimated to be in the
range of 2.56 to 7.25 percent.58
Non-Homotheticity With non-homothetic preferences for tourism-related services, part of the
observed increase in Mexican tourism since the 1950s could be due to higher incomes. Although
this would not invalidate the counterfactual we quantify above, it would matter for the inter-
pretation of the results. To get a sense of the importance of such non-homotheticities, we use
microdata from the Mexican income and expenditure surveys for the year 2004 and estimate the
tourism Engel curve conditional on municipality-by-period fixed effects, as depicted in appendix

   58 Forcompleteness, we also report a second Table A.24 where we keep γS at the estimated 0.087 and report the
gains from tourism across a range of values of κe ∈ (2.35, 6.35) and γ M ∈ (0, 0.064). The estimated gains are in the
range of 4.46 and 8.98.


                                                         35
Figure A.2. Using the estimate of this slope, and the fact that Mexican real GDP per capita grew
by 135 percent over the period 1960-2010 (source: World Development Indicators), we find that
non-homotheticity in Mexican consumption of tourism contribute about 0.3 percentage points of
the long-run change in Mexican tourism GDP. We then re-compute the welfare gains from tourism
starting from a current-day equilibrium that assumes away this part of the demand for tourism
services. We find that under this metric, non-homotheticities do not play a major role in shaping
the welfare gains from tourism in our baseline counterfactual. As presented in appendix Table
A.25, we find an estimate of the gains from tourism of 4.74 percent, which is very close to our
baseline estimate (4.82).
Transportation Infrastructure The analysis in Section 3 suggests that, while the local effects of
tourism are quite robust to conditioning on public spending, part of the positive effect could be
driven by better access to transport infrastructure. In the context of our quantitative analysis,
this gives rise to the concern that part of the impact of tourism on manufacturing comes from an
endogenous reduction in transport costs rather than productivity spillovers. In turn, this could
lead to over-stated welfare gains since the estimation of the cross-sector externality (γS ) could be
upward biased due to this omitted increase in local market access. We explore the sensitivity of
our results to this concern in three different ways. First, we repeat the whole quantitative analysis,
but now assume that the development of tourism leads to the construction of federal highways
between the top 20 percent of touristic municipalities along the coastline and their nearest state
capital. Using GIS, we model this as a 50 percent reduction in bilateral trade costs between any
pair of municipalities that are crossed by straight-line connections between the centroids of state
capitals and tourism centers.59 Second, we instead assume that the development of tourism brings
about a 50 percent reduction in the trade costs of these tourism centers with respect to of all of their
bilateral trading partners (all domestic regions and RoW). Third, we apply the estimated effect of
tourism on bilateral transport costs on the Mexican transport network from Section 3 (Table 5). In
particular, we obtain the second-stage IV estimate of that elasticity and use the highest of the three
point estimates (0.036 in Table A.26). We then make the assumption that each region’s bilateral
trade costs fell in proportion to their observed current-day levels of tourism, for regions above the
20th percentile of tourism activity. We assume that trade costs do not change for regions below. In
all three counterfactual exercises, touristic regions thus experience an endogenous increase in their
transport costs as we move from today’s spatial equilibrium to the counterfactual equilibrium in
the absence of tourism. As reported in Table A.27, we find estimates of γS and γ M that are very
close to our baseline estimates, ranging from 0.08-0.086 for γS and 0.07-0.08 for γ M . As expected,
the spillovers from tourism γS are somewhat weaker than in our baseline specification, but the
magnitude of these changes is small across all three counterfactuals. In line with this, we find
very similar gains from tourism that range between 4.74-5.23 compared to our baseline estimate
of 4.82. Overall, these results provide some further reassurance that our findings are unlikely to
be biased upwards due to omitted increases in local market access.
   59 Based differences in speed limits between Mexican federal highways and rural two-lane roads (110 vs 90 km/h),

the 50 percent reduction would be an upper bound.


                                                        36
6   Conclusion
    We study the economic consequences of the development of tourism, a fast-growing services
sector in developing countries. To do this convincingly and comprehensively, we combine a rich
collection of Mexican microdata with a spatial equilibrium model of trade in goods and tourism
services and a new empirical strategy. The analysis presents several findings. We find that tourism
causes large and significant long-run local economic gains. Given that tourism has had more than
five decades to shape relative regional economic outcomes in Mexico in a setting with labor mo-
bility, the raw empirical moment speaking most directly to this effect is the fact that a 10 percent
increase in local tourism revenues leads to a 2.5 percent increase in relative local employment and
a 2 percent increase in the local population.
    We find that these local effects are in part driven by sizable positive multiplier effects on man-
ufacturing production. Taking account of other general equilibrium forces, such as input-output
linkages and the gain in market access brought about by tourism, we find that these multiplier ef-
fects provide evidence of positive spillovers from the development of the local services sector on
traded goods production. In particular, we estimate significant cross-sector spillovers in addition
to within-sector localization economies within manufacturing. While these two sources of ag-
glomeration economies reinforce one another locally, leading to the large observed re-allocations
of manufacturing and total GDP towards tourism centers in the data, we find that they in part off-
set one another for the aggregate implications of tourism. That is, while tourism leads to sizable
gains in agglomeration economies at the local level, these gains are muted at the national level.
Spillover effects contribute to about 10 percent of the total gains from tourism and the aggregate
welfare gains are mainly driven by a classical market integration effect.
    The analysis serves to inform currently ongoing policy debates in two main ways. First, we
provide credible empirical evidence on the long-term effects of tourism activity on economic out-
comes. Given that most of the current tourism policies are targeted at investing in the local at-
tractiveness for tourism (the A
                              fn in our framework), our results on both the local and aggregate
implications of tourism integration are directly related to these policies. Second, this research pro-
vides a useful methodology combining empirical evidence with a spatial equilibrium model to
study the propagation of localized and sector-specific economic shocks to aggregate outcomes in
other empirical contexts of interest.

References
Adao, R., Arkolakis, C., & Esposito, F. (2017). Trade, agglomeration effects and labor markets:
 Theory and evidence. Yale University Working Paper.
Adao, R., Costinot, A., & Donaldson, D. (2015). Nonparametric counterfactual predictions in neoclas-
 sical models of international trade (Tech. Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ahlfeldt, G. M., Redding, S. J., Sturm, D. M., & Wolf, N. (2015). The economics of density: Evidence
 from the Berlin wall. forthcoming, Econometrica.




                                                 37
Allcott, H., & Keniston, D. (2014). Dutch disease or agglomeration? the local economic effects of natural
  resource booms in modern america (Tech. Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Allen, T., & Arkolakis, C. (2014). Trade and the topography of the spatial economy. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1085, 1139.
Allen, T., & Arkolakis, C. (2016). Optimal city structure (Tech. Rep.).
Allen, T., Arkolakis, C., & Li, X. (n.d.). On the existence and uniqueness of trade equilibria (Tech. Rep.).
  Citeseer.
Allen, T., Arkolakis, C., & Takahashi, Y. (2014). Universal gravity. NBER Working Paper(w20787).
Arezki, R., Cherif, R., & Piotrowski, J. (2009). Tourism specialization and economic development:
  Evidence from the unesco world heritage list (No. 9-176). International Monetary Fund.
Arkolakis, C., Costinot, A., & Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2012). New trade models, same old gains?
  American Economic Review, 102(1), 94–130.
Atkin, D., Faber, B., & Gonzalez-Navarro, M. (2015). Retail globalization and household welfare:
  Evidence from mexico. UC Berkeley mimeo.
Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., & Hanson, G. H. (2013). The china syndrome: Local labor market effects
 of import competition in the United States. The American Economic Review, 103(6), 2121–2168.
Baumol, W. J. (1967). Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: The anatomy of urban crisis. The
  American economic review, 57(3), 415–426.
Bryan, G., & Morten, M. (2015). Economic development and the spatial allocation of labor: Evi-
  dence from Indonesia. Manuscript, London School of Economics and Stanford University.
Caliendo, L., Dvorkin, M., & Parro, F. (2015a). The impact of trade on labor market dynamics (Tech.
  Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Caliendo, L., Dvorkin, M., & Parro, F. (2015b). The impact of trade on labor market dynamics (Tech.
  Rep.).
Caliendo, L., & Parro, F. (2014). Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of nafta. The Review of
  Economic Studies, rdu035.
Caliendo, L., Parro, F., Rossi-Hansberg, E., & Sarte, P.-D. (2014). The impact of regional and sectoral
  productivity changes on the us economy (Tech. Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Caselli, F., & Michaels, G. (2009). Do oil windfalls improve living standards? evidence from brazil (Tech.
  Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Copeland, B. R. (1991). Tourism, welfare and de-industrialization in a small open economy. Eco-
  nomica, 515–529.
Davis, M. A., & Ortalo-Magné, F. (2011). Household expenditures, wages, rents. Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 14(2), 248–261.
Dekle, R., Eaton, J., & Kortum, S. (2007). Unbalanced trade. American Economic Review, 97(2),
 351–355.
Donaldson, D. (in press). Railroads of the raj: Estimating the impact of transportation infrastruc-
 ture. American Economic Review.



                                                    38
Donaldson, D., & Hornbeck, R. (2015). Railroads and american economic growth: A "market
 access" approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Eilat, Y., & Einav, L. (2004). Determinants of international tourism: a three-dimensional panel data
  analysis. Applied Economics, 36(12), 1315–1327.
Fajgelbaum, P. D., Morales, E., Serrato, J. C. S., & Zidar, O. M. (2015). State taxes and spatial
  misallocation (Tech. Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
FONATUR. (2011). Oportunidades de inversion en el sector turistico Mexicano. Fondo Nacional de
  Fomento al Turismo.
Francois, J., & Hoekman, B. (2010). Services trade and policy. Journal of Economic Literature, 48(3),
  642–692.
Galle, S., Rodrıguez-Clare, A., & Yi, M. (2014). Slicing the pie: Quantifying the aggregate and
 distributional effects of trade. Unpublished manuscript, UC Berkeley.
Hawkins, D. E., & Mann, S. (2007). The world bank’s role in tourism development. Annals of
 Tourism Research, 34(2), 348–363.
Head, K., & Mayer, T. (2014). Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook. Handbook of
 International Economics, 4, 131.
Herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R., & Valentinyi, Á. (2014). Growth and structural transformation. In
 P. Aghion & S. N. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of economic growth (pp. 855–941).
Horowitz, J. L. (2001). The bootstrap. In J. J. Heckman & E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of econometrics
 (Vol. 5, p. 3159 - 3228). Elsevier.
Hummels, D. (2007). Transportation costs and international trade in the second era of globaliza-
 tion. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 131–154.
Kline, P., & Moretti, E. (2014). Local economic development, agglomeration economies, and the big
  push: 100 years of evidence from the tennessee valley authority*. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(1).
Leatherman, S. P. (1997). Beach rating: a methodological approach. Journal of coastal research,
  253–258.
McGregor, T., & Wills, S. (2017). Surfing a wave of economic growth. Oxford University Working
 Paper.
McMillan, M. S., & Rodrik, D. (2011). Globalization, structural change and productivity growth (Tech.
 Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Melo, P. C., Graham, D. J., & Noland, R. B. (2009). A meta-analysis of estimates of urban agglom-
 eration economies. Regional science and urban Economics, 39(3), 332–342.
Mian, A., & Sufi, A. (2009). The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from the
 us mortgage default crisis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1449–1496.
Monte, F., Redding, S., & Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2015). Commuting, migration and local employment
 elasticities (Tech. Rep.).
Peters, M. (2017). Refugees and local agglomeration: Evidence from germany’s post-war popula-
  tion expulsions. Yale University Working Paper.


                                                 39
Redding, S. J. (2016). Goods trade, factor mobility and welfare. Journal of International Economics,
  101, 148–167.
Rosenthal, S., & Strange, W. (2004). Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration
  economies. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 4, 2119–2171.
SECTUR. (2011). Encuesta de flujos del turismo. SECTUR Report.
Sequeira, T. N., & Macas Nunes, P. (2008). Does tourism influence economic growth? a dynamic
  panel data approach. Applied Economics, 40(18), 2431–2441.
Silva, J. S., & Tenreyro, S. (2006). The log of gravity. The Review of Economics and statistics, 88(4),
   641–658.
Topalova, P. (2010). Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evidence on
  poverty from India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(4), 1–41.
Weaver, D., Oppermann, M., et al. (2000). Tourism management. John Wiley and Sons.




                                                  40
     7    Figures and Tables
     Figures

                                   Figure 1: Beach Characteristics along the Coastline and Archaeological Ruins in Mexico




                                                                                          ^
                                                                                          _
                                                                                           _
                                                                                           ^     ^
                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                                 _^_
                                                                                              _  _
                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                              ^##^ _
                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                   ^ _
                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                 ^ _
                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                   ^_
                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                    ^_
                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                    _^
                                                                                                    ^  _
                                                                                                      _^
                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                              ^_
                                                                                               ^
                                                                                              _^
                                                                                               _
                                                                                               ^     _
                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                               _^
                                                                                                _       _
                                                                                                        ^__
                                                                                                          ^
                                                                                                          ^
                                                                                                          _^
                                                                                                           _




41
                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                 ^    _
                                                                                                      ^_^
                                                                                                       ^    _^
                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                       _^
                                                                                                        _ ^  _
                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                        ^
                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                        ^
                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                        ^^
                                                                                                         _^
                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                        ^_
                                                                                                         ^_
                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                          ^  ^
                                                                                                             __^
                                                                                                               _^
                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                          ^_^
                                                                                                           ^    _
                                                                                                                ^
                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                ^
                                                                                                           _
                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                           _^_
                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                          ^#
                                                                                                                           _
                                                                                                                           ^##                                                     _^
                                                                                                                                                                                   ^   _
                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                                      _^
                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                                           _^
                                                                                                                            _                 _
                                                                                                                                              ^                                # ## ^   _
                                                                                                                                                                                        ^
                                                                                                                             ^     ##         _
                                                                                                                                              ^                              _
                                                                                                                                                                             ^
                                                                                                                                                                             # #    # #_
                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                       ^#
                                                                                                                            ^_# ##
                                                                                                                            _^
                                                                                                                             _   # ##   #     #                              _
                                                                                                                                                                             ^
                                                                                                                                                                             ####
                                                                                                                                                                                ### ^#_
                                                                                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                             ^      ## # #
                                                                                                                                   ## #                                       ###   #_
                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                     ^_
                                                                                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                             ^_
                                                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                                              _^        #
                                                                                                                                        # #
                                                                                                                                          ## # ^ __
                                                                                                                                                  ^
                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                  ^                                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                                    _  _
                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                                               _        ##
                                                                                                                                         #                                    ##
                                                                                                                                                                               #####^
                                                                                                                                                                                    _^
                                                                                                                                                                                     _^
                                                                                                                                    ##### #  #
                                                                                                                                            ##                     #         #  #
                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                                                                             ##                           ###
                                                                                                                                    _^_       ####                          ##
                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                        ^                                 ##
                                                                                                                                                                            ##
                                                                                                                                                                          ###
                                                                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                 ^
     Notes: The left panel displays the remote sensing satellite data covering the Mexican coastline at a resolution of 30x30 meter. In the right panel, the stars indicate the
     location of islands within 5 km from the Mexican coastline, and the triangles indicate the location of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins. See Section 2 for discussion.
         Figure 2: Indirect Inference for Best-Fitting Combination of Agglomeration Forces




Notes: See Section 5.1 for discussion.


Tables

                                         Table 1: Beach Tourism in Mexico

                                Number of          Sum of Hotel Revenues in 1998   Share of National Hotel
                               Municipalities      and 2008 (Thousands of Pesos)   Revenues 1998 and 2008

 Inland Municipalities              2305                    46,070,000                      0.365

 Coastal Municipalities              150                    80,130,000                      0.635
Notes: Source: Censos Economicos for 1998 and 2008.
                                                       42
                                                       Table 2: Tourism’s Effect on Municipality Employment and Population

                                                                                                                                                                           Log Municipality
             Dependent variables:                                                    Log Municipality Employment 2000, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                         Population 2000, 2010
                                              (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)          (12)
                                             OLS          OLS       Island IV   Island IV     Beach IV      Beach IV     Ruins IV   Ruins IV    Cobmined    Combined    Combined      Combined
                                                                                         Panel A: OLS and IV Regressions
             Log Hotel Sales                0.236***     0.218***    0.295***    0.323***     0.234***     0.252***      0.250***    0.215***    0.256***    0.245***    0.211***    0.200***
                                           (0.00605)    (0.00568)    (0.0890)     (0.122)     (0.0793)     (0.0771)      (0.0515)    (0.0544)    (0.0372)    (0.0406)    (0.0376)    (0.0416)
             Log Distance to US Border      0.0790**      -0.0290    0.105**      0.0206       0.0783       -0.0129      0.0852*      -0.0306    0.0879**     -0.0163    0.137***     0.0341
                                            (0.0386)     (0.0416)    (0.0513)    (0.0676)     (0.0529)     (0.0547)      (0.0442)    (0.0484)    (0.0404)    (0.0438)    (0.0422)    (0.0460)
             Log Distance to Mexico City   -0.587***    -0.578***   -0.508***   -0.463***    -0.590***    -0.541***     -0.569***   -0.581***   -0.560***   -0.549***   -0.596***   -0.591***
                                            (0.0258)     (0.0284)     (0.122)     (0.137)      (0.109)     (0.0882)      (0.0733)    (0.0660)    (0.0557)    (0.0526)    (0.0562)    (0.0539)
             Log Municipality Area         0.340***     0.351***     0.263**       0.223     0.342***     0.309***       0.322***   0.355***    0.314***    0.318***    0.365***    0.370***
                                            (0.0172)     (0.0169)     (0.118)     (0.150)      (0.105)     (0.0957)      (0.0689)    (0.0687)    (0.0514)    (0.0525)    (0.0523)    (0.0540)
             State Capital Dummy                         0.796***                  0.378                     0.660*                  0.810***                0.689***                0.627**
                                                          (0.191)                 (0.506)                   (0.355)                   (0.294)                 (0.242)                 (0.256)
             Old City Dummy                              1.028***                  0.624                   0.897**                   1.041***                0.924***                0.920***
                                                          (0.229)                 (0.513)                   (0.364)                   (0.313)                 (0.268)                 (0.285)
             Colonial Port Dummy                         0.699***                  0.300                     0.569*                  0.712***                0.597***                0.671***
                                                          (0.141)                 (0.509)                   (0.321)                   (0.246)                 (0.205)                 (0.216)
             Log Average Precipitation                  0.263***                 0.244***                  0.257***                 0.263***                0.258***                0.245***
                                                         (0.0402)                (0.0483)                  (0.0423)                  (0.0414)                (0.0409)                (0.0415)
             Log Average Temperature                     0.233**                   0.194                   0.221**                   0.235**                 0.223**                0.282***
43




                                                          (0.106)                 (0.123)                   (0.110)                   (0.108)                 (0.107)                 (0.106)
             Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                 
             Observations                    4,889         4,889      4,889        4,889       4,889         4,889        4,889        4,889      4,889        4,889      4,889        4,889
             R-squared                       0.659         0.682
             Number of Municipalities        2455          2455       2455        2455         2455         2455          2455        2455        2455        2455        2455        2455
             First Stage F-Stat                                       9.549       5.748        15.58        15.58         25.30       21.66       17.56       15.13       17.56       15.13
             Over-ID Test P-Value                                                                                                                 0.879       0.662       0.834       0.699
                                                                                       Panel B: Reduced-Form Regressions
             Island IV                                              0.587**     0.506**                                                         0.516**     0.458**      0.448*       0.407*
                                                                    (0.235)     (0.226)                                                          (0.236)     (0.225)     (0.231)     (0.223)
             Beach IV                                                                         9.028**     9.703***                              8.617**     9.459**       6.375       7.217*
                                                                                               (3.738)     (3.534)                               (4.016)     (3.776)     (4.191)     (3.970)
             Ruins IV                                                                                                   0.504***    0.366***    0.451***    0.317***    0.378***     0.258**
                                                                                                                         (0.148)     (0.118)     (0.151)     (0.118)     (0.142)     (0.114)
             Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                  
             Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                                                   
             Observations                                             4,889      4,889          4,889       4,889         4,889       4,889       4,889       4,889       4,889       4,889
             R-squared                                                0.400      0.478          0.399       0.478         0.401       0.478       0.403       0.480       0.409       0.476
             Number of Municipalities                                 2455        2455          2455        2455          2455        2455        2455        2455        2455         2455

     Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km of the municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction
     of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered by white sand pixels that lie within the wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV is
     a dummy indicating the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins. Log hotel sales are measured with the hyperbolic inverse sine transformation as described in
     Section 3. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                               Table 3: Tourism’s Effect on Municipality Wage Bill, GDP by Sector and Wages

                                                                                                   Censos Economicos 1998, 2008                                                             Population Census 2000, 2010
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)          (10)         (11)       (12)         (13)           (14)
                                                                                                                   Log GDP Log GDP
                                      Log Labor Log Labor                                  Log GDP Log GDP                                 Log GDP      Log GDP      Log GDP    Log GDP      Log Wage       Log Wage
        Dependent Variables:                              Log GDP            Log GDP                                (Manu+      (Manu+
                                       Income    Income                                   (w/o Hotel) (w/o Hotel)                           (Manu)       (Manu)       (Agri)     (Agri)       Residual       Residual
                                                                                                                    Mining)     Mining)
                                         OLS       Three IVs       OLS       Three IVs        OLS       Three IVs     OLS      Three IVs      OLS       Three IVs       OLS     Three IVs       OLS         Three IVs
                                                                                                 Panel A: OLS and IV Regressions
        Log Hotel Sales                0.480***     0.475***     0.464***     0.404***     0.458*** 0.380*** 0.516*** 0.335***              0.530***     0.394***     0.291***     0.102     0.0220***     0.0446***
                                        (0.0104)     (0.0691)     (0.0104)     (0.0713)     (0.0106)     (0.0732)   (0.0144)     (0.102)     (0.0146)     (0.0939)     (0.0164)   (0.150)     (0.00309)     (0.00572)
        Log Distance to US Border      -0.364***    -0.367***    -0.299***    -0.328***    -0.304*** -0.341*** -0.290*** -0.376***            -0.181*     -0.245**     0.267**     0.178     -0.0550***    -0.0403***
                                        (0.0713)     (0.0758)     (0.0691)     (0.0768)     (0.0696)     (0.0783)    (0.105)     (0.118)      (0.105)      (0.116)      (0.107)   (0.136)      (0.0106)     (0.00889)
        Log Distance to Mexico City    -0.641***    -0.647***    -0.705***    -0.770***    -0.711*** -0.796*** -0.871*** -1.068***          -0.889***    -1.038***    -0.231*** -0.438**       0.00860      0.0188**
                                        (0.0510)     (0.0876)     (0.0489)     (0.0919)     (0.0494)     (0.0944)   (0.0678)     (0.132)     (0.0690)      (0.124)     (0.0753)   (0.180)      (0.0103)     (0.00943)
        Log Municipality Area           0.183***      0.190**     0.217***     0.290***     0.221*** 0.316*** 0.181*** 0.402***              0.112***      0.278**     0.451*** 0.683***      -0.0167**    -0.0272***
                                        (0.0323)     (0.0901)     (0.0310)     (0.0929)     (0.0313)     (0.0954)   (0.0430)     (0.133)     (0.0428)      (0.123)     (0.0435)   (0.186)     (0.00833)     (0.00756)
        State Capital Dummy             1.224***     1.247***     1.164***     1.403***     1.197*** 1.508*** 0.689**           1.409**       0.736**      1.278**       0.287     1.043        0.0233        -0.0183
                                         (0.207)      (0.344)      (0.210)      (0.369)      (0.214)      (0.383)    (0.319)     (0.558)      (0.348)      (0.538)      (0.661)   (0.983)      (0.0298)      (0.0286)
        Old City Dummy                  1.310***     1.332***     1.307***     1.537***     1.324*** 1.624*** 1.242*** 1.937***              1.241***     1.764***       0.733     1.463       -0.00604     -0.0685**
                                         (0.240)      (0.360)      (0.242)      (0.390)      (0.246)      (0.406)    (0.363)     (0.598)      (0.394)      (0.579)      (0.809)   (1.079)      (0.0299)      (0.0339)
        Colonial Port Dummy              0.829**      0.850**       0.548       0.775*        0.551       0.848*      0.400       1.087        0.462        0.979        -0.873    -0.152     -0.132***      -0.171**
                                         (0.325)      (0.400)      (0.446)      (0.448)      (0.486)      (0.467)    (0.959)     (0.807)      (0.962)      (0.850)      (0.739)   (1.161)      (0.0435)      (0.0707)
        Log Average Precipitation      -0.629***    -0.627***    -0.578***    -0.567***    -0.577*** -0.564*** -0.960*** -0.928***          -0.937***    -0.913***       -0.182    -0.149    -0.0956***    -0.0921***
44




                                        (0.0807)     (0.0827)     (0.0760)     (0.0787)     (0.0765)     (0.0799)    (0.106)     (0.113)      (0.106)      (0.110)      (0.111)   (0.118)      (0.0146)      (0.0166)
        Log Average Temperature         0.577***     0.578***     1.069***     1.092***     1.077*** 1.107*** 1.394*** 1.463***              1.437***     1.489***     2.367*** 2.439***      -0.167***     -0.232***
                                      (0.197)      (0.197)      (0.184)      (0.188)      (0.186)      (0.191)    (0.270)     (0.282)      (0.276)      (0.283)      (0.305)    (0.319)        (0.0389)      (0.0479)
        Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                                            
        Observations                      4,596        4,596        4,889        4,889        4,889        4,889      4,889       4,889        4,889        4,889         4,889     4,889     5,490,558     5,490,558
        R-squared                         0.636                     0.643                     0.636                   0.506                    0.507                      0.429                  0.390
        Number of Municipalities          2385       2385           2455       2455           2455         2455       2455        2455         2455       2455            2455      2455         2455         2455
        First Stage F-Stat                           14.93                     15.13                       15.13                  15.13                   15.13                     15.13                     53.26
        Over-ID Test P-Value                         0.668                     0.302                       0.353                  0.271                   0.457                    0.307                      0.992
                                                                                               Panel B: Reduced-Form Regressions
        Island IV                                     0.461                     0.280                      0.242                -0.0746                    0.114                  0.764*                       0.0596
                                                     (0.369)                   (0.377)                    (0.374)                (0.457)                  (0.420)                (0.461)                     (0.0372)
        Beach IV                                    19.63***                  19.67***                  18.38***               16.00***                  15.45***                 1.416                     1.981***
                                                     (5.581)                   (5.031)                    (5.006)                (5.384)                  (5.081)                (8.254)                      (0.277)
        Ruins IV                                    0.735***                  0.601***                   0.578**                0.626**                  0.745***                -0.0246                      -0.0286
                                                     (0.234)                   (0.232)                    (0.233)                (0.285)                  (0.287)                (0.395)                     (0.0263)
        Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                                                   
        Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                                                                               
        Observations                                  4,596                     4,889                      4,889                  4,889                    4,889                  4,889                     5,490,558
        R-squared                                     0.362                     0.382                      0.381                  0.287                    0.274                  0.365                        0.379
        Number of Municipalities                      2385                      2455                       2455                   2455                     2455                    2455                         2455

     Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Regressions in the final two columns are weighted using population weights and also include controls for gender, ethnicity and
     3rd-order polynomials for age and years of education. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                                                            Table 4: Placebo Falsification Tests

      Dependent Variable:                                                                                  Log Municipality Census Population
                                       (1)            (2)         (3)                (4)          (5)              (6)             (7)                (8)       (9)            (10)       (11)                (12)
      Census Years:                  1921, 1930, 1940, 1950             2000, 2010              1921, 1930, 1940, 1950                   2000, 2010           1921, 1930, 1940, 1950             2000, 2010

                                    Island IV      Island IV   Island IV        Island IV      Beach IV        Beach IV         Beach IV         Beach IV    Ruins IV       Ruins IV    Ruins IV         Ruins IV
                                                                 Panel A: Left Hand Side with Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation for Log Population
      Instrumental Variable            -0.151         -0.197    0.510**          0.430*          -15.69*          -15.67           6.601          6.635**      -0.0152        -0.0770   0.437***          0.329**
                                      (0.350)        (0.347)     (0.233)         (0.221)         (9.458)         (9.639)          (4.031)          (3.091)     (0.234)        (0.236)     (0.142)          (0.135)
      Log Distance to US Border       0.121*        0.149**      0.0415         0.0909*         0.126**          0.154**          0.0386           0.0883      0.122*        0.152**      0.0258           0.0788
                                     (0.0636)       (0.0635)    (0.0574)        (0.0534)        (0.0634)        (0.0632)         (0.0578)         (0.0538)    (0.0623)       (0.0619)    (0.0580)         (0.0540)
      Log Distance to Mexico City   -0.419***      -0.394***   -0.878***       -0.836***       -0.413***       -0.388***        -0.880***        -0.837***   -0.419***      -0.395***   -0.873***        -0.832***
                                     (0.0574)       (0.0571)    (0.0321)        (0.0326)        (0.0574)        (0.0570)         (0.0322)         (0.0327)    (0.0576)       (0.0572)    (0.0322)         (0.0327)
      Log Municipality Area         0.497***       0.430***    0.633***        0.515***        0.495***         0.427***        0.637***         0.518***    0.497***       0.430***    0.627***         0.511***
                                     (0.0215)       (0.0220)    (0.0205)        (0.0205)        (0.0214)        (0.0220)         (0.0204)         (0.0205)    (0.0195)       (0.0205)    (0.0206)         (0.0208)
      Log Km of Major Roads 1940                   0.117***                    0.205***                         0.117***                         0.205***                   0.117***                     0.204***
                                                    (0.0116)                    (0.0113)                        (0.0116)                          (0.0113)                   (0.0114)                     (0.0113)
      Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                                             
      Observations                   9,736            9,736     4,868             4,868           9,736           9,736            4,868            4,868      9,736           9,736      4,868             4,868
      R-Squared                      0.231            0.256     0.400             0.469           0.234           0.260            0.399            0.469      0.230           0.256      0.401             0.469
      Number of Municipalities       2434              2434     2434              2434            2434             2434            2434             2434       2434            2434       2434              2434
                                                                               Panel B: Left Hand Side with Log of One for Zero Population
45




      Instrumental Variable            -0.144         -0.189    0.510**           0.430*         -15.62*          -15.60          6.601           6.635**    0.000341         -0.0611   0.437***          0.329**
                                      (0.337)        (0.334)     (0.233)          (0.221)        (9.413)         (9.596)         (4.031)           (3.091)     (0.223)        (0.225)     (0.142)          (0.135)
      Log Distance to US Border       0.116*        0.144**      0.0415          0.0909*        0.120**         0.149**          0.0386            0.0883      0.116*        0.146**      0.0258           0.0788
                                     (0.0607)       (0.0605)    (0.0574)         (0.0534)       (0.0605)        (0.0603)        (0.0578)          (0.0538)    (0.0595)       (0.0591)    (0.0580)         (0.0540)
      Log Distance to Mexico City   -0.427***      -0.403***   -0.878***        -0.836***      -0.421***       -0.397***       -0.880***         -0.837***   -0.427***      -0.404***   -0.873***        -0.832***
                                     (0.0542)       (0.0538)    (0.0321)         (0.0326)       (0.0542)        (0.0538)        (0.0322)          (0.0327)    (0.0544)       (0.0540)    (0.0322)         (0.0327)
      Log Municipality Area         0.499***       0.431***    0.633***         0.515***       0.496***        0.429***        0.637***          0.518***    0.498***       0.432***    0.627***         0.511***
                                     (0.0205)       (0.0211)    (0.0205)         (0.0205)       (0.0205)        (0.0211)        (0.0204)          (0.0205)    (0.0187)       (0.0196)    (0.0206)         (0.0208)
      Log Km of Major Roads 1940                   0.116***                     0.205***                       0.116***                          0.205***                   0.116***                     0.204***
                                                    (0.0112)                     (0.0113)                       (0.0111)                          (0.0113)                   (0.0110)                     (0.0113)
      Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                                             
      Observations                   9,736            9,736     4,868              4,868         9,736            9,736          4,868              4,868     9,736            9,736     4,868              4,868
      R-Squared                      0.246            0.273     0.400              0.469         0.250            0.278          0.399              0.469     0.246            0.273     0.401              0.469
      Number of Municipalities       2434              2434     2434               2434          2434              2434          2434               2434      2434             2434      2434               2434

     Notes: See Section 5.2 for discussion. Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km of the municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction
     of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered by white sand pixels that lie within the wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV
     is a dummy indicating the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican states. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance
     levels.
                                                       Table 5: Role of Public Investment and Transport Infrastructure

                                             (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)       (11)          (12)
                                                Log Stock of Public                    Log Distance from                                               Log Distance to International
       Dependent Variables:                                                                                             Log Km of Paved Roads
                                               Investment in Tourism                Planned Tourism Center                                                       Airport

       Island IV                          2.050***                              -0.491***                           0.00789                           -0.387**
                                           (0.672)                               (0.145)                            (0.0816)                           (0.157)
       Beach IV                                          31.50*                             -5.757*                            2.678***                          -5.064*
                                                         (16.69)                            (3.218)                             (0.717)                          (3.030)
       Ruins IV                                                    0.972***                              -0.0152                          0.194***                            -0.111
                                                                    (0.236)                             (0.0653)                          (0.0570)                           (0.0754)
       Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                               
       Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                                           
       Observations                        4,889         4,889       4,889       4,889       4,889        4,889      4,889      4,889       4,889      4,889      4,889        4,889
       R-Squared                           0.654         0.653       0.652       0.422       0.417        0.413      0.619      0.619       0.620      0.226      0.224        0.223
       Number of Municipalities            2455          2455        2455        2455        2455         2455       2455       2455        2455       2455       2455         2455

                                            (13)          (14)        (15)        (16)        (17)       (18)         (19)      (20)        (21)
                                                   Log Transport Time                 Log Transport Time                 Log Transport Time
       Dependent Variables:
46




                                                    (Simple Average)             (Population-Weighted Average)         (GDP-Weighted Average)

       Island IV                          -0.0591**                             0.00692                              0.0193
                                           (0.0241)                             (0.0407)                            (0.0464)
       Beach IV                                        -1.085***                            -0.495**                           -0.648*
                                                        (0.266)                              (0.234)                           (0.351)
       Ruins IV                                                    -0.0406***                          -0.0825***                         -0.109***
                                                                    (0.0108)                            (0.0200)                           (0.0262)
       Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                
       Full Set of Controls                                                                                                            
       Observations                        4,889         4,889        4,889      4,889       4,889        4,889      4,889      4,889        4,889
       R-Squared                           0.641         0.641        0.641      0.528       0.529        0.531      0.355      0.355        0.359
       Number of Municipalities            2455          2455         2455       2455        2455         2455       2455       2455         2455

     Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km of the municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction
     of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered by white sand pixels that lie within the wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV
     is a dummy indicating the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins. “Transport Time” refers to the mean (or weighted mean as indicated) of municipality travel
     times to other municipalities and border crossings on the full terrestrial Mexican transport network. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%,
     ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                        Table 6: The Gains from Tourism

                                                                 Estimated           No Spillovers
                                                                 γS = 0.087                 γS = 0
                   Parameters
                                                                 γM = 0.064                 γM = 0

                   Gains from All Tourism                           4.82%                4.45%
                                                                 (3.46, 9.48)         (3.24, 7.45)
                                                                 [3.85, 8.97]         [3.42, 6.65]

                   Gains from International Tourism              1.84%                   2.39%
                                                              (-0.01, 5.02)           (1.88, 3.37)
                                                              [1.35, 4.72]             [2.0, 3.19]
Notes: See Section 5.2 and Appendix 4.4 for discussion. 95% confidence intervals below point estimates in round
brackets, and 90% confidence intervals in square brackets.



              Table 7: The Role of Agglomeration Forces for Local and Aggregate Effects

       Dependent variable:                        Counterfactual Change in Log Total GDP
                                         (1)                (2)                    (3)                   (4)
                                       γS = 0              γS = 0               γS = 0.15            γS = 0.087
       Parameters
                                       γM = 0            γM = 0.15               γM = 0              γM = 0.064
                                                Panel A: IV Estimates
       Log Tourism GDP               0.232***        0.0478***        0.657***                       0.409***
                                     (0.0549)         (0.0123)         (0.144)                       (0.0900)
       Coast FX                                                                                       
       Full Set of Controls                                                                           
       Observations                     300             300              300                            300
       Number of Clusters               32               32               32                             32
                                       Panel B: Reduced-Form Regressions
       Island IV                     0.321***           0.0640***               0.918***             0.561***
                                     (0.0832)            (0.0159)                (0.238)              (0.146)
       Beach IV                      5.542***            1.204***               15.37***             10.02***
                                      (1.456)             (0.278)                (4.160)              (2.552)
       Ruins IV                       0.0136              0.00546                0.0332               0.0213
                                      (0.125)            (0.0239)                (0.357)              (0.219)
       Coast FX                                                                                       
       Full Set of Controls                                                                           
       Observations                     300                 300                    300                  300
       Number of Clusters               32                   32                     32                   32
       Gains from Tourism             0.0445              0.00647                0.0704               0.0482
Notes: See Section 5.2 for discussion. The point estimates are from an IV regression using the island, beach and ruins
instruments. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican states. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                            47
Appendix - For Online Publication
Appendix 1: Additional Figures and Tables

                                                                        Figure A.1: Tourism’s Distance Decay
            Predicted Deviations in Log Bilateral Tourism Exports
             -2               0               2               4




                                                                    4            6                          8   10
                                                                                 Log Bilateral Distances (km)

Notes: The estimated slope and confidence interval are based on the partial prediction from a PPML regression with
bilateral tourism exports on the left-hand side and log bilateral distances in addition to origin-by-year fixed effects,
destination-by-year fixed effects, and dummies for common border, language, colonial ties and travel visa requirements
on the right-hand side. The figure depicts 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the
level of origin-destination pairs.




                                                                                          1
                                                               Figure A.2: Tourism Engel Curve
                                            .015
   Deviations of Tourism Expenditure Shares
           0          .005 -.005  .01




                                                   -2   -1.5   -1       -.5       0       .5       1   1.5   2
                                                                    Deviations of Log Total Income

Notes: See Section 5.2 for discussion. The graph depicts a non-parametric plot of deviations of tourism expenditure
shares (y-axis) against deviations of log household income, both relative to municipality-by-period means. The data
source is the Mexican household income and expenditure survey 2004 (ENIGH). The graph also depicts confidence in-
tervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of municipalities. The number of household observations
is 22,595, and the point estimate of the slope is 0.0033 estimated with a t-statistic of 11.09.




                                                                               2
                                                                                             Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                                                           1998 Censos Economicos or 2000 Population Census                 2008 Censos Economicos or 2010 Population Census
     Data Source                      Variable
                                                                                    N           mean            sd         min         max           N          mean             sd          min         max

                                      state id                                     2,434        19.30          7.32        1.00        32.00        2,455       19.26           7.34         1.00        32.00
             Censos Economicos




                                      gdp                                          2,434    1,528,000.00   9,613,000.00    6.00    251,800,000.00   2,455    4,480,000.00   27,220,000.00   21.00    704,200,000.00

                                      log gdp                                      2,434        9.92           2.97        1.79        19.34        2,455       10.92           2.96         3.05        20.37

                                      hotel sales                                  2,434      12,847.00     138,994.00     0.00     5,230,000.00    2,455     38,668.00      433,757.00      0.00    13,730,000.00

                                      log hotel sales                              2,434        3.28           3.92        0.00        16.16        2,455        4.53           4.26         0.00        17.13

                                      number of hotels                             2,434        4.42          18.53        0.00       431.00        2,455        7.51          26.72         0.00       457.00
             Population Census




                                      population                                   2,434      39,832.00     119,060.00    105.00    1,763,000.00    2,455     45,603.00      132,175.00     90.00     1,794,000.00

                                      log population                               2,434        9.34           1.50        4.65        14.38        2,455        9.42           1.56         4.50        14.40

                                      employment                                   2,434      14,542.00     48,042.00     34.00     825,945.00      2,455     17,999.00      60,391.00      37.00     874,120.00

                                      log employment                               2,434        8.17           1.56        3.53        13.62        2,455        8.27           1.64         3.61        13.68
3




                                      coast id                                     2,434        0.06           0.24        0.00         1.00        2,455        0.06           0.24         0.00         1.00
             Satellite Data and GIS




                                      island dummy                                 2,434       0.0189         0.136         0            1          2,455      0.0191          0.137          0            1

                                      share of nice beach within 100 m of coast    2,434      0.000367       0.00602        0          0.177        2,455     0.000366        0.00599         0          0.177

                                      presence of pre-Hispanic ruins               2,434       0.0312         0.174         0            1          2,455      0.0318          0.175          0            1

                                      distance to northern border (km)             2,434       753.40         265.80       6.59       1,348.00      2,455      755.10          266.00        6.59       1,348.00

                                      distance to Mex City (km)                    2,434       453.70         372.50       2.30       2,271.00      2,455      454.20          372.10        2.30       2,271.00

                                      state capital dummy                          2,434        0.02           0.14        0.00         1.00        2,455        0.02           0.14         0.00         1.00
         Mexican Statistical
         Institute (INEGI)




                                      old city dummy                               2,434        0.02           0.13        0.00         1.00        2,455        0.02           0.13         0.00         1.00

                                      colonial port dummy                          2,434        0.00           0.03        0.00         1.00        2,455        0.00           0.03         0.00         1.00

                                      average monthly temperature (Celsius x 10)   2,434       197.30         40.30       104.50      290.30        2,455      197.40          40.36        104.50      290.30

                                      average monthly precipitation (mm)           2,434        88.79         50.57        5.99       336.50        2,455       89.15          50.77         5.99       336.50

    See Section 2 for a description of the datasets.
          Table A.2: Accommodation Share in Total Mexican Tourism Expenditure 2003-2013

                                                      Share of Accommodation in
                                    Year
                                                      Total Tourism Expenditure
                                 2003                           0.130
                                 2004                           0.125
                                 2005                           0.126
                                 2006                           0.124
                                 2007                           0.126
                                 2008                           0.126
                                 2009                           0.125
                                 2010                           0.127
                                 2011                           0.127
                                 2012                           0.127
                                 2013                           0.129
                           Average 2003-13                      0.127
Notes: The data source is the tourism satellite account of Mexico’s national account statistics.


               Table A.3: Wavelength Ranges Among the Top-Ranked Beaches in Mexico

                      Bandwidth 1     Bandwidth 2      Bandwidth 3      Bandwidth 4     Bandwidth 5      Bandwidth 6
  Beaches
                      min    max      min    max       min    max       min    max      min    max       min    max
  Playa del Carmen    72      125      67      110      79       120    119     175      69        142   41      93
  Tulum               81      106      74      94       99       120    121     153      97        133   56      84
  Cozumel             71      111      66      101      78       102    113     157      96        138   59      86
  Cancun              81      111      72      101      74       102    38      149      15        125    7      71
  Acapulco            50       53      56      59       64       67     76       78      80        94    60      76
  Mazatlan            50       53      56      60       64       68     76       81      81        81    55      57
  Puerto Vallarta     56       58      71      73       87       89     101     105      120       125   103    108
  Los Cabos           55       59      78      97       84       89     86      105      85        121   59     101

Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. The table presents the wavelength ranges of the top 8 beaches in Mexico as identi-
fied by U.S. News. The data source are LandSat satellite data from 1980s and 90s at a resolution of 30x30 meters.




                                                             4
                                                                            Table A.4: Robustness

     Dependent variable:                                                                     Panel A: Log Municipality Employment 2000, 2010
                                                                                                                Excluding Origin
                                             Baseline                    Omitted Variables                  Municipalities of Beach                Sensitivity to Cutoffs
                                                                                                                     Ratings
                                               (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)                     (5)                   (6)                     (7)
                                                             Coastal                                                                   Island Within 10
                                                                         Fishery Potential     Both                                                      Beach Cover Within 200 m
                                                            Elevation                                                                         km
                                            Three IVs       Three IVs       Three IVs        Three IVs              Three IVs              Three IVs               Three IVs

     Log Hotel Sales                        0.245***         0.230***        0.246***        0.231***               0.255***                0.241***            0.250***
                                            (0.0406)         (0.0435)        (0.0404)        (0.0433)               (0.0532)                (0.0409)            (0.0399)
     Log Mean Coastal Elevation                               -0.411*                         -0.420*
                                                              (0.243)                         (0.241)
     Log Stand Dev of Coastal Elevation                        0.108                           0.118
                                                              (0.137)                         (0.138)
     Log Mean Ocean Primary Productivity                                      0.0371          0.0392
                                                                             (0.0608)        (0.0603)
     Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                        
     Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                                    
     Observations                             4,889           4,889            4,889           4,889                  4,874                     4,889            4,889
5




     Number of Municipalities                 2455            2455             2455            2455                   2447                      2455             2455
     First Stage F-Stat                       15.13           14.53            15.36           14.83                  7.899                     16.68            20.44
     Over-ID Test P-Value                     0.662           0.556            0.639           0.550                  0.512                     0.749            0.628
     Dependent variable:                                                                      Panel B: Log Municipality Population 2000, 2010

     Log Hotel Sales                        0.200***         0.183***        0.201***        0.183***               0.214***                0.195***            0.206***
                                            (0.0416)         (0.0443)        (0.0414)        (0.0442)               (0.0528)                (0.0419)            (0.0407)
     Log Mean Coastal Elevation                               -0.441*                         -0.452*
                                                              (0.252)                         (0.251)
     Log Stand Dev of Coastal Elevation                        0.157                           0.168
                                                              (0.141)                         (0.141)
     Log Mean Ocean Primary Productivity                                      0.0345          0.0416
                                                                             (0.0635)        (0.0623)
     Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                        
     Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                                    
     Observations                             4,889           4,889            4,889           4,889                  4,874                     4,889            4,889
     Number of Municipalities                 2455            2455             2455            2455                   2447                      2455             2455
     First Stage F-Stat                       15.13           14.53            15.36           14.83                  7.899                     16.68            20.44
     Over-ID Test P-Value                     0.699           0.686            0.678           0.680                  0.470                     0.807            0.676

    Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
               Table A.5: Model-Based Test of Direct Effect on Local Residential Amenities



Dependent variable:                                             Log Municipality Residential Amenities

                                                    (1)                               (2)                               (3)
                                          Not Using Island IV             Not Using Beach IV                 Not Using Ruins IV

Left -Out IV                                      -0.0238                           0.0997                             0.183
                                                  (0.323)                           (2.958)                           (0.365)
Coast FX                                                                                                               
Full Set of Controls                                                                                                   
Observations                                        300                               300                               300
R-Squared                                          0.344                             0.354                             0.349
Number of Clusters                                   32                                32                                32
Notes: See Sections 3 and 5.1 for discussion. Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5
km of the municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered
by white sand pixels that lie within the wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV is a dummy
indicating the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican
states. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.



                             Table A.6: Checking Correlations of Amenity Measures

       Dependent Variable: Log of Estimated
                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)            (7)
             Municipality Amenities

  Log Average Temperature                           3.087***
                                                     (1.107)
  Log Fraction of Green Land in Municipality                   0.336***
                                                                (0.110)
  Log Robberies Per Capita                                                -0.334
                                                                          (0.216)
  Log Density of Cars (Cars per Capita)                                               -0.674***
                                                                                        (0.238)
  Log Square Km of Water Bodies in Municipality                                                   0.265***
                                                                                                  (0.0636)
  Log Number of Water Bodies in Municipality                                                                 0.340***
                                                                                                             (0.0888)
  Log Distance to Ocean                                                                                                 -0.251**
                                                                                                                        (0.0996)
  Coast FX                                                                                                            
  Observations                                        300        288       276           275        300        300         300
  R-Squared                                          0.171      0.186     0.098         0.155      0.237      0.237       0.110
  Number of State Clusters                            32         32        32            32         32         32          32

Notes: See Section 2 and Appendix 2 for description of the data and Sections 3 and 5.1 for discussion. The data on
parcels of green land relative to total land, the number of robberies and the number of registered vehicles are from
the year 2005 and were provided to us as part of INEGI’s Sistema Estatal y Municipal de Bases de Datos (SIMBAD).
Access to inland bodies of water and ocean stem from aerial surface data from INEGI’s geo-statistics division. Where
applicable, distance is defined in terms of centroids. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican states. * 10%,
** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                  6
                                 Table A.7: Controlling for Local Crime and Security

                                                                      Population Census 2000, 2010
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
 Dependent Variables:                                Log Employment                                  Log Population
                                                       Control for    Refined Crime                   Control for     Refined Crime
                                          Baseline                                     Baseline
                                                       Total Crime      Controls                      Total Crime       Controls
                                          0.245***      0.244***        0.232***       0.200***        0.199***         0.186***
 Log Hotel Sales
                                          (0.0406)       (0.0406)       (0.0425)       (0.0416)        (0.0416)         (0.0437)
 Total Reported Crimes Per Capita                       -13.04***                                        -4.066
                                                          (5.007)                                       (5.100)
 Robberies Per Capita                                                      52.94                                           75.87
                                                                          (43.37)                                        (48.69)
 Homicides Per Capita                                                   -99.41***                                       -86.63***
                                                                          (14.04)                                        (17.29)
 Battery (Physical Violence) Per Capita                                    37.25                                           47.65
                                                                          (129.9)                                        (127.2)
 Assault Per Capita                                                      -107.8**                                        -82.01*
                                                                          (49.31)                                        (47.88)
 Extorsion Per Capita                                                   -54.77***                                       -52.23***
                                                                          (13.73)                                        (13.29)
 Fraud                                                                     44.13                                           96.29
                                                                          (73.19)                                        (84.19)
 Drug-Related Offenses Per Capita                                          332.7                                          1,047*
                                                                          (559.8)                                        (546.7)
 Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                       
 Full Set of Controls (Not Shown)                                                                                       
 Observations                              4,889          4,889            4,889         4,889           4,889             4,889
 Number of Municipalities                  2455           2455             2455          2455            2455              2455
 First Stage F-Stat                        15.13          15.89            15.31         15.13           15.89             15.31
 Over-ID Test P-Value                      0.662          0.640            0.727         0.699           0.691             0.825

Notes: See Section 2 for description of the data and Sections 3 and 5.1 for discussion. The data on different types of
local crimes were provided to us as part of INEGI’s Sistema Estatal y Municipal de Bases de Datos (SIMBAD). Crimes
refer to both local and federal convictions occurring in the municipality. Standard errors are clustered at the level of
municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                  7
                                                               Table A.8: Heterogeneity of the Reduced Form

                                            (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)
            Dependent Variable:         Number of Municipality Immigrants Log (IHS) Number of Municipality Log (0+1) Number of Municipality        Log Number of Municipality
                                               (Active & Retired)          Immigrants (Active and Retired)  Immigrants (Active and Retired)       Immigrants (Active and Retired)

      Island IV                          3,050**                            2.077***                          2.093***                           1.617***
                                          (1,477)                            (0.301)                           (0.298)                            (0.315)
      Island IV * Retired Dummy          -3,636**                           -1.870***                         -2.024***                          -1.838***
                                          (1,446)                            (0.194)                           (0.178)                            (0.237)
      Beach IV                                       102,405                            17.39**                           17.64**                              11.91
                                                     (65,179)                           (7.633)                            (7.595)                            (8.364)
      Beach IV * Retired Dummy                      -108,599*                            -7.848                           -11.70**                           -18.29***
                                                     (62,905)                           (5.091)                            (4.571)                            (3.252)
      Ruins IV                                                   936.6**                          1.390***                           1.374***                            1.187***
                                                                  (462.4)                          (0.212)                            (0.212)                             (0.211)
      Ruins IV * Retired Dummy                                   -1,015**                         -0.960***                          -1.033***                           -0.889***
                                                                  (460.4)                          (0.163)                            (0.156)                             (0.269)
      Coast-By-Period FX                                                                                                                                          
      Observations                        9,778        9,778       9,778     9,778       9,778      9,778      9,778       9,778       9,778      5,545       5,545        5,545
8




      R-Squared                           0.048        0.068       0.035     0.599       0.596      0.599      0.562       0.557       0.561      0.158       0.151        0.159
      Number of Municipality Clusters     2455         2455        2455      2455        2455        2455      2455        2455         2455      2432        2432          2432

    Notes: See Section 2 and Appendix 2 for description of the data and Section 3 for discussion. Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km
    of the municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered by white sand pixels that lie within the wavelength
    ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV is a dummy indicating the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins. Standard errors are clustered at the
    level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                              Table A.9: Using Panel Variation to Estimate Effect of Tourism on Population (Decadal Changes)

                                                                                                          Population Censuses 1921-2010
                                                    (1)      (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)      (6)        (7)           (8)      (9)      (10)       (11)          (12)
    Dependent Variable:
                                                                    Island IV                                       Beach IV                             Pre-Hispanic Ruins IV
    Log Municipality Population
                                                      OLS      OLS Shift-Share IV Shift-Share IV    OLS     OLS Shift-Share IV Shift-Share IV OLS       OLS Shift-Share IV Shift-Share IV
    Log Tourist Arrivals Interacted with Instrument 0.155** 0.176**   0.149**        0.172**        3.516 4.486*     4.215         5.187*    0.103** 0.0562    0.116**         0.0701
                                                    (0.0681) (0.0749) (0.0668)       (0.0741)      (2.705) (2.553)  (2.841)        (2.698)   (0.0446) (0.0447) (0.0464)       (0.0463)
    Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                   
    Municipality FX                                                                                                                                                    
    Full Set of Controls Interacted with Time FX                                                                                                                       
    Observations                                     24,340 24,340     24,340         24,340       24,340 24,340    24,340         24,340     24,340 24,340     24,340         24,340
    Number of Municipalities                          2434     2434     2434           2434         2434 2434        2434           2434       2434     2434     2434           2434

    Notes: See Section 2 for description of the data and Section 3 for discussion. The table is based on 10 rounds of decadal census data for consistent spatial units starting
    in 1921 and ending in 2010. Shift-share IV uses time series data on US airfares in constant USD to instrument for international tourist arrivals to Mexico. Island IV is a
    dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km of the municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline
    covered by white sand pixels that lie within the wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV is a dummy indicating the presence of pre-Hispanic
    archaeological ruins. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
9
    Table A.10: Share of Accommodation Expenses and Professional Travel across Destinations

                                   Share of Accommodation
     Dependent Variables:          Expenditure in Tourism             Share of Hotel Nights from Professional Travel
                                 Expenditure at Destination
                                     (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)

  Share of Hotel Nights Spent        0.0154         0.0180         -0.0741***   -0.0723***      -0.00218       -0.00511
  in Coastal Regions                (0.0147)       (0.0135)         (0.0111)      (0.0103)      (0.0218)       (0.0200)
  Indicator for Top Third of                                                                   -0.0671***     -0.0627***
  Destinations                                                                                  (0.0161)       (0.0155)
  Year Fixed Effects                                                                                          
  Origin Fixed Effects                                                                                        
  Observations                       1,218          1,218            5,519         5,519          5,519          5,519
  R-Squared                          0.006          0.595            0.134         0.211          0.141          0.218
  Number of Origin Clusters            28             28               30            30            30             30
Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Regressions in columns 1 and 2 are based on EuroStat data that provide us with
accommodation shares in tourist expenditures from a given European origin country across different European desti-
nation countries for the years 2012, 2013 and 2014 and for 30 European countries. Accommodation shares are relative to
local tourist expenditures at the destination (excluding travel costs to get there). Regressions in columns 3-6 are based
on Eurostat data on the share of hotel nights for professional travel from a given European origin country across 30
different European destination countries for the years 1999-2015. On the right hand side in all regressions, we use the
Eurostat data on the share of total hotel nights spent by non-residents in a destination country that are located in coastal
NUTS 2 regions within the destination country relative to non-coastal NUTS 2 regions. Standard errors are clustered at
the level of origin countries. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                              10
                        Table A.11: Tourism’s Effect on Municipality Employment and Population: Not Using IHS Transformation

      Dependent variables:                        Log Municipality Employment 2000, 2010                                   Log Municipality Population 2000, 2010
                                              (1)                   (2)                  (3)                          (4)                    (5)                   (6)
                                     Baseline Specification  Log Hotel Sales      Log Hotel Sales            Baseline Specification  Log Hotel Sales         Log Hotel Sales
                                     (IHS Transformation)     (+1 for Zeroes)      (Ignore Zeroes)           (IHS Transformation)     (+1 for Zeroes)        (Ignore Zeroes)
                                           Three IVs             Three IVs            Three IVs                    Three IVs             Three IVs              Three IVs

      Log Hotel Sales                       0.245***                0.254***                0.263***                0.200***                0.208***            0.214***
                                            (0.0406)                (0.0413)                (0.0574)                (0.0416)                (0.0426)            (0.0624)
      Log Distance to US Border              -0.0163                 -0.0185                 0.0630                  0.0341                  0.0324              0.0920
                                            (0.0438)                (0.0432)                (0.0535)                (0.0460)                (0.0456)            (0.0573)
      Log Distance to Mexico City          -0.549***               -0.562***               -0.449***               -0.591***               -0.602***           -0.480***
                                            (0.0526)                (0.0499)                (0.0446)                (0.0539)                (0.0514)            (0.0482)
      Log Municipality Area                 0.318***                0.335***                0.253***                0.370***                0.383***            0.284***
                                            (0.0525)                (0.0489)                (0.0291)                (0.0540)                (0.0505)            (0.0315)
      State Capital Dummy                   0.689***                0.666***                0.759***                0.627**                 0.607**             0.683**
                                             (0.242)                 (0.241)                 (0.256)                 (0.256)                 (0.256)             (0.277)
      Old City Dummy                        0.924***                0.925***                0.961***                0.920***                0.920***            0.911***
11




                                             (0.268)                 (0.265)                 (0.257)                 (0.285)                 (0.282)             (0.278)
      Colonial Port Dummy                   0.597***                0.558***                0.688***                0.671***                0.639***            0.776***
                                             (0.205)                 (0.209)                 (0.246)                 (0.216)                 (0.218)             (0.273)
      Log Average Precipitation             0.258***                0.266***                0.106**                 0.245***                0.251***             0.101*
                                            (0.0409)                (0.0404)                (0.0519)                (0.0415)                (0.0412)            (0.0541)
      Log Average Temperature               0.223**                 0.222**                   0.195                 0.282***                0.281***              0.210
                                             (0.107)                 (0.107)                 (0.131)                 (0.106)                 (0.105)             (0.134)
      Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                         
      Observations                            4,889                   4,889                   2,613                   4,889                   4,889               2,613
      Number of Municipalities                2455                    2455                    1489                    2455                    2455                1489
      First Stage F-Stat                      15.13                   15.46                   14.86                   15.13                   15.46               14.86
      Over-ID Test P-Value                    0.662                   0.731                   0.843                   0.699                   0.749               0.813
     Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
Table A.12: Tourism’s Effect on Municipality Employment and Population: Using Number of
Tourists


                                         Log Municipality Employment                 Log Municipality Population
  Dependent variables:
                                                 2000, 2010                                 2000, 2010

                                               (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)
                                                               Log Number                                Log Number
                                            Baseline                                  Baseline
                                                                 Tourists                                  Tourists
                                           Three IVs            Three IVs             Three IVs           Three IVs

  Log Hotel Sales                          0.245***                                   0.200***
                                           (0.0406)                                   (0.0416)
  Log Number of Tourists                                        0.276***                                   0.227***
                                                                 (0.0737)                                   (0.0656)
  Log Distance to US Border                  -0.0163            -0.231***              0.0341               -0.142**
                                            (0.0438)             (0.0576)             (0.0460)              (0.0563)
  Log Distance to Mexico City              -0.549***            -0.876***            -0.591***             -0.859***
                                            (0.0526)             (0.0381)             (0.0539)              (0.0365)
  Log Municipality Area                    0.318***             0.516***             0.370***              0.530***
                                            (0.0525)             (0.0335)             (0.0540)              (0.0308)
  State Capital Dummy                      0.689***                0.110              0.627**                 0.144
                                             (0.242)              (0.476)              (0.256)               (0.423)
  Old City Dummy                           0.924***              0.777**             0.920***               0.793**
                                             (0.268)              (0.396)              (0.285)               (0.358)
  Colonial Port Dummy                      0.597***               -1.318*            0.671***                 -0.910
                                             (0.205)              (0.799)              (0.216)               (0.707)
  Log Average Precipitation                0.258***             0.394***             0.245***              0.356***
                                            (0.0409)             (0.0579)             (0.0415)              (0.0550)
  Log Average Temperature                   0.223**             0.680***             0.282***              0.657***
                                             (0.107)              (0.164)              (0.106)               (0.153)
  Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                           
  Observations                                4,889                4,889                4,889                 4,889
  Number of Municipalities                    2455                 2455                 2455                   2455
  First Stage F-Stat                          15.13                4.730                15.13                 4.730
  Over-ID Test P-Value                        0.662                0.959                0.699                 0.960
Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Both log hotel revenues and log number of tourists are computed with the in-
verse hyperbolic sine transformation. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%
significance levels.




                                                          12
       Table A.13: Tourism’s Effect on Municipality Population: Using 100% Census Samples

  Dependent variable:                            Log Census Population 2000 and 2010
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                        10% Sample Data (IPUMS)      100% Sample Data (INEGI)
                                          OLS         Three IVs         OLS          Three IVs

  Log Hotel Sales                         0.200***             0.200***          0.200***            0.202***
                                         (0.00564)             (0.0416)         (0.00563)            (0.0413)
  Log Distance to US Border                0.0341                0.0341           0.0300              0.0310
                                          (0.0427)             (0.0460)          (0.0425)            (0.0457)
  Log Distance to Mexico City            -0.592***            -0.591***         -0.590***           -0.588***
                                          (0.0284)             (0.0539)          (0.0283)            (0.0537)
  Log Municipality Area                   0.370***             0.370***          0.369***            0.367***
                                          (0.0171)             (0.0540)          (0.0170)            (0.0537)
  State Capital Dummy                     0.627***              0.627**          0.632***            0.624**
                                           (0.195)              (0.256)           (0.195)             (0.255)
  Old City Dummy                          0.920***             0.920***          0.920***            0.912***
                                           (0.233)              (0.285)           (0.233)             (0.283)
  Colonial Port Dummy                     0.672***             0.671***          0.673***            0.665***
                                           (0.143)              (0.216)           (0.143)             (0.214)
  Log Average Precipitation               0.245***             0.245***          0.246***            0.245***
                                          (0.0407)             (0.0415)          (0.0407)            (0.0414)
  Log Average Temperature                 0.282***             0.282***          0.280***            0.279***
                                           (0.104)              (0.106)           (0.104)             (0.106)
  Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                    
  Observations                              4,889                 4,889            4,889               4,889
  Number of Municipalities                  2455                  2455             2455                2455
  First Stage F-Stat                                              15.13                                15.13
  Over-ID Test P-Value                                           0.699                                 0.701
Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%
significance levels.




                                                         13
                                            Table A.14: Coastal vs Inland Variation

 Dependent variable:                               Log Municipality Employment 2000, 2010           Log Municipality Population 2000, 2010
                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
                                                                     Coastal                                         Coastal
                                                     All                           Interacted        All                           Interacted
                                                                  Municipalities                                  Municipalities
                                                 Municipalities                     Controls     Municipalities                     Controls
                                                                      Only                                            Only
                                                  Island and       Island and      Island and      Island and      Island and      Island and
                                                  Beach IVs        Beach IVs       Beach IVs       Beach IVs       Beach IVs       Beach IVs

 Log Hotel Sales                                   0.279***         0.279***       0.257***        0.241***         0.241***       0.218***
                                                   (0.0493)         (0.0493)       (0.0661)        (0.0514)         (0.0514)       (0.0706)

 Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                 
 Full Set of Controls Interacted with Coast FX                                                                                        
 Observations                                        4,889             297           4,889           4,889             297           4,889
 Number of Municipalities                            2455              150           2455            2455              150           2455
 First Stage F-Stat                                  15.72            15.48          10.63           15.72            15.48          10.63
 Over-ID Test P-Value                                0.178            0.178          0.469           0.178            0.178          0.469

Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km of the
municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered by white
sand pixels that lie within the wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Standard errors are clustered
at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.



     Table A.15: Tourism’s Effect on Municipality Employment and Population: 2SLS vs LIML

  Dependent variable:                  Log Municipality Employment 2000, 2010                   Log Municipality Population 2000, 2010
                                              (1)                  (2)                                (3)                    (4)
                                             2SLS                LIML                                2SLS                  LIML
                                           Three IVs           Three IVs                           Three IVs              Three IVs

  Log Hotel Sales                           0.24497***                  0.24570***                 0.19978***                  0.19978***
                                             (0.04059)                   (0.04169)                  (0.04156)                   (0.04273)
  Log Distance to US Border                   -0.01629                    -0.01594                   0.03410                     0.03410
                                             (0.04385)                   (0.04402)                  (0.04598)                   (0.04618)
  Log Distance to Mexico City              -0.54851***                 -0.54770***                -0.59145***                 -0.59144***
                                             (0.05261)                   (0.05364)                  (0.05393)                   (0.05503)
  Log Municipality Area                     0.31818***                  0.31728***                 0.36955***                  0.36954***
                                             (0.05253)                   (0.05383)                  (0.05397)                   (0.05534)
  State Capital Dummy                       0.68907***                  0.68614***                 0.62698**                   0.62697**
                                             (0.24213)                   (0.24492)                  (0.25613)                   (0.25920)
  Old City Dummy                            0.92440***                  0.92156***                 0.91992***                  0.91991***
                                             (0.26803)                   (0.27030)                  (0.28497)                   (0.28758)
  Colonial Port Dummy                       0.59672***                  0.59392***                 0.67134***                  0.67133***
                                             (0.20499)                   (0.20822)                  (0.21552)                   (0.21892)
  Log Average Precipitation                 0.25810***                  0.25797***                 0.24461***                  0.24461***
                                             (0.04088)                   (0.04093)                  (0.04148)                   (0.04153)
  Log Average Temperature                   0.22324**                   0.22296**                  0.28170***                  0.28170***
                                             (0.10748)                   (0.10756)                  (0.10585)                   (0.10592)
  Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                               
  Observations                                  4,889                       4,889                     4,889                       4,889
  Number of Municipalities                      2455                        2455                       2455                        2455

Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%
significance levels.




                                                                         14
                                                    Table A.16: Excluding or Controlling for Planned Tourism Centers

                                                           Population Census 2000, 2010                                                  Censos Economicos 1998, 2008
                                     (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)           (9)        (10)       (11)            (12)
       Dependent Variables:                  Log Employment                            Log Population                           Log GDP                              Log Manu GDP

                                  (Baseline)                              (Baseline)                               (Baseline)                           (Baseline)
                                  0.245***      0.265***      0.238***    0.200***        0.222***      0.193***   0.404***     0.416***    0.354***    0.394***       0.484***     0.411***
       Log Hotel Sales
                                  (0.0406)      (0.0508)      (0.0533)    (0.0416)        (0.0510)      (0.0533)   (0.0713)     (0.0895)    (0.0936)    (0.0939)        (0.127)      (0.134)


       Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                                                     
       Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                                                 

       Add Controls for Planned
                                                                                                                                                                       
       Centers and Distance

       Drop Planned Centers                                                                                                                                                         

       Observations                 4,889        4,889          4,875       4,889          4,889         4,875       4,889       4,889        4,875       4,889         4,889        4,875
       Number of Municipalities     2455         2455           2448        2455           2455          2448        2455        2455         2448        2455          2455         2448
       First Stage F-Stat           15.13        8.899          7.956       15.13          8.899         7.956       15.13       8.899        7.956       15.13         8.899        7.956
15




       Over-ID Test P-Value         0.662        0.160          0.323       0.699          0.194         0.294       0.302       0.540        0.859       0.457         0.861        0.747

     Notes: See Section 3.3 for discussion. The table presents second-stage IV point estimates using the three IVs combined. The first column for each outcome variable
     presents the baseline estimate. The second column presents the estimate after controlling for FONATUR’s planned tourism centers and log distance to them. The third
     column drops planned tourism centers. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                    Table A.17: Tourism’s Effect on Traded Sector Production By Degree of Input Intensity

                                                       (1)                               (2)                               (3)                           (4)
      Dependent variable: Log            Below Median Input Intensity      Above Median Input Intensity Sectors Not in Tourism Satellite Sectors in Tourism Satellite Use
      Manufacturing GDP                         (10 Sectors)                      (11 Sectors)              Use Table (16 Sectors)              Table (5 Sectors)
                                                   Three IVs                         Three IVs                          Three IVs                     Three IVs
                                                                  Panel A: Left Hand Side with IHS Transformation
      Log Hotel Sales                               0.497***                          0.529***                          0.448***                      0.672***
                                                    (0.0984)                           (0.102)                          (0.0930)                       (0.113)
      Year-By-Coast-By-Sector FX                                                                                                                       
      Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                             
      Observations                                   53,779                            48,890                            73,335                        29,334
      Number of Municipalities                        2455                              2455                              2455                          2455
      First Stage F-Stat                              15.16                             15.16                             15.16                         15.15
      Over-ID Test P-Value                            0.323                             0.502                             0.387                         0.493
                                                                     Panel B: Left Hand Side with Log(Zero+1)
      Log Hotel Sales                               0.466***                          0.491***                          0.418***                      0.629***
                                                    (0.0929)                          (0.0962)                          (0.0873)                       (0.107)
16




      Year-By-Coast-By-Sector FX                                                                                                                       
      Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                             
      Observations                                   53,779                            48,890                            73,335                        29,334
      Number of Municipalities                        2455                              2455                              2455                          2455
      First Stage F-Stat                              15.16                             15.16                             15.16                         15.15
      Over-ID Test P-Value                            0.315                             0.483                             0.374                         0.481
                                                             Panel C: Left Hand Side with Simple Logs (Dropping Zeroes)
      Log Hotel Sales                               0.359***                          0.457***                          0.388***                      0.431***
                                                    (0.0721)                          (0.0714)                          (0.0619)                      (0.0944)
      Year-By-Coast-By-Sector FX                                                                                                                       
      Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                             
      Observations                                   19,637                            13,516                            21,184                        11,969
      Number of Municipalities                        2224                              2057                              2161                          2203
      First Stage F-Stat                              14.83                             14.57                             16.33                         12.45
      Over-ID Test P-Value                            0.460                             0.739                             0.552                         0.771
     Notes: See Section 3.3 for discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                      Table A.18: Checking Effect of IVs in 2000 vs 2010

                             (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)            (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)      (10)         (11)      (12)

Dependent variables:                  Employment                       Population                           GDP                    Manufacturing GDP


Island IV                  0.526**                          0.435**                              0.329                          0.193
                            (0.222)                          (0.222)                            (0.374)                        (0.417)
Island IV x 2010            -0.0401                          0.0227                             0.0794                         0.0810
                           (0.0381)                         (0.0318)                           (0.0979)                        (0.134)
Beach IV                              9.215***                          6.627*                            21.27***                       18.13***
                                       (3.354)                          (3.684)                            (4.691)                        (4.016)
Beach IV x 2010                         0.969                          1.551***                             -1.849                         -3.506
                                       (0.709)                          (0.545)                            (1.368)                        (3.423)
Ruins IV                                         0.391***                           0.291***                         0.689***                        0.824***
                                                  (0.115)                            (0.109)                          (0.239)                         (0.294)
Ruins IV x 2010                                   -0.0492                            0.0170                           -0.0755                         -0.0944
                                                 (0.0502)                           (0.0221)                         (0.0888)                         (0.136)
Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                                              
Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                          
Observations                4,889       4,889      4,889     4,889       4,889        4,889     4,889      4,889       4,889  4,889       4,889        4,889
R-squared                   0.478       0.478      0.478     0.475       0.475        0.475     0.380      0.381       0.381  0.272       0.273        0.274
Number of Municipalities    2455        2455       2455      2455        2455         2455      2455       2455        2455   2455        2455         2455

 Notes: Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km of the municipalities’ coastline. Beach
IV is the fraction of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered by white sand pixels that lie within the
wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV is a dummy indicating the presence of pre-Hispanic
archaeological ruins. Standard errors are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.



             Table A.19: Checking Correlations of Tourism Shifters with IVs and Hotel Sales
                                       (1)           (2)               (3) (4)      (5)                                (6)             (7)  (8)
                                                                        Log Hotel                                                        Log Hotel
Dependent Variables: Log(Ãn)                     Log(Ãn)        Log(Ãn)           Log(An)                            Log(An)     Log(An)
                                                                          Sales                                                            Sales

Island IV                          1.328***                                                       1.242***
                                    (0.411)                                                        (0.414)
Beach IV                                           22.45*                                                            20.86*
                                                   (10.81)                                                           (10.39)
Ruins IV                                                            0.963*                                                        0.924*
                                                                    (0.485)                                                       (0.482)
Log(Ãn)                                                                            0.974***
                                                                                   (0.0512)
Log(An)                                                                                                                                             0.984***
                                                                                                                                                    (0.0523)
Full Set of Controls                                                                                                                             
Number of Regions                    150            150               300             300               150            150          300                300
R-Squared                           0.359          0.363             0.227           0.804             0.349          0.353        0.226              0.793
 Notes: See Section 5.2 for discussion. Island IV is a dummy indicating whether an offshore island is within 5 km of the
municipalities’ coastline. Beach IV is the fraction of municipality area within 100 m of the coastline covered by white
sand pixels that lie within the wavelength ranges of the 8 top-ranked Mexican beaches. Ruins IV is a dummy indicating
the presence of pre-Hispanic archaeological ruins. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican states. * 10%, **
5%, *** 1% significance levels.



                                                                             17
                                     Table A.20: Within-Country Tourism Flows

    Reported Top 5       Predicted Rank of        Reported Top 5                                Reported Top 5       Predicted Rank
                                                                       Predicted Rank of
  Domestic Tourist      Origins to Ciudad de    Domestic Tourist                              Domestic Tourist ofOrigins to Quinatana
                                                                      Origins to Veracruz in
 Origin States Visiting Mexico in Calibrated   Origin States Visiting                        Origin States Visiting Roo in Calibrated
                                                                        Calibrated Model
  Ciudad de Mexico             Model                 Veracruz                                    Quintana Roo            Model


     Mexico State                1              Ciudad de Mexico              1             Ciudad de Mexico              1

        Puebla                   2                Mexico State                2               Mexico State                2

       Veracruz                  4                   Jalisco                  4                 Veracruz                  4

      Michoacan                  8                 Michoacan                 10                Michoacan                 13

      Guerrero                  10                  Guerrero                 12                 Guerrero                 15


Notes: See Section 5.1 for discussion.




                                                               18
                                  Table A.21: Spatial Labor Supply Elasticity

   Dependent Variable:                               Log Municipality Employment 2000, 2010
                                            (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                           OLS               Three IVs            OLS               Three IVs

   Log Nominal Wage                       1.163***           5.150**
                                           (0.262)           (2.362)
   Log Real Wage                                                                1.910***             6.353**
                                                                                 (0.348)             (2.608)
   Log Distance to US Border               0.0325              0.441             0.0584               0.396
                                          (0.0986)            (0.308)           (0.0926)             (0.259)
   Log Distance to Mexico City             -0.0291            0.0640             0.0554               0.315
                                           (0.142)            (0.144)            (0.130)             (0.224)
   Log Municipality Area                  0.297***            0.202**           0.302***            0.248***
                                           (0.105)           (0.0905)           (0.0963)            (0.0801)
   State Capital Dummy                    0.916***             -0.308            0.716**              -0.579
                                           (0.312)            (0.784)            (0.296)             (0.805)
   Old City Dummy                           -0.321             -1.041             -0.367             -0.961*
                                           (0.479)            (0.640)            (0.450)             (0.544)
   Colonial Port Dummy                    2.906***           2.481***           2.702***            1.940***
                                           (0.298)            (0.417)            (0.282)             (0.545)
   Log Average Precipitation               0.375*             0.680*              0.350               0.500
                                           (0.211)            (0.393)            (0.210)             (0.343)
   Log Average Temperature                  -0.313             0.311              -0.250              0.321
                                           (0.897)            (0.986)            (0.866)             (0.905)
   Coast FX                                                                                          
   Observations                              300                300                300                 300
   Number of Clusters                         32                 32                 32                  32
   First Stage F-Stat                                          3.723                                  3.594
   Over-ID Test P-Value                                        0.890                                  0.856
Notes: See Section 5.1 and Appendix 4 for discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican states. *
10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                        19
                                                                  Table A.22: Tourism’s Trade Elasticity

           Dependent Variables:                                                         Log Tourism Exports from Origin to Destination
                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)                     (7)
                                                   Same Year        Same Year        1-Year Lag 2-Year Lag 3-Year Lag 4-Year Lag                        5-Year Lag
                                                     OLS               IV               IV           IV            IV              IV                      IV
           Panel A: All Destinations
           Log Inverse Consumption PPP             -0.140***           -0.201         -0.419*          -0.550**         -0.715**         -0.710**          -0.351
                                                    (0.0402)          (0.205)         (0.227)           (0.222)          (0.281)          (0.301)         (0.227)
           Log Destination GDP                     0.438***          0.410***         0.238**           0.0699            -0.104           -0.102         0.0216
                                                    (0.0492)          (0.103)         (0.121)           (0.121)          (0.152)          (0.165)         (0.129)
           Origin-by-Destination FX                                                                                                                    
           Origin-by-Period FX                                                                                                                         
           Observations                              25,089           25,089           20,935           18,328           16,084           14,361          12,497
           Number of Orig-Dest Pairs                  2899              2899            2596             2513              2265             2169            2098
           First Stage F-Stat                                          171.5            159.9            136.4            72.74            76.19           102.5
20




           Panel B: Touristic Destinations Only
           Log Inverse Consumption PPP             -0.114***           -0.298         -0.488**         -0.571**         -0.656**         -0.616*           -0.361
                                                    (0.0442)          (0.204)          (0.249)          (0.251)          (0.311)         (0.339)          (0.293)
           Log Destination GDP                     0.402***          0.312***           0.132          -0.00375           -0.141          -0.159           -0.109
                                                    (0.0631)          (0.110)          (0.138)          (0.137)          (0.162)         (0.182)          (0.162)
           Origin-by-Destination FX                                                                                                                    
           Origin-by-Period FX                                                                                                                         
           Observations                              17,165           17,165           14,294           12,535           11,052           9,874            8,603
           Number of Orig-Dest Pairs                  1981              1981            1771             1710              1511            1474             1428
           First Stage F-Stat                                          138.0            119.4            125.4            62.48           65.19            69.67
     Notes: See Appendix 4 for discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of origin-by-destination pairs. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                                                               Table A.23: The Gains from Tourism Across Alternative Parameter Combinations


                                                                       σ=ρ      σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ
                                                                       = 1.5    = 2.0   = 2.5   = 3.0   = 3.5   = 4.0   = 4.5   = 1.5   = 2.0   = 2.5   = 3.0   = 3.5   = 4.0   = 4.5

                                                          γS = 0       4.60     3.19    2.77    2.61    2.56    2.56    2.60    1.22    1.00    0.91    0.84    0.78    0.71    0.64
        κ/(1-κε) = 2.35 κ/(1-κε) = 4.35 κ/(1-κε) = 6.35




                                                          γS = 0.027   5.36     3.93    3.50    3.32    3.26    3.26    3.29    1.79    1.53    1.39    1.29    1.18    1.06    0.94
                                                          γS = 0.057   6.14     4.67    4.22    4.03    3.96    3.94    3.96    2.29    1.97    1.79    1.64    1.48    1.32    1.16
                                                          γS = 0.087   6.81     5.32    4.82    4.61    4.51    4.47    4.46    2.49    2.07    1.84    1.65    1.48    1.31    1.13
                                                          γS = 0       4.62     3.24    2.83    2.67    2.63    2.64    2.68    1.31    1.09    1.00    0.93    0.87    0.79    0.71
                                                          γS = 0.027   5.40     4.00    3.58    3.42    3.37    3.38    3.41    1.93    1.68    1.55    1.44    1.32    1.20    1.06
                                                          γS = 0.057   6.22     4.79    4.36    4.20    4.14    4.14    4.17    2.54    2.25    2.07    1.91    1.75    1.57    1.38
                                                          γS = 0.087   6.96     5.50    5.05    4.88    4.81    4.80    4.82    3.04    2.69    2.48    2.27    2.06    1.84    1.60
21




                                                          γS = 0       4.68     3.32    2.92    2.78    2.74    2.75    2.80    1.43    1.23    1.13    1.06    0.99    0.90    0.81
                                                          γS = 0.027   5.50     4.13    3.73    3.58    3.54    3.55    3.60    2.12    1.88    1.75    1.63    1.50    1.36    1.21
                                                          γS = 0.057   6.39     5.00    4.60    4.45    4.41    4.42    4.46    2.85    2.57    2.39    2.22    2.04    1.83    1.61
                                                          γS = 0.087   7.25     5.84    5.43    5.28    5.23    5.24    5.28    3.54    3.22    2.99    2.77    2.52    2.26    1.97

     Notes: See Section 5.2 and Appendix 4 for discussion. The left panel reports the gains from tourism, and the right panel from international tourism. The highlighted
     cells indicate the model’s best-fitting parameter calibration given the data.
                                                                               Table A.24: The Gains from Tourism Across Alternative Parameter Combinations


                                                                       σ=ρ      σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ     σ=ρ
                                                                       = 1.5    = 2.0   = 2.5   = 3.0   = 3.5   = 4.0   = 4.5   = 1.5   = 2.0   = 2.5   = 3.0   = 3.5   = 4.0   = 4.5

                                                          γM = 0       8.25     6.81    6.38    6.21    6.15    6.14    6.17    4.29    3.92    3.65    3.38    3.09    2.78    2.45
        κ/(1-κε) = 2.35 κ/(1-κε) = 4.35 κ/(1-κε) = 6.35




                                                          γM = 0.024   7.67     6.21    5.77    5.59    5.52    5.51    5.52    3.66    3.29    3.04    2.80    2.55    2.29    2.01
                                                          γM = 0.044   7.22     5.74    5.27    5.08    5.00    4.98    4.99    3.11    2.73    2.49    2.28    2.06    1.84    1.61
                                                          γM = 0.064   6.81     5.32    4.82    4.61    4.51    4.47    4.46    2.49    2.07    1.84    1.65    1.48    1.31    1.13
                                                          γM = 0       8.52     7.10    6.69    6.53    6.47    6.48    6.51    4.63    4.26    3.98    3.69    3.38    3.03    2.67
                                                          γM = 0.024   7.92     6.49    6.06    5.90    5.84    5.84    5.87    4.04    3.68    3.42    3.17    2.89    2.59    2.28
                                                          γM = 0.044   7.43     5.99    5.55    5.38    5.32    5.32    5.35    3.54    3.19    2.95    2.72    2.48    2.22    1.95
                                                          γM = 0.064   6.96     5.50    5.05    4.88    4.81    4.80    4.82    3.04    2.69    2.48    2.27    2.06    1.84    1.60
22




                                                          γM = 0       8.98     7.58    7.18    7.02    6.98    6.99    7.04    5.13    4.75    4.44    4.12    3.76    3.37    2.94
                                                          γM = 0.024   8.32     6.93    6.52    6.37    6.32    6.34    6.38    4.53    4.17    3.90    3.62    3.30    2.95    2.58
                                                          γM = 0.044   7.78     6.39    5.98    5.82    5.78    5.79    5.83    4.04    3.70    3.45    3.19    2.91    2.61    2.28
                                                          γM = 0.064   7.25     5.84    5.43    5.28    5.23    5.24    5.28    3.54    3.22    2.99    2.77    2.52    2.26    1.97

     Notes: See Section 5.2 and Appendix 4 for discussion. The left panel reports the gains from tourism, and the right panel from international tourism. The highlighted
     cells indicate the model’s best-fitting parameter calibration given the data.
                    Table A.25: The Gains from Tourism Allowing for Non-Homotheticity

                                                                                                Allowing for Increase in Tourism
                                                        Baseline Counterfactual
                                                                                                    Due to Higher Incomes

   Gains from Tourism                                                4.82%                                          4.74%

Notes: See Section 5.2 for discussion.


                  Table A.26: IV Point Estimates of Endogenous Reduction in Trade Costs

                                               (1)                                (2)                                 (3)
                                      Log Transport Time                Log Transport Time                 Log Transport Time
  Dependent Variables:
                                       (Simple Average)            (Population-Weighted Average)         (GDP-Weighted Average)

                                           -0.0276***                         -0.0282***                         -0.0360***
  Log Hotel Sales
                                            (0.00586)                          (0.0104)                           (0.0138)

  Year-By-Coast FX                                                                                                  
  Full Set of Controls                                                                                              

  Observations                                4,889                             4,889                               4,889
  Number of Municipalities                    2455                              2455                                2455
  First Stage F-Stat                          15.13                             15.13                               15.13

Notes: See Sections 3.3 and 5.2 for discussion. The table reports second-stage IV estimates using the island, beach
and ruins instruments. “Transport Time” refers to the mean (or weighted mean as indicated) of municipality travel
times to other municipalities and border crossings on the full terrestrial Mexican transport network. Standard errors
are clustered at the level of municipalities. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.



Table A.27: The Gains from Tourism Before and After Allowing for Endogenous Transport Cost
Reductions

                                                               Allowing for Highway     Allowing for 50 Percent Allowing for Estimated
                                     Baseline Counterfactual    Connections to State    Reduction in Transport Reduction in Transport
                                                                     Capitals                   Costs           Costs (Elasticity 0.036)


  Gains from Tourism                          4.82                     4.74                      4.64                       5.23

  Gains from International Tourism            1.84                     1.63                      1.28                       2.07

  γS Estimate                                0.087                    0.086                      0.08                       0.086

  γM Estimate                                0.064                    0.070                      0.08                       0.07


Notes: See Section 5.2 for discussion.




                                                                     23
                   Table A.28: The Local Gains from Tourism Without Labor Mobility

  Dependent variable:                                      Counterfactual Change in Log Local Worker Utility
                                                                      (1)                             (2)
  Counterfactual                                                 All Tourism                International Tourism
  Parameters                                                         κ=0                             κ=0
                                                                  Three IVs                       Three IVs

  Counterfactual Change in Log Tourism GDP                        0.237***                         0.235***
                                                                  (0.0719)                         (0.0715)
  Full Set of Controls                                                                                
  Coast FX                                                                                            
  Observations                                                       300                              300
  Number of Clusters                                                  32                               32
  First Stage F-Stat                                                3.532                            3.514
  OverID P-Value                                                    0.179                            0.181
Notes: See Appendix 4.6 for discussion. The point estimates are from an IV regression using the island, beach and ruins
instruments. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican states. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.



        Table A.29: The Gains from Tourism Accounting for Imperfect Competition and FDI




     Fraction of Gains from Tourism if 35 Percent of Profits Are Repatriated
                                                                                                          0.777
     (Relative to All Profits Remaining in Mexico)


Notes: See Appendix 4.6 for discussion.



               Table A.30: The Gains from Tourism With Different Numbers of Regions




                                              300 Mexican Regions                2455 Mexican Regions


Gains from All Tourism                                 4.82%                               4.94%

Gains from International Tourism                       1.84%                               1.80%

Notes: See Appendix 4.6 for discussion.




                                                            24
       Table A.31: The Regional Implications of Tourism With Different Numbers of Regions

          Dependent variable:                        Counterfactual Change in Log Total GDP
                                                         (1)                         (2)
                                                 300 Mexican Regions        2455 Mexican Regions

          Log Tourism GDP                               0.409***                          0.403***
                                                        (0.0900)                          (0.0996)

          Coast FX                                                                            
          Full Set of Controls                                                                
          Observations                                      300                              2455
          Welfare Gains                                   0.0482                            0.0494
          Number of Clusters                                32                                32
Notes: See Appendix 4.6 for discussion. The point estimates are from an IV regression using the island, beach and ruins
instruments. Standard errors are clustered at the level of Mexican states. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.


Appendix 2: Data
Hotel Revenues and Local Production Every five years the Mexican statistical institute INEGI
undertakes a census of all economic establishments located in municipalities with more than 2500
inhabitants, and covers a representative sample of establishments in rural locations with less than
2500 inhabitants. In our analysis, we use the municipality-level data of the Censos Economicos
1999 and 2009, which contain information about economic activity in 1998 and 2008 respectively.
The timing of these two datasets closely coincides with the two most recent national population
censuses in Mexico in 2000 and 2010 that we describe below.
    Our main explanatory variable of interest is municipality-level sales of hotels and other tempo-
rary accommodation (e.g. hostels). In our specifications, we label this variable as hotel sales. They
are covered as part of the Censos Economicos Comerciales y de Servicios, from which we obtain
two cross-sections of municipality hotel revenues for 1998 and 2008. We combine this information
on hotel sales with data from the Censos Economicos for the same years on total municipality
GDP, total municipality wage bill, and GDP broken up by sector of activity (e.g. manufacturing,
mining, agriculture).
    In the analysis, we interpret differences in log hotel sales across municipalities as effectively
capturing proportional differences in total local tourism expenditures. The reason is that the avail-
able data for other tourist expenditures, such as restaurants, do not distinguish between sales to
local residents vs visiting non-residents. The underlying assumption is that hotel sales are a con-
stant share of tourist expenditure. As we discuss in Section 3, we also examine this assumption
using available data over time and across destinations (see appendix Tables A.2 and A.10).
    Finally, we obtain data on the number of foreign tourist arrivals in Mexico over time from the
Mexican Secretariat for Tourism (Sectur), and data on the average airfares in constant US Dollars
faced by US travelers from the US Transportation Statistics Database at the Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics. As we discuss in Section 3, we use these data to corroborate the cross-sectional results with
panel variation.
Population Census Data We use IPUMS microdata from the Mexican Population Census in 2000
and 2010 to construct municipality-level total population and employment, as well as individual-


                                                            25
level wages including information on gender, education, age and ethnicity. The IPUMS microdata
provide us with 10 percent random census samples in addition to population weights that are
linked to each observation.
    To construct municipality population, we sum up the number of people surveyed and weight
the summation by population weights. To construct total municipality-level employment, we
make use of the fact that the Mexican population censuses in 2000 and 2010 asked people in
which municipality they work, and sum up the number of people (again weighted by popula-
tion weights) that work in a given municipality.1
    In order to construct wages, we first divide monthly incomes by hours worked in the census
data. We then construct Mincerized wage residuals from a regression of log wages on dummies
for gender and ethnicity in addition to the cubic polynomials of years of education and years
of age as well as census year fixed effects. We weight these regressions by population weights.
The final step is to take the population weighted average of the log wage residuals by year and
municipality in the data.
    In addition to the two most recent census rounds, we use historical Mexican population census
data for the years 1921, 1930, 1940 and 1950 in order to estimate a set of placebo falsification tests.
To that end, we use INEGI’s database Archivo Historico de Localidades to construct spatial units
for the year 2010 that we can trace back consistently to 1921. In particular, we extract the history
of each census tract that existed in each of the 10 national population censuses conducted between
1921-2010. For example if municipality boundaries changed over time, or a census tract was split
or merged, these instances are reported and traceable.2 The historical census database provides
us with municipality populations, but not employment.
GIS and Satellite Data We use GIS and satellite data to build various measures of the attractive-
ness for beach tourism. As discussed in the next section, we use these measures to build a set of
instrumental variables that influence local tourism demand. To this end, we use the earliest high-
resolution satellite data that we could obtain.3 The data source is the Global Land Survey (GLS)
1990 dataset that is based on the raw data from the LandSat 4-5 Thematic Mapper (TM). The GLS
dataset provides a consolidation of the best quality LandSat imagery that were taken during the
period of 1987-1997 over the coast of Mexico. We obtained these data at the original resolution of
30x30 meter pixels for six different wavelength bands.4 When restricted to a 2 km buffer around
the Mexican shoreline, these satellite data provide us with six raster data layers that each have
approximately 52 million 30x30 meter pixels. Figure 1 provides an illustration of the satellite data
when illustrated with all six bands using the GLS data tiles that intersect with the Mexican coast-
line. The satellite data also provide us with detailed information on coastal elevation and relief at
the same level of spatial resolution, that we use for a robustness test as discussed below.
    1 To verify that the 10 percent samples from IPUMS do not give rise to concerns about sparseness at the municipality

level, we also report robustness checks using municipality-level population data that is computed from 100 percent
samples at INEGI. While the 100 percent sample data are available for total population, we do not have access to the
microdata, which we require to compute Mincerized wages as well as employment.
    2 Using this information, we construct population numbers over time for consistent municipality units that are as

close as possible to the units we observe in 2010. Given the richness of the database at the census tract level, the only
(rare) case when boundaries change relative to 2010 is when a census tract splits over time and some of the splitted
units change municipality boundaries while others not.
    3 We are interested in historical satellite coverage to limit the potential concern that some municipalities invest

more to maintain high quality beaches (e.g. efforts against coastal erosion). As we discuss in the empirical section, we
also present a number of additional robustness checks against such concerns (e.g. reporting results before and after
including controls, and verifying to what extent the island IV yields similar point estimates).
    4 Band 1 covers 0.45-0.52, Band 2 covers 0.52-0.60, Band 3 covers 0.63-0.69, Band 4 covers 0.76-0.90, Band 5 covers

1.55-1.75, and Band 6 covers 2.08-2.35. We do not make use of a seventh band covering thermal infrared (10.40-12.50)
that was only recorded at a resolution of 120 instead of 30 m pixels.


                                                           26
    We combine these satellite data with a number of GIS data layers that we obtain from the Mex-
ican statistical institute INEGI. These geo-coded data layers include the administrative shape file
of municipality boundaries for the 2010 population census, the position of the Mexican coastline,
the Mexican transport network for the year 2009 (airports, seaports, paved roads and railways),
and the coordinates for each island feature within the Mexican maritime territory from the Mexi-
can census of maritime land territory. The second panel in Figure 1 depicts the position of islands
within 5 km of the Mexican coast. Finally, the geo-statistics division at INEGI provided us with
the location of pre-Hispanic archaeological sites in Mexico that we also depict in Figure 1.
    We also obtain GIS data from additional sources. The first is a measure of monthly temperature
and precipitation at the level of 30 arc seconds (roughly 1km) for the period 1950-2000 from the
WorldClim database. We take annual means of precipitation and temperature from the monthly
data and collapse the grid cells to the municipality-level mean values of these two variables. The
second is a measure of primary ocean productivity at the level of 0.1 degree cells from the Nasa
Earth Observation (NEO) program. Primary productivity indicates the amount of biomass created
from photosynthesis (measured by chlorophyll concentrations), which is an important determi-
nant of the density of fish populations that can be sustained. We use these data to measure the
mean primary ocean productivity within 50 km of the coastline among coastal municipalities for
the year 2005.
Municipality-Level Information on Public Investment in Tourism We obtain information on
public investments in local tourism development at the municipality level from INEGI’s depart-
ment for public finances (Estadística de Finanzas Públicas Estatales y Municipales (EFIPEM)). This
database is the most detailed available account of public finances for both federal, state-level and
local spending at the municipality-level covering the period 1989-2010. For earlier years, we com-
plement this database with records that we obtain from Mexico’s Fondo Nacional de Fomento al
Turismo (FONATUR) that provide us with information on public investments in tourism going
back to the beginning of the 1960s.
     Public investments in tourism mainly take one of two forms. The first are investments in public
capital and local infrastructure that are specific to the development of the tourism sector, such as
building museums, tourist information centers, developing the marina, restoring historical build-
ings and monuments as well as investing in tourism promotion and advertising campaigns for
local tourism. The second are investments in transport infrastructure, such as roads and airports,
that historically have been mainly targeted at the seven government-planned tourism centers (un-
til 2010) and implemented through federal funding by FONATUR and its predecessors.
     To construct a measure of the stock of public capital invested in tourism development across
municipalities for 1998 and 2008, we need two additional pieces of information. First, we convert
all listed investments over time, that are reported in current Mexican Pesos at the time, into con-
stant 1998 or 2008 Mexican Pesos (adjusted for inflation), using data on annual inflation rates over
time from INEGI. Second, past investments in tourism-related capital depreciate over time, so that
more recent investments should receive a higher weight relative to investments over past decades.
To adjust for this in computing today’s capital stock, we use an estimate of capital depreciation
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA, 2010), that report capital deprecation rates sepa-
rately for different types of public and private capital investments. We use the upper range of the
reported estimates of capital depreciation for non-defense government investments at 12 percent
per year. This is conservative in our setting as some of largest past investments by FONATUR are
reported in the current market valuation of these investments, rather than values in the past. As a
result, using a higher rate of depreciation implies a larger level of annualized public investment in
the model calibration compared to using a lower estimate of capital depreciation (see Appendix



                                                 27
4.1).5 Using this approach we estimate a value of the stock of public government investment in
tourism development at 26.48 billion USD as of 2008. Appendix 4.1 provides further details on the
model calibration.
Bilateral Tourism Exports 1990-2011 To estimate the tourism trade elasticity, we use data on bi-
lateral tourism exports from the World Bank WITS database on trade in services. We link these
data to information from the IMF on PPP rates for final consumption goods across countries in
order to empirically capture the relative price of local consumption for origin-destination country
pairs over time. The database spans the years 1990-2011 and includes 115 origin and destination
countries.

Appendix 3: Model
Solving for Counterfactual Changes
    As discussed in section 4.3, we consider counterfactual changes where (i) public investment
changes, and/or (ii) travel frictions to tourism change. Variables in the counterfactual equilibrium
                                                                                              0
are noted with a prime, and changes compared to the current equilibrium are noted: x̂ = xx .
    Given the expression for the prices indexes (10) and (8), the expression for trade and tourism
shares, (9) and (7), and the expression of manufacturing productivity (11) and tourism unit costs
(6), changes in trade shares and prices between two equilibria are simple functions of changes
in wages, public investment, and local populations working in the services or the manufacturing
sector:

                                                       −θ c       θ
                                                  cd
                                                   M,i    Mi
                                        πcni =              −θ
                                                                                                                 (A.1)
                                                       Pd
                                                        M,n
                                        −θ
                                                 ∑ πnj cd   −θ c              θ
                                   Pd
                                    M,n    =            M,j    Mj                                                (A.2)
                                                   j
                                                           L                   s
                                                                 ∏
                                                                             ν
                                                b n ) νM
                                        M,i = ( w
                                       cd                                  Pbs,nM                                (A.3)
                                                             s∈ M,N
                                                         γM        γS
                                        ci =
                                        M         Ld M,i    LdST,i                                               (A.4)
                                                        −β c−β
                                                   cc
                                                    T,i    tni
                                         ni =
                                        λc                  −β
                                                                                                                 (A.5)
                                                      P
                                                      d T,n
                                        −β                     −β
                                   P
                                   dT,n    =     ∑    λnj tcnj    ccT,j
                                                                        −β
                                                                                                                 (A.6)
                                                    j
                                                                       L                s
                                               b −α F ( w                   ∏
                                                                                      ν
                                         T,i = Gi
                                        cc              bn )νT                      Pbs,nT                       (A.7)
                                                                           s∈ M,N
                                                        1− ρ
                                                   Pd
                                                    M,n
                                        cn =
                                        χ                  1− ρ
                                                                                                                 (A.8)
                                                PMT,n
                                                \
                                        1− ρ                   1− ρ           1− ρ
                                                                                    
                                PMT,n
                                \              = (1 − χn ) Pd
                                                            T,n      + χn Pd
                                                                           M,n        ,                          (A.9)

   We assume that public investment remains in constant proportion to what is observed in the
current equilibrium, but varies in level in response to the level of tax such that the government
    5 We confirm this conjecture by alternatively using a rate of depreciation at 2.5 percent, which yields estimates of

the gains from tourism of 5.2 percent instead of the 4.8 percent we report in our baseline approach.


                                                                  28
budget constraint holds, i.e.:
                                                Gn       Gn0
                                                      =                                        (A.10)
                                               ∑M Gn    ∑M Gn0
                                                ∑ Gn0 = ∑ ι0 L0n wn0                           (A.11)
                                                 M                    M

Changes in local population levels within Mexico are determined by the location choice equation
(12) together with the maintained assumption that total population is unchanged in the counter-
factual equilibrium, i.e. ∑n∈M L0n = LM :

                                                                    −α MT κ̃
                                               α MT
                                            w
                                            cn            PbMT,n
                            Ln =                                          −α MT κ̃ ∀n ∈ M.   (A.12)
                            c                               
                                         Li
                                    ∑
                                                      α MT
                                        LM       w
                                                 bi              PbMT,i

    Finally, the system is closed by the market clearing conditions in each sector, that is, equations
(13)-(15) expressed in the counterfactual equilibrium, together with:


                                              Li0 = L0M,i + L0T,i + L0S,i                      (A.13)
                                        L0ST,i    =          L0T,i    +   L0S,i                (A.14)

   Finally, welfare change U
                           dM is equalized across all regions between two equilibria:

                                1 − ι0
                                              α MT
                                            w
                                            cn           −1
                        UM =
                        d                              Ln κ̃ , for all n ∈ M
                                                       c
                                1−ι       P̂MT,n

Appendix 4: Calibration and Quantification
A.4.1 Data and Calibration
Calibration of Rest of the World We calibrate the wage in RoW as the trade-weighted aver-
age wage of Mexico’s trading partners (measured as GDP per capita), and adjust population of
RoW so that the ratio of GDP of Mexico to the GDP of RoW in the quantified model matches the
one in the data. The shares of workers in the manufacturing and tourism industries for RoW are
calibrated to the share of world GDP in each sector.
Share of Workers in Non-Traded Services We first estimate the relative size of tourism in the
traded sector in each region: ξ n ≡ L T,n /( L T,n + L M,n ) using local manufacturing GDP and local
hotel sales data that we scale up by a constant scale factor so that aggregate values match the data.
The share of workers in the non-traded services sector is then estimated, accounting for the fact
that local non traded services are used both for final consumption, as well as for the production
of tourism and manufacturing (see input-output coefficients in Appendix 4.2 below). The share of
workers in the non-traded services sector is then derived from the local market clearing condition
in the non-traded services sector, which leads to:
                                                                       νS         νS
                                 LS,n   αS (1 − ι) + ξ n νTL + νML (1 − ξ n )
                                                          T     M
                                      =                      S
                                                                              .
                                  Ln                νTS    νM
                                            1+ξ         + (1 − ξ )
                                                             n νL          L
                                                                          νM           n
                                                                  T

Stock of Public Investment in Tourism Development We use the Mexican database on public
investments described in the Appendix 2 to construct the stock of public investments in tourism

                                                                 29
development across municipalities Kn . To convert this into the local investment in tourism infras-
tructure Gn in a unit consistent with the model, we compute an annualized flow based on Kn . We
do this using the depreciation rate discussed above, assuming that our model corresponds to one
period in the steady-state. That is, to maintain a capital stock Kn , yearly investments have to be
Gn where Kn = ∑∞                  t
                   t=0 Gn (1 − d ) and d is the depreciation rate of investment. We express this mea-
sure of yearly investment relative to Mexico’s GDP, and use this measure in the calibration. As
discussed in Section 5.1 of the paper, we calibrate the share αG from equation (5) using the ratio of
government investment over total tourism GDP, which leads to αG = 0.057. This is close to related
elasticities estimated in e.g. Fajgelbaum et al. (2015).
A.4.2 Elasticity Estimates
Input Shares We calibrate the input-output shares of the model using total requirement coeffi-
cients for services and manufacturing inputs of the 2003 Mexican input-output table. The remain-
ing value added is attributed to a single factor labor. The corresponding input shares are:
                                         Tourism Manufacturing
                                   νjL     0.63      0.40
                                   νjM     0.20      0.45
                                   νjS     0.17      0.15
Parameter αG The parameter αG controls the impact of government investment on tourism pro-
ductivity. Recall that the production function for tourism services is:
                                                                          j
                                           o1−αG αG
                                  q T,n = ZT,n  Gn       ∏        m Tj,n νT .
                                                       j∈ L,M,S

   To calibrate αG , we compare government investment to tourism GDP. If the government is in-
vesting in tourism infrastructure in an optimal way, then its spending in tourism infrastructure
should be equal to a constant fraction α α+Gν L of tourism GDP. We assume that this holds, which
                                          G   T
leads to a calibrated value of αG = 0.057. To benchmark this value, we compare it to results in
Fajgelbaum et al. (2015). They calibrate a related parameter that governs how much productivity
increases with government spending using US tax data. Their preferred estimate is 0.05, which is
in the same order of magnitude of what we find here.
Consumption Shares We calibrate αS using the following accounting equality, which comes
from the market clearing condition for the local non traded services sector in each region (equation
15) aggregated at the national level:
                       "          !                       !              #
                                S                       S              S
                               νM     GDPS       νTS  νM    GDPT      νM      1
                 αS =      1+ L             −      L
                                                     − L          − L              ,
                               νM GDP            νT   νM    GDP       νM ( 1 − ι )

where GDP  S      GDPT
        GDP and GDP measure the relative size of tourism and services in aggregate GDP. This
equation relates aggregate value added shares to both consumption shares and input shares. In
turn, α MT = 1 − αS .
Tourism Trade Elasticity To estimate the elasticity β, we use the panel data on country-level
bilateral tourism exports. Equation (7) leads to the following estimation equation:
                               logEnkt = δnt + ζ nk − β log wkt + ξ nkt ,                      (A.15)
where Enkt is the spending of country n on tourism in country k at period t, δnt is an origin-by-time
fixed effect (e.g. capturing productivity shocks), ζ nk is an origin-by-destination fixed effect (e.g.


                                                  30
capturing distances or cultural proximity), ln wkt is the relative consumption price of tourism ser-
vices across destinations, and ξ nkt is a mean zero error term. To empirically measure log wkt , we
use country-level PPP rates for final consumption goods that the International Price Comparison
(ICP) program computes for all 115 countries over the period 1990-2011 in our database. The ICP
constructs this measure, PPPkt as the number of units of a country k’s currency required to buy
the same basket of goods and services in k’s domestic market as one US Dollar would buy in the
United States. To measure log wkt , we take the log of (1/PPPkt ). Given the inclusion of origin-by-
period and origin-by-destination fixed effects, this measure effectively captures (with some error)
relative consumption price changes across different destination countries from the point of view
of a given origin-by-time cell.
    The main concern for the identification of β is that changes in consumption prices across des-
tinations are correlated with other factors that may increase or decrease bilateral tourism flows in
the error term. For example, if prices in a destination increase at the same time that travelers at
the origin become more likely to travel to the destination for other reasons (e.g. due to business
travel or attractiveness), this would lead to an upward biased estimate of − β (towards zero).
    The first step we take to address this concern is to condition on a basic control for time changing
economic conditions in the destination countries, by including the log of country GDP as a control.
Second, to address remaining concerns, in addition to the very likely concern of measurement er-
ror in our measure of log wkt , we use nominal exchange rate changes across destination countries
with respect to the US Dollar, log ekt , as an instrumental variable for log (1/PPPkt ). The exchange
rates are used as part of the PPP rate construction by the ICP, so that we can expect a strong first
stage. The exclusion restriction is that differential exchange rate changes across different destina-
tion markets to not affect bilateral tourism expenditure except through relative price changes of
tourism services, conditional on the included fixed effects and destination-specific changes in log
GDP.
    To further assess the validity of this assumption, we also estimate specification (A.15) after
restricting attention to what we label touristic destinations: i.e. destinations for which more than
80 percent of total travel inflows are due to leisure rather than business travel. Finally, to allow for
tourist flows to respond to relative price information across destination markets with some time
lag, we also estimate specifications in which we lag the independent variable by 1-5 years.
    Appendix table A.22 presents the estimation results. We find a negative and statistically sig-
nificant tourism trade elasticity that reaches β = .7 when we lag the relative destination price
changes by 3-4 year (1.5 with lesser lags). These results are confirmed with a slightly lower point
estimate of .6 once we restrict attention to destinations with more than 80 of travel inflows driven
by leisure rather than business purposes. These results indicate that the tourism trade elasticity
appears to be significantly lower than common estimates of the trade elasticity for flows of goods.
To be conservative in our quantification of the gains from tourism, we compute the upper end of
the 95% confidence intervals supported by the point estimates in Table A.22 as β + 1 = 2.5. In a
similar vein, we choose the value of ρ = β + 1 = 2.5. As discussed above, we also report results
of the counterfactual analysis across a range of different parameterizations in Section 5.2.
A.4.3 Indirect Inference Procedure
   The procedure relies on solving for a counterfactual equilibrium with no tourism, for a range
of possible values for (γ M , γS ). To do so, we model a shut down of all public investment to
                                                        Ai down to 0 in every location in Mexico,
tourism infrastructure. This brings the tourism shifter f
corresponding to a counterfactual equilibrium with no tourism. For any candidate value of the
agglomeration parameters (γ M , γS ), we use the system of equations (A.1)-(A.14) to compute nu-
merically the corresponding vector of exogenous manufacturing productivities, Mno (γ M , γS ), as


                                                  31
well as the counterfactual distribution of population under no tourism, Lon (γ M , γS ), while hold-
ing all other exogenous parameters constant.6 We then compute the correlation of these vectors
with our set of instrumental variables, conditional on the full set of controls used in Section 3.
Specifically, we estimate the following regressions within the model across alternative parameter
combinations of (γ M , γS ):
                                                  ( j)   ( j) ( j)     0         ( j)
                                  log (ync ) = αc + β y znc + α( j) Xnc + unc ,                                (A.16)
for each of the instruments j ∈ 1...3, and for y = Lon (γ M , γS ) and y = Mno (γ M , γS ) respectively.
The vector Xnc is the full vector of pre-determined controls described in (1). The indirect inference
procedure finds the combination of spillover parameters such that:

                                  (γc  cS )= argmin β(γ M , γS )0 W β(γ M , γS ),
                                    M, γ
                                          ( j)
where β(γ M , γS ) is the vector of β y (γ M , γS ) for j=1...3 and y = { Lon , Mno }, and W is a weighting
                                                                                                     ( j)
matrix for which we use the inverse of the variance of the point estimates of each β y in equation
(A.16).
    The results of this procedure are reported graphically in Figure 2, where the loss function is
given by L = β(γ M , γS )0 W β(γ M , γS ). To minimize computing power requirements, we look for
the parameter combination that delivers the best fit over a grid of possible values for γ M and γS
ranging from 0 to .2 in both parameters. After inspection of Figure 2, it is clear that the best-fitting
parameter combination is insensitive to extending the grid space to larger (less realistic) values.
To get the standard errors we bootstrap the procedure accounting for sampling error as discussed
in Appendix 4.4. In line with the estimated standard errors, the function is flatter in the direc-
tion of γ M than it is in the direction of γS : the cross-sectoral spillover parameter is more precisely
identified by the procedure, whereas the within-sector parameter has somewhat wider confidence
intervals.
A.4.4 Confidence Intervals / Bootstrap
    To obtain confidence intervals, we bootstrap the quantification exercise 200 times. In each
bootstrap, we draw the parameters for both the trade and tourism trade elasticities θ and β from
a normal distribution with a mean equal to the point estimate and a standard deviation equal to
the standard error of the estimate. And as discussed above, for each draw of β, we also adjust
ρ = β + 1. The standard error associated to the point estimate 6.1 of the trade-in-goods elasticity
is 1.046 as reported in Table 1 of Adao et al. (2015). The standard error for the point estimate of the
tourism trade elasticity is reported in appendix Table A.22.
    In addition, we also allow for the possibility that the regional data we feed into the model’s
calibration as part of Section 5.1 in the text are reported with measurement error. In particular,
we treat each of the raw data moments (regional employment, wages, manufacturing and tourism
GDP) as if each region’s reported number was not a data point, but instead a point estimate subject
to a signal-to-noise ratio of 80-20. The implied standard error for each of the regional data points
are consistent with a point estimate that has a t-statistic (ratio of reported regional number over
standard error) equal to 5, reflecting the 80-20 assumption. This implies that we are drawing each

    6 As discussed above, there is the potential for multiple equilibria in the model in the presence of spillovers. We

implement the following equilibrium selection rule. We solve for the closest counterfactual equilibrium compared to
the baseline. That is, we use the values of the endogenous variables from the current equilibrium as a starting point
for the counterfactual equilibrium. The procedure then updates the candidate value of endogenous variables in the
counterfactual equilibrium based on a weighted average of this initial guess and the new values that come out of
solving the model. The procedure is iterated until new values and initial values converge.


                                                          32
regional moments from a distribution whose mean is the reported number with a 95% confidence
interval of +/- 40% of the reported regional value.
    This procedure follows a parametric bootstrap (e.g. Horowitz, 2001) that implicitly assumes
errors are uncorrelated across datasets. Finally, the bootstrap confidence intervals do not take into
account 9 cases of degenerate equilibria where in excess of half of Mexico’s total population con-
centrates in just one region in the no-tourism equilibrium. For reference, the largest regional share
of population in today’s observed equilibrium with 300 regions is less than 5 percent.
A.4.5 Counterfactuals With Less Aggregated Interior Regions
    In this appendix we provide additional results to investigate the sensitivity of the welfare
quantifications with respect to more or less regional aggregation for the interior regions of Mex-
ico. As we discuss in Section 5.1, the 2455 regions case pushes the limits of the computational
requirements when it comes to our indirect inference approach (involving a grid of parameter
combinations) as well as for the bootstrapping of the computation of counterfactual equilibria
several hundreds of times.
    To this end, we document the welfare gains from tourism as well as the regional effects of
tourism across regions when running counterfactuals based on the disaggregated 2455 regions
case compared to the baseline 300 regions case that we work with in the main text. In particular,
we use the same model parameter values as in our preferred counterfactuals, but solve the model
for counterfactual no-tourism equilibria in both the more and less aggregated scenarios.
    Appendix tables A.30 and A.31 report the quantification results back-to-back. Reassuringly,
we find very similar estimates of the welfare gains from tourism and international-only tourism,
and we also find that the regional implications of tourism are remarkably similar across the two
levels of regional aggregation. As discussed in the main text, these results are as expected, because
the key source of variation that we use to inform the calibration of the model and its parameters
stems from coastal municipalities. The aggregation of interior municipalities into larger regions
that are centered around the 150 largest economic centers –while keeping the coastal geography
as in the regression analysis– is thus greatly convenient for computational power, but largely in-
consequential for the estimated results.
A.4.6 Model Extensions and Robustness
Alternative Parameter Values
     Appendix table A.23 reports the estimated gains from tourism as well as from international-
only tourism across different parameter combinations for the trade elasticity of tourism (β), the
spatial labor supply elasticity (eκ ) and the cross-sector co-agglomeration force γS . All other param-
eters are held constant at their values of our baseline calibration discussed above.
     First, the tourism trade elasticity (β) directly affects the magnitude of the estimated neoclassical
gains from lower frictions to tourism trade. In particular, a larger tourism trade elasticity implies
a lower gain from trade in tourism for a given set of empirical moments. This is analogous to the
role of the trade-in-goods elasticity in the recent quantitative literature on the gains from trade
(Arkolakis et al., 2012). Intuitively, moving from the observed level of tourism consumption to
tourism autarky implies a larger loss in welfare if the demand elasticity of tourism consumption
is lower (less elastic). As reported in Table A.23, the gains from tourism are about 8 percent lower
(4.46 vs 4.82) if the tourism trade elasticity were to increase to 4.5 relative to the upper bound of
the point estimate of 2.5 that we estimate in the data.7

   7 Note   that a very similar logic applies to the elasticity of substitution between tourism and manufacturing
consumption (ρ). A lower value magnifies the gains from tourism because the less substitutable tourism becomes
relative to other consumption, the more will an increase in the frictions to tourism trade deprive consumers from the


                                                         33
     Second, we explore the sensitivity of the gains from tourism with respect to different assump-
tions about the spatial labor supply elasticity. As noted in Section 5.1 above, our preferred estimate
of κe = 6.35 is significantly larger than many of the estimates in the existing literature that have
exploited shorter-term variation over time, rather than cross-sectional estimates. Table A.23 thus
reports the gains from tourism across three alternative parameterizations for κe = 6.35, κe = 4.35
and κe = 2.35, with the first one equal to our empirical estimate from the data. Interestingly, our
welfare quantification appears to be quite robust to different assumptions about the spatial labor
supply elasticity. Holding all other parameters constant, the gains from tourism range between
4.82 and 5.43 percent across the different rows, and the gains from international-only tourism
range between 1.84 and 2.99 percent.
     Finally, we explore to what extent lower values of the estimated cross-sector spillover pa-
rameter affect the welfare results. As we have discussed in the previous section, the services-
to-manufacturing externality matters directly for the extent of net gains or losses in traded goods
production in the aggregate due to the development of tourism. This is also apparent in Table
A.23: holding other parameter values at their baseline, the estimated gains from tourism range
between 4.82 and 2.77 percent as we move from the baseline calibration of γS = 0.087 to 0.057,
0.027 and finally 0. In turn, the gains from international tourism range between 1.84 percent in the
baseline calibration to 0.91 percent in the absence of co-agglomeration forces.
     For completeness, the table also reports the full cross of these parameter ranges. In particular,
moving towards the lower left of each panel tends to increase the estimated gains from tourism
(reducing β and κe, and increasing γS ). Conversely, moving toward the upper right of each panel
tends to lower the estimated gains from tourism (increasing β and κe, and reducing γS ).
     Finally, appendix Table A.24 also reports the identical exercises depicted in Table A.23, but in-
stead of varying the parameter of the cross-sector agglomeration force, we instead vary the value
of the within-manufacturing spillover, γ M , in the same way, while holding γS constant. In line
with the discussion of the role of the spillover parameters at the end of Section 4, we find that, for
every given parameter combination of β and κe, the estimated gains from both domestic and inter-
national tourism increase as we reduce the strength of the within-manufacturing agglomeration
externality.
Local Gains from Tourism Without Migration
    What would the local welfare effect of tourism be in absence of a long-term spatial equilibrium
with labor mobility. To address this question, we first solve for the counterfactual spatial equilib-
rium with prohibitive frictions to both domestic and international tourism in Mexico. Starting
from this initial equilibrium, we then simulate the new equilibrium that arises when lowering the
tourism travel frictions to today’s level for either both domestic and international or international-
only tourism, but now under the assumption that labor is immobile across regions within Mexico.
We thus effectively shut down the economic geography dimension of the model, and evaluate the
local welfare implications of tourism in a world with trade in goods and tourism-related services.
All other forces in the model, such as input-output linkages and agglomeration economies, are
held constant at their baseline parameters, but the model no longer allows workers to choose their
region of residence, so that expected real incomes are no longer equalized across regions.
    Appendix table A.28 reports the counterfactual effect of regional variation in tourism activity
on local worker welfare. In particular, the table replaces the left-hand side in specification (21) by
the log change in worker utility when moving from the no-tourism equilibrium to the current level
of tourism trade frictions. We regress this variable on the counterfactual change in local tourism
GDP (which in specification (21) was equal to today’s level of tourism GDP, but this is no longer

benefits of tourism consumption. In the limit of ρ = 1 (Cobb-Douglas) this leads to infinite gains from tourism.


                                                          34
the case in absence of mobility) in addition to the full set of controls. As in the previous subsection,
we instrument for the change in local tourism activity with our island and beach IVs.
    We find that a 10 percent increase in local tourism activity causes a 2.37 percent increase in lo-
cal worker welfare in the absence of immigration. When focusing on international-only tourism,
we find almost the same point estimate (0.235 with standard error of 0.0715). In principle, there
are several factors that could lead to differences in the local welfare elasticity with respect to inter-
national and domestic tourism activity. As we have discussed above, international and domestic
tourism are concentrated in different regions of Mexico. For example, the initial sectoral compo-
sition of the local economies could differ when hit by the tourism shock, and this could lead to
heterogeneous local welfare effects due to the presence of both within and cross-sector agglomer-
ation forces. In practice, however, the local welfare effects of the two counterfactuals turn out to
be very similar in terms of proportional changes.
    In summary, we estimate large and significant local welfare gains of tourism that would have
occurred in the absence of regional migration. These local welfare gains are the model-based coun-
terpart of the strong migration responses to local variation in tourism that we have documented
in the regression analysis in Section 1.
Profits in the Tourism Sector
Model We describe here an extension where the tourism sector is imperfectly competitive. All
other dimensions of the model are unchanged. Demand for tourism services is nested CES, with
the upper-nest driving demand for different regions to which we add a lower nest for demand for
various tourism services (henceforth, “hotels”) provided in a given region:
                           "                           # β+β 1                         Z                                      σ σH−1
                                         1        β                                                              σH −1

                               ∑ Ai
                                       β +1     β +1                                                                             H
                 Q T,n =                      q T,i              ;           q T,i =                     q(ω )    σH
                                                                                                                         dω
                               i 6=n                                                        ω ∈ H (i )

    There is a continuum of hotels ω ∈ H (i ) in each region. The mass of hotels in each region
NHi is taken as exogenous. Hotels produce tourism services combining labor and manufacturing
input according to q(ω ) = `(ω )νT m(ω )1−νT . Hotels are small and take the price index of tourism in
their region as given. They compete according to monopolistic competition. Therefore, a hotel ω,
located in region n, prices at a constant markup over its marginal cost: p(ω ) = σHσH−1 c T,n . As in the
                             1−νT
main text, c T,n = Ψ T wnνT PM,n  . It follows that the price index of tourism services sold in region n is:
                                                                                                   !− β1
                                                    σH
                                       PT,n     =
                                                  σH − 1             ∑f
                                                                      Ai (c T,n tni )         −β
                                                                                                           ,
                                                                     i 6=n
                                                         −β
                                      1− σ
where we have defined f   Ai ≡ Ai NHi M . The taste shifter for region i, Ai , is not separably iden-
tified from the variety effect of the range of tourism services and hotels offered in this region,
governed by NHi . Expenditures shares in tourism take the same form as in the baseline model,
that is, the share spent by region non tourism services in region i is:
                                                                    Aei (tni c T,i ) − β
                                                λni =                                      .                                             (A.17)
                                                                       fk (tnk c T,k ) − β
                                                                 ∑k6=n A
Finally, to close the model, write In the income of workers in region n. The market clearing condi-




                                                                       35
tion are:
                           N
                                                 1 − νT           1 − νM
                                                                               
        wi Li,M
         νM
                      =   ∑ πni      α T χn In +
                                                   νT
                                                        wn Ln,T +
                                                                    νM
                                                                         wn Ln,M ,     for n ∈ (1..N ). (A.18)
                          n =1
                                   "                       #
                                        N
            wi Li,T       σH − 1
             νT
                      =
                            σH         ∑ λni (αT (1-χn ) In )   ,   for n ∈ (1..N ).                   (A.19)
                                       n =1
            wi Li,S = αS Ii ,      for i ∈ (1..N ).                                                    (A.20)
   Income of workers in region n is their labor income plus a share Π̃i of the profits made in the
tourism industry, that is,
                                                 In = wn Ln + Π̃n .                                    (A.21)
The parameter Γ governs the ownership structure of firms in the tourism sector in Mexico: a share
Γ in local, and (1-Γ) is foreign-owned (FDI). We assume that there is no Mexican FDI abroad, i.e.
that firms operating in RoW are all owned by RoW. Within Mexico, we assume that profits are al-
located proportionally to local GDP. The share of profits distributed in region n ∈ M is therefore:
                                                            wn Ln
                                                 Π̃n = Γ          ΠM                                   (A.22)
                                                           GDPM
where ΠM is the profit of the tourism industry in Mexico, which can be expressed as a function
of the wage bill in the Mexican tourism sector: ΠM = σH1−1 ν1T ∑nM=1 wn Ln,T . Profits distributed to
RoW are Π̃ N = ΠM (1 − Γ) + Π N , where Π N are profits realized by the tourism industry in RoW.
Equations (A.17)-(A.22), together with the ones that govern the manufacturing sector, the non-
tradable services sector and labor mobility, unchanged from the main text, define an equilibrium
of this economy.
Calibration We calibrate the new parameters of the model Γ and σH so as to match the share
of profits over revenues and the share of FDI over total investments made in the Mexican hotel
sector (37.5 and 35 percent respectively, source: FONATUR (2011)). We then redo step 1 of the cal-
ibration presented in the main text, with this extended version of the model. The new calibration
of An , Mn , tborder and τborder ensures that equations (A.17)-(A.22) hold. All other elasticities remain
unchanged.
     Table A.29 reports the results of the welfare quantification in the extended model. We find
that the welfare gains from tourism are 22 percent lower when 35 percent of tourism profits are
captured by foreigners compared to the case where all profits made in Mexico stay within Mexico.
Note, however, that the levels of the gains from tourism become higher in the calibrated model
with profits (with or without repatriation) compared to our baseline estimate under perfect com-
petition. The reason is that the models with and without profits are calibrated to the same data –in
particular the same trade and tourism shares. Compared to a case where the tourism sector prices
at its cost, the case where the tourism sector prices at a markup corresponds to a calibration with
higher productivity/demand shifters for tourism relative to manufacturing. These ensure that
the same consumption patterns can be rationalized despite a higher price of tourism. Therefore,
touristic regions are revealed in the calibration with profits to have an even stronger comparative
advantage in tourism than in the baseline calibration. This stronger comparative advantage me-
chanically leads to higher gains from tourism integration (gains of 8 percent in Mexico under 35
percent repatriation of profits relative to our baseline estimate of 4.82 percent).




                                                           36
