NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENVIRONMENTAL TAXATION
Roberton C. Williams III
Working Paper 22303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22303

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

This paper was written for the 2015 Conference on the Economics of Tax Policy, sponsored by
the Robert D. Burch Center at the University of California-Berkeley, the Penn Wharton Public
Policy Initiative, and the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center. I am grateful to Alan Auerbach,
Don Fullerton, and participants at the conference for their comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Roberton C. Williams III. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Environmental Taxation
Roberton C. Williams III
NBER Working Paper No. 22303
June 2016
JEL No. H21,H22,H23,Q50,Q58
ABSTRACT
This paper examines potential environmental tax policy reforms. It focuses primarily on a carbon
tax, but also more briefly considers a range of other possible changes. These include revising or
eliminating various energy and environmental tax credits and deductions (many of which might
become unnecessary in the presence of a carbon tax), as well as changes to energy taxes that have
substantial environmental implications (such as the federal gasoline tax). The paper draws on
recent theoretical and empirical research to evaluate the effects of such reforms on tax revenue,
pollution emissions, economic efficiency, and income distribution.

Roberton C. Williams III
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of Maryland,
Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
roberton@umd.edu

1. Introduction
Long-term projections of the US federal budget show an increasingly large deficit, which
would be difficult to address using spending cuts alone. But tax reform proposals tend to be
much more concrete about tax cuts than about how those cuts will be paid for (much less how to
achieve a net increase in tax revenues). Thus, potential new sources of tax revenue are in
demand.
There is also increasing recognition of the need to take action to limit emissions of
greenhouse gases and further reduce emissions of local air pollutants. Using traditional
command-and-control environmental regulation to accomplish those goals would be costly.
Environmental taxes have the potential to address both of those issues, providing a source
of new tax revenue and a cost-effective way to reduce pollution emissions.
This paper examines potential environmental tax policy reforms. It focuses primarily on
a carbon tax, which is the largest and most important potential new environmental tax. It also
more briefly considers a range of other potential reforms. These include revising or eliminating
various energy and environmental tax credits and deductions (many of which might become
unnecessary in the presence of a carbon tax), as well as changes to energy taxes that have
substantial environmental implications (such as the federal gasoline tax). The paper draws on
recent theoretical and empirical research to evaluate the effects of such reforms on tax revenue,
pollution emissions, economic efficiency, and income distribution.
The next section of this paper provides some background on the theory and practice of
environmental taxation. Section 3 discusses carbon taxes. Section 4 considers changes to taxes
on motor fuels (gasoline and diesel fuel). Section 5 briefly looks at reforms to existing

1

environment- and energy-related tax credits and deductions. The final section summarizes and
concludes.
2. Background
This section provides first an overview of the theory of environmental taxation and then a
short discussion of the existing environmental tax provisions in the United States.
A. Theory of Environmental Taxation
This subsection discusses the theory of environmental taxation and its implications for
the design and implementation of environmental taxes. It starts by considering environmental
taxes as corrective taxes, providing incentives to lower pollution emissions. It then goes on to
consider the role of environmental taxes within the larger tax system, considering both the
potential for using environmental tax revenue to lower other taxes (or prevent raising them) and
how environmental taxes interact with the rest of the tax system. Finally, it compares
environmental taxes with alternative policy instruments.
i. Corrective Taxation
The concept of using taxation to correct negative externalities, such as pollution, is
generally credited to Pigou (1920), and such corrective taxes are sometimes referred to as
Pigouvian taxation. The basic idea is simple. A negative externality – a case in which
production or consumption of some good harms someone other than the buyer or seller of that
good – represents a market failure because the buyer’s and seller’s decisions fail to take into
account that external cost. Consequently, an unregulated free market will generally result in an
inefficiently high quantity of any good with an associated negative externality. Imposing a tax
on the externality-generating good can correct the externality. If the tax rate is set equal to
marginal external damage (the total harm to parties other than the buyer and seller from one
2

additional unit of the good), it brings that external cost into the transaction, ensuring that the
buyer pays the full marginal social cost of the good. Thus, the incentive provided by the tax
ensures that the market produces the efficient level of the good (in the absence of any other
uncorrected market failures).
One complication would be if the marginal external damage from a good varies based on
who produces the good or how it is produced. For example, the carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions
from a megawatt-hour of electricity produced from a power plant that burns natural gas are much
lower than the CO2 emissions if the same quantity of electricity is produced by burning coal (and
much lower still if produced by a wind turbine). But that apparent complication is easily
incorporated into this simple theory, either by viewing those as different goods (and thus
charging different tax rates on electricity produced from different sources) or, more simply, by
viewing CO2 emissions as the good with the negative externality, and imposing a tax per ton of
CO2 emissions. Similarly, if the marginal damage from local air pollutants varies based on
where those pollutants are emitted,1 then emissions in different locations should face different
tax rates.
In practice, imposing a theoretically ideal tax can be challenging. Estimating marginal
damage is difficult, particularly in cases where the harm will occur in the future (as with
greenhouse gas emissions) or where damage varies widely across space or time (as with local air
pollutants). And in many cases, it is difficult for taxing authorities to directly measure
emissions, and thus imposing the tax on some proxy for emissions (such as the amount of fuel
burned) makes it much easier to enforce. In such cases, any tax will need to depart from the

1

For example, the marginal damage from emissions immediately upwind of a major city tend to
be much higher than those in a sparsely populated rural area, because the number of people
affected is much greater.
3

theoretical ideal, but the theory provides some general principles: set tax rates based on the best
estimate of marginal damage, and when it is impractical to tax emissions directly, choose a proxy
that is as close as practicable to what matters for marginal damage. Taxing based on those
principles will most efficiently correct the negative externality from pollution.
Note that I have not yet mentioned the use of revenue from an environmental tax. Many
non-economists would define an environmental tax as a tax whose revenue is used to address
environmental goals. But to most economists, an environmental tax is a tax on pollution
emissions (or on a good proxy for pollution emissions). This latter definition focuses on the
corrective role of environmental taxes. In general, the revenue raised by efficient levels of taxes
on emissions could be greater or less than the efficient level of spending to address
environmental goals, and thus economic theory argues that environmental tax revenue should not
necessarily be spent on environmental ends, nor should environmental spending necessarily be
financed by environmental taxes.
ii. Environmental Taxes as Part of the Broader Tax System
Of course, environmental taxes don’t just correct externalities. They also raise revenue,
and that can be a major advantage. That revenue can be used to cut (or prevent increasing) other
taxes, to reduce the budget deficit, to pay for public goods, to address distributional goals, or for
many other purposes. At the same time, interactions between environmental taxes and other preexisting taxes (primarily income and payroll taxes) can significantly raise the efficiency costs of
environmental taxes (or any other excise tax or similar policy). This sub-section reviews
research on the potential gains from using environmental tax revenue, as well as the potential
extra costs implied by interactions with other taxes.

4

The argument that the revenue-raising role of environmental taxes is a substantial
additional reason to implement such taxes first came to prominence in the “double dividend”
literature.2 The idea is simple: if revenue from an environmental tax can be used to finance a cut
in the tax rate for a pre-existing distortionary tax (such as the income tax), that cut produces an
efficiency gain in addition to the other effects of the environmental tax. The term “double
dividend” refers to the claim that environmental taxes raise economic efficiency through two
separate channels, both by correcting an externality and by raising revenue that can be used to
cut other taxes. That second “dividend” has since come to be known as the “revenue-recycling
effect.”3 And that basic concept also applies to a broader range of uses for the revenue: spending
the revenue on public goods or using it to cut the budget deficit could produce similar gains in
economic efficiency.4
Early papers in the double dividend literature argued that because of that gain from
recycling revenue, environmental taxes would still be worthwhile even if the pollutant being
taxed turned out to be harmless: that the efficiency gain from revenue-recycling would more than
cover the efficiency cost of the tax. That was a particularly attractive argument in the case of a
carbon tax, because at the time the early double-dividend papers were written, there was still
significant scientific uncertainty about the relationship between anthropogenic carbon emissions
and climate change (and it remains a potentially attractive political argument even today, given

2

See, for example, Tullock (1967), Pearce (1991), Repetto (1992), and Oates (1995).

3

The terms “revenue-recycling effect” and “tax-interaction effect” are due to Goulder (1995).

4

If the levels of the budget deficit and of spending on public goods are efficient ex ante, then at
the margin, using environmental tax revenue to cut the deficit or increase public good provision
will have the same efficiency benefit as using it to cut other taxes. To the extent that those levels
are not optimal, those alternative uses could produce larger or smaller gains.
5

that many Americans still doubt that relationship). However, subsequent work showed that
argument – now referred to as the “strong double dividend” – does not generally hold.
What those early double-dividend studies missed was the general-equilibrium
interactions between environmental taxes and pre-existing distortionary taxes. Environmental
taxes lower the real returns to factors of production such as capital and labor, either directly by
reducing wages and returns on capital, or indirectly by pushing up the prices of polluting goods.
This discourages the supply of those factors, and because pre-existing taxes have already
distorted those factor markets (causing the marginal social cost of supplying those factors to be
lower than their marginal product), this creates a welfare loss.
Under central-case assumptions, the extra cost from this “tax-interaction effect” is
actually slightly larger than the gain from the revenue-recycling effect, and thus not only is there
no strong double dividend, but the efficient level of an environmental tax is slightly lower than
marginal pollution damage. The intuition for that result is that broader taxes are generally more
efficient revenue-raising instruments, and an environmental tax is a narrower tax than an income
tax (because the income tax covers all production, whereas the environmental tax covers only
polluting production).
More recent work has pushed back to some extent against that conclusion. To pick just
one example, Parry and Bento (2000) suggest that inefficient tax preferences within the income
tax system (tax deductions, credits, and exemptions that are not justified by market failures)
narrow the tax base of the income tax, and that taking this into account means that environmental
taxes are more efficient at raising revenue than the income tax – and thus that the optimal
environmental tax is more than marginal damage. A major problem with that argument is that it
compares the existing (inefficiently designed) income tax to an efficiently designed

6

environmental tax. If a real-world environmental tax also includes inefficient deductions or
exemptions, then this would weaken or overturn Parry and Bento’s argument.
The literature has not come to a single clear and unambiguous conclusion about whether
interactions with the broader tax system cause the optimal environmental tax to be slightly higher
or lower than marginal damage: it depends on many aspects of the situation at hand. But the
literature has generally rejected arguments that such effects cause the optimal tax to be
dramatically different from marginal damage.
iii. Environmental Taxes versus Other Environmental Policy Instruments
There are many other alternative policies beyond taxes that can be used to reduce
pollution emissions, including tradable permits, technology or emissions standards, and subsidies
for less polluting alternatives. In general, the most efficient policies provide an incentive to
reduce emissions, while giving the market flexibility about how to accomplish that emissions
reduction – flexibility both across different methods of reducing emissions for a given emitter
and across different emitters.
Emissions pricing policies – emissions taxes or tradable permits – provide that
combination of incentives with flexibility. Other policies generally do not. For example, a
technology standard (such as a requirement that all new automobiles have a catalytic converter)
requires the use of emissions control technology but provides little or no incentive to reduce
emissions in any other way (such as by improving fuel economy or driving less). Standards also
typically aren’t flexible across emitters (i.e., there’s no option for one emitter to reduce pollution
further than the standard requires in return for another emitter’s being allowed to reduce
pollution by less). Similarly, subsidizing a less polluting alternative (such as subsidies for

7

ethanol) provides an incentive only for switching to that alternative, not for any other way to
reduce emissions.
The flexibility provided by emissions pricing policies provides a cost advantage because
polluters can choose the lowest-cost combination of methods of reducing emissions. Policies
that provide less flexibility will generally be more expensive (for a given level of emissions
reductions) because they don’t take advantage of all of the possible channels for reducing
emissions.
There are some potential efficiency arguments for those less-flexible policies. One such
argument is ease of monitoring and enforcement: if it is much easier to check whether a
particular technology is in place (e.g., whether a car has a catalytic converter installed) than it is
to monitor emissions levels, that could outweigh the cost advantage that would come with
greater flexibility. A few decades ago, this was a major consideration in many cases. But given
advances in monitoring technology, this argument has much less bite today. Another argument
is that poorly informed emitters given flexibility may not choose the lowest-cost option, and if
regulators are better informed, then a regulation that provides incentives only on the low-cost
options could be more efficient than a fully flexible policy. But while this might hold in some
cases, the claim that regulators know a business’s or consumer’s costs better than that business or
consumer does should be regarded with some skepticism.
B. Environmental Taxes in the United States
Metcalf (2009) says that “Environmental taxes in the United States are like virtue: much
discussed but little practiced.” Williams (2009) notes that definitions of what constitutes an
environmental tax vary, and measures of the magnitude of environmental taxation will vary

8

correspondingly.5 But under any reasonable definition, the current level of environmental
taxation in the United States is very low, relative either to environmental taxation in other
developed countries or to the levels that would efficiently correct major pollution externalities.
By far the largest existing environmental tax in the US is the motor fuels excise tax: state
and federal taxes on motor fuels accounted for approximately $70 billion in 2005, which was
roughly 94% of all US environmental tax revenue (Metcalf, 2009). The remainder comes from a
variety of much smaller taxes. Although some of these are intended to provide incentives (e.g.,
the “gas guzzler” tax on cars with especially low fuel efficiency), most are designed simply to
raise money to remediate environmental problems (e.g., an excise tax on oil to fund the Oil Spill
Liability Trust Fund, or the excise tax on coal which funds the Black Lung Disability Fund).
Fullerton (1996) notes that this latter group provides only relatively weak incentives to reduce
pollution, because the tax bases for these taxes are not tightly connected to pollution emissions.
Metcalf (2009) compared environmental tax revenue in the United States with that of
other OECD countries, using data from the mid 2000s. Environmental tax revenue as a share of
gross domestic product (GDP) was lower for the US than for all but one other country (Mexico),
and was far less than the average (US environmental tax revenue was 0.9% of GDP, compared
with 2.23% for the average OECD country). Looking at environmental tax revenue relative to
total tax revenue yields a similar picture: the US had the lowest of all countries in the sample.
Using more recent data would, if anything, strengthen that pattern: the US has not imposed any
substantial new federal environmental taxes, and the tax rate for the biggest environmental tax in

5

Williams suggests three possible definitions for what constitutes an environmental tax: a tax
whose revenue is spent on an environmental goal, as a tax intended to reduce pollution, or as a
tax on pollution emissions (or on some quantity closely correlated with pollution emissions. The
first two definitions would likely exclude motor fuel taxes, which account for the vast majority
of “environmental tax” revenue in the US and in most other industrialized nations.
9

the US – the motor fuels excise tax – has remained constant in nominal terms per gallon since
1993, thus falling in real terms.
An alternative comparison would be to the level of environmental taxation that would
efficiently correct major environmental externalities. Again, current levels of environmental
taxation look very low. First consider motor fuel taxes. Rates for these taxes are well below the
efficient level (i.e., marginal external damage). The current combined federal and average state
tax is 48.69 cents/gallon,6 whereas Parry and Small (2005) find that the efficient tax rate would
be roughly $1/gallon.7
Including other possible environmental taxes widens this gap much more. Consider the
carbon tax. Carbone et al. (2013) estimate that a $30/ton carbon tax would raise an average of
$226 billion per year (in 2012 dollars) over the first 10 years after implementation. That’s more
than twice the total revenue per year from all existing state and federal environmental taxes. And
that rate is somewhat lower than most recent estimates of marginal damage.8 Thus, even if one
considers only those two environmental taxes – motor fuels taxes and a carbon tax – the revenue
from setting the taxes at levels necessary to correct externalities would dwarf existing US
environmental tax revenue.9

6

This figure comes from American Petroleum Institute (2015).

7

West and Williams (2007) find that interactions with the rest of the tax system (as discussed in
Section 2.A.ii) imply an even higher efficiency-maximizing gas tax rate. For further discussion
and a breakdown of the Parry and Small estimate, see section 4.A of this chapter.
8

For example, a recent Inter-Agency Working Group report (US IAWG, 2013) estimates that the
marginal external damage per ton of carbon is roughly $43.
9

One can’t simply add together revenue from motor fuels taxes and a carbon tax, both set to the
efficient level, because this would entail some double-counting: most estimates of the marginal
damage associated with motor fuel use include carbon emissions from motor fuels. However,
this double-counting is small: carbon emissions account for slightly less than 5% of Parry and
Small’s (2005) estimate of the efficient gasoline tax.
10

There are also a variety of environmental tax incentives that aren’t environmental taxes,
but rather tax expenditures: tax deductions, credits, or exemptions that provide incentives for
“clean” (i.e., less polluting, at least on some dimension) energy or energy conservation. These
are small in absolute terms (in fiscal year 2010, the largest was the alcohol fuel credit and excise
tax exemption, which cost $5.75 billion, and that provision has since expired), but nonetheless
large relative to all existing US environmental taxes other than motor fuels taxes.
3. A Carbon Tax
Increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in Earth’s atmosphere are trapping heat,
leading to an overall warming of the globe and other related changes to the climate. The most
important of these gases is carbon dioxide, which is emitted primarily through burning fossil
fuels, though other gases such as methane are also important. Reducing emissions of greenhouse
gases is the most reliable way to limit or prevent such changes. A tax on such emissions –
generally referred to as a carbon tax, even though it could apply to a broader range of gases than
just carbon dioxide – would be a cost-effective means of reducing such emissions.
This section reviews research on the design of a carbon tax and on what effects such a tax
would have. The first subsection reviews key design elements of such a tax. The next
subsection looks at estimates of key aggregate effects of a carbon tax. The final subsection
considers the incidence of a carbon tax: how the burden of the tax is distributed.
A. Carbon Tax Design
This subsection focuses on details of a carbon tax: what the tax base is, at what point in
the production process the tax could be imposed, the tax rate, and the path for the rate. In each
of these cases, economic theory gives a simple and clear answer for what will maximize
efficiency, though real-world proposals often vary substantially from that.

11

i. Tax Base and Point of Collection
The primary role of a carbon tax is to correct an externality, with the goal of reducing
emissions of greenhouse gases. Thus, the theoretically ideal tax base would be all greenhouse gas
emissions, with each gas taxed based on how much effect one unit of emissions of that gas has
on climate change. As the name “carbon tax” suggests, such a tax would apply to carbon dioxide
emissions, but would also apply to a range of other greenhouse gases, such as methane, nitrous
oxide, and chlorofluorocarbons. In practice, however, implementing such a tax presents practical
difficulties.
First, reducing the climate-changing effects of a particular gas to a single number is not a
simple exercise. Different gases trap heat to different extents and persist for different periods of
time in the atmosphere. Methane, for example, is a much more potent greenhouse gas than
carbon dioxide (one extra ton of methane in the atmosphere has approximately the same shortrun greenhouse effect implications as a hundred tons of CO2), but persists for a much shorter
period (with an atmospheric lifetime of roughly 12 years, versus an estimated 30 to 95 years for
CO2), so the relative effects of the two gases depend crucially on the time period used for
evaluation.10
The standard approach in the literature is to calculate the “global warming potential”
(GWP) for a given gas: the sum of its climate-changing effect over a given period of time, taking
into account the gradual decay of the gas in the atmosphere over time, but not taking into account
discounting or changes over time in the marginal damage from a particular temperature change.11

10

These numbers and the GWP estimates in the following paragraph are taken from Forster et al.
(2007), table 2.14.
11

A theoretically ideal measure for economic purposes would make these two adjustments (for
discounting and changes over time in marginal damage from climate change), and would use an
infinite time horizon. But such a calculation would requires choosing a discount rate and
12

The GWP for a particular gas is then expressed relative to that of CO2. For example, the GWP
of methane is 72 over a 20-year time horizon, indicating that over the first 20 years after it is
emitted, a ton of methane will cause the same total warming over that period as 72 tons of CO2.
The analogous numbers for longer time horizons are 25 over 100 years and 7.6 over 500 years,
which shows how dramatic an effect the time horizon can have on this measure. Emissions are
then generally expressed in terms of CO2 equivalent quantities (CO2e), typically based on a 100year time-horizon GWP estimate. Adopting this approach for a tax would imply taxing CO2e
emissions or, equivalently, taxing emissions of each gas based on its GWP.
A more important problem is that monitoring emissions of many of these gases is
difficult. CO2 is relatively straightforward in this regard because the vast majority of
anthropogenic CO2 emissions come from combustion of fossil fuels (e.g., 94% of US CO2
emissions in 2013 were from combustion12), and the CO2 emitted by combustion is simply
proportional to the quantity of carbon in the fuel.13 Thus, a tax on fossil fuel combustion, based
on the carbon in the fuel, is equivalent to a tax on combustion-related CO2 emissions. Moreover,
much of the non-combustion CO2 emissions are from large industrial uses such as cement
manufacture and use, which are also relatively easy to monitor. Thus, including nearly all CO2
emissions is relatively easy.

estimating the time path of marginal damage. One can view the standard GWP approach as a
rough approximation to that.
12

The emissions figures here and in the next paragraph come from U.S. EPA (2015).

13

This is because all of the CO2 produced by combustion is released into the atmosphere.
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology could change this. CCS would capture CO2
released by combustion and store it so it is not released into the atmosphere. But CCS will only
become cost-effective if technology advances dramatically or if carbon tax rates are much higher
than the range of current proposals.
13

Mansur (2012) provides an excellent discussion of important considerations in choosing
the point in the supply chain to apply a corrective tax. Because combustion-related CO2
emissions depend only on the carbon content of the fuel, these considerations argue for imposing
the tax at natural choke points in the fossil fuel supply chain, where the number of entities
subject to the tax would be relatively small, thus minimizing enforcement and compliance costs.
For example, there are roughly 150 refineries in the United States, so taxing the carbon content
of oil at the refinery level (and applying an equivalent tax to imports of refined petroleum
products when they enter the country) would be vastly simpler than taxing consumer purchases
of refined petroleum products. Metcalf and Weisbach (2009) suggest that if the tax is applied in
this manner, taxing a few thousand fossil fuel firms could cover roughly 80% of US CO2e
emissions.
Adding some other greenhouse gases to the base of a carbon tax could also be easy.
Chlorofluorocarbons are already regulated and taxed (because of their role in depleting the ozone
layer), so they would be easy to include in a carbon tax, and extending that to cover the closely
related hydrochlorofluorocarbons (which are much less damaging to the ozone layer but similar
in terms of greenhouse gas effects) would also be straightforward.
However, including most other greenhouse gases (which made up roughly 18% of US
CO2e emissions in 2013) is substantially more difficult. Advances in remote sensing could help
track methane and nitrous oxide emissions, but it is still likely that including these gases in the
base for a carbon tax would need to rely on taxing readily observable proxies for emissions,
rather than the emissions themselves – and to the extent that those aren’t perfect proxies, this
could entail potentially significant inefficiencies (which would need to be weighed against the

14

inefficiency of leaving those emissions out of the tax base14). Including these gases could also
be politically difficult because agriculture is responsible for a substantial share of emissions of
these gases and is politically powerful.
ii. Initial Tax Rate and Time Path of Rate
As discussed earlier, the basic theory of corrective taxes suggests that the optimal
corrective tax rate should equal the marginal damage per unit of emissions. Interactions with the
broader tax system may raise or lower this somewhat but don’t dramatically alter that basic
conclusion.
The main question, then, is what is the marginal damage from greenhouse gas emissions.
This is a complex and difficult question to answer, both because the exact climate effects of a
given level of greenhouse gases remain uncertain, and because changes to the climate have a
wide range of effects, most occurring well into the future, and these are uncertain and difficult to
value accurately. Thus, any estimate will necessarily be highly uncertain.
A recent US interagency working group report (US IAWG 2013) estimated the marginal
damage from carbon emissions (also referred to as the social cost of carbon, or SCC) to be
roughly $43/ton. Because this report could not follow all potential channels for climate change
damages, this is likely to be an underestimate, though it is obviously difficult to predict the
degree of underestimation. And the report has generally been highly controversial. Nonetheless,
this represents the best available estimate, and thus is a good general guideline for the efficient
carbon tax rate, suggesting a rate of $43/ton CO2e.
14

For example, leaks from the natural gas extraction and distribution system are responsible for a
substantial share of methane emissions. Natural gas has lower CO2 emissions per unit of energy
than other fossil fuels, so a carbon tax would likely cause a shift from other fossil fuels toward
natural gas. If methane leaks are significant, and are not taxed, then it’s possible that the shift
toward natural gas could actually raise CO2e emissions. But taxing leaks is difficult.
15

This SCC estimate includes damages to the entire world (which is quite unusual: costbenefit analysis by the US government typically considers only costs and benefits to the US).
Thus, setting a worldwide tax rate equal to that SCC estimate would be efficient from a global
perspective (i.e., including costs and benefits to the entire world). Setting the US tax rate is a
more complex problem. If one considers only costs and benefits to the US, and if other countries
don’t adjust their policies in response to US policy, then the optimal tax would be equal just to
the marginal damage to the US, which is in the vicinity of $4/ton to $5/ton, roughly 1/10 of the
SCC estimate. However, if the US puts any weight on damage to the rest of the world, or if
other countries will react to more stringent US climate policy by making their own policies more
stringent, then the optimal tax would be higher than marginal damage to the US, perhaps as high
as (or if the latter effect is strong enough, even higher than) marginal damage to the entire world.
Weitzman (2009) argues that risk aversion and uncertainty about climate-change
damages together should imply a much more aggressive policy to limit climate change. The
argument is that the probability distribution of damage from climate change is “fat-tailed” – put
simply, that as we consider very unlikely, highly catastrophic outcomes, the probability of those
outcomes falls as we consider more and more severe possible outcomes, but falls relatively
slowly compared with most commonly used probability distributions. This means that those
catastrophic outcomes – even though they are very unlikely – are still enormously important in
determining the expected harms from climate change. And thus, including those potentially
catastrophic outcomes implies a much higher SCC estimate (indeed, in its most extreme form,
Weitzman’s argument implies an infinitely high SCC). More intuitively, Weitzman’s argument
suggests that we should view climate change policy more as buying insurance against the worst
possible outcomes than as trying to reduce damages in the relatively likely cases of moderate

16

damage. Including such effects in a numerical estimate is very difficult, and thus the IAWG did
not incorporate them – another reason it might represent an underestimate.
A closely related question concerns the optimal time path for the tax rate. Should the tax
start immediately at the SCC, or should it be gradually phased in? And once it is fully in place,
how should it change over time?
Williams (2012) shows that the efficient carbon tax would not be pre-announced or
gradually phased in but would start immediately at the SCC, even if households and firms face
substantial capital adjustment costs in responding to the tax (e.g., the cost of retiring coal-fired
electric plants before the end of their useful lives). Shimer (2013) finds an analogous result for
labor adjustment costs such as layoffs in fossil-fuel industries.
The intuition for these results is simple: although those adjustments are costly and affect
the optimal quantity path for emissions (with higher adjustment costs implying a slower drop in
emissions), the adjustment costs are not market failures, and thus they don’t influence the
optimal corrective tax, which still equals marginal damage. Williams (2012) notes, however,
that these adjustment costs can be important for the distribution of costs, and that although other
approaches such as direct transfers would be more efficient, if such alternatives are not possible,
a gradual phase-in could be useful for meeting distributional objectives.
In general, the efficient carbon tax will rise over time at the same rate as marginal
damage. The IAWG estimates suggest that the SCC rises at roughly 1.5% - 2% per year (in real
terms), which would imply a similar rate of increase for the efficient carbon tax rate. Moreover,
Daniel et al. (2015) and Lontzek et al. (2015) each add uncertainty about climate change
(including the risk of climate tipping points) to integrated assessment models, and find that this
implies a substantially different time profile for the SCC (and therefore for the optimal carbon

17

tax), one that starts much higher and rises much more slowly than without any uncertainty.
Indeed, Daniel et al. (2015) finds that this effect is so strong that the SCC actually falls over
time.
Sinn (2008) observes that a rapidly rising carbon tax could actually accelerate greenhouse
gas emissions. Consider the problem than an owner of fossil-fuel reserves faces when a rising
carbon tax is imposed. If the tax is high enough, then it might make sense to leave the fuel in the
ground forever. But if not, the sooner that fossil fuel is extracted and burned, the less tax will be
charged on it – and if the tax is rising faster than the rate of interest, then even the present
discounted value of the tax will be rising over time, thus providing an incentive to extract and
burn the fuel sooner. This leads to a “green paradox”: a carbon tax that starts lower and rises
rapidly can cause more emissions in the short run than if there were no tax at all. However, as
noted earlier, estimates of the SCC rise substantially more slowly than the rate of interest, so a
tax rising with the SCC won’t trigger the green paradox.15 Thus, the green paradox is a real
worry only for taxes that rise much faster than the SCC.
Some carbon-tax proposals set the carbon tax based on estimates of the SCC,16 but most
proposals include rates that rise more quickly than that. Many call for a tax that rises at 4% or
5% in real terms (e.g., Morris’s (2013) proposal for the Hamilton Project suggests a 4% real
rise), and it is not uncommon to see proposals that rise far faster than that (e.g., recent proposals

15

If the SCC were rising faster than the rate of interest, then the “green paradox” could be
optimal. A rapidly rising SCC would indicate that future carbon emissions are expected to cause
much more damage than emissions today, and in such a case, burning the fuel now rather than
later would reduce the damage it causes. But estimates suggest that case is more of a theoretical
curiosity than a real possibility.
16

A notable recent example is the American Opportunity Carbon Fee Act, proposed in 2015 by
Senators Sheldon Whitehouse and Brian Schatz.
18

from the Carbon Tax Center start at $10/ton and rise by $10/ton each year, an extremely fast rate
of increase). There are three main reasons for this.
First, many of these proposals start at rates below the SCC and thus must rise more
quickly to catch up. It would be more efficient to start at a higher rate and rise more slowly, but
if distributional or political considerations prevent that, then starting low and rising quickly may
be the next best alternative.
Second, some proposals are aimed at emissions reduction pledges (e.g., an 80% reduction
in US emissions by 2050) or at specific temperature-change limits (e.g., a 2o C rise in global
temperatures), and these typically entail very modest short-term reductions and very aggressive
longer-term reductions in emissions, which are consistent with a very rapidly rising carbon price.
These targets are generally arbitrary and rarely based even in part on any analysis of costs and
benefits. Thus, the tax paths necessary to follow these emissions trajectories are often far from
efficient. Nonetheless, such targets may have substantial political value. And the carbon tax is
still a cost-effective approach for following any arbitrary trajectory.
Third, proposals are sometimes based on the idea that the tax rate should rise at the real
rate of interest – a common characteristic of proposals offered by economists. This is the tax
path that minimizes present-discounted costs of hitting a given total quantity of emissions over
time (and is also the price path – in the absence of uncertainty – that a system of bankable and
tradable carbon permits would follow). This has some appeal on cost-effectiveness grounds.
But looking only at total emissions over a long period (rather than year-by-year emissions)
makes sense only if the present-discounted marginal damage from emissions is constant over
time. Put differently, this approach minimizes the discounted costs of hitting a target expressed

19

in undiscounted tons, a combination that doesn’t generally make sense. Again, this kind of target
may have political value, but it’s not efficient.
B. Effects on Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Tax Revenue, Growth, and Efficiency
This section looks at estimates for important aggregate effects of a carbon tax: how it
affects greenhouse gas emissions, the potential tax revenue, and effects on economic growth.
i. Greenhouse Gas Emissions
The primary purpose of a carbon tax is to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. Thus, a
central question for carbon tax models to answer is the extent to which a given carbon tax will
actually reduce emissions. Estimates vary somewhat for a given carbon tax across different
models. And they obviously vary substantially based on the details of the carbon tax, with the
tax rate being the most important and the time path also playing an important role, while other
details, such as the use of revenue from the tax play less important roles. The degree of coverage
of the tax (the fraction of total greenhouse gas emissions that are in the tax base) is also
potentially important, though differences here come mostly from whether the tax misses major
fossil-fuel uses rather than the extent to which it includes non-CO2 gases.
Two key points to note when evaluating estimates of emissions reductions are the year
(or years) under consideration, and the reference point used for measuring reductions. In
general, a given tax rate will generate larger emissions reductions further into the future, because
some responses to the tax take significant time, and thus the long-run elasticity of emissions with
respect to the tax rate is much higher than the short-run elasticity. The point of reference for
reductions also matters. National pledges to reduce emissions are typically expressed relative to
emissions in some base year (e.g., under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change the
US pledged to reduce emissions in 2025 to 26%-28% below 2005 levels), and model estimates

20

are sometimes also expressed this way. More commonly, estimates from economic models are
reported as reductions below “business-as-usual” (BAU) emissions, meaning the level that would
have occurred in a given year in the absence of the policy.17 The latter measures the effect of the
policy, whereas the former shows the actual level of emissions.
Hafstead and Kopp (2015) find that a $45/ton carbon tax, starting in 2016 and rising at
2% per year in real terms, would reduce US emissions in 2025 by 41% relative to BAU, which is
equivalent to 45% below 2005 levels. In contrast, Carbone et al. (2013) estimate that a $50/ton
carbon tax (starting in 2015 and held constant in real terms) would reduce US emissions in 2025
by roughly 23% below BAU. Part of that difference reflects differences in the tax rate under
consideration, but more of the difference comes from differences in the models used. Estimating
the responsiveness of large sectors of the economy to a carbon tax is very difficult, given that the
US has never imposed such a policy, and thus estimates vary significantly across models.
By way of comparison, the latter study also finds that a $30/ton tax would reduce
emissions by roughly 17% below BAU, and a $20/ton tax by roughly 12%. In general, the effect
on emissions rises less than linearly with the tax rate (e.g., doubling the tax rate will less than
double the emissions reductions). These estimates vary somewhat based on how the revenue
from the tax is used, but those differences are relatively small: for example, the estimated
emissions reduction from a $30/ton carbon tax is 14.92% if the carbon tax revenue is recycled to
finance tax cuts on capital income, versus 16.61% if it is returned to households via lump-sum
transfers. That difference arises largely because of differences in overall economic growth
caused by the different uses of revenue.

17

A further complication is that BAU sometimes refers to emissions in the absence of the
particular policy under consideration, and sometimes to emissions in the absence of any GHG
emissions reduction policies.
21

Most models suggest that the vast majority of emissions reductions will come from the
electricity sector, at least for moderate carbon tax rates. For example, the same Hafstead and
Kopp (2015) study find that 72% of the emissions reductions in 2025 come from the electricity
sector. This is because switching from coal to lower-carbon sources of electricity is one of the
least expensive ways to reduce carbon emissions.
An alternative approach when considering the emissions effect of a carbon tax is to look
at the question from the other direction: what tax rate is necessary to achieve a particular level of
emissions reductions in a given year (or a particular path of emissions over a range of years)?
Fawcett et al. (2015) reports results from a Stanford Energy Modeling Forum exercise that took
this approach, using eight models under a range of assumptions about technology changes and
other influences. The exercise looked at what carbon tax rate would be needed to achieve a 17%
reduction (relative to 2005) by 2020 and a 50% reduction by 2050. On average across the
different models and assumptions, this required a tax rate of $41/ton in 2020 and $192/ton in
2050 (both expressed in 2012 dollars). This again shows the non-linearity of the response to the
tax: getting a reduction roughly three times as large requires a tax rate more than three times as
high. Those estimates also ranged widely across models, with a standard deviation of $35/ton in
2020 and $113/ton in 2050, which again demonstrates the degree of uncertainty about how large
the response to any given tax would be.
ii. Carbon Tax Revenue
Given an estimate of the emissions effects of a carbon tax, estimating the gross revenue
the tax will raise is simple: it equals the tax rate times the emissions subject to the tax. The
revenue from a moderate carbon tax is potentially substantial. Carbone et al. (2013) estimates
that a $30/ton carbon tax (held constant in real terms) would raise a total of $2.26 trillion in gross

22

revenue over the first ten years. Marron et al. (2015) scale a Congressional Budget Office
estimate and find that a $25/ton carbon/ton tax (rising at 2%/year in real terms) would raise $1.6
trillion in gross revenue over ten years.
However, imposing a carbon tax can change the revenues from other taxes and the cost of
goods and services that the government buys. Thus, the most relevant figure isn’t gross revenue,
but net revenue: the amount of revenue left after accounting for those other changes to the
government budget. The Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) and CBO impose a standard offset
factor (informally known as a “haircut”) to account for effects of indirect taxes (such as a carbon
tax) on revenue from other taxes: it reduces the amount of revenue available by 25%.18 To the
extent that the carbon tax affects the overall size of the economy, those effects will also influence
net revenue (with greater economic growth implying more net revenue relative to gross revenue
from the tax).
Applying that standard offset reduces the gross estimates in Carbone et al. (2013) and
Marron et al. (2015) to net revenue of $1.7 trillion and $1.2 trillion, respectively, over the next
ten years. This still represents a large amount of revenue. By way of comparison, the corporate
income tax is estimated to bring in $4.6 trillion in revenue over that period, the total of all excise
taxes $1.1 trillion, and the estate and gift tax $246 billion, and the primary budget deficit over
that period is projected to be $2 trillion (CBO 2015). Thus, a carbon tax could finance
substantial reductions in other taxes or in the budget deficit.

18

The rationale for this standard offset is that for a given total amount of total economic activity,
each dollar of indirect tax revenue will reduce total wage and profit income by a dollar, thus
reducing revenue by the amount of tax that would have been collected on that dollar. If tax rates
average roughly 25%, then this implies a correction factor of roughly 25%. Note that this does
not include any effects on the overall size of the economy.
23

iii. Effects of a Carbon Tax on Economic Growth
By itself, a carbon tax is likely to slow economic growth slightly. Fossil fuels are used
throughout the economy, and thus taxing carbon acts as an implicit tax on all production. This
lowers the return to factors of production such as capital and labor (either directly, though effects
on wages and profits, or indirectly, by raising product prices and lowering real returns), and thus
discourages work, saving, and investment.
This effect is significant but not dramatic: Carbone et al. (2013) estimates that a $30/ton
carbon tax would reduce GDP by roughly 3.5% in 2050.19 Note that the figure expresses a
difference in GDP levels, whereas we usually hear about GDP growth rates. A 3.5% difference
in GDP levels 35 years from now is equivalent to roughly a 0.1% difference in average annual
growth rates over that time.
That estimate assumes that the entire revenue from the tax is returned to households in
lump-sum transfers. If the revenue is used in some alternative way that provides a boost to
growth, such as cutting marginal tax rates, reducing the budget deficit, or funding growthenhancing public goods, then this would reduce or even reverse the drag on GDP. For example,
Carbone et al. (2013) finds that using the net revenue from the carbon tax to fund cuts in taxes on
capital income, reverses the effect on GDP, leading to a roughly 1.3% higher level of GDP in
2050.
Williams and Wichman (2015) review estimates for the effect of a carbon tax on growth
from a range of models, carbon tax rates, and uses of revenue, and all of them lie between the
19

This section focuses on effects on GDP because it is an easily understood measure of
economic growth. However, it is worth noting that GDP only measures the value of market
goods and services, and leaves out many other goods that are valuable but not sold in the market
(for example, the value of leisure time or of goods produced at home, such as childcare and
home-cooked meals). Many studies find that using GDP overstates the cost of a carbon tax
relative to more complete measures of economic well-being (such as equivalent variation).
24

two estimates cited in the previous two paragraphs. Most cluster around a 0.5% to 0.7% lower
level of GDP by 2040, with higher GDP estimates associated with revenue used for capital tax
cuts and lower estimates associated with revenue used for lump-sum rebates and/or with
extremely high carbon tax rates.20
C. Distribution of the Cost of a Carbon Tax
The aggregate effects of a carbon tax are important, but they are certainly not all that
matters. The distribution of those effects is also important for both equity and political reasons.
This sub-section considers how the costs of a carbon tax are distributed across income groups
and across states and regions of the US. Note that it focuses only on the distribution of the costs
of the tax (and distributional effects of potential uses of the carbon tax revenue). It does not
consider the distribution of the environmental benefits from a carbon tax (the avoided damage
from climate change), which could easily be just as important as the distribution of costs, but is
much harder to estimate.
i. Distribution across Income Groups
It is natural to think that a carbon tax will be quite regressive. Its most obvious effect is
to raise the prices that consumers pay for direct energy goods: electricity, natural gas, gasoline,
heating oil, etc. And these goods represent a larger share of the budget for poor households than
for wealthier households.
Williams et al. (2015) shows that the burden imposed by higher prices for direct energy
goods caused by a carbon tax, expressed as a percentage of income, is roughly five times as large
for the bottom income quintile (the poorest 20% of households in the US) as it is for the top
20

For example, NERA (2013) estimates a 3.4% lower GDP in 2050 for a case that reduce carbon
emissions by 80% in 2050 – which in their model requires a carbon price of almost $1,000/ton.
25

income quintile. Those figures are based on current-year income, and it is well-known that such
measures tend to overstate how regressive increases in consumer prices are, relative to measures
based on income over a longer term (or proxies for longer-term income such as current-year
consumption). But even using estimates from Hassett et al. (2009) based on current-year
consumption, the burden from price increases for direct energy goods is 2.5 times as large for the
bottom decile as for the top decile.
However, the effects of a carbon tax on consumer prices go well beyond just the effects
on direct energy goods. Every good in the economy has some energy use somewhere in its
production process, and almost certainly some associated carbon emissions, so one would expect
a carbon tax to influence the prices of all goods. Direct energy goods account for only about half
of all carbon emissions in the US. And the effects on the prices of other goods are spread much
more evenly through the income distribution. Hassett et al. (2009) find that when using
measures based on current-year consumption, the distribution of this indirect burden is slightly
progressive, though very close to equal across the income distribution. Thus, taking into account
the effects on all prices, not just prices of direct energy goods, shows that the carbon tax is not as
regressive as it might first appear.21
Moreover, a carbon tax doesn’t just affect prices of consumer goods, it can also affect
sources of income such as wages and returns to capital. Most studies of the distributional effects
of carbon taxes (or carbon pricing in general) miss those effects because they assume that the
entire carbon tax is passed forward into product prices. In fact, some portion of it will be passed
backward, affecting the prices of factors of production used to produce carbon-intensive goods.
21

Grainger and Kolstad (2010) and Mathur and Morris (2014) find generally similar results to
Hassett et al. (2009). In addition, Grainger and Kolstad (2010) find that adjusting for household
size makes the carbon tax somewhat more regressive, and both papers look at policy options to
reduce the regressivity of the tax.
26

The few studies that include effects on sources of income find that these effects make the
carbon tax more progressive. Carbon-intensive goods tend also to be capital-intensive in
production, so a carbon tax causes a drop in capital demand relative to demand for labor.
Moreover, even to the extent that the tax is passed forward into product prices, this also raises
the price of capital goods, acting as an implicit tax on capital.22 Together, these effects cause the
carbon tax to fall disproportionately on capital income relative to labor income, and capital
income goes disproportionately to higher income people. Moreover, income from government
transfers – which goes disproportionately to poorer households – are typically indexed for
inflation, and this helps compensate poorer households for the consumer price effects of the
carbon tax.23
Williams et al. (2015) finds that effects on incomes substantially reduce the regressivity
of a carbon tax, though the tax remains slightly regressive. Rausch et al. (2011) finds an even
stronger result, with these effects sufficient to make the carbon tax slightly progressive.
Finally, the use of the revenue from the carbon tax can dramatically influence the overall
distributional implications of the policy. Williams et al. (2015) find, for example, that using
carbon tax revenue to cut taxes on capital income makes the top income quintile better off (even
ignoring any environmental gains) while making the other four quintiles worse off (with the loss
getting larger as a percentage of income as one moves down the income distribution).
Conversely, returning the revenue via equal-per-capita lump-sum transfers to households makes
the bottom three quintiles better off and the top two worse off (with the gain getting smaller or
22

Many economists incorrectly view a carbon tax as having similar effects to a broad-based
consumption tax such as a VAT, because they see it as raising consumer good prices. But the
carbon tax implicitly taxes all production – whether used for consumption or investment.
23

This point was first made by Parry and Williams (2010) and then was studied in more detail by
Fullerton et al. (2011).
27

the loss getting larger as one moves up the income distribution). Returning the revenue via cuts
in labor taxes falls in between, with a roughly flat distribution of burden. Marron et al. (2015)
finds quite similar results using a substantially different model.
Those results indicate that the use of the carbon tax revenue is more important than the
effect of the carbon tax itself in determining the overall distributional effect of the policy. The
carbon tax by itself is mildly regressive. Combining it with a regressive use of revenue (such as
a cut in taxes on capital) makes it substantially more regressive. Combining it with a progressive
use of revenue (such as lump-sum transfers) makes it substantially progressive.
ii. Distribution across States or Regions
The distribution of the costs of a carbon tax across states or regions of the US is generally
more even than the distribution across income groups. Although there are strong geographic
patterns to the use of particular energy goods (e.g., heating oil use is strongly concentrated in the
Northeast, and electricity use is highest in the South because of air-conditioning demand),
consumption of energy goods as a whole is spread relatively evenly across the country. And just
as with the distribution across income groups, the effects of a carbon tax on the prices of goods
that are not direct energy goods are spread more evenly across the economy. Thus, the effect of
a carbon tax on consumer prices is estimated to be relatively flat across different regions of the
country.
For example, Hassett et al. (2009) estimate that the burden of a carbon tax varies by only
20% across regions (i.e., the region with the lightest burden bears a tax burden that is 20%
smaller as a percentage of income than the region with the heaviest burden), a range that is much
narrower than the variation across income groups. Moreover, that study finds that which regions

28

bear the heaviest and lightest burdens varies substantially from year to year. Mathur and Morris
(2014) find similar results.
Williams et al. (2014) looks at the effects not just on consumer prices, but also on sources
of income (wages, returns to capital, and government transfers) by linking to a computable
general-equilibrium model. Again, the distribution of burdens across states is relatively flat.
And, just as with the distribution across income groups, the use of the revenue from the carbon
tax is important for the distribution of costs across states. Returning the revenue via lump-sum
transfers benefits relatively low-income states, such as those in the Southeast and Appalachia.
Using revenue to cut taxes on capital income benefits states with large shares of income from
capital, such as Florida and relatively high-income coastal states. Returning the revenue via cuts
in taxes on labor income leads to a net cost that is nearly flat across states.
4. Motor Fuel Taxes
While a carbon tax is the largest and likely most important potential new environmental
tax, motor fuel taxes (taxes on gasoline and diesel fuel) are by far the most important existing
environmental tax, accounting for more than 90% of environmental tax revenue in the US (and
playing a similarly dominant role in nearly all other industrialized nations). This section focuses
on motor fuel taxes, with the first subsection considering research on the efficient rates for these
taxes, and the second subsection focusing on their distributional effects.
A. The Efficient Level of Motor Fuel Taxes
Motor vehicle use has many negative externalities including environmental externalities
such as emissions of greenhouse gases and local air pollutants, as well as other externalities such
as traffic congestion and vehicle accidents. The most economically efficient approach would be
to correct each of these externalities with a policy specifically targeting that externality: for

29

example, a corrective tax aimed at traffic congestion would charge tolls that vary across roads
and times of day, with the toll being highest when traffic congestion is at its worst, and falling to
zero when a road is empty. The gasoline tax is a very blunt instrument by comparison. But there
are practical difficulties with imposing a full set of policies to address those externalities, and it
is much easier to adjust the level of existing motor fuel taxes. And regardless of why, to the
extent that those other externalities are not fully corrected, they will influence the efficient level
of taxes on motor fuels.
A naïve analysis would simply estimate the average level of each of those externalities on
a per-gallon basis and add them up to calculate the efficient level for a corrective tax. For
externalities that are directly proportional to the amount of fuel burned (such as carbon
emissions), that’s the correct approach, but not for other externalities. For example, suppose that
a particular driver’s contribution to traffic congestion is proportional to how much driving he
does. If he responds to a higher gasoline tax only by driving less, then the reduction in the
externality is directly proportional to the drop in fuel use. But if the higher tax also causes the
driver to buy a more fuel-efficient car, then the reduction in the traffic externality is smaller than
the drop in fuel use – and in that case, because the gas tax does less to address the traffic
externality, that externality adds less to the efficient level of the tax.
Parry and Small (2005) review the various externalities associated with driving and also
take into account interactions with the rest of the tax system (as discussed earlier, in Section
2.A.ii); they calculate the efficient tax on gasoline as approximately $1.01/gallon (in 2000
dollars).24 West and Williams (2007) find that higher gasoline prices boost household labor
supply (more than one would expect based simply on income effects), and that this further raises
24

In comparison, they find that a naïve calculation, simply adding up the externalities, would
suggest a much higher rate of $1.76/gallon.
30

the efficient gas tax, to $1.12/gallon.25 Converting that to 2015 dollars implies an efficient tax
rate of $1.55/gallon. That is far above the current combined federal and state tax on gasoline,
which averages 48.69 cents/gallon, and ranges as high as 73.7 cents/gallon (in Pennsylvania).26
Far fewer studies look at the efficient level of taxes on diesel fuel, but the efficient tax on
diesel fuel used by passenger cars should be roughly similar to that for gasoline, with some
upward adjustment based on the greater greenhouse gas and local air pollution emissions per
gallon, and the higher average miles per gallon (which magnifies per-mile externalities when
converted to a per-gallon basis). Parry (2008) finds that the optimal tax on diesel fuel used by
heavy-duty trucks is $1.12/gallon (a figure that appears to be in year 2000 dollars, equivalent to
$1.55/gallon in 2015). Again, this is well above the current average combined federal and state
diesel tax rate of 54.41 cents/gallon (API, 2015).
B. Distributional Implications of Motor Fuel Taxes
One major argument against increasing taxes on gasoline is that such a tax is regressive:
lower-income households spend a larger fraction of their budgets on gasoline than do wealthier
households. Unlike with other energy goods, this doesn’t hold throughout the entire income
distribution – the very poorest households are less likely to own cars – but it does hold for most
of the income distribution.
As noted earlier, in section 3.C, studies based on one year’s income tend to make taxes
on consumer goods look more regressive than studies based on income over a longer time period
(or proxies for longer-term income, such as expenditures). Poterba (1991) showed that this
25

This figure again is in 2000 dollars, and is based on the externality estimates taken from Parry
and Small. Of that total, 5 cents comes from carbon dioxide emissions, 16 cents from emissions
of local air pollution, 29 cents from traffic congestion, 24 cents from accidents, and an additional
26 cents because the gasoline tax is a more efficient revenue-raising tax than the income tax.
26

See American Petroleum Institute (2015).
31

effect was important for analysis of the gas tax. West (2004) and West and Williams (2004)
pointed out that lower-income households have more elastic gasoline demand than higherincome households, and that this lowers the burden they bear from a price increase, making the
gas tax less regressive than if the elasticity were constant across incomes.
Nonetheless, even after taking those effects into account, the gas tax is still somewhat
regressive. West and Williams (2004) find that the burden of a gas tax is highest for the secondlowest income quintile and lowest for the top quintile, though it is relatively flat across the
bottom four quintiles: they estimate that raising the gas tax to the efficient rate (an increase of
roughly $1/gallon) would impose a burden of 2.78% of annual expenditures for the bottom
quintile, and 3.01% 2.88%, 2.49% and 1.60% for the second through fifth quintiles, respectively.
5. Environmental and Energy Tax Credits and Deductions
Many of the current environmental and energy provisions in the US tax code are not
environmental or energy taxes but rather tax credits, exemptions, and deductions. Rather than
taxing pollution, energy use, or similar activities that government wants to discourage, these tax
expenditures are implicit subsidies. This section briefly reviews two of the larger energy and
environmental tax expenditures, discusses their effects, and considers whether they could be
removed or replaced with more efficient alternatives.
A. Tax Credits for Renewable Electricity Generation
The renewable energy production tax credit (PTC) provides a tax credit of 2 cents/kWh
of electricity generated from qualifying renewable sources (primarily solar, wind, and biomass).
Alternatively, firms can take a investment tax credit (ITC) of 30% of the cost of investing in
qualifying generating equipment. These credits substantially lower the cost of generating power
from renewable sources, and thus encourage use of renewable energy.
32

This policy can be viewed as correcting a pollution externality, to the extent that
renewable power substitutes for other more polluting sources of electricity (and that those
pollution externalities are not already corrected by other policies). One might also argue that the
policy addresses externalities in technology development (such as research and development
spillovers), though that justification is more tenuous, given that these are not brand-new
technologies and the US represents a relatively small share of world demand.
Nordhaus et al. (2013) looked at the effects of the PTC and ITC on carbon emissions, and
found relatively small effects: eliminating these provisions would increase carbon emissions by
roughly 360 million metric tons, less than 0.3% of US energy sector emissions. Moreover, this is
a relatively expensive way to reduce carbon emissions: the government gives up more than $250
in tax revenue per ton of CO2 reductions.27
Thus, if the goal of the PTC and ITC is to reduce carbon emissions, these credits are a
relatively expensive way to achieve that goal. A carbon tax – even one with a very low rate –
would do much more to reduce emissions, and at a lower cost.
B. Depletion Allowances for Oil and Gas Wells
Owners of oil and gas wells can deduct a depletion allowance, which is intended to
reflect the decline in the value of oil and gas reserves as those reserves are extracted and sold.
That depletion is a cost and thus should be deductible, just as other business costs are. However,
independent companies producing in the US are allowed to use percentage depletion – deducting
a percentage of gross income associated with the sale of the oil and/or gas – which typically

27

Note that revenue cost is not the same thing as the economic cost of the policy, and
unfortunately the model used could not provide estimates of social cost. Nonetheless, this
suggests that the policy is quite costly relative to its modest effects, which is consistent with
theoretical results that such subsidies are inefficient relative to emissions pricing policies.
33

allows for deductions that exceed the actual cost of acquiring and developing the resource. Thus,
the difference between percentage and cost depletion represents an implicit subsidy to oil and gas
production by independent producers. The JCT estimates that the difference reduced tax revenue
by $4.1 billion over the 2010-2014 period.
This subsidy is difficult to justify on economic grounds. There is no obvious positive
externality associated with domestic oil and gas production. “Energy security” is sometimes
used as an argument for domestic production, but it is not clear why this represents an
externality, nor is it clear that promoting depletion of reserves enhances energy security (indeed,
one could argue that energy security is greater if those reserves are left in the ground so that they
can be used later in case of an energy crisis). The subsidy today largely benefits natural gas
producers, and gas is a relatively clean fuel, which suggests there might be some environmental
justification. But Nordhaus (2013) finds that eliminating percentage depletion would actually
reduce greenhouse gas emissions slightly (a net drop of 37 million metric tons per year).
6. Conclusions
This paper has reviewed major potential environmental and energy tax changes. It has
focused primarily on a carbon tax but also considered potential changes to the taxes on motor
vehicle fuels (currently by far the largest environmental taxes in the US today) and to two of the
largest environmental and energy tax expenditures.
A carbon tax represents a cost-effective way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Research suggests that an efficient carbon tax would be imposed on the carbon content of fossil
fuels at a rate equal to the social cost of carbon (SCC), which is currently estimated at roughly
$45/ton, and would rise slowly over time, reflecting the projected rise over time in the SCC of
roughly 1.5% to 2% per year.

34

Such a tax would likely slow economic growth, but that effect is very small, especially if
the tax revenue is used in ways that promote economic growth, such as cutting marginal rates of
other taxes, reducing the budget deficit, or financing growth-enhancing public goods. The tax
would also be mildly regressive, imposing a slightly higher burden on lower-income households
than on higher-income households, though much less regressive than it is widely perceived to be.
Moreover, this regressivity could be overcome if some of the revenue is used in a progressive
way.
Taxes on motor fuels are also well below economically efficient levels, by roughly
$1/gallon. These taxes are somewhat regressive.
Finally, the two tax expenditures considered – the production and investment tax credits
for renewable energy and percentage depletion for oil and gas – have relatively small
environmental effects. Both provide environmental benefits, but at relatively high cost. A carbon
tax would do far more to reduce pollution emissions, and in a much more cost-effective way.
Percentage depletion is slightly damaging to the environment, and is generally difficult to justify
based on economic efficiency arguments.

35

References
American Petroleum Institute, 2015. “State Motor Fuel Taxes, rates effective 10/01/2015.”
http://www.api.org/~/media/Files/Statistics/StateMotorFuel-OnePagers-October-2015.pdf
Carbone, Jared C., Richard D. Morgenstern, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw, 2013.
“Deficit Reduction and Carbon Taxes: Budgetary, Economic, Distributional and Economic
Impacts,” Resources for the Future Report.
Congressional Budget Office, 2015. “Options for Reducing the Deficit: 2015 to 2024.”
Daniel, Kent. D, Robert B. Litterman, and Gernot Wagner, 2015. “Applying Asset Pricing
Theory to Calibrate the Price of Climate Risk.” Working paper, Columbia Business School.
Fawcett, Allen A., Leon C. Clarke, and John P. Weyant, 2015. “Carbon Taxes to Achieve
Emissions Targets: Insights from EMF 24.” In Implementing a US Carbon Tax: Challenges and
Debates, edited by Ian Parry, Adele Morris, and Roberton C. Williams III, 62-82. International
Monetary Fund and Routledge: London and New York.
Forster, P., V. Ramaswamy, P. Artaxo, T. Berntsen, R. Betts, D.W. Fahey, J. Haywood, J. Lean,
D.C. Lowe, G. Myhre, J. Nganga, R. Prinn, G. Raga, M. Schulz and R. Van Dorland, 2007:
Changes in Atmospheric Constituents and in Radiative Forcing. In: Climate Change 2007: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M.
Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Fullerton, Don, 1996. “Why Have Separate Environmental Taxes?” Tax Policy and the Economy
10:33-70.
Fullerton, Don, Garth Heutel, and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 2011. “Does the Indexing of Government
Transfers Make Carbon Pricing Progressive.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics
94(2):347-353.
Goulder, Lawrence H., 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the ‘Double Dividend’: A Reader’s
Guide.” International Tax and Public Finance 2(2):157-183.
Grainger, Corbett A., and Charles D. Kolstad, 2010. “Who Pays a Price on Carbon?”
Environmental and Resource Economics 46(3):359-376.
Hafstead, Marc A.C., and Raymond J. Kopp, 2015. “Analysis of the American Opportunity
Carbon Fee Act” Resources for the Future issue brief 2015-01.
Hassett, Kevin A., Aparna Mathur, and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 2009. “The Incidence of a U.S.
Carbon Tax: A Lifetime and Regional Analysis” The Energy Journal 30(2):155-178.

36

Lontzek, Thomas S., Yongyang Cai, Kenneth L. Judd, and Timothy M. Lenton, 2015.
“Stochastic Integrated Assessment of Climate Tipping Points Indicates the Need for Strict
Climate Policy.” Nature Climate Change, 5:441-444.
Mansur, Erin, 2012. “Upstream versus Downstream Implementation of Climate Policy.” In The
Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy, edited by Don Fullerton and Catherine
Wolfram, 179-193. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Marron, Donald, Eric Toder, and Lydia Austin, 2015. “Taxing Carbon: What, Why, and How.”
Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center.
http://taxpolicycenter.org/publications/url.cfm?ID=2000274
Mathur, Aparna and Adele Morris, 2014. “Distributional Effects of a Carbon Tax in Broader
U.S. Fiscal Reform” Energy Policy 66:326-334.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., 2009, “Environmental Taxation: What Have We Learned in This Decade?”
In Tax Policy Lessons from the 2000s, edited by Alan Viard. AEI Press.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David Weisbach, 2009. “The Design of a Carbon Tax.” Harvard
Environmental Law Review 33:499-556.
Morris, Adele C., 2013, “The Many Benefits of a Carbon Tax.” In 15 Ways to Rethink the
Federal Budget, edited by Michael Greenstone, Max Harris, Karen Li, Adam Looney, and
Jeremy Patashnik, 63-69. Brookings Institution: Washington, DC.
NERA Economic Consulting, Economic Outcomes of a U.S. Carbon Tax (2013).
Nordhaus, William D., Stephen A. Merrill, and Paul T. Beaton, eds. Effects of US Tax Policy on
Greenhouse Gas Emissions. National Academies Press, 2013.
Oates, Wallace, 1995, “Green Taxes: Can We Protect the Environment and Improve the Tax
System at the Same Time,” Southern Economic Journal 61:914-922.
Parry, Ian, 2008. “How Should Heavy-Duty Trucks Be Taxed?” Journal of Urban Economics
63(2):651-668.
Parry, Ian W.H., and Antonio M. Bento, 2000, “Tax Deductions, Environmental Policy, and the
“Double Dividend” Hypothesis,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 39: 6796.
Parry, Ian, and Kenneth Small, 2005. “Does Britain or the United States Have the Right Gasoline
Tax?” American Economic Review, 95:1276-1289.
Parry, Ian W.H., and Roberton C. Williams III, 2010. “What are the Costs of Meeting
Distributional Objectives for Climate Policy?” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy,
10(2): Article 9.

37

Pearce, David, 1991. “The Role of Carbon Taxes in Adjusting to Global Warming.” Economic
Journal 101:938-48.
Poterba, James M., 1991. “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?” Tax Policy and the Economy 5:145164.
Pigou, Arthur C., 1920, The Economics of Welfare, London: Macmillan.
Rausch, Sebastian, Gilbert E. Metcalf, and John M. Reilly, 2011. “Distributional Impacts of
Carbon Pricing: A General Equilibrium Approach with Micro-Data for Households.” Energy
Economics 33(S1):S20-S33.
Repetto, Robert, Roger C. Dower, Robin Jenkins, and Jacqueline Geoghegan, 1992. Green
Fees: How a Tax Shift Can Work for the Environment and the Economy. World Resources
Institute, November.
Shimer, Robert, 2013. “A Framework for Valuing the Employment Consequences of
Environmental Regulation” Working paper, University of Chicago.
Sinn, Hans-Werner, 2008. “Public Policies against Global Warming: A Supply Side Approach”
International Tax and Public Finance 15(4):360-394.
Tullock, Gordon. 1967. “Excess Benefit.” Water Resources Research 3: 643-4.
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 2015, Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and Sinks, 1990-2013. US EPA report EPA 430-R-15-004.
US Interagency Working Group (IAWG), 2013. Technical Support Document: Technical Update
of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis under Executive Order 12866.
IAWG on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government, Washington, DC.
Weitzman, Martin, 2009. “On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic Climate
Change.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1):1-19.
West, Sarah, 2004. “Distributional Effects of Alternative Vehicle Pollution Control Policies.”
Journal of Public Economics 88(3-4):735-757.
West, Sarah, and Roberton C. Williams III, 2004. “Estimates from a Consumer Demand System:
Implications for the Incidence of Environmental Taxes,” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 47(3):535–558.
West, Sarah, and Roberton C. Williams III, 2007. “Optimal Taxation and Cross-Price Effects on
Labor Supply: Estimates of the Optimal Gas Tax,” Journal of Public Economics, 91:593-617.
Williams, Roberton C., III, 2009, “A Response to Gilbert E. Metcalf.” In Tax Policy Lessons
from the 2000s, edited by Alan Viard. AEI Press.
Williams, Roberton C., III, 2012. “Setting the Initial Time-Profile of Climate Policy: The
Economics of Environmental Policy Phase-Ins.” In The Design and Implementation of U.S.

38

Climate Policy, edited by Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram, 245-254. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Williams, Roberton C., III, Hal Gordon, Dallas Burtraw, Jared Carbone, and Richard
Morgenstern, 2014. “The Initial Incidence of a Carbon Tax across U.S. States,” National Tax
Journal, 67(4):807-830.
Williams, Roberton C., III, Hal Gordon, Dallas Burtraw, Jared Carbone, and Richard
Morgenstern, 2015. “The Initial Incidence of a Carbon Tax across Income Groups,” National
Tax Journal, 68(1):195-214.
Williams, Roberton C., III, and Casey J. Wichman, 2015. “Macroeconomic Effects of Carbon
Taxes.” In Implementing a US Carbon Tax: Challenges and Debates, edited by Ian Parry, Adele
Morris, and Roberton C. Williams III, 62-82. International Monetary Fund and Routledge:
London and New York.

39

