NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL-FINANCIAL LINKAGES
AMONG OPEN ECONOMIES

Sven W. Arndt
J. David Richardson

Working Paper No. 2230

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1987

This paper is the opening chapter in a book edited by the authors and entitled
Real-Financial Linkages Among Open Economies, forthcoming 1987 from MIT Press.
It has benefitted greatly from the comments of Michael Hutchison, Richard C.
Marston, Robert E. Lipsey, Charles Pigott, and several anonymous referees. The
research underlying this and other papers in the volume has been supported by
National Science Foundation Grant PRA-8116459 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2230
May 1987

Real-Financial Linkages Among Open Economies

ABSTRACT

This paper integrates the contributions to a forthcoming volume of the
same title by the authors. The volume analyzes and empirically examines
linkages between the real and financial variables that themselves link open
economies-- "linkage" thus has a double meaning. Two types of linkages are
discussed. Structural linkages describe differences across economies and
among sectors in market structure (competitive/oljgopoljstjc), productivity
growth, and openness to trade. Inter-temporal linkages describe differences
across economies and over time or circumstance in saving preferences and
capital formation, government budgets, portfolio shares of "inside" and
"outside" assets, and openness to mobile financial flows. Structural
linkages are important chiefly for explaining sustained divergences in
national competitiveness as measured by purchasing-power-parity norms.
Inter-temporal linkages also account for them, as well as for sustained
divergences in current and capital-account positions, geographical growth
rates, and national incomes of residents.

Sven W. Arndt
Department of Economics
University of California,
Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
(408) 429-4849

J. David Richardson
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin,
Madison

Madison, Wisconsin 53706
(608) 263-3867/3876

1

REAL-FINANCIAL LINKAGES AMONG OPEN ECONOMIES
Sven W. Arndt
J. David Richardson

A. International Economics, Real and Financial
A familiar separation persists in international economic analysis. There
are two camps. "Real" international economics, also called "international
trade," examines cross—border transactions in current goods and services.
"International finance" examines cross-border transactions in "capital" —-

claims on the future. Typical real and financial international economists
converse only superficially and develop little appreciation for each other's

problems. Real—side scholars find closest kinship with colleagues in applied
microeconomics, industrial organization, and public economics. Financial—side
scholars find closest kinship with colleagues in macroeconomics, money and

banking, and portfolio analysis. There are, of course, notable outliers such
as W. M. Corden and Robert Mundell, and the giants of earlier generations have
comfortably inhabited both camps (Gottfried Haberler, Harry Johnson, Fritz

Machiup, and others). Yet today there is a chasm between international trade
and international finance that is quite broad and quite deep.
The aim of this volume (Arndt and Richardson (1987)) is to begin filling
in the chasm, in the hope of stimulating research that will some day span it.
To do that, the chapters focus on linkages between the real and financial

variables that themselves link open economies. Thus the word "linkage" has a
double meaning throughout.
The aim of this introduction is to draw the volume together, identifying
overlapping and unique contributions of each chapter to the common theme.

Sections B, C, and D describe in more detail the typical separation between real

and financial analysis. Typical analysis notwithstanding, real—financial

2

linkages among open economies spring from two fundamental sources: structural
(or inter-sectoral) differences among economies and temporal (or inter-

temporal) differences among them. Some of the more important structural dif—
ferences are described in sections E and F, which integrate contributions from
chapters by Krugman (1986), Marston (1986), and Kravis and Lipsey (1986).

Temporal differences, which can also be conceived as circumstantial differences
in a world of uncertainty, are discussed in section C, which integrates

contributions from chapters by Hutchison and Pigott (1986), Hamada and
Horiuchi (1986), and De Grauwe and de Belief roid (1986). Structural and temporal differences are examined together in Section H.

3

B. How the Typical Twain Do Not Meet
The separation described above can also be called a dichotomy of interest.
Real-side international economics is concerned with the way cross-border transactions affect an economy's trade patterns, production structure, and factor

markets. Financial-side international economics is concerned with the way
cross—border transactions affect an economy's exchange rates, interest rates,

and financial markets. Typical treatments of these concerns are almost completely independent of each other.

The typical pure analytic approaches to "real" international trade make

exchange rates, interest rates, and capital movements irrelevant. Such
financial variables are ignored or taken for granted in the most familiar

general-equilibrium models. Exchange rates are ignored because they are assumed
to be the relative price of two moneys, both of which are "veils" that have no

real effects. Money does not matter, and neither do exchange rates. They are
all neutral. Interest rates do not matter because they are essentially intertemporal prices, with only second-order-of-small effects on inter-sectoral

prices and relative factor prices. Financial capital movements may matter in a
"long run" long enough for them to influence an economy's endowment of produc-

tive capital. But its endowment (stock) is often taken to be so large relative
to its annual, even decennial, increments that changes in the increments can be

ignored as infinitesimal. International trade in productive capital (or labor)
may also be ignored if commodity trade eliminates the wage-rental incentives for

factors to become mobile across borders (Mundell (1957)). And since international transfers of financial purchasing power must be reversed sometime if
national budget balance is to be maintained, familiar general-equilibrium models
insist that long-run equilibria feature no capital—account (or current-account)
imbalance.

4

The typical pure analytic approaches to international finance make the sec—
toral structure of production and comparative advantage irrelevant. Sectoral
structure is ignored in familiar macroeconomic approaches because demands for
(and supplies of) financial assets are assumed to depend on aggregate real

income and wealth, not on their sectoral source, and on inter-temporal prices

reflected in earnings and interest rates, not on inter—sectoral prices. Asset
stocks in turn determine capital movements, exchange rates, and, in pegged

exchange-rate regimes, official intervention. Devaluation and revaluation in
such regimes may have temporary differential impacts on sectoral outputs,

prices, and employment. But sectoral structure is usually irrelevant for
calculating the long—run effects of these parity changes. Even non—tradeables
prices move to match the equilibrium shift in tradeables prices from the
parity change, given price flexibility and inter-sectoral factor mobility.

5

C. Difference in Focus on Different Relative Prices
All international economics is concerned with "foreign relative prices
relative to domestic relative prices" -- a double relative in every sense,

and a mouthful, too. But the relative prices being compared across borders
differ between international trade and international finance. The dichotomy
of interest between the sub-areas can be clarified by describing the different
relative prices that occupy each, and by discussing when one set of relative

prices can be assumed independent of another. The description will also be
useful in summarizing several of the chapters that follow in this volume.

We can conceive P and *

to

be indexes of prices denominated in the

currencies of a domestic and foreign economy, respectively. Each index is a
function of two vectors, one of tradeables prices

and other of non-

tradeables prices (p,,). Each vector contains many elements, each representing
the price of a given sector's homogeneous product.

(1)

Pt

*

(PP);

*

*
Pt

.*
Pti

f*(p,p);

.

*

nk

n

nk

Typical pure analytic approaches to "real" international trade are concerned
with relative inter—sectoral prices ——

that

is, relative prices within the vec-

tor p relative to those within the vector p. The ratios of the ratios

pti
—I

tj

——
tj

for

.

all i

j

6

determine each economy's comparative advantage, production structure, exports,

imports, and implicit factor demands. Although p's are expressed in domestic
currency and p*'s in foreign currency, exchange rates do not directly influence

the relative price comparisons above, and are ignored in "real" analysis. Also
ignored are expected and actual inflation and interest rates, which have to do
with the rate of change of prices between periods 0 and 1.

It is not these

rates of change that concern typical "real" analysis. Its concern is the
international comparison of the relative prices for period 0, and then the

same comparison independently for period 1. Comparative advantage may indeed

but

change between the periods --

if so, the reason will have been

tial rates of change among sectoral prices, not their common rate of change
(i.e., not general inflation).

Typical pure analytic approaches to international finance are concerned with

relative inter-temporal prices, for example P1/P0 relative to P/P, using
subscripts 0 and 1 to denote time. The ratios of the ratios

P1 P , for
—I

O 0

all lengths of interval between 0 and 1,

influence the economies' relative interest rates, and in turn the exchange

rate and capital movements between them. Ratios formed from the sectoral
prices that are components of each price index, such as

above, have

no particular implication for the value of P or P*, and are ignored in inter-

national finance. Also ignored are international differences in the sectoral
composition of production, themselves the consequences of relative inter-

sectoral prices. Financial assets that are issued by various sectors of the
economy, as well as those issued by the government, are typically assumed to
lose much of their sectoral identity as integrated capital markets "size up"

7

their market value. The mechanism by which they are homogenized is competitive financial arbitrage, motivated by the desire of lenders to maximize
their future returns, and of borrowers to minimize their future debt burdens.
When asset markets are well integrated within each economy in this way, the

sectoral composition of production and balance sheets is irrelevant to the
concerns of international finance.

8

0. "Laws of One Price" and Purchasing-Power-Parity
All this notwithstanding, the dichotomization of international trade and

finance has never been absolute. Some real-financial linkages have always been
implicit, and a few have received significant attention, especially those
relating to the "law of one pricet' and "purchasing power parity." These

venerable linkages play important roles in several of the chapters in this
volume, and need elaboration.

The first step in the elaboration is to describe equilibrium price struc-

tures in open economies. One of the chief conclusions of "real" analysis is
that unencumbered, perfectly competitive trade in goods and services will make
the relative price of tradeable I to tradeable j the same in every trading eco-

nomy. In special circumstances, furthermore, the relative prices of some nontradeables k and 1 may be equated across economies --

not,

obviously, because

they are traded, but because their producers employ the same primary factors as
do tradeables producers, and must pay competitive rates for those factors.1

Relative factor prices themselves may become equated across economies, as
perhaps the most important example of how global tradeables markets may implicitly "globalize" even non-tradeables markets.

Typical "real" analysis has implications for price levels as well as rela-

tive prices. The same unencumbered, perfectly competitive forces of trade will
bring about price-level equalization for any tradeable good:

=

ep,

for all i,

where the exchange rate e is the domestic currency price of foreign currency.

This equation is called the "law of one price," and would come close to holding

9

for indexes of tradeables prices:

eP (where P, P represent indexes

of tradeable goods alone). The "law of one price" might hold even for some
non—tradeable goods too, for the reasons described above. That -is why economists presume that general price indexes ought to vary similarly across economies:

should vary quite closely with eP.
P should vary somewhat closely with eP*.

These co-variations are called "purchasing-power—parity" (PPP) relationships.
The accuracy of each is enhanced by the accuracy of the component laws of one
price, and by similiarity between the domestic and foreign weights implicit -in

the price-index functions f and f* The accuracy of the second (general) PPP
relationship will be further enhanced by any tendency of non—tradeables prices
to track tradeables prices due to internal competition over primary factors.
Laws of one price describe prices of homogeneous goods taken one by one.

PPP relationships describe aggregations of those prices. Although laws of one
price generally contribute to the accuracy of PPP relationships, they are

neither sufficient nor necessary. One could see perfect validity of laws of
one price and failure of PPP because of international differences in the

weights that sensible aggregation suggests. One could imagine conversely that
PPP relationships were reasonably accurate, but that laws of one price did not
describe cross-boundary prices well for certain sub-sets of sectors.
PPP relationships are used often to specify a norm for exchange rates:

e "should" vary closely with

or even P/P*. Such use illustrates one of

the simplest, oldest, and most important types of real-financial linkage: the
relative price of two nations' money, a financial asset, should bear some pre-

10

dictable relationship to relative aggregates of their prices for current goods
and services.

Of course, trade barriers, international transport costs, and other
encumbrances interfere with "laws" of one price, and with PPP as a consequence.

Yet such barriers are often roughly proportional to prices (as, for example, an

ad valorem tariff). In that case, these price relationships will be observable
in rates of change over time, albeit not in levels. These are usually called
"relative" as opposed to "absolute" versions of the price relationships. The
relative version of the law of one price is

=

(recognizing

A(ep)

Ae +

that the percentage change in the product of two variables is

approximately equal to the sum of their percentage changes). And the
"relative" versions of PPP are

A(eP) ?e +
A(eP*)

%e +

%*,

From these relations comes one of the most popular norms on which to forecast
exchange rate trends: they ought to be related fairly closely to international

differences in inflation rates (p -

These price relationships and their implicit real-financial linkages can
be depicted in Figure 1. Quadrants 1 and 3 summarize PPP tendencies that
arise within each period from competitive cross-border trade in goods, as

studied by "real" international—trade analysts. Quadrants 2 and 4 imply the
inter-temporal transition relationships between exchange rates and inflation
rates (and also, implicitly, rates of interest) that are studied by inter—

11

national financial analysts. For example, when the foreign rate of inflation is
zero and the domestic rate positive, then the P1/PØ locus in quadrant 2 is
displaced below the 45° line, unlike the PC/P0* locus in quadrant 4 that

coincides with the 45° line. This displacement brings forth a mirror-image
clockwise rotation of the "PPP cone" in quadrant 3 such that the future
exchange rate is consistent with differential inflation rates (and possibly
with corresponding nominal interest-rate differentials between economies).

The PPP relationships are drawn as cones of approximation to reflect the fact

that P and * include non-tradeables and other products for which the law of
one price should not be expected to hold tightly. Thus the actual exchange
rates e0 and e1 may not be exactly equal to PPP norms

and e1. But if the

relative version of PPP holds, then any future divergence measured by the
angle a1 ought to be equal to the current divergence, measured by

a0 (a1 =

a0).
From these price relationships also come various measures of a nation's

"international competitiveness." Sectoral competitiveness is often measured by

the change in p/ep since some "normal" base period, that is by
-

— %Ae).

National competitiveness is often measured by the change

in P/eP or P/eP* since some "normal" base period, and even sometimes by the
change in a ratio of non-tradeables prices -- where wages and occasionally
other factor costs are taken to be the principal components of non-tradeables
indexes.

National competitiveness measures are frequently called "real exchange
rates"; negative changes are described as "real depreciation," signifying
improved competitiveness, positive changes as "real appreciation," signifying
reduced compet i t i veness.

12

International competitiveness is currently an important and controversial

topic in analysis, policy, and interpretation. Recent movements in real
exchange rates have been larger, more enduring, and more divergent among econo-

mies than either history or analysis had suggested. Older views and experience
were that an economy's international competitiveness might rise and fall over
medium-term periods, but would on average, over a decade or so,

approximate the norm dictated by PPP. Ebbs and flows of competitive "advantage"
would appear random over time and across economies.

Events of the past ten years have undermined this confidence, especially
the appearance of persistent, marked competitive advantage2 for Japan and com-

petitive disadvantage for the United States. Trade-policy conflict has escalated as these divergences have been reflected in persistent, marked
trade-balance surpluses for Japan and deficits for the United States.

One of the most important questions for international economics today is
what explains the persistence and size of divergences from laws of one price and

purchasing-power—parity norms. A number of the contributions to this volume
provide the beginnings of an answer.

13

E. Explaining International Competitiveness:
Predictable Divergences from Laws of One Price and PPP
Three of the chapters devote explicit attention to international com-

petitiveness, and others, implicit attention. All measure competitiveness as
a sustained divergence from the law of one price or from PPP. All contribute
something new to the established literature along these lines on real-

financial linkage. Yet each asks a unique question, and methodologies and
aggregation differ among them. Even their terminology is distinct.
Krugman (1986) asks how imperfectly competitive market structure con-

ditions the way exchange rates change international competitiveness at the

industry level. Algebraically, he explores how the comparative-equilibrium
derivative

d(pt1/ep)
de

is altered by the presence of monopolistic price discrimination and oligopoly,

(among other things). The derivative itself reflects a classic issue in real-

financial linkage: how an exchange-rate change that is exogenous from the
viewpoint of firms in an industry "passes through" into its prices at home and

abroad. The exchange-rate change in the denominator of the derivative is
obviously "financial"; the relative-price measure of industry competitiveness in
the numerator is obviously "real."

Under perfect competition and the law of one price, the derivative and the

real-financial linkage are zero. Krugman shows how imperfect competition,
however, makes the derivative non-zero and establishes potential for indefinite

divergences from the law of one price. He calls such divergences "pricing to
market," because of the incentives for imperfectly competitive firms to maintain
historical pricing in each distinct market despite an exchange-rate shock.

14

Exchange rates in these cases do influence relative prices, international

competitiveness, and by implication, comparative advantage, too. Imperfectly
competitive market structure is a mechanism for real—financial linkage.

Marston (1986) asks how differential productivity growth among sectors
(among other things) affects different measures of U.S. competitiveness rela-

tive to Japan. He is particularly interested in comparative-equilibrium derivatives such as

d

[

where

:;]

Gt and G stand respectively for productivity growth in the tradeables

sector and the overall economy (both tradeables and non-tradeables). Marston
calls the bracketed term in the numerator a relative real exchange rate, because

it is a ratio of two alternative measures of international competitiveness. One
of his major contributions is to show how large such derivatives are --

which

is

also to show how divergent are alternative measures of international competitiveness when an economy's sectoral growth patterns differ radically from

each other. This is very important because ratios such as P/P* and

are

used to set exchange-rate (e) norms. Alternative exchange-rate norms obviously
diverge greatly from each other when sectoral trends do. It would be very hard
then to write sensible rules for internationally coordinated monetary policy or
exchange-market intervention aimed at damping e fluctuations, as recommended by

some plans for international monetary reform.3 Disparate e norms would stand

15

like multiple targets at an archery contest, some commending themselves to one
country and others to others.

Like Marston, Kravis and Lipsey (1986) illustrate an international linkage

from real economic structure to a "financial" variable. They ask how an economy's international competitiveness is affected by its:

(1) per capita

income, (2) sectoral structure (between t and n goods), and (3) openness to

trade. Using regressions run cross-sectionally over 25 countries for various
time periods, they calculate

d(P/eP*)

and

d(Pt/eP)

dZ

'

dZ

d(P/eP)
dZ.

where P, P denote indexes of non-tradeables prices, and Z (j=1,2,3) stands
for their three structural determinants of measured competitiveness.

They

use the United States as a standard against which to compare other countries,

normalizing U.S. prices (P*) to be 1.00, and then calling the 25 calculated
P/e's each nation's "price level" (implicitly relative to the United States).

If purchasing—power-parity held, every nation's price level would clearly be

1.00, too. Kravis and Lipsey show instead that divergences from 1.00 are very
large, very persistent over time, and reasonably well explained (across economies) by international structural differences.

Furthermore, as detailed below, chapters by Hutchison-Pigott (1986) and
Hamada-Horjuchi (1986) describe implicitly how fiscal policy and capital

controls have impacts on a nation's international competitiveness and its
distance from any PPP norms.

16

F. The Influence of Tradeables/Non-tradeables
Structure on Exchange Rates and Price Levels
Differences across economies in inter—sectoral trends are one of the fun-

damental sources of real-financial linkage. They are emphasized in both the
Marston (1986) chapter and that by Kravis and Lipsey (1986), and have a

modest analytical and empirical history (Balassa (1964), others). Among the
most important implications of this work is that exchange rates, although a
"financial" variable are influenced significantly by relative product prices.

These linkages can be detailed usefully in Figure 2, a familiar diagram
that depicts production possibilities and preference contours for a small open

economy. The assumption of smallness, made here for convenience only, implies
that trends in the world prices of the economy's exportables and importables

are exogenous. If the trends are also identical, then exportables and importables can be properly aggregated into tradeables, and units of either can be

measured along the vertical axis. Other assumptions made for convenience are
that preferences are homothetic and that the point P, C lies directly below
the point P', C'.

This sort of real—financial linkage can be illustrated first across economies, in the fashion of Kravis and Lipsey, and then over time, in the fashion

of Marston. Suppose that two economies differ in their real structure in the
following way. One has an across-the-board technological advantage that by
world standards is especially large in tradeable goods. The other has a less
marked absolute and differential advantage. Or to make the point more
graphic, suppose that the second economy is a laggard across-the—board in pro-

ductivity, and especially backward in tradeables. The first economy will, of
course, tend to have above-average per capita income, and the second, below

17

average. The production possibilities curve of the rich economy can be taken
to be Q.Q, and that of the poor economy

"Equilibrium" production and

consumption for the rich economy in typical analyses can be identified with

point P', C', and for the poor economy with point P. C. These are equilibrium
points in the sense that each economy's single-period aggregate budget is

balanced -- aggregate spending during the period is exactly equal to aggregate

income during the period. The value of national production (P) is equal to the
value of national consumption (C). Each economy's trade must thus be balanced,
with commodity exports equal in value to commodity imports.

When we consider inter-temporal trade below, we will abandon this definition of equilibrium as overly rigid and unrealistic. But it is quite typical.
And it leads directly to the conclusion that the relative price of tradeables to

non-tradeables is lower in the rich economy than the poor one. That is,

(2)

P P
n

n

This much is familiar. It is all "real" analysis. Less familiar is its
implication for financial variables, such as the national "price levels"

that Kravis and Lipsey emphasize. These are defined as P'/e' and Pie, where
P' =

f'(P,P)

and P =

f(Pt,P)

as in (1). Since these index functions ought

sensibly to be homogeneous of degree one in all prices, they can be rewritten
as

(3)

P'/e' =

f'(P/e',

P/e') and P/e =

f(P/e,

P/e)

Because each of these two economies faces the same exogenous world prices of

tradeables, laws of one price suggest that P will be equal to both

18

and P/e. Using these equalities, (3) can be rewritten as (4)

P'/e' =

(4)

f'(P,

P,/e') and P/e =

f(P,

P/e).

and (2) can be rewritten as (5)
e'

e

(5)
n

n

Then substituting (5) into (4), it is clear that the national price level will
be higher in the first (rich) economy than in the second (that is, P'/e' >

P/e)

--

as long as the price indexes f' and f are sufficiently similar.

To summarize, the cross-country real-financial linkage illustrated here is
that economies with strong productivity advantage by world standards in tra-

deables relative to non-tradeables will have higher price levels than naive

purchasing-power-parity norms suggest. Economies with relatively weak productivity advantage in tradeables relative to non-tradeables will have lower

price levels than naive PPP norms suggest. These latter economies are often
presumed to be poor and the former rich, a presumption based on productivity
in non-tradeables sectors being similar world—wide.

A similar real-financial link over time is illustrated by Marston. His

analysis can be summarized in Figure 2 by assuming that tn and QQ, both
represent Japanese production-possibilities curves, the first in the 1970s

and the second in the 1980s. Their difference illustrates Japanese productivity growth that was especially rapid in tradeables over this period compared to the (undiagrammed) rest of the world (specifically the United States

in Marston's analysis). Each of the equations above has its analog in
Marston's analysis over time. The analog to (2) implies that prices of tra—

19

deables relative to non-tradeables had to fall faster over this period in
Japan than in the United States to maintain balanced trade (national spending

equal to national income). The analog to (5) shows two financial mechanisms
by which this real change might have taken place: Japanese e might have
fallen, that is, the yen might have appreciated, or Japanese non-tradeables

prices (P,) might have risen. The analog to (4) shows that if either had happened sufficiently, Japanese prices overall would have risen relative to the

U.S. price level. Or, using Narston's terminology, real exchange rates based
on general price indexes would have shown yen appreciation from 1973 to 1983.

Marston shows in fact that general measures of the yen's real value hardly

changed at all over this period. As a result, "equilibrium" real—financial
linkage could not be attained. Linkage still existed, but took on a character
typically thought to imply disequilibrium. The sense in which it does can be

illustrated in Figure 2. Because neither e nor P moved sufficiently from 1973
to 1983, Japan's price of tradeables relative to non-tradeables remained unduly

high. This had consequences. Consumption of tradeables relative to nontradeables was discouraged, including consumption of imports. Production of
tradeables relative to non-tradeables was encouraged, including production for

export. Japanese consumption in the 1980s was better depicted by the point C"
than C', Japanese production by P" instead of P'. The implied gap between
national income and national spending is precisely the distance C"P" measured in
units of tradeables, and is identically the Japanese trade surplus (more exactly

its growth over the period). Instead of generating a rise in the Japanese price
level relative to the world, the unusually strong Japanese productivity growth

in tradeables generated a Japanese trade surplus. It may furthermore last a
long time. Some of Kravis and Lipsey's regressions toward the end of their

20

chapter suggest trade-balance effects of price-level misalignments that stretch
over the ensuing decade!

It is next appropriate to address the issue of whether Marston's illustra-

tion is necessarily a disequilibrium real-financial linkage. The next section
shows that is is not necessarily so if economies are allowed to trade intertemporally, that is, to finance or "save" single-period differences between

national spending and national income. In allowing for such inter-temporal
trade, additional mechanisms for real-financial linkage appear.

21

6. The Influence of Inter-Temporal
Considerations on Real-Financial Linkage
Differences across economies in inter-temporal preferences and in capabilities for inter—temporal transformation are a second fundamental source of

real-financial linkage. They are emphasized in the Hutchison-Pigott and
Hamada-Horiuchi chapters (1986), and are behind the scenes of the Marston
chapter.

They are also emphasized in a chapter by Stockman (1986), yet with added

generality. What economists often mean by inter-temporal trade is contingent
trade ——

trade

across uncertain circumstances, not necessarily across time.

For example, if persons are currently employed, they may decide to consume
less than they earn, trading away current consumption in order to increase

consumption if they become unemployed. There is no need to analyze their contingent decisionmaking inter-temporally. The circumstantial problem and the
inter-temporal problem have exactly the same structure. Financial markets
facilitate not only inter-temporal transactions but transactions under uncertainty, too.

Thus what we describe here as inter-temporal linkages could also be con-

ceived as circumstantial linkages, those caused by uncertainty. It is from this
perspective that De Grauwe and de Bellefroid (1986) analyze the effect of
exchange-rate variability on a very long-run, decade-spanning measure of

international—trade volume. They are not surprised to find a significant
negative correlation between variability and volume because they recognize the
inadequacies (even non—existence) of financial markets for hedging risk over

decade-long horizons. They thus illustrate one of Stockman's key conclusions:

22

a spectrum of financial markets is often necessary to support any particular
"real" transaction; in the absence of the right financial markets, the real
transaction may not take place.

Real-financial linkages from inter-temporal differences across economies can

be detailed usefully in Figure 3. fc represents an economy's productionpossibilities curve between "current" goods and "future" goods, (both assumed

homogeneous and tradeable. If the economy is closed to international transactions, then the vertical axis is typically considered also to measure capital

goods output -- produced increments to the economy's endowment (stock) of productive capital -- which are the way a closed economy's claims on future goods

can be increased (or maintained, when there is depreciation). For convenience
it is assumed that national preferences are homothetic (less defensible than

sometimes because of the presence of a pre-existing background stock of claims
on the future, implied by the interrupted vertical axis below the origin
labelled 100).

Inter—temporal linkages identified by both Hamada-Horiuchi and by

Hutchison—Pigott can be described in this diagram. Hamada-Horiuchi focus on
preferences, in particular, on financial liberalization given differences between

economies in inter-temporal preferences. Hutchison-Pigott focus on availability of unique financial instruments, in particular, on differences between

economies in "production" rates of government securities through fiscal policies that create budget deficits.

(i) Financial Liberalization and Differences in Preferences. Japan's
national saving rate is high by world standards, and for purposes of refereri—

ce, we might suppose that the Japanese economy is closed not only by capital

controls but to trade as well. Then Japan's equilibrium could be described by

point PJCJ on the preference contour through that point. Real interest

23

rates, reflected in the slope of the tangent line, would be low. If the rest
of the world has a lower saving rate but is otherwise identical to Japan (for
convenience, and let us call it the United States) then its equilibrium could
be described by point

Real interest rates would be higher than in

Japan.

Liberalization of commodity trade alone between the two economies would add

a very simple real-financial linkage. But most economists would consider this
strictly a 1treal" experiment. Each economy would produce at P'. Japan would

consume at C, importing SCJ

of

capital goods and exporting SP' of consumer

goods. The U.S. would consume at C1, with the mirror-image trade pattern.
Trade would be balanced; there would be no trade surpluses or deficits or

international capital movements as usually defined. Real interest rates would
be higher in Japan and lower in the U.S. than they were before trade. As a
result, Japan's current consumption would decline and her purchases of investment goods would increase, with an increased growth rate of her capital stock

and gross national product (GNP) being the result. U.S. effects would be opposite: current consumption would rise, and investment and growth would decline
(though U.S. welfare would rise). With these effects the two economies could
not remain identical in periods subsequent to the one depicted. The production
possibilities curve for Japan would shift outward faster than that for the U.S.
Removing capital controls and liberalizing international financial trade

could change the picture still further. This is what Japan did in the late
1970s and early 1980s, as Hamada and Horiuchi discuss. The principal change
is that the allocations among nations of the world's capital stock and its

wealth can be independent of each other.5 A simple way to describe the change
is to assume that what additionally could be traded freely was ownership

24

certificates to the productive capital stock -—

pieces of paper that entitle

the owner to the income of a machine whether it is in his/her backyard or far

away. Now if newly produced machines do not differ from existing machines,
then some of Japan's excess demand for claims on future goods might be
satisfied by Japanese purchases of ownership certificates, not by physical

shipment of the capital goods themselves. U.S. exports of capital goods may
in fact decline. It is cheaper, among other things, to transport pieces of
paper than machines! A U.S. deficit on commodity trade could develop, offset
of course by a U.S. surplus in exchanges of financial assets. In fact, a
stable, recurrent Japanese demand each period for U.S. financial assets would
cause the U.S. dollar to appreciate to a stable higher level in real terms,
thus generating the sustained trade deficit and making the U.S. appear

"uncompetitive." The requisite exchanges of goods for paper could continue
indefinitely at stationary levels each period among growing economies like
those pictured.

Debt service and investment income are other important aspects of intertemporal real-financial linkage that can be introduced in this simple

scenario. To do this, it is helpful to discuss one of an infinity of
equilibria (an infinity due to the assumption that financial ownership cer-

tificates and physical machines are perfect substitutes in trade). In the
equilibrium that we examine each economy would produce at P'. Japan would
consume at C, importing SJCJ of ownership claims to U.S. capital (not the

machines themselves) and exporting SP' of consumer goods. The U.S. would
would consume at C1, with the mirror-image trade pattern. Commodity trade
would no longer be balanced as it was before financial liberalization. Japan
would have a current-account surplus equal to SP' (or SJCJ in value) and a
capital-account deficit of the same size. The U.S. would have mirror-image

25

imbalances of the same size -— a current—account deficit and capital-account

surplus. If Japan plowed back the periodic earnings on its U.S.-domiciled
capital into future purchases of such capital, then there would be no inter-

national investment income or debt service. Current—account imbalances would
be identical in size to trade imbalances.
In this case, the Japanese-owned capital stock would be growing at

QC per period, just as it was before financial liberalization. But the
Japanese-domiciled share of this increment would be growing at only

Q,S; S,C' would represent "net foreign investment" in the U.S. by Japan.
The growth rate of the capital stock in geographical Japan would be lower

than previously, as would the growth rate of Japanese GNP. In fact, Japanese
growth rates would be identical to those of the geographical U.S. in this

equilibrium (because 9's' is equal to QP'). The geographical economies
would remain identical in periods subsequent to the one depicted. But Japanese
residents would own a larger and larger share of the growing U.S. capital stock
as time went on, with corresponding claims over a larger and larger share of

U.S. GNP. (Note that although U.S. residents' ownership shares would fall,
their claims over future goods would still be rising at %SJ per period.)

Debt service and investment income then become a natural aspect of intertemporal linkage as Japan reaches the point of wanting to repatriate earnings
on its U.S.-domicj led capital rather than reinvesting them. A simple way to

represent that development in the diagram is to assume that SJT of repatriation
is carried out in machinery, Japan's importable. This repatriation causes
a decline in the Japanese trade surplus (U.S. trade deficit) and other adjustments in international balances and real exchange rates that are summarized in
Table 1. It also causes the two geographical economies -to begin growing apart

26

Table 1

DIFFERING INTER-TEMPORAL PREFERENCES:
FINANCIAL LIBERALIZATION,
DEBT SERVICE, INTERNATIONAL
BALANCES, AND REAL EXCHANGE RATES

No
Financial
Liberal izat ion

Trade
Balances2

Zero

Financial Liberalization....
.

repatriation

.

. .with

repatriation

J: SJCJI surplus

J: T,'JCJ, surplus

U: SJP'I deficit

U: TPt, deficit

J: STJP income

Zero

Zero

Investment
Income!
2
Debt Service

. .without

U: SJTJI service

Zero

Current-ccount

<

J: SCJ1 surplus —>

<

U: SJP', deficit —>

Balances

<— J:

Zero

Capita1-ccount

deficit

Balances

<

"NormaP'

Real

Exchange
Rates

U: SJP'1 surplus —>

Highest (lowest)
real value of
dollar (yen)

High (low)
real value of
dollar (yen)

tJapan (J) is assumed in the table to have a higher national saving
rate than the rest of the world, represented by the U.S. (U).
2

.

.

Measured in units of capital goods.

27

again, losing their identical character, with Japan's investment and GNP
growth exceeding that of the geographical U.S.

(ii) Budget Deficits and Differences in "Production" Rates of Government
Securities. Suppose that we introduce a further difference across the economies by allowing the U.S. government to run (and increase) a bud9et deficit
financed by issues of new Treasury securities every period, precisely the

situation analyzed by Hutchison and Pigott. If the U.S. were a completely
closed economy, nothing might change from introducing this feature. The
Treasury securities might be considered "inside," not "outside" assets; some
U.S. residents and generations would "owe" them to other U.S. residents and

generations. In this extreme case (Ricardian equivalence) there would be no
real change in the U.S. production possibilities curve in Figure 3, nor therefore in capabilities for transforming present goods into claims on future

goods. Nor, of course, would there be any burden of the public debt.
But in the open-economy setting, matters are quite different, whatever

one believes about the burden of the debt and Ricardian equivalence. From
Japan's point of view, U.S. Treasury securities are clearly "outside" assets,

purchases of which would represent increased Japanese capability to consume

future goods. Japan may even see them as perfect substitutes for ownership
certificates to the U.S. capital stock, taking account of risk, liquidity,
and all aspects of financial assets. From the point of view of Japanese
decision-making, the increased U.S. government budget deficits and the
increased issue of new Treasury securities every period shift the U.S.

production-possibilities curve vertically by exactly the increased

deficit/issue. The U.S. produces wonderful Treasury securities every year and

28

equally wonderful capital goods! There is of course not necessarily any real
shift from the U.S. point of view, but that is irrelevant for what concerns
us.

One of Hutchison's and Pigott's important points is a difference in inter—

temporal transformation opportunities. Even a perceived shift in Japan's ability to use external trade to transform present goods into claims on future

goods establishes a real-financial linkage. To show the motive for such trade
in its starkest simplicity, assume that U.S. and Japanese inter-temporal pre-

ferences were identical after all, and depicted by the preference contours
through point

Then because from a Japanese perspective U.S. Treasury

securities are outside assets, and because the perceived U.S. production-

possibilities curve has been shifted vertically, Japan will also perceive
higher potential real interest rates at

than at

as reflected in

the steeper tangent price line. Japanese residents (unlike U.S. residents) will
be prepared to bid for assets at prices between those implied by the two

tangents. Trade will be thereby encouraged in which Japan exports consumer
goods to the U.S. in return for Treasury securities (as well as assets and
capital goods that may be perfect substitutes for the Treasury securities).
The U.S. will incur a trade-account deficit and probably debt-service

obligations, offset by a capital—account surplus, plus other consequences
discussed by Hutchison and Pigott.
A purist might object to this real-financial linkage by observing that

the world production possibilities curve that could be constructed from Figure
3's true U.S. and Japanese curves would be unaffected by any issue of govern-

ment securities. That observation is correct, but focuses only on production
of real goods. It neglects "production't of financial assets, which is an

29

equally important element of generalized supply in this perspective, and
especially important when the asset is "inside" to some agents and "outside"

to others. Real-financial linkage follows directly. It arises in an open
economy for precisely the same reason that it would arise in a closed economy
with "distribution effects" caused by two groups of agents, one that considers
government securities to be net wealth, and one that does not.

30

H. Structural and Inter-Temporal
Linkages Jointly Considered
Combining the inter-temporal and structural perspectives on real-financial

linkage is valuable for its suggestive richness. It also allows fuller
reference to the Hutchison-Pigott (1986) chapter and to familiar macroeconomic
linkages that are de-emphasized in this volume.

Every economy in reality has an array of differentiated current goods and

assets (claims on future goods). It has proved helpful above to recognize
this very simply in the distinction between tradeable and non-tradeable

current goods. Now it is helpful to conceive symmetrically of tradeable and
non-tradeable assets, identifying the first with government securities and

ownership claims to capital goods, and identifying the second with money. It
is also helpful to conceive of wealth owners holding a portfolio of tradeable
assets and "their own" (but not the other) non-tradeable money, just as
current-goods consumers buy tradeables and "their own" non—tradeable (but not
the other).

General equilibrium in this conception includes stock equilibrium in all

asset markets, characterized in ways that are captured in monetary, portfolio-

balance, and stock-adjustment models of international finance. Figure 4 summarizes what is familiar from these models and draws out their implications
for real—financial linkages along with Figure 5.
In Figure 4, asset—market equilibrium is described in quadrant 1, where
schedules HH and FF describe pairs of (nominal) interest rates (r) and

exchange rates (e) that make portfolio managers content to hold the existing

31

stock supplies of (non—tradeable) money and (tradeable) foreign securities.
At the interest and exchange rate common to both schedules, the stock supply

of domestic securities must be willingly held, too, because existing wealth is
constrained to be held in either money, domestic securities, or perfectly

substitutable foreign securities. Conditions for equilibrium can be written

H/P =

L(y,

v, r)

eF/P =

F(y,

v, r)

where H and F stand for existing nominal stocks of money and foreign

securities in an economy's portfolio, and P is an index of prices of current
tradeables and non—tradeables as in equations (1).
The real demand for money varies directly with real income (y) and real

wealth (v),6 and inversely with the domestic rate of interest on tradeable

securities (r). The real demand for foreign securities varies inversely with
real income and the domestic rate of interest and directly with real wealth.
The foreign rate of interest can be treated exogenously and ignored if for convenience we focus on a small economy.

The FF curve in Figure 4 is negatively sloped because a rise in e
(appreciation of foreign currency) creates an excess supply of foreign securi-

ties, requiring a fall in the domestic rate of interest to correct it.7 The
HH curve is positively sloped because a rise in e creates an excess demand for
domestic money which must be offset by a rise in the domestic rate of
interest.

The real sector is typically linked to this financial sector by an
equilibrium condition equating supplies of and demands for domestically produced current goods in the open economy:

32

T(Pt/eP# y, y*) +

D =

S(y,

r) —

1(r),

where any excess of private real saving (S) over investment (I) is either
invested abroad, creating a real trade surplus (positive 1) to match the

negative balance on capital account, or absorbed by government budget deficits

(D). The trade balance is usually assumed to be directly related to foreign
real income, and inversely to domestic real income and the real exchange rate.

Private saving is usually assumed to be directly related to income and the

interest rate, and private investment inversely to the interest rate. This
equilibrium condition yields an "IS curve" depicted in quadrant 2 of Figure 4,

and an aggregate demand curve in quadrant 3. When factor markets are free of
distortions (factor-price rigidities, money illusion, etc.) so that the economy
operates on its production possibilities curve in Figure 3, then the aggregate

supply curve in Figure 4 can be taken to be vertical.8 The distance Oy in
Figure 4 in fact corresponds to distances like OP in Figure 3. Furthermore the
"IS curve" in Figure 4 is precisely the demand curve generated by the preference
map of Figure 3, and distances corresponding to 1, 0, S1 and I can be found in
Figure 3.

With this framework we can see more clearly the contributions of

Hamada-Horiuchi and Hutchison—Pigott (1986). Hamada and Horiuchi discuss the
linkage effects of Japanese regulation and deregulation of the use of yen
assets as transactions media (H behavior) and as stores of value (F behavior).

Hutchison and Pigott discuss the linkage effects of government budget deficits
(D), controlling implicitly for whether they are financed by money creation (H

behavior) or securities issue (F-equivalent behavior). Given a value of D, of
course, this choice of whether to finance it by money creation or securities
issue is equivalent to the choice of some open market exchange (operation) of

33

money for securities. This kind of open market exchange is easy to analyze in
our framework in order to introduce the importance of tradeables/non-tradeables
structure in questions of real-financial linkage.
To that end, consider monetary expansion by way of an open market purchase

of domestic securities. This increases H and shifts the HH curve down in
quadrant one of Figure 4, initially bringing down the rate of interest and

depreciating the domestic currency. These developments stimulate domestic
demand and shift expenditure from foreign to home goods, as indicated by the

shift in aggregate demand. Because the aggregate supply curve is vertical,
though, the monetary expansion leaves real income unaffected. In the new
equilibrium, the nominal exchange rate and the price level rise in proportion to
the change in money supply.

The rise in domestic prices restores the original values of H/P and e/P,

and shifts the HH and FF curves up, returning the interest rate to its origi-

nal level. The new equilibrium is characterized by neutrality, with real
variables remaining unaffected while prices and the nominal exchange rate rise

in proportion to the rise in the money stock. Linkage is absent.
Structural differentiation of the real economy does not alter this. Linkage
will still be absent. Distinguishing between tradeables and non-tradeables
makes no difference to the neutrality conclusion. We can demonstrate this in

Figure 5, where the price of tradeables relative to non—tradeables (P/P) is
measured vertically. In the right-hand panel, the demand for tradeables is a
negative function of the relative price and a positive function of overall

expenditure, while supply is a positive function of relative price. In the
left panel, the demand curve for non-tradeables slopes up from right to left and
the supply curve slopes down from right to left to reflect the fact that the

34

relative price of non-tradeables falls as we move up along the price axis.
(These supply and demand curves could in fact be derived directly from Figure 2

by rotating a price line respectively around the production possibilities curve
and the indifference curve that is tangent to it.)
The initial equilibrium in Figure 5 shows both markets to be cleared at

relative price

and thus reflects the familiar constraint in pure trade

theory that the market for non-tradeables must clear and that trade must be

balanced Monetary expansion causes the initial depreciation of domestic
currency from e0 to e1 in Figure 4 to raise P. (incipiently) in Figure 5 if the

law of one price holds. But a rise in the price ratio creates excess demand in
nontradeables as well as a trade surplus. For small economies, it is clear
that, in the absence of shifts in demand or supply, the original price ratio is

the only equilibrium relative price. Hence the excess demand in the nontradeables sector serves to raise the price of non-tradeables, ensuring that its

movement keeps pace with the nominal depreciation. In this situation we will
observe the law of one price not only for tradeables but for non-tradeables as

well. The rise in n in turn feeds back to the financial sector by raising the
price level, shifting HH and FF up. In the new equilibrium,

P,

E and P

will have all risen proportionately, while real variables remain the same.
During the adjustment process, any decline in the rate of interest that

increases aggregate expenditure has the effect of shifting out the Dt and D
curves, thereby adding to the disequilibrium in the non-tradeables sector,

while reducing the trade surplus. That same transitional decline in the
interest rate can, however, also cause both the exchange rate and tradeables
prices to 'tovershoot" their ultimate equilibrium values (Dornbusch (1976),
Kouri (1976)).

35

The importance of e, Pt overshooting for our purposes is that their
variance over time might be greater than the variance of P, non-tradeables

prices. This difference in variance might be expected especially in an
economy with floating exchange rates and monetary "shocks" that dominate real
ttshocks.lI This in turn might explain the withdrawal of risk-averse resource

owners from tradeables sectors and the reduction in trade volumes under
floating exchange rates that De Grauwe and de Bellefroid seem to detect.

Thus real-financial linkages that are absent in comparisons of equilibria that
feature neutrality may nevertheless be present during adjustment periods or

under uncertainty. Stockman's paper describes why we should not be surprised
by this conclusion.

Hutchison's and Pigott's securities-financed fiscal expansion gives

structural differentiation an even stronger role. Consider first an
increase in government expenditure (and D) in which the entirety goes to

purchase non-tradeables. The demand for non-tradeables shifts to 1.
D in
Figure 5, creating an excess demand at the initial relative price and
requiring a fall in the relative price of tradeables if equilibrium in
non-tradeables is to be restored.

The needed decline in the price ratio can be achieved by currency

appreciation and/or a nominal price rise in non-tradeables. The fall in the
relative price of tradeables is needed to liberate resources for use in
non-tradeables production and to crowd out private demand for non-tradeables.

As price falls in tradeables, increased private consumption of tradeables

is met by imports. Hence, the budget deficit and the rise in public demand for
non—tradeables leads directly to a trade deficit, matched of course by a
capital-account surplus that represents the sale abroad of a portion of each

36

period's additional issue of government securities. What happens to internal
relative prices, and relative production and consumption of the two types of
goods, is in fact completely analogous to the discussion of Kravis—Lipsey's and

Marston's work in Section F above. There, however, the impetus comes from
supply—side shocks, whereas in Hutchison and Pigott, the impetus is from the
demand side.

In the financial sector, the fiscal expansion raises the stock of domestic

securities, the effect of which depends to some extent upon whether domestic
money and securities are considered part of domestic wealth or whether foreign
("outside") securities are the only financial asset representing wealth.
There exists considerable disagreement on this issue, as implied in Section G,

but we will assume that wealth is increased at least somewhat. The rise in
wealth shifts the HH and FF curves upward, hence raising the rate of interest.

The IS curve in quadrant 2 of Figure 4 would also shift up in response to the
fiscal expansion.

Given fixed aggregate supply (albeit change in its composition) and a
fixed money stock, the overall price level P will tend to move directly

with velocity, which rises due to the higher interest rate. Although it seems
possible that prices of both tradeables and non-tradeables rise due to the

fiscal expansion, n must rise more than

in order to bring about the

required decline in equilibrium t'n And the nominal exchange rate e
must fall in this case enough to bring about the real appreciation (higher

P/eP) that is required to generate the trade-balance deficit required. (We
assume the economy is too small to affect Pt.)
The preceding illustrates a set of linkages between the real and

financial sides of the economy due to fiscal policy. It also provides a
useful insight into the efficacy of exchange market intervention.

37

Suppose that the authorities were dissatisfied with the required appreciation (lower e) and they attempted through exchange market intervention to

reverse it. Suppose further that this was accomplished by official purchases
of foreign securities added to reserves which shift the FF curve up in the
first panel of Figure 4, bringing about the nominal rise in e, at least as

far as the financial side of the economy is concerned. The depreciation would
push up the price ratio in Figure 5 and create excess demand in the non—

tradeables sector while reducing the trade deficit. This outcome cannot be
sustained, however, for the relative price must fall again to restore

equilibrium in non-tradeables. The ensuing rise in the price of nontradeables would have secondary effects in the financial sector, pushing the

two curves up. The upshot of the intervention policy would be a depreciation
of the dollar in nominal terms, but no change in the price ratio, nor in the
real exchange rate, and hence no improvement in the trade balance.
Exchange market intervention of the type discussed is a nominal or
financial policy, while the trade balance deficit is a real phenomenon.

Intervention fails to budge the trade balance because it has no effect on the
domestic relative price.

The discussion above assumes that the fiscal policy increases purchases

of non-tradeables. If by contrast, the increased government expenditure were to
fall entirely on traded goods, represented by a shift in the Dt curve to D,
the initial real side effect is a trade balance deficit at the original relative price

Meanwhile, the financial sector repercussions are as

before. The price relative cannot change, however, since that would break
equilibrium in the non-tradeables sector. Thus, the nominal exchange rate and
the price of non-tradeables must rise (or fall) together, preserving the price

38

relative, while the trade balance moves into deficit by an amount equal to the
increase in government spending. The real exchange rate remains unaffected.
The clear lesson is that the real-financial linkages from fiscal policy are

ambiguous! They depend not only on the type of differentiated asset that the
government uses to finance its budget deficit, but also on the type of differentiated goods that it buys. Nominal and real exchange rates, relative prices,
and several other variables ought to respond differently to fiscal policy in

different economies, depending on these considerations. Therefore it is no
surprise, and is in fact an important contribution, that Hutchison and Pigott

find different configurations of quantitative effects for different countries in
their sample.

39

END NOTES

1.
This

prediction depends on a conception of non-tradeables as comparable

goods from economy to economy, only perhaps facing prohibitive transport costs,
for example, personal services such as hair styling, shoeshines, and dry

cleaning. To apply the prediction to unique national non-tradeables, for
example, judicial services, would be nonsense because factor requirements
will obviously be themselves unique to each economy.
2"Competitive advantage," measured say by %A(Pt./eP.), is obviously a

quite different concept than "comparative advantage, measured by

The two concepts are often confused.
3See, for example, for discussion and references, Goldstein (1984).
4
.
.
In interpreting
the two production-possibilities curves as belonging to
.

two economies, we are adopting the conception that one economy's non—tradeables
are comparable to the other's, and measuring both along the same horizontal
axis -- see note 1.

5This particular wording is Charles Pigott's.
6Real wealth can be visualized in Figure 3 as the vertical distance between the points C and the horizontal axis market 0.
7rhe presence of at least one asset with a nominally fixed face value, of

which money is the best example, is necessary for this conclusion.
8Real-financial linkages in open economies with factor-market distortions
are the meat of many open-economy macroeconomic models, and receive little

attention in this volume because of their familiarity. One might think of openeconomy macroeconomics and this volume as describing real-financial linkages
respectively on and below the production possibilities curve of Figures 2 and 3

or on and to the left of thevertical aggregate supply curve of Figure 4.

40

References

Arndt, Sven W. and J. David Richardson (1987), Real—Financial Linkages Among

Open Economies, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Balassa, Bela (1964), "The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,"
Journal of Political Economy, 72 (December), pp. 584-596.

De Grauwe, Paul and Bernard de Bellefroid (1986), "Long—Run Exchange Rate
Variability and International Trade," processed, forthcoming as Chapter
8 of Arndt and Richardson (1987).
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976), "Expectations and Exchange—Rate Dynamics,"
Journal of Political Economy, 84 (December), pp. 1161-1176.

Goldstein, Morris (1984), "The Exchange Rate System: Lessons of the Past and
Options for the Future," International Monetary Fund, Occasional Paper
No. 30, July.

Hamada, Koichi and Akiyoshi Horiuchi (1987), "Monetary, Financial, and Real

Effects of Yen Internationalization," processed, forthcoming as Chapter
7 of Arndt and Richardson (1987).

Hutchison, Michael M. and Charles A. Pigott (1986), "Real and Financial

Linkages in the Macroeconomic Response to Budget Deficits: An Empirical
Investigation," processed, forthcoming as Chapter 6 of Arndt and
Richardson (1987).

Kouri, Pentti, J. K. (1976), "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments
in the Short Run and in the Long Run," Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
78 (May), pp. 280-304.

Kravis, Irving B. and Robert E. Lipsey (1986), "The Assessment of National
Price Levels," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
1912, May, forthcoming as Chapter 5 of Arndt and Richardson (1987).

41

Krugman, Paul R. (1986), "Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1926, May, forthcoming as Chapter 3 of Arndt and Richardson (1987).

Marston, Richard C. (1986), "Real Exchange Rates and Productivity Growth in
the United States and Japan," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
No. 1922, May, forthcoming as Chapter 4 of Arndt and Richardson (1987).

Mundell, Robert A. (1957), "International Trade and Factor Mobility," American
Economic Review, 47 (June), pp. 321-335.

Stockman, Alan C. (1986), "Some Interactions Between Goods Markets and Asset
Markets in Open Economies," processed, forthcoming as Chapter 2 of Arndt
and Richardson (1987).

42

FIGURE 1

PRICES ACROSS BORDERS AND TIME

ft
L1
e,

e0
P1

Domestic

inflation
locus

P1

e1

period 1
Foreign
inflation
locus

ck1

e1

P1*/ P0*

P1*

43
FIGURE 2

RELATIVE
Tradeables
(Exportables
Importables)

TRADEABLES/NON-TRADEABLES
STRUCTURE

PI,cI

Qt

0

on

Q'n

Non-tradeables

44
FIGURE 3

(Incerment to
Claims on ...)
Future Goods
(Caoital Goods)

INTER-TEMPORAL TRADE

/

of

104*

'1

/

/s

/

'I

--;

T

1

Qc

Current Goods
0

45

FIGURE 4

A FAMILIAR REAL-FINANCIAL MODEL

r

r

H2
H1

IS
y

P

P2
P0

AD2

(Aggregate Demand)
AS

(Aggregate
Supply)
y

y

e0e2e1

e

46

FIGURE 5

STRUCTURAL DISAGGREGATION UNDERLYING
THE FAMILIAR REAL-FINANCIAL MODEL

Pt /Pn
D

Sr?

ni
LJ

on

D°

St0

0

ot

