                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CAN WAR FOSTER COOPERATION?

                                         Michal Bauer
                                      Christopher Blattman
                                        Julie Chytilová
                                        Joseph Henrich
                                        Edward Miguel
                                          Tamar Mitts

                                      Working Paper 22312
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22312


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2016




We have received valuable comments from Gordon Hanson, Ulrike Malmendier, Enrico Moretti,
Suresh Naidu, and Tim Taylor. JH thanks CIFAR. MB and JC thank the Czech Science
Foundation (Bauer P402/12/G130, Chytilová 13-20217S) and the People Programme (Marie
Curie Actions) of the EU's Seventh Framework Programme under REA grant (609642). We also
thank the many scholars who generously shared their data, sometimes pre-publication. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Michal Bauer, Christopher Blattman, Julie Chytilová, Joseph Henrich, Edward
Miguel, and Tamar Mitts. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Can War Foster Cooperation?
Michal Bauer, Christopher Blattman, Julie Chytilová, Joseph Henrich, Edward Miguel, and
Tamar Mitts
NBER Working Paper No. 22312
June 2016
JEL No. C80,D74,H56,O10,O12,O40

                                          ABSTRACT

In the past decade, nearly 20 studies have found a strong, persistent pattern in surveys and
behavioral experiments from over 40 countries: individual exposure to war violence tends to
increase social cooperation at the local level, including community participation and prosocial
behavior. Thus while war has many negative legacies for individuals and societies, it appears to
leave a positive legacy in terms of local cooperation and civic engagement. We discuss,
synthesize and reanalyze the emerging body of evidence, and weigh alternative explanations.
There is some indication that war violence especially enhances in-group or "parochial" norms and
preferences, a finding that, if true, suggests that the rising social cohesion we document need not
promote broader peace.


Michal Bauer                                     Joseph Henrich
CERGE-EI, a joint workplace                      Department of Human Evolutionary Biology
 of Charles University and                       Harvard University
 the Czech Academy of Sciences                   11 Divinity Ave
Politickych veznu 7                              Cambridge, MA 02138
Prague 1                                         henrich@psych.ubc.ca
Czech Republic
michal.bauer@cerge-ei.cz                         Edward Miguel
                                                 Department of Economics
Christopher Blattman                             University of California, Berkeley
School of International and Public Affairs       530 Evans Hall #3880
Columbia University                              Berkeley, CA 94720
420 West 118th Street                            and NBER
New York, NY 10027                               emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
and NBER
chrisblattman@columbia.edu                       Tamar Mitts
                                                 Department of Political Science
Julie Chytilová                                  Columbia University
Institute of Economic Studies                    420 West 118th Street
Faculty of Social Science                        New York, NY 10027
Charles University                               tm2630@columbia.edu
Opletalova 26, Prague 1, 110 00
Czech Republic
chytilova@fsv.cuni.cz


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22312
Warfare leaves terrible legacies, from raw physical destruction to shattered lives and families.

Many international development researchers and policymakers describe war as “development in

reverse” (Collier et al. 2003), having persistent adverse effects on all factors relevant for devel-

opment: physical, human, and social capital. Yet a long history of scholarship from diverse dis-

ciplines offers a different perspective on the legacies of war. Historians and anthropologists have

noted how, in some instances, war fostered societal transitions from chiefdoms to states and fur-

ther strengthened existing states (Carneiro 1970; Flannery and Marcus 2003; Tilly 1985; Choi

and Bowles 2007; Morris 2014; Diamond 1999). Meanwhile, both economists and evolutionary

biologists, in examining the long-run processes of institution building, have also argued that war

has spurred the emergence of more complex forms of social organization, potentially by altering

people’s psychology (Bowles 2008; Turchin 2015).

   In this article, we discuss and synthesize a rapidly growing body of research from which a

new stylized fact has emerged: people exposed to war violence tend to behave more cooperative-

ly after war. We show the range of cases where this holds true, and persists, even many years

after war. We can do so because of a wealth of new data. Until recently, a paucity of individual-

level data from conflict and post-conflict societies prevented researchers from systematically

exploring the legacies of war on social and political behavior. In the last decade, however, inter-

disciplinary teams of researchers – mainly in economics, anthropology, political science, and

psychology – have begun to design research projects specifically to understand how exposure to

war violence affects collective action, fairness, cooperation and other important aspect of social

behavior among populations around the globe.

   In case after case, people exposed to war violence go on to behave more cooperatively and

altruistically, which we will generally call “prosocial” behavior. Table 1, Panel A illustrates the
                                                                                             2
breadth of evidence, referencing studies involving Sierra Leone, Uganda, and Burundi in Africa,

and to the Republic of Georgia, Israel, Nepal, and many other societies. The data come from in-

dividual surveys collected in seven countries, plus one paper with comparable data from 35 Eu-

ropean countries. This evidence covers both civil and interstate wars; and includes a wide array

of wartime violence experiences, ranging from personal exposure in which individuals them-

selves were targeted or directly witnessed violence, to more indirect exposure in which family

members were killed or injured.

    The evidence suggests that war affects behavior in a range of situations, real and experi-

mental. People exposed to more war-related violence tend to increase their social participation,

by joining more local social and civic groups or taking on more leadership roles in their commu-

nities. They also take actions intended to benefit others in experimental laboratory games, such

as altruistic giving.

    Our meta-analysis also suggests the effects of violence are persistent and fairly consistent

across cases. Moreover, we see little systematic difference by the type of violence experienced

(including in a related body of studies that estimate impacts of crime victimization), or across

studies with different empirical strategies. The results appear to hold for men and women, as

well as children and adults exposed to violence, and are remarkably similar for both the victims

and perpetrators of violence. Finally, the impacts of exposure do not diminish with time; indeed,

if anything, the opposite seems to be true.

    Violence may also affect in-group prosocial behavior – namely, participation with, and altru-

ism towards, members of one’s own village or identity group – most of all. Too few studies de-

fine ‘out-groups’ consistently (or at all), so this in-group bias remains somewhat speculative.

Nonetheless, it and some of the other patterns we observe is consistent with a broad literature on
                                                                                           3
human behavior and evolutionary biology emphasizing that parochial altruism is a widespread

evolved response to external threats. The increased local cooperation we document might help to

explain why some post-conflict countries experience almost “miraculous” economic and social

recoveries. Yet if people become more parochial and less cooperative with out-group members,

this behavioral response could also harden social divisions, contribute to conflict cycles, and help

explain the well-known pattern that many post-conflict countries soon return to violence.

   Understanding the effects of war in all its complexity, including on post-war patterns of indi-

vidual behavior and institution-building, is of broad importance. Nearly half of all nations in the

world have experienced some form of external or internal armed conflict in the past half century

(Blattman and Miguel 2010). According to the World Bank, about two billion people live in

countries deemed fragile (Burt, Hughes, and Milante 2014). The findings discussed here empha-

size that war is not only one of the most consequential forces for economic development and the

emergence of state institutions, but also appears to have complex and multifaceted effects on

post-war populations, society and politics.



Case Evidence on the Effects of Exposure to Wartime Violence

To make the discussion more concrete, we highlight the case of Sierra Leone, a post-conflict

society for which there is an unusual wealth of evidence: three studies by three sets of authors,

each with different study populations. The Sierra Leone case also illustrates the synergy of di-

verse measurement and research methods, including survey reports, behavior in lab experimental

tasks, and observational data.


The Sierra Leone Civil War
                                                                                           4
A brutal, countrywide civil war afflicted Sierra Leone from 1991 to 2002. The Revolutionary

United Front (RUF), a small group of militants who first entered Sierra Leone from Liberia, in-

spired a violent rebellion which was nominally directed against the corruption and ineffective-

ness of the government. The reach and duration of the war were fueled by access to alluvial dia-

monds and opportunities to loot civilian property. Many communities organized local fighting

groups to protect themselves from the violence of the rebels. Neither ethnic nor religious divi-

sions played a central role in this war: both the RUF and the Sierra Leone army were explicitly

multi-ethnic. An internationally-brokered peace agreement was signed in 2003 after a large de-

ployment of United Kingdom and United Nations troops.

   The war killed more than 50,000 civilians and temporarily displaced roughly two million

people—nearly half of the country’s population. Armed groups mutilated and raped thousands of

civilians. Few people escaped some form of assault or other violence. Nonetheless, there was

wide variation in the degree of exposure and victimization.

   The period since the end of the civil war has seen an almost miraculous recovery. While the

country remains one of the poorest in the world, it has experienced over a decade of peace and

has held several rounds of national and local elections, with alternation of political power among

the major political parties at the national level. Until the Ebola outbreak during 2014, the local

economy had improved in each year since the end of the conflict, often with very rapid growth

rates and high levels of foreign direct investment (Casey, Glennerster, and Miguel 2015).

   All three studies from Sierra Leone identified the same essential pattern: plausibly exogenous

variation in exposure to war-related violence was associated with greater social participation and

prosocial behavior. The earliest study in this literature, by Bellows and Miguel (2006, 2009),

analyzed patterns of local collective action and individual political engagement using a large-
                                                                                            5
scale nationally representative survey dataset on more than 10,000 Sierra Leone households

gathered three to five years after the conflict’s end. To measure exposure to war-related violence,

they constructed an index from responses to three questions: “Were any members of your house-

hold killed during the conflict?”, “Were any members injured or maimed during the conflict?”,

and “Were any members made refugees during the war?”. Victimization rates were high; for

instance, 44 percent of respondents reported a household member being killed during the con-

flict. They found that people whose households directly experienced war violence displayed

much higher levels of civic and political engagement compared to non-victims: they were more

likely to report attending community meetings (by 6.5 percentage points), to vote in elections (by

2.6 percentage points), to join social and political groups, and to participate in school committees

and “road brushing”, a local infrastructure maintenance activity.

   To move past relying only on self-reports of behavior, researchers have also carried out in-

centivized lab-in-field experimental games in Sierra Leone, in order to more directly assess

whether war-related violence causes changes in social preferences or in beliefs about others’

behavior, albeit in controlled and artificial situations. This lab experimental evidence comple-

ments observational survey evidence by helping to map out changes to economic primitives, and

thus may contribute to a better understanding of competing theories.

   Table 1 summarizes the games that were implemented in each study. Different types of ex-

perimental games help to distinguish between different factors. In simple allocation tasks, such

as a Dictator game or a Social Value Orientation experiment, decision-makers anonymously al-

locate rewards between themselves and another person. Because the recipient is passive and the

interaction is one-shot and anonymous, beliefs about the reaction of the other player should not

in principle affect sharing decisions. Choice situations in which participants not only maximize
                                                                                           6
their own rewards but also take into account recipients’ welfare are taken as measures of social

preferences, such as altruism, inequality aversion, or adherence to social norms.

   In a second class of games, including the Ultimatum game or Trust game, the recipient is not

passive and choices are made sequentially. These tasks are designed to uncover willingness to

reciprocate, by rewarding kind acts and punishing unfair behavior, as well as beliefs about coop-

erative behavior of others. Specifically, in an Ultimatum game, the first player is given a sum of

money to divide with another player. If the second player accepts the division, then both receive

the money. But if the second player rejects the division, neither player receives anything. The

second player’s choices, in particular rejections of low offers, reveal whether she is willing to

sacrifice earnings in order to punish unfair behavior, while beliefs about whether others have

such fairness motivations should be reflected in the choices of the first player. In a Trust game,

the amount given by the first player to the second player is tripled, and then the second player

can decide whether to give some of the money back to the first player. Transfers of the first play-

er reveal trust, i.e., beliefs about whether other players will cooperate, while back transfers made

by the second player provide a measure of reciprocity.

   Finally, a Public Goods game, multiple players decide simultaneously (without knowing

about the choices of others) whether to contribute to a public good. The private return from con-

tributing is negative but the total group payoff increases since the return to other players is sub-

stantial. This game thus reveals individual willingness to cooperate or to free ride (i.e., hoping

that other players will contribute to the public good). The identities of the other players can also




                                                                                             7
vary in these games, in particular by whether players are interacting with those from a group

with whom they have some reason to identify, such as an ethnic or social group, or not.1

    Bauer et al. (2014) ran various allocation games, sometimes referred to as mini-Dictator

games, designed to distinguish selfishness from altruism and inequality aversion, in northwestern

Sierra Leone. They experimentally manipulated the identity of an otherwise anonymous recipient

to shed light on whether violence increases prosocial behavior only towards people at the local

level, or whether the effects on prosocial behavior are more generalized. In the in-group condi-

tion the partner was from the same village as the decision-maker, and in the out-group condition

the partner was from a “distant village.” Compared to non-victims, people who were directly

exposed to conflict-related violence were less selfish (by 23 percentage points) and more ine-

quality averse (by 25 percentage points) towards in-group members eight years after experienc-

ing war-related violence. Effects were especially large among those exposed to violence during

their childhood and adolescence. There were no comparable effects on behavior towards out-

group members.

    Elsewhere in Sierra Leone, once again eight years post-conflict, Cecchi et al. (2015) found

similar results among young street soccer players (aged 14-31 years) using both experimental

and observational approaches. Players made anonymous choices in the Dictator game, and those

who had been exposed to more intense conflict-related violence behaved more altruistically to-



1
  In considering the contribution of these behavioral experiments, an important question is the degree to which links
between such measures and the formation of real world institutions and cooperation has been made. Work establish-
ing these links is limited. However, in Ethiopia, Rustagi, Engel, and Kosfeld (2010) show that communities with
more prosocial individuals, as measured using behavioral games, more effectively form real world cooperatives to
monitor forest exploitation, more energetically monitor for free-riders (forest exploiters), and end up cooperating
more effectively to manage harvests; these findings hold when the frequency of prosocial individuals is instrument-
ed using the distance from market towns. The results suggest that if these villages were 'shocked’ (e.g., by war) in a
way that suddenly increased the frequency of prosocial individuals (as measured by experiments), they might be-
come better at constructing local institutions to address real public goods problems.
                                                                                                            8
wards their teammates (the in-group) but not towards the out-group (their match opponents).

Direct observation of behavior during soccer matches also revealed that the more violence-

exposed players were more likely to receive a yellow or red foul card during the game, suggest-

ing that a violent conflict not only elevated in-group prosocial behavior but may also have exac-

erbated out-group antagonism.2

    Notice that a common feature of this body of research—for Sierra Leone and the other stud-

ies discussed below—is that analysis is based on a comparison of individuals who suffered dif-

ferent degrees of war violence. These data do not allow the estimation of impacts on society as a

whole since no suitable counterfactual exists.


Other Country Cases: Uganda, Burundi, Georgia, Nepal, and others

Another much studied country case is Uganda, with six papers listed in Table 1. Blattman (2009)

examines the case of northern Uganda, where for 20 years the rebel group the Lord’s Resistance

Army (LRA) forcibly recruited tens of thousands of young people. The study attempted to ac-

count for confounders and other econometric identification concerns, using rebel raiding patterns

as a source of plausibly exogenous variation in armed recruitment. The paper used a pre-war

sample, tracks survivors, and attempts to account for non-survivors, reducing concerns about

bias due to selective attrition. An average of five years after temporary conscription into the

LRA, the experience led to substantial increases in post-war participation in this case self-

reported voting and community leadership (though not social group membership).




2
 While not directly comparable due to a lack of data on in-group cooperation, Miguel, Saiegh, and Satyanath (2011)
show that professional soccer players (in the major European leagues) who lived in conflict settings as children are
also more prone to committing violent card fouls against the opposing team during matches.
                                                                                                         9
   Studies from other post-conflict societies in Africa and elsewhere have documented similar

patterns. Notably, Voors et al. (2012) implemented a Social Value Orientation experiment

among adults in rural Burundi to study consequences of the 1993-2003 civil conflict there be-

tween the Tutsi-dominated army and Hutu rebels. Nine years after the war, individuals who per-

sonally experienced war-related violence, or who lived in attacked communities, behaved more

altruistically towards neighbors in the experimental tasks, and were also more likely to report

being involved in local community organizations.

   Beyond Africa, Bauer et al. (2014) conducted an experimental study in the Republic of

Georgia that paralleled their Sierra Leone study. The data were gathered among a sample of chil-

dren six months after the brief August 2008 war with Russia over South Ossetia. As in Sierra

Leone, the authors found evidence of a differential treatment of in-group and out-group: partici-

pants who were more affected by the conflict were less selfish and more inequality averse to-

wards in-group members (their classmates) as compared to their less affected peers, but no such

effects on behavior towards out-group was found.

   In a study of Nepalese society, Gilligan, Pasquale, and Samii (2014) found that members of

communities with greater exposure to violence during the 1996-2006 civil war, between gov-

ernmental forces and Maoist revolutionaries, exhibited greater levels of cooperation when inter-

acting with each other: three years post-conflict, they were more trustworthy in a Trust game,

more willing to contribute to the common pot in the Public Goods game, and they reported being

more active in community organizations.

   In Israel, meanwhile, results from Ultimatum and Trust games indicated that living in a so-

ciety with an active ongoing conflict (the Israel-Hezbollah conflict of 2006) temporarily in-

creased the willingness of senior citizens to punish non-cooperators and to reward cooperation
                                                                                         10
(Gneezy and Fessler 2012). An aspect of this study is that it relied on comparison of choices

made before, during and after the conflict and thus does not account for any time effects that

occurred contemporaneously with the conflict.

   In a study in Tajikistan, more than a decade after its 1992-1997 civil war, Cassar, Grosjean,

and Whitt (2013) explored the effects of war-related violence on trust and cooperation. The war

in Tajikistan has been described as a power struggle pitting former communists against a highly

fractionalized group of challengers with diverse ideologies (e.g., Islamist groups, ethnic national-

ists, and pro-democratic reformers). What makes this civil war interesting is the complex net-

work of rivalries that emerged within local communities during the fighting, often resulting in

neighbors fighting neighbors (intra-group conflict). This contrasts with the above mentioned

studies, in which violence was typically perpetrated by people from outside of the affected com-

munities (inter-group conflicts). In experimental games, Cassar, Grosjean, and Whitt (2013)

matched subjects with another (anonymous) individual from the same village, and thus with

some probability with someone from an antagonistic group. It turns out that the exposure to vio-

lence during the civil war was associated with a decrease in trust (measured by the first mover

transfers in the Trust game). Interestingly, these negative effects were quite heterogeneous and

appear to have depended on the nature of infighting within local communities: effects were par-

ticularly negative in regions where opposing groups were residentially inter-mixed and where

local allegiances were thus split, indicating that exposure to violence reduced cooperative behav-

ior when people thought they may interact with members of an opposing group in the conflict.

Yet the authors also found evidence of elevated participation in local groups and associations

among the war exposed, as in other studies. In the case of local group participation, individuals

presumably had some ability to choose with whom they would interact (in contrast to the games,
                                                                                         11
where matching was random), so this result is also consistent with war exposure raising levels of

pro-social behavior towards in-group members, although alternative interpretations remain pos-

sible.

    The broad pattern of war exposure stimulating greater cooperation also holds in large-scale

national surveys across multiple countries. Grosjean (2014) linked comparable nationally repre-

sentative surveys from the Life in Transition Survey project, which gathered data from 35 coun-

tries in central and eastern Europe, the Baltic states, south-eastern Europe, the former Soviet Un-

ion, and Mongolia in 2010. Nearly forty thousand individuals answered questions on their own

and their parents’ and grandparents’ war exposure, with the relevant recall period covering

World War II (1939-1945), as well as the civil wars in the former Yugoslavia (in the 1990s), the

Tajik civil war (1992-1997), Chechen wars (1994-2009), and Kyrgyzstan clashes in 2010. The

incidence of WWII exposure was very high: the average proportion of respondents who reported

that they or their parents/grandparents were injured or killed was nearly 30% overall. Grosjean

then focused on within-country variation in exposure to war violence. The results show a posi-

tive link between past violent conflict experiences and contemporary participation in community

groups, and collective action and membership in political parties, while there is also a negative

effect on trust in central government institutions.3




3
 Some evidence suggests that the effects of experiencing war-related violence may be more persistent if experi-
enced during childhood and adolescence, in line with a broader literature on critical periods in the formation of pref-
erences and non-cognitive skills (Heckman 2006; Almås et al. 2010; Bauer, Chytilová, and Pertold-Gebicka 2014;
Kosse et al. 2014). Specifically, in Sierra Leone Bauer et al. (2014) find the strongest effects on social preferences
among those who were children or adolescents during the civil war, and similarly in Uganda Bauer, Fiala, and
Levely (2014) show that effects are driven mainly by those who soldiered during childhood or early adolescence.
                                                                                                           12
Disentangling Correlation and Causation

The obvious econometric concern is the possibility that the correlation between war exposure

and cooperation is driven by some omitted variable that has a confounding effect, rather than

reflecting a causal impact. For instance, more cooperative people could be more likely to partici-

pate in collective action, including civil defense forces or armed organizations that represent

their groups during wartime, and thus are more likely to live in a family that experiences some

form of direct war victimization. Or perhaps attackers systematically target people who are likely

to be more cooperative in nature, such as leading families or wealthy and influential citizens. If

true, statistical tests would overstate the impact of war victimization on later civic participation

and social capital. Attrition poses another potential challenge for causal identification, if the least

prosocial or cooperative people are also more likely to die, migrate, or be displaced and not re-

turn home.

   Given the impossibility of randomized experiments involving targeted violence, studies in

this area have taken various analytical steps to mitigate some of the most worrisome confound-

ers. For example, Bellows and Miguel (2009) use three strategies in their study of Sierra Leone.

First, they control for local fixed effects, typically at the village level, thus removing potential

regional and local omitted variables, and show that within-village variation in violence exposure

helps to explain patterns of within-village cooperation. In some settings, the qualitative evidence

suggests violence is relatively indiscriminate in nature within a village, which is supported by

statistical tests documenting the weak relationship between pre-war characteristics and the likeli-

hood of falling victim to violence.




                                                                                             13
   Second, the researchers attempt to control for local confounders with an extensive set of pre-

war characteristics, such as wealth or whether victimized households were more central to local

politics. González and Miguel (2015) expand on this issue, discuss limitations of the original

Bellows and Miguel (2009) analysis, and present alternative ways of accounting for the possible

selection into war violence exposure.

   Third, they estimate effects among sub-samples for which victimization was likely to be less

systematic: for example, for individuals too young (e.g., children) to have been prewar commu-

nity leaders, or for individuals living in areas where fighters were unlikely to have detailed

knowledge of the local area, in which case indiscriminate violence seems more likely.

   These three strategies describe nearly every study in our sample. All make some form of a

conditional unconfoundedness assumption, and control (where such data exist) for possible con-

founders. Every war is different, of course, and so there is no universal set of confounders. But

each paper makes a plausible case that the remaining variation in violence is largely idiosyncrat-

ic. Despite these efforts, none of these empirical strategies can fully eliminate concerns about

bias from selection and omitted variables. As we show in the meta-analysis, the results are none-

theless relatively consistent across different studies and approaches to causal identification, argu-

ably generating more confidence that the estimated relationships are causal.



Meta-analysis

The existence of so many new papers tackling the same core question with similar data permits

us to formalize some of the cross-paper comparisons with a formal reanalysis.

   We identified 23 published and unpublished papers that estimate the effects of violence on

social behavior, and report them in Table 1. Of these, 19 focus on war violence (as opposed to
                                                                                       14
violence in the form of crime or during elections) and we focus our analysis on these war-related

papers here. Of these, 16 studies meet two additional criteria for our reanalysis: the dependent

variable was some measure of social participation, cooperation, or prosociality; and the individu-

al data were available online or from the authors.4 We perform a meta-analysis of these 16 stud-

ies using the original data, calculating the average effect of war violence on cooperation as a

weighted mean across studies. The online appendix available with this paper at http://e-jep.org

summarizes details of the formal literature search, inclusion and exclusion criteria, and discusses

the statistical methods and results in greater detail.


Outcome Measures

Outcome measures vary across studies, and not all outcomes are gathered in every paper. To

simplify comparisons, we employ the data from each study to construct a standardized index of

outcomes that has a mean of zero and unit standard deviation. The outcome variables generally

fall into six categories, as follows (and we summarize them for each study in Table 1):

    1) Social group participation. This variable captures participation in local social clubs, sports

teams, or community organizations. Some studies report the number of groups in which an indi-

vidual participates, and we standardize the summed measure. If a study uses a binary indicator

for group participation and no data is available for the number of groups, we standardize the bi-

nary measure.




4
  We excluded one paper for which data are unavailable, and excluded two papers that examine behaviors that are
not comparable to other studies (such as trust in the national government, or willingness to host refugees). Panel B in
Table 1 provides information on these three studies. In addition, we identified four related studies focusing on other
types of exposure to violence (such as crime, electoral violence, or displacement) in Panel C. We explored the ro-
bustness of our results to including some of these additional studies in the meta-analysis, and find qualitatively simi-
lar patterns. The results are available in the online appendix.
                                                                                                           15
   2) Community leadership and participation. This variable includes indicators for community

leadership and engagement, such as participating in local meetings, volunteering for community

work, and/or being a community leader or mobilizer. We sum the available indicators for each

study and standardize.

   3) Trust. For each study, we sum the available trust variables (such as “How much do you

trust members of your village?”) and standardize the sum. Since trust in in-group and out-group

members might differ, we also create separate variables for these subgroups. We define in-group

members as people from the same family, village, class, and ethnic group. Out-group members

are classified as individuals from other ethnic groups or parts of the country.

   4) Prosocial behavior in experimental games. Measures of prosocial behavior vary by study

(see Table 1), ranging from altruistic and inequality averse behavior in allocation tasks (such as

the Dictator game), trust and reciprocal behavior in a Trust game, punishment of unfair offers in

an Ultimatum game, and contributions in a Public Goods game. As the scale of each outcome

measure varies by game and study, we standardize each outcome, where higher (positive) values

correspond to more prosocial behavior. We also distinguish between prosocial behavior toward

in-group and out-group members for studies that manipulated the identity of the experimental

counterpart accordingly.

   5) Voting. This variable measures voting in local and national elections. We sum the number

of elections in which participants were registered to vote, planned to vote, or voted, and stand-

ardize the summed measure.

   6) Knowledge of and interest in politics. This measure combines binary indicators for famili-

arity with political figures or events and more general interest in a country’s politics. For each

study, we sum these indicators and standardize the summed measure.
                                                                                           16
      To enhance comparability, as well as address the multiple comparison problem, we also cre-

ate a summary index of all cooperation measures. In particular, for each study, we generate a

mean effect across all available outcomes (following Kling and Liebman 2004; Kling, Liebman,

and Katz 2007) where the indices are calculated from the standardized outcome measures of each

study.


    Statistical Approach

We replicate each study’s original research design, taking the study’s identification strategy,

measure of violence exposure, control variables, and observation weights at face value.5 Each

study has a different empirical strategy for identifying the impact of war violence exposure, and

as noted above, most papers assume conditional unconfoundedness—namely, that after adjusting

for any observed variables (including location fixed effects in many cases) that would help to

determine violence, the remaining exposure to violence can be treated as random.

      Violence is rarely truly random, of course, and not all the plausible determinants of violence

are observed. Thus, the plausibility of the econometric identification assumptions vary from pa-

per to paper, and so these causal claims must be taken with some caution. To analyze this issue

more systematically, we code studies by their analytical approach, and document the details in

the online appendix. For example, some studies possess pre-war data on victims, some have a




5
  There is one small exception to this, namely, if a paper uses a continuous measure of violence, we convert it to an
indicator for comparability with other studies and ease of interpretation. In the appendix we also consider alternative
independent variables: standardized continuous measures; indicators of the respondent’s direct or personal exposure
to violence; and indicators of indirect exposure to violence (e.g., through the household or community’s exposure;
these include, for example, having household members killed or injured, or being in a community that was targeted
by violence). Results, reported in Appendix Table A17, are qualitatively similar using alternative approaches.
                                                                                                           17
long list of “substantive” control variables that go beyond basic demographics to control for the

specific confounders (such as wealth or status) that arguably could drive victimization risk.

    First, however, we estimate overall effects of violence on prosocial behavior. We use both

fixed effects and random effects models for this meta-analysis, though note that this terminology

has a somewhat different meaning in a meta-analysis than it would to refer to the use of fixed or

random effects in a regression model in a single study. In meta-analysis, a fixed effect refers to

whether the effects of the independent variable are indicative of a single stable underlying pa-

rameter, while a random effect allows the effect of the variable to differ across contexts in possi-

bly idiosyncratic ways. To put it another way, a fixed effect meta-analysis model is based on the

assumption that there is a common effect across all the studies, and effectively assumes that stud-

ies are drawn from the same population, with larger sample studies thus receiving much more

weight in the analysis. In contrast, random effects models allow the true effect magnitude to vary

across studies, perhaps because the nature of war violence effects is context-specific. In this case,

the studies included in the meta-analysis are simply thought of as a sample from the broader dis-

tribution of effects, and smaller sample studies receive relatively more weight than they do in the

fixed effects meta-analysis.

    In this meta-analysis, the random effects model is arguably preferable on conceptual grounds,

since the nature and effects of war violence are likely to be heterogeneous across contexts, but

we also report the results of fixed effects approaches, as is common in the related meta-analysis

literature, in order to assess robustness to statistical modeling assumptions.6 Below we also ex-

plicitly model the heterogeneity in effect estimates as a function of observed study factors (e.g.,

6
  The online appendix available with this paper also considers a third approach, following Stanley and Jarrell (1989),
to include studies without published data. To do so, we use t-statistics as a standardized measure of effect size. As
can be seen in Table A18, we find qualitatively similar results.
                                                                                                          18
duration since war exposure), in order to better characterize the nature of context-dependence,

something that random effects meta-analysis alone is unable to shed light on.


Results

Figure 1 displays the average effect of war violence on the standardized indexes, as well as on

the overall summary index of all cooperative and prosocial behaviors. There is some variation in

the number of studies that capture particular aspects of cooperative behavior, as indicated in the

figure, with N=17 studies contributing to the summary index. We present both the fixed and ran-

dom effects average treatment effects with 95 percent confidence intervals. Table 2 reports the

corresponding coefficients, standard errors, and p values.7

    Overall, exposure to war violence is associated with a positive and statistically significant in-

crease in the summary index, with a coefficient of 0.07-0.08 standard deviation units and statisti-

cal significance for both the fixed effects (p value<0.01) and random effects (p value<0.01) ap-

proaches. We interpret this as a rejection of the null of no effect, and substantial evidence of pos-

itive effects, albeit with only moderate magnitude.

    When considering different types of outcomes, the standard errors in the random effects

models are much larger than in the fixed effects case, which is not uncommon in meta-analysis.

Precision is increasing in both the number of subjects per study as well as the number of studies,

and so the effects are least precise where we have a small number of studies (as in the case of

trust). Taken together, there is substantial evidence of an increase in several dimensions of coop-



7
 In the online Appendix available with this paper, Figures A4 to A25 present the study-by-study estimates that
make up the meta-analysis, for each outcome. The count for the summary index is 17 (and not 16, the total number
of analyzed studies) because the Bauer et al (2014) paper has data from two countries, as we thus consider them as
two estimates here.
                                                                                                        19
eration and prosocial behavior with exposure to war violence. The fixed effect estimates are

positive and statistically significant for participation in social groups, community leadership and

participation, prosocial behavior in experimental games, voting, and knowledge of politics (all

with p value<0.01). However, the effect of exposure to war violence on trust is close to zero. The

random effect estimates are positive and significant for prosocial behavior in experimental

games, and marginally significant for community leadership and participation in social groups,

while effects are not distinguishable from zero for the other categories.

    In Figure 2, we examine behavior towards in-groups versus out-groups, focusing on the pa-

pers and outcomes with appropriate data. For experimental game measures of prosocial behavior,

there are positive and significant impacts of war exposure on behavior towards in-group mem-

bers in both the fixed effect and random effect models, with substantial gains of 0.24 to 0.25

standard deviation units and statistically significant findings (p value<0.01). In contrast, effects

are smaller in magnitude (at 0.04 standard deviation units) for behavior towards out-group mem-

bers and not statistically significant in either model. While there is no indication of negative ef-

fects towards the out-group, there is significantly less prosocial behavior towards them than to-

wards the in-group. For the stated trust measures, there are no statistically significant effects

overall or towards in-group or out-group individuals separately, nor do we find a significant dif-

ference between effects on in-group and out-group members, although it is worth recalling that

there are relatively few studies with the detailed trust questions needed to undertake this analysis.


Patterns across Studies




                                                                                           20
   It is informative to examine how circumstances, settings, or study characteristics correlate

with the estimated effects of violence on prosocial behavior, although standard errors are rela-

tively wide given the N=17 estimates in hand.

   First, we see no evidence that the effects of war violence on prosocial behavior declines over

time. We regressed the estimated effect from each study on the length of time between the end of

the conflict and the study measures (Table 1 reports the time since war exposure for each study).

Figure 3, Panel A illustrates the results in a meta-analytic scatterplot; the figure shows the ob-

served effects estimated for individual studies (measured as a standardized index of all coopera-

tion outcomes) plotted against the length of time (in years) between the end of the conflict and

the timing of each study. The resulting regression line has a small positive slope of 0.01 that is

not statistically significant in the random effects model (although the fixed effects estimate, re-

ported in the online appendix, is significant).

   Second, in Figure 3B, we compare the war violence studies to data from a study that exam-

ines exposure to criminal violence and prosocial behavior across the world (Bateson, 2012), and

obtain similar average effects. Indeed the estimated effects from crime studies are if anything

somewhat larger: the difference in average effect size is 0.03, although it is again not significant

in the random effects model. Of course, the difference between war violence and criminal vio-

lence is often hard to make, especially if crime involves victims and perpetrators arrayed across a

salient social cleavage or carried out by gangs, so some crime incidents could also have an orga-

nized inter-group dimension; the data do not allow us to say. But the evidence at least suggests

that the “war” aspect may not be at the core of whatever is causing this phenomenon.

   Third, the estimated effects are fairly consistent across the various empirical strategies used

in the emerging literature. As discussed above, we coded variables that capture different aspects
                                                                                           21
of the papers’ research designs, including the use of pre-war data, substantive controls, commu-

nity fixed effects, instrumental variables, and sensitivity analyses. The results, reported in the

online appendix (Figure A3), show that the empirical strategy does not significantly predict vari-

ation in the magnitude of the effects across studies in a random effects model, although some

study-level covariates are significant in the fixed effects model. For instance, we find that esti-

mates from studies that control for pre-war individual covariates are of larger magnitude, and

estimates from studies that employ sensitivity analyses are somewhat smaller in magnitude (and

these patterns are significant in the fixed effects meta-analysis), although we have not identified

a definitive explanation for these differences.

   Fourth, we examine whether the way in which violence exposure is measured—on the per-

sonal and household level, as opposed to the community, municipality, or district level—might

explain the variation in the magnitudes of the effects. We find that studies using measures of

personal exposure have smaller coefficients, on average, than studies using more aggregated

measures of exposure. We also categorize each study based on whether civilians were exposed to

violence, as opposed to combatants, and find that exposure to violence as a civilian is associated

with larger effects.



Theoretical Explanations

The research to date has done a far better job of establishing the effect of war violence on later

cooperation than of explaining it. Most papers propose at least one economic, evolutionary, or

psychological theory consistent with the observed patterns, but few are able to directly test alter-

native theoretical predictions of specific models, and the existing pattern of results does not


                                                                                           22
strongly favor any single theoretical perspective. Here, we try to organize the various explana-

tions into a somewhat more coherent conceptual framework.


Changes in Constraints, Economic Payoffs, and Beliefs

Interestingly, almost none of the studies in Table 1 proposes an explanation rooted in the logic of

neoclassical economics, that is, an explanation in which social participation or prosocial behavior

becomes the optimal choice after war due to the effects of violence on people’s economic incen-

tives, constraints and beliefs. Even so, it is possible that violence affects behavior in this way.

   Several economic channels may be relevant. First, greater cooperation may arise from the

greater value of social insurance. War frequently destroys household assets, and may make vic-

tims of violence more dependent on local informal systems of risk-sharing and insurance, espe-

cially among kin and neighbors, thus increasing the return to investments in social capital. More-

over, during wartime, investments in various types of physical and human capital may have been

too risky, too constrained, or too expensive relative to investments in social capital. Those most

victimized (or most at risk of violence) would thus have an incentive to make larger social capi-

tal investments, which could be reflected after war in group memberships, community leader-

ship, and other forms local participation. Second, cooperative behavior could emerge from mo-

tives of personal safety and protection. During and after war, property rights and personal securi-

ty seem likely to be low, and investments in local social capital could be a valuable form of self-

protection—for example, in the case of mutual assistance patrols of the neighborhood or village

against intruders).

   It is also possible that the rapid economic recovery many post-war societies experience—

such as Sierra Leone after its civil war, or many of the European cases studied in Grosjean

                                                                                            23
(2014) after WWII—could produce the effects we document, if improving economic circum-

stances tend to generate more social cooperation.

   War-related experience may also induce changes in people’s beliefs that make prosocial be-

havior more (or less) persistent. If a sufficiently large number of community members experi-

ence the war “shock” at the same time, the entire community could be driven to a more prosocial

equilibrium. In this situation, war-affected individuals would appear particularly prosocial soon

after the war, but in the long run they would not be distinguishable from the rest of their commu-

nity because all community members would converge to the new equilibrium. Alternatively, as-

suming that only a subset of a community experienced the shock of war at the same time, then

perhaps the community as a whole does not shift to a new equilibrium. Instead, the prosocial

behavior of war-affected individuals might decline over time as their beliefs converge back to the

prevailing reality in their communities.


Changes in Parochial Norms and Preferences

Social scientists commonly seek to explain variation in individual social and political activity by

pointing to variation in altruism, ethical norms, intrinsic motives to serve the public good, and

other “social preferences.” Some researchers have suggested that exposure to war-related vio-

lence may shape these underlying preferences.

   In particular, evolutionary theories suggest that changes due to war violence might lead to

favoring one’s own group rather than social and political action in general. More specifically,

evolutionary researchers from several disciplines have argued that our species’ long history of

intergroup competition may have favored adaptive psychological responses that promote the

success of an individual’s group relative to other groups – especially relative to antagonistic out-

                                                                                          24
groups (see Alexander 1987; Boyd et al. 2003; Darwin 1981; Henrich 2004). This idea has

spurred two theoretical variants, one rooted in purely genetic evolution, and a second that con-

siders the interaction between cultural and genetic evolution.

   In the purely genetic version, intergroup competition directly favors prosociality toward in-

group members and the derogation of those in competing groups (Bowles 2006; Choi and

Bowles 2007; Haidt 2012; Wilson 2012). The prediction from this approach is that intergroup

competition—and especially war, an extreme form of such competition—will increase individu-

als’ prosocial behavior toward in-group members. These effects are expected to shift people’s

social preferences—their intrinsic motivations—to make them more parochially prosocial.

   In the culture-gene co-evolutionary variant, intergroup competition favors cultural practices

in the form of social norms or institutions that promote success in intergroup competition

(Henrich and Boyd 2001; Richerson and Boyd 2001). Meanwhile, operating within groups, natu-

ral selection favors psychological reactions that motivate stronger adherence to these local social

norms, institutional practices, and cultural beliefs in favor of culturally-defined in-groups. This

psychological response to intergroup competition is favored because cultural evolution has long

selected cooperative combinations of norms, institutions and beliefs—so greater norm adherence,

including a greater willingness to punish norm-violators, should promote competitive success.

   To the degree that local norms prescribe cooperative behavior, individuals more exposed to

intergroup competition—including war—should reveal greater prosociality. Since norms are

eventually internalized as motivations (or preferences), this approach predicts a shift in prefer-

ences similar to that noted above for the purely genetic version. However, unlike the genetic ver-

sion, this war-exposure could also increase adherence to other norms: for example, if local social

norms derogate homosexuality, favor attendance at religious rituals or promote belief in a partic-
                                                                                           25
ular god, then more war-exposed individuals also ought to be more inclined to derogate homo-

sexuality, attend rituals and believe in the relevant deity (Henrich 2015).

   To study changes in parochial norms and preferences, it is essential to assess what the rele-

vant in- and out-groups are. For example, the experience of a civil war that pits one ethnic group

against another might strengthen co-ethnic pro-sociality, while corroding the between-ethnic

group social capital that could be necessary for later nation-building. Conversely, the experience

of an external aggressor attacking a population already possessing a national identity might bond

that entire population even more tightly together, and potentially enhance the opportunities for

constructing effective national-level institutions in the post-war period. In both cases, and more

speculatively, war experience would harden people’s parochial pro-sociality, but the downstream

consequences for social stability might depend on how the in-group is interpreted, and what role

the relevant out-group plays in social and political life going forward.


Changes in General Preferences and Other Psychological Explanations

   A final set of theories and articles propose that preferences for participation and prosociality

shift more generally, rather than for or against a particular group. For example, there is substan-

tial evidence that war violence is linked to symptoms of depression and distress, which include a

general malaise and lack of desire to engage with people, avoidance of places or people that re-

minds them of the traumatic event, difficulty in maintaining close relationships, an inability to

experience positive emotions, negative feelings about oneself or others, and hopelessness about

the future (Ehlers and Clark 2000; Galovski and Lyons 2004). Most victims of wartime violence

do tend to recover from these symptoms with time, but an important minority continues to expe-

rience moderate to severe symptoms for many years, or even the rest of their lives. When people

                                                                                          26
speak of the harmful effects of war on social and political activity, they often have this kind of

lasting psychological damage in mind. What is striking is that, in spite of the well-documented

effects of violence on distress and depression for some individuals, the emerging empirical evi-

dence reveals an increase in average cooperation and community participation.

    Along the same lines of generalized preference change, other psychologists have documented

the opposite reaction to violence, a phenomenon they have labeled “post-traumatic growth.”

Working with the survivors of serious accidents, rape, or other near-death experiences, psy-

chologists have noted that some people respond to trauma by reflecting on and reevaluating their

lives, especially in terms of what they regard as important and valuable, such as family and rela-

tionships; this research is based largely on case studies. For instance, some victims report a

greater valuing of life, more meaningful relationships with others, greater personal hardiness, a

realization of new possibilities, and increased spirituality (Calhoun et al. 1998; Tedeschi and

Calhoun 2004). After war violence, it is possible to imagine victims changing their priorities in

life and placing renewed value on relationships with family and community, and even changing

other-regarding preferences. Such changes need not be parochial in nature; the existing literature

in this area is silent on this point.

    Yet another perspective on preference change comes from the political science literature on

rebellion. Some ethnographers studying who joins rebel movements (and why) have argued that

the experience of injustice, particularly war-related violence, increases individual preferences for

collective action. Wood (2003), studying insurgents in El Salvador, noted that people tended to

join or support the rebel movement in response to government violence against them or their

family members. She argues that material considerations (such as destruction of property or aspi-

rations of land distribution) played little role in who joined. Rather, Wood argues that the injus-
                                                                                          27
tice of being the subject of violence instilled a “pleasure in agency”—an increase in the intrinsic

value in collective action and associational life.

   Political scientists use the intrinsic pleasure of participation or expression to explain a variety

of behaviors, perhaps most importantly to explain why people expend time and energy to vote,

and where these intrinsic motives are referred to as “expressive preferences” (for example,

Brennan and Lomasky 1997). As with the economists’ closely related concept of social prefer-

ences, it is not clear what drives these “expressive preferences,” or how they respond to experi-

ence or investment. Some ethnographers have argued that injustices instill a desire for revenge

and a pleasure in punitive action (for example, Petersen 2001). Wood’s (2003) work in El Salva-

dor has powerful parallels to psychological narratives of post-traumatic growth. On the other

hand, since the participation Wood observes is inherently parochial, it is possible that these ex-

pressive preferences are also sometimes parochial and could have similar evolutionary origins.


What does the evidence suggest?

   Each of the above theories is intuitive and plausible, but empirical support is, so far, relative-

ly limited. Nonetheless, the patterns in the emerging literature do weigh against certain interpre-

tations and lend some support to others. Our reading is that the evidence favors the idea that war

violence influences individual social preferences or adherence to existing social norms, and there

is suggestive evidence that these changes may be parochial in nature.

   For instance, several patterns suggest skepticism towards neoclassical economic explana-

tions. First, the evidence from anonymous behavioral games seems to suggest that something

beyond a straightforward calculated response to costs and benefits is occurring. Second, some

studies document effects even among young children, and children are more likely to be influ-

                                                                                           28
enced by prevailing norms and social preferences than by economic cost-benefit considerations

or constraints. Third, the war violence effects we document endure long after the conflicts end

and even when post-war prosperity and security have improved relative to the pre-war (or imme-

diate post-war) situation. Finally, if it were simply a matter of post-war household economic cir-

cumstances driving cooperation, one might expect that improving living standards driven by ex-

ternal assistance programs would have a similar effect on local cooperative behavior, but there is

little evidence of such a relationship. For example, in a randomized controlled trial in post-war

Sierra Leone, Casey, Glennerster, and Miguel (2012) show that large amounts of aid increased

local incomes and market activity but did not translate into improvement in a wide range of

measures of village meeting participation, social capital, and cooperation.

   Nor do we see much evidence consistent with the view that a change in beliefs about the be-

havior of others is key. This perspective has two empirical implications: first, that behavioral

differences between war-affected people and others are driven by possibly ephemeral differences

in information and beliefs, and second, there may not be any enduring long-run differences be-

tween the war-affected individuals and the rest of the community (although there may be persis-

tent differences between entire communities subjected to war and those that were not, if a new

local equilibrium emerges). Yet neither of these is borne out in the data. War exposed individuals

do not expect others to be more cooperative in survey questions on trust, they behave more pro-

socially even in games in which beliefs about the behavior of others should not matter, and the

behavioral differences between more and less war exposed members of the same community are

not ephemeral: they appear to last for many years after conflict ends.

   There are at least three reasons, meanwhile, to suggest that war violence may lead to chang-

ing social preferences. First, several studies document behavioral changes in experiments that
                                                                                          29
were specifically designed to identify social preferences or adherence to social norms, while con-

trolling for other motivations. Second, there is the body of qualitative studies and case evidence

from the political analysis of conflict, described above, that documents self-reported changes in

preferences following war victimization. Third, several studies document a change in in-group

prosociality, but not out-group prosociality—a form of social preference change predicted by the

theory.

   Ultimately, there is still insufficient evidence to conclude decisively in favor of one theory

over another, but generating such evidence provides a clear direction for future research.



Conclusion

   In less than a decade, nearly 20 observational studies have emerged on the same basic ques-

tion in different settings, 16 of which are sufficiently similar, and have publicly available data, to

be jointly re-analyzed. This in itself is a striking accomplishment: not only did a few provocative

early papers promote a flurry of replications and extensions around the world, but in nearly every

case the data have been made freely available online or shared with us directly by the authors,

even for unpublished papers.

   This replication and openness, and the synthesis it permits here, generate some important and

perhaps surprising conclusions about violence, psychology and the formation of social capital,

conclusions that differ in some cases from the arguments in the individual papers themselves.

   Most of the papers in this emerging literature do agree on one central matter: that the data

strongly reject the common view that communities and people exposed to war violence will inev-

itably be deprived of social capital, collective action, and trust. Across the 16 studies from eco-


                                                                                           30
nomics, anthropology, political science and psychology, the average effect on a summary index

of cooperation is positive and statistically significant, if moderate in magnitude.

   Looking across many studies, however, systematic patterns emerge which were not readily

apparent in any single article. For instance, despite early indications that political behavior might

also be as positively affected as prosociality (Blattman 2009), this increase in political engage-

ment is not borne out in several more recent studies (e.g., Voors et al. 2012; Cassar, Grosjean,

and Whitt 2013; Bauer, Fiala, and Levely 2014). Another example comes from the lab experi-

ments, which more often than not have shown that the pro-sociality that emerges is focused on

in-group interactions but not on behavior towards out-groups. This evidence for parochial altru-

ism, while preliminary, matters because war might enhance intragroup cooperation and facilitate

post-conflict reconstruction while simultaneously raising the risk of future social divisions and

renewed intergroup conflict.

   The most important next step will be for researchers to focus on establishing the reach and

generality of this parochial altruism finding. Does it withstand scrutiny, and can we decisively

rule out generalized changes in prosocial preferences, or more standard economic arguments?

This necessitates a sharper focus on behaviors towards out-group members that belong to the

antagonistic group in the war, which is not the case in most existing studies.

   Another important direction is to examine other forms of insecurity, including crime, state

repression, natural disaster, life-threatening accidents, and domestic abuse. In particular, the dis-

tinction between wartime violence and urban crime may not be large in certain cases, especially

where widespread organized crime takes on characteristics of civil conflict, such as the cases of

Mexican or Colombian drug trafficking organizations.



                                                                                           31
   Early evidence does indeed suggest that our findings on violence and cooperation could gen-

eralize to a wider range of situations. The meta-analysis finds that those who have experienced

crime-related violence are also more likely to display cooperative behavior, just like war victims.

There are parallels in related literatures, including findings that victims of crime are more likely

to participate in community and political meetings, be interested in politics, and engage in group

leadership (Bateson 2012). Other emerging evidence exploring the effects of post-election vio-

lence (Becchetti, Conzo, and Romeo 2014), and earthquake and tsunami damage (Caló-Blanco,

et al. 2015; Cassar, Healy, and Von Kessler 2011; Rao et al. 2011) also mimics the main finding

of this paper, namely that survival threats tend to enhance local cooperation. We expect that

work in these areas will yield new insights about what psychological, economic and social

mechanisms could lead those who experience violence to shift to more cooperative behavior.

   The core empirical finding we identify – that exposure to wartime conflict fosters coopera-

tive behavior– resonates with the experience of rapid post-war political, social and economic

recovery in many war-torn societies, as well as their tendency to implement egalitarian social

policies, including progressive taxation and gender equality reforms (Tripp 2015, Scheve and

Stasavage 2010, 2012). While the human costs of war are horrific, there may also be at least

some reason for optimism once the violence ends.




                                                                                           32
Acknowledgements

   We have received valuable comments from Gordon Hanson, Ulrike Malmendier, Enrico

Moretti, Suresh Naidu, and Tim Taylor. JH thanks CIFAR. MB and JC thank the Czech Science

Foundation (Bauer P402/12/G130, Chytilová 13-20217S) and the People Programme (Marie

Curie Actions) of the EU's Seventh Framework Programme under REA grant (609642). We also

thank the many scholars who generously shared their data, sometimes pre-publication.




                                                                                       33
References

Alexander, Richard D. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. New York: Aldine De Gruyter.
Almås, Ingvild, Alexander W. Cappelen, Erik Ø Sørensen, and Bertil Tungodden. 2010. “Fair-
       ness and the Development of Inequality Acceptance.” Science 328 (5982): 1176–78.
       doi:10.1126/science.1187300.
Annan, Jeannie, Christopher Blattman, Dyan Mazurana, and Khristopher Carlson. 2011. “Civil
       War, Reintegration, and Gender in Northern Uganda.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 55
       (6): 877–908.
Bateson, Regina. 2012. “Crime Victimization and Political Participation.” American Political
       Science Review 106 (03): 570–87. doi:10.1017/S0003055412000299.
Bauer, Michal, Alessandra Cassar, Julie Chytilová, and Joseph Henrich. 2014. “War’s Enduring
       Effects on the Development of Egalitarian Motivations and in-Group Biases.” Psycholog-
       ical Science 25 (1): 47–57.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Barbara Pertold-Gebicka. 2014. “Parental Background and
       Other-Regarding Preferences in Children.” Experimental Economics 17 (1): 24–46.
       doi:10.1007/s10683-013-9355-y.
Bauer, Michal, Nathan Fiala, and Ian V. Levely. 2014. “Trusting Former Rebels: An Experi-
       mental Approach to Understanding Reintegration after Civil War.” CERGE-EI Working
       Paper Series, no. 512.
       http://papers.ssrn.com.ezproxy.cul.columbia.edu/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2417617.
Becchetti, Leonardo, Pierluigi Conzo, and Alessandro Romeo. 2014. “Violence, Trust, and
       Trustworthiness: Evidence from a Nairobi Slum.” Oxford Economic Papers 66 (1): 283–
       305. doi:10.1093/oep/gpt008.
Bellows, John, and Edward Miguel. 2006. “War and Institutions: New Evidence from Sierra Le-
       one.” The American Economic Review 96 (2): 394–99.
———. 2009. “War and Local Collective Action in Sierra Leone.” Journal of Public Economics
       93 (11): 1144–57.
Blattman, Christopher. 2009. “From Violence to Voting: War and Political Participation in
       Uganda.” American Political Science Review 103 (2): 231–47.
Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel. 2010. “Civil War.” Journal of Economic Literature
       48 (1): 3–57.
Bowles, Samuel. 2006. “Group Competition, Reproductive Leveling, and the Evolution of Hu-
       man Altruism.” Science 314 (5805): 1569–72. doi:10.1126/science.1134829.
———. 2008. “Being Human: Conflict: Altruism’s Midwife.” Nature 456 (7220): 326–27.
       doi:10.1038/456326a.
Boyd, Robert, Herbert Gintis, Samuel Bowles, and Peter J. Richerson. 2003. “The Evolution of
       Altruistic Punishment.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100 (6): 3531–
       35. doi:10.1073/pnas.0630443100.
Brennan, Geoffrey, and Loren Lomasky. 1997. Democracy and Decision: The Pure Theory of
       Electoral Preference. Cambridge University Press.
Burt, Alison, Barry Hughes, and Gary Milante. 2014. “Eradicating Poverty in Fragile States:
       Prospects of Reaching The ‘High-Hanging’ Fruit by 2030.” World Bank Policy Research
       Working Paper No. 7002. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2479667.

                                                                                   34
Calhoun, Dr Richard G. Tedeschi, Richard G. Tedeschi, Crystal L. Park, and Lawrence G. Cal-
        houn. 1998. Posttraumatic Growth: Positive Changes in the Aftermath of Crisis.
        Routledge.
Caló-Blanco, A., J. Kovarik, F. Mengel, and J. G. Romero. 2015. “Natural Disasters and Social
        Cohesion.”
Carneiro, Robert L. 1970. “A Theory of the Origin of the State.” Science 169 (3947): 733–38.
        doi:10.1126/science.169.3947.733.
Casey, Katherine, Rachel Glennerster, and Edward Miguel. 2012. “Reshaping Institutions: Evi-
        dence on Aid Impacts Using a Preanalysis Plan*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
        127 (4): 1755–1812. doi:10.1093/qje/qje027.
———. 2015. “Healing the Wounds: Learning from Sierra Leone’s Post-War Institutional Re-
        forms.” In NBER Volume on African Economic Successes, edited by S. Edwards, S. John-
        son, and D. Weil. University of Chicago Press. http://www.nber.org/papers/w18368.
Cassar, Alessandra, Pauline Grosjean, and Sam Whitt. 2013. “Legacies of Violence: Trust and
        Market Development.” Journal of Economic Growth 18 (3): 285–318.
Cassar, Alessandra, Andrew Healy, and Carl Von Kessler. 2011. “Trust, Risk, and Time Prefer-
        ences after a Natural Disaster: Experimental Evidence from Thailand.”
Cecchi, Francesco, Koen Leuveld, Maarten Voors, and Lizzy van der Wal. 2015. “Civil War
        Exposure and Competitiveness: Experimental Evidence from the Football Field in Sierra
        Leone.” Accessed November 13. http://www.tilburguniversity.edu/upload/e4d323d7-
        eef9-45fc-a589-2ca175bee824_cecchi.pdf.
Choi, Jung-Kyoo, and Samuel Bowles. 2007. “The Coevolution of Parochial Altruism and War.”
        Science 318 (5850): 636–40. doi:10.1126/science.1144237.
Collier, Paul, V. L. Elliott, Håvard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Marta Reynal-Querol, and Nicholas
        Sambanis. 2003. Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. World
        Bank Publications.
Darwin, Charles. 1981. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. Princeton: Prince-
        ton University Press.
De Juan, Alexander, and Jan Henryk Pierskalla. 2014. “Civil War Violence and Political Trust:
        Microlevel Evidence from Nepal*.” Conflict Management and Peace Science,
        0738894214544612.
De Luca, Giacomo, and Marijke Verpoorten. 2015a. “Civil War and Political Participation: Evi-
        dence from Uganda.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 64 (1): 113–41.
        doi:10.1086/682957.
———. 2015b. “Civil War, Social Capital and Resilience in Uganda.” Oxford Economic Papers,
        gpv036.
Diamond, Jared. 1999. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. W. W. Norton &
        Company.
Ehlers, Anke, and David M. Clark. 2000. “A Cognitive Model of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.”
        Behaviour Research and Therapy 38 (4): 319–45. doi:10.1016/S0005-7967(99)00123-0.
Flannery, Kent V., and Joyce Marcus. 2003. “The Origin of War: New 14C Dates from Ancient
        Mexico.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100 (20): 11801–5.
        doi:10.1073/pnas.1934526100.



                                                                                     35
Galovski, Tara, and Judith A Lyons. 2004. “Psychological Sequelae of Combat Violence: A Re-
        view of the Impact of PTSD on the Veteran’s Family and Possible Interventions.” Ag-
        gression and Violent Behavior 9 (5): 477–501. doi:10.1016/S1359-1789(03)00045-4.
Gilligan, Michael J., Benjamin J. Pasquale, and Cyrus Samii. 2014. “Civil War and Social Cohe-
        sion: Lab-in-the-Field Evidence from Nepal.” American Journal of Political Science 58
        (3): 604–19.
Gneezy, Ayelet, and Daniel MT Fessler. 2012. “Conflict, Sticks and Carrots: War Increases Pro-
        social Punishments and Rewards.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Bio-
        logical Sciences 279 (1727): 219–23.
González, Felipe, and Edward Miguel. 2015. “War and Local Collective Action in Sierra Leone:
        A Comment on the Use of Coefficient Stability Approaches.” Journal of Public Econom-
        ics 128 (August): 30–33. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2015.05.004.
Grosjean, Pauline. 2014. “Conflict and Social and Political Preferences: Evidence from World
        War II and Civil Conflict in 35 European Countries.” Comparative Economic Studies 56
        (3): 424–51.
Grossman, Guy, Devorah Manekin, and Dan Miodownik. 2015. “The Political Legacies of Com-
        bat: Attitudes Toward War and Peace Among Israeli Ex-Combatants.” International Or-
        ganization 69 (04): 981–1009. doi:10.1017/S002081831500020X.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2012. The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Reli-
        gion. New York: Pantheon Books.
Hartman, Alexandra C., and Benjamin S. Morse. 2015. “Wartime Violence, Empathy, and Inter-
        group Altruism: Evidence from the Ivoirian Refugee Crisis in Liberia.”
        http://cega.berkeley.edu/assets/miscellaneous_files/119_-
        _HartmanMorseViolenceEmpathy-May_2015_-_ABCA.pdf.
Heckman, James J. 2006. “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
        Children.” Science 312 (5782): 1900–1902. doi:10.1126/science.1128898.
Henrich, J. 2015. The Secret of Our Success: How Learning from Others Drove Human Evolu-
        tion, Domesticated Our Species, and Made Us Smart. Princeton University Press.
Henrich, Joseph. 2004. “Cultural Group Selection, Coevolutionary Processes and Large-Scale
        Cooperation.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Evolution and Altruism,
        53 (1): 3–35. doi:10.1016/S0167-2681(03)00094-5.
Henrich, Joseph, and Robert Boyd. 2001. “Why People Punish Defectors: Weak Conformist
        Transmission Can Stabilize Costly Enforcement of Norms in Cooperative Dilemmas.”
        Journal of Theoretical Biology 208 (1): 79–89. doi:10.1006/jtbi.2000.2202.
Hopfensitz, Astrid, and Pepita Miquel-Florensa. 2014. “Investigating Social Capital in Colom-
        bia: Conflict and Public Good Contributions.” Toulouse School of Economics (TSE).
        http://neeo.univ-tlse1.fr/3625/1/wp_tse_463.pdf.
Kling, Jeffrey R., and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2004. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Ef-
        fects on Youth.” John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
        http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/jeffreyliebman/klingliebman2004.pdf.
Kling, Jeffrey R, Jeffrey B Liebman, and Lawrence F Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
        Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1): 83–119. doi:10.1111/j.1468-
        0262.2007.00733.x.
Kosse, Fabian, Thomas Deckers, Hannah Schildberg-Hörisch, and Armin Falk. 2014. “For-
        mation of Human Prosociality: Causal Evidence on the Role of Social Environment.”
                                                                                    36
        http://www.sfbtr15.de/fileadmin/user_upload/redaktion/events/Tagung_Bonn_April_201
        5/C8_Falk_SchildbergHoerisch.pdf.
Miguel, Edward, Sebastián M. Saiegh, and Shanker Satyanath. 2011. “Civil War Exposure and
        Violence.” Economics & Politics 23 (1): 59–73. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0343.2010.00372.x.
Morris, Ian. 2014. War! What Is It Good For?: Conflict and the Progress of Civilization from
        Primates to Robots. Macmillan.
Petersen, Roger D. 2001. Resistance and Rebellion: Lessons from Eastern Europe. Cambridge
        University Press.
Rao, Li-Lin, Ru Han, Xiao-Peng Ren, Xin-Wen Bai, Rui Zheng, Huan Liu, Zuo-Jun Wang, Jin-
        Zhen Li, Kan Zhang, and Shu Li. 2011. “Disadvantage and Prosocial Behavior: The Ef-
        fects of the Wenchuan Earthquake.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32 (1): 63–69.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. 2001. “The Evolution of Subjective Commitment to
        Groups: A Tribal Instincts Hypothesis.” Evolution and the Capacity for Commitment 3:
        186–220.
Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2013. “Seeds of Distrust: Conflict in
        Uganda.” Journal of Economic Growth 18 (3): 217–52.
Rojo-Mendoza, Reynaldo T. 2014. “From Victims to Activists: Crime Victimization, Social
        Support, and Political Participation in Mexico.”
Rustagi, Devesh, Stefanie Engel, and Michael Kosfeld. 2010. “Conditional Cooperation and
        Costly Monitoring Explain Success in Forest Commons Management.” Science 330
        (6006): 961–65.
Scheve, Kenneth, and David Stasavage. 2010. “The Conscription of Wealth: Mass Warfare and
        the Demand for Progressive Taxation.” International Organization 64 (04): 529–61.
———. 2012. “Democracy, War, and Wealth: Lessons from Two Centuries of Inheritance Taxa-
        tion.” American Political Science Review 106 (01): 81–102.
Shewfelt, Steven Dale. 2009. Legacies of War: Social and Political Life after Wartime Trauma.
        Yale University. http://gradworks.umi.com/33/61/3361597.html.
Stanley, T. D., and Stephen B. Jarrell. 1989. “Meta-Regression Analysis: A Quantitative Method
        of Literature Surveys.” Journal of Economic Surveys 3 (2): 161–70. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
        6419.1989.tb00064.x.
Tedeschi, Richard G., and Lawrence G. Calhoun. 2004. “Posttraumatic Growth: Conceptual
        Foundations and Empirical Evidence.” Psychological Inquiry 15 (1): 1–18.
        doi:10.1207/s15327965pli1501_01.
Tilly, Charles. 1985. “War Making and State Making as Organized Crime.” In Bringing the State
        Back In. Cambridge University Press.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511628283.008.
Tripp, Aili Mari. 2015. Women and Power in Post-Conflict Africa. Cambridge University Press.
Turchin, Peter. 2015. Ultrasociety: How 10,000 Years of War Made Humans the Greatest Coop-
        erators on Earth. Beresta Books.
Voors, Maarten J., and Erwin H. Bulte. 2014. “Conflict and the Evolution of Institutions: Un-
        bundling Institutions at the Local Level in Burundi.” Journal of Peace Research 51 (4):
        455–69.
Voors, Maarten J., Eleonora EM Nillesen, Philip Verwimp, Erwin H. Bulte, Robert Lensink, and
        Daan P. Van Soest. 2012. “Violent Conflict and Behavior: A Field Experiment in Burun-
        di.” The American Economic Review 102 (2): 941–64.
                                                                                     37
Wilson, Edward O. 2012. The Social Conquest of Earth. New York: Liveright Pub.
Wood, Elisabeth Jean. 2003. Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salvador. Cam-
      bridge University Press.
      http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=QBAAN3ABKmIC&oi=fnd&pg=PR8&d
      q=Insurgent+collective+action+and+civil+war+in+El+Salvador.&ots=7YJAUiSoA3&sig
      =H_pifIj0Ct-O3m2R-SZg7n0UE_U.




                                                                                38
                                                            Table 1: Studies of war exposure and cooperation
                                                                                                                                             Comparable         Time since                   Data
                                                                       Data collec-                             Comparable survey
      Paper             Country                 Conflict                                     Sample                                          experimental      war exposure      Published   avail-
                                                                          tion                                     measures
                                                                                                                                               measures                                       able

                                                                         A. Papers eligible for the meta-analysis
                                                                                          Representative
                                         Lord’s Resistance Army                          sample of youth,        Groups, community,
       Annan et al.
1.
         (2011)
                         Uganda         (LRA) insurgency (1986-           2005-7       some of whom were       trust, voting, interest in          --             ~7 years
                                                 2006)                                 conscripted by LRA;              politics
                                                                                              N=613
                                                                                                                  Georgia: groups                                Georgia: 6
                                        Georgia: war with Russia                        Georgia: children;                                  Both countries:
                                                                       Georgia: 2009                           Sierra Leone: groups,
       Bauer et al.    Georgia and      over South Ossetia (2008)                             N=565                                         Allocation tasks       months
2.                                                                     Sierra Leone:                             community, trust,
         (2014)        Sierra Leone   Sierra Leone: civil war (1991-                    Sierra Leone: adult                                  (mini-dictator    Sierra Leone: 8
                                                                           2010                                  voting, interest in
                                                 2002)                                  population; N=586                                       games)              years
                                                                                                                      politics
                                                                                       Young men, some of
      Bauer, Fiala,
                                        Lord’s Resistance Army                          whom were con-          Groups, community,
3.     and Levely        Uganda
                                        insurgency (1986-2006)
                                                                           2011
                                                                                        scripted by LRA;           trust, voting
                                                                                                                                              Trust game           5 years
         (2014)
                                                                                             N=337
      Bellows and                                                                       Nationally repre-        Groups, community,
                                                                         2005 and
4.    Miguel (2006,    Sierra Leone      Civil war (1991-2002)
                                                                           2007
                                                                                        sentative sample;      trust, voting, interest in          --             3-5 years
         2009)                                                                              N=10,496                    politics
                                                                                       Young men, some of
                                         Lord’s Resistance Army
        Blattman                                                                        whom were con-          Groups, community,
5.
         (2009)
                         Uganda         (LRA) insurgency (1986-           2005-6
                                                                                        scripted by LRA;              voting
                                                                                                                                                   --             ~5 years
                                                 2006)
                                                                                             N=741
         Cassar,
                                                                                        Adult population;       Groups, community,
6.    Grosjean, and     Tajikistan       Civil war (1992-1997)             2010
                                                                                             N=426                 trust, voting
                                                                                                                                              Trust game          13 years
      Whitt (2013)
                                                                                        Youth male street
      Cecchi et al.
7.
        (2015)
                       Sierra Leone      Civil war (1991-2002)             2010         football players;                  --                Dictator game         8 years
                                                                                             N=162
      De Luca and                                                                       Nationally repre-
                                        Lord’s Resistance Army          2000, 2005,
8.    Verpoorten         Uganda
                                        insurgency (1986-2006)             2012
                                                                                        sentative sample;           Groups, trust                  --             12 years
        (2015a)                                                                             N=4,671
      De Luca and                                                                       Nationally repre-
                                        Lord’s Resistance Army          2000, 2005,                             Community, voting,
9.    Verpoorten         Uganda
                                        insurgency (1986-2006)             2012
                                                                                        sentative sample;
                                                                                                                 interest in politics
                                                                                                                                                   --             12 years
        (2015b)                                                                             N=4,671
                                                                                                                                             Dictator game,
        Gilligan,
                                                                                        Household heads;                                      Trust game,
10.   Pasquale, and       Nepal          Civil war (1996-2006)           2009-10
                                                                                            N=252
                                                                                                                 Interest in politics
                                                                                                                                              Public goods
                                                                                                                                                                   3 years
      Samii (2014)
                                                                                                                                                 game
       Gneezy and                                                                                                                           Ultimatum game,
11.
      Fessler (2012)
                          Israel      Israel-Hezbollah war (2006)         2005-7       Senior citizens; N=50               --
                                                                                                                                               Trust game
                                                                                                                                                                   1 year


                                                                                                                                39
                                      WWII (1939-1945); Yugoslav
                      35 countries     wars (1991-5); Kosovo war
                                                                                        Nationally repre-
        Grosjean     in Europe, the     (1998-9); Tajik civil war                                           Groups, trust, voting,                      5 months – 65
12.                                                                       2010         sentative samples;                                   --
         (2014)      Caucasus and        (1992-7); Chechen wars                                              interest in politics                           years
                                                                                           N=38,864
                      Central Asia      (1994-2009); Kyrgyzstan
                                             clashes (2010)
       Grossman,                                                                      Former soldiers who
      Manekin, and                     Israeli-Palestinian conflict                     enlisted between     Voting, interest in
13.
      Miodownik
                         Israel
                                                 (1967+)
                                                                          2013
                                                                                      1998-2003 and 2004-         politics
                                                                                                                                            --           1-12 years
         (2015)                                                                          2009; N=2,334
        Rohner,                                                                         Nationally repre-
      Thoenig, and                      Lord’s Resistance Army          2000 and        sentative sample;
14.
        Zilibotti
                        Uganda
                                        insurgency (1986-2006)            2008              N=2,431
                                                                                                                    Trust                   --             8 years
         (2013)
                                                                                                                                     Allocation tasks
      Voors et al.                                                                     Household heads,     Groups, community,        (social value
15.
        (2012)
                       Burundi           Civil war (1993-2005)            2009
                                                                                           N=287                  voting               orientation
                                                                                                                                                          4-6 years
                                                                                                                                      experiment)
       Voors and                                                                       Adult population;
16.
      Bulte (2014)
                       Burundi           Civil war (1993-2005)            2007
                                                                                            N=874
                                                                                                                Groups, trust               --             4 years


                                                                       B. Papers ineligible for the meta-analysis
      De Juan and                                                                      Nationally repre-
                                                                                                              Trust in national
17.    Pierskalla        Nepal           Civil war (1996-2006)            2003         sentative sample;
                                                                                                                government
                                                                                                                                            --            0-7 years
        (2014)                                                                               8,822
      Hartman and                                                                      Adult population;     Willingness to host
18.
      Morse (2015)
                        Liberia          Civil war (1989-2003)            2013
                                                                                          N~1,600                 refugees
                                                                                                                                            --            10 years
                      Indonesia,                                                      Indonesia: N=1,752     Indonesia: Groups,
                      Bosnia and       Indonesia: insurgency in                        Bosnia: nationally     community, trust,
                                                                       Indonesia:
                     Hercegovina,         Aceh (1976-2005)                            representative sam-          voting
        Shewfelt                                                         2007
19.
         (2009)
                      USA (Vi-        B&H: civil war (1992-1995)
                                                                      Bosnia: 2006
                                                                                          ple; N=3,580         Bosnia: Groups,              --           2-11 years
                     etnam veter-      USA: Vietnam war (1955-                        USA: male Vietnam       voting, interest in
                                                                       USA: 1986
                         ans)                   1975)                                   theater veterans;          politics
                                                                                            N=1,171             USA: Groups

                                                                      C. Papers studying other forms of violence
                                                                                        Latin America:
                                                                       Americas:
                                                                                            39,238
                                                                          2010
                                                                                       U.S. and Canada:     Groups, community,
        Bateson                                                       Africa: 2008-
20.                  70 countries         Crime victimization                                3,000           voting, interest in            --
        (2012)                                                              9
                                                                                        Africa: 27,713            politics
                                                                      Europe: 2000
                                                                                        Europe: 17,088
                                                                      Asia: 2005-8
                                                                                         Asia: 16,725
       Becchetti,                      Kenyan crisis, post-election                      Nairobi slum-
21.                     Kenya                                             2010                                        --               Trust game
       Conzo, and                          violence (2007-8)                            dwellers; N=404

                                                                                                                            40
      Romeo (2014)

       Hopfensitz
      and Miquel-                                                   Coffee farmers;                           Public goods
22.                  Colombia   Colombian conflict (1964+)   2012                          Community
        Florensa                                                        N=260                                    game
         (2014)
          Rojo-                                                     Nationally repre-
                                                                                        Groups, interest in
23.    Mendoza       Mexico        Crime victimization       2011   sentative sample;                              --
                                                                                            politics
         (2014)                                                         N=7,416




                                                                                                     41
                                          Table 2: Meta-analysis results
                                   Table 2: Main Results (Excluding Crime)
                                                                              (1)                (2)
           Outcome (Standardized)                          Estimate      Fixed Eﬀects       Random Eﬀects
           Summary index (mean eﬀects)                     Coef.             0.07***              0.08***
                                                           Std. Err            0.00                 0.02
                                                           P-val               0.00                 0.00
           Social groups participation                     Coef.             0.11***               0.12
                                                           Std. Err            0.00                0.08
                                                           P-val               0.00                0.10
           Community leadership/participation              Coef.             0.16***               0.17*
                                                           Std. Err            0.01                0.09
                                                           P-val               0.00                0.07
           Trust                                           Coef.              0.00                 -0.04
                                                           Std. Err           0.00                  0.09
                                                           P-val              0.87                  0.64
           Prosocial behavior in experimental games        Coef.             0.17***              0.18***
                                                           Std. Err            0.02                 0.05
                                                           P-val               0.00                 0.00
           Voting                                          Coef.             0.02***               -0.01
                                                           Std. Err            0.00                 0.03
                                                           P-val               0.00                 0.86
           Knowledge/interest in politics                  Coef.             0.06***               0.02
                                                           Std. Err            0.00                0.04
                                                           P-val               0.00                0.57


      Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,*** p<0.01. Meta-analysis results for each outcome reported in the rows. Column (1)
 reports results from a fixed-effects model; Column (2) reports results from a random-effects model. The coefficient
 represents the estimated population effects of exposure to violence across studies, measured in standard deviation
 units. This analysis excludes exposure to crime violence.



                            Table 3: Correlation matrix: Causal inference design
                                         Substantive controls    FE design     Pre-war data     Sensitivity
               Substantive controls                     1.00          0.54             0.88            0.33
                         FE design                      0.54          1.00             0.41           -0.09
                     Pre-war data                       0.88          0.41             1.00            0.25
                        Sensitivity                     0.33         -0.09             0.25            1.00

Note: The table reports the correlation between causal inference design variables. Substantive controls is an indicator
for studies that control for confounders that associate with risk of violence exposure; FE design is an indicator for
studies that use community-fixed eﬀects, comparing neighbors within the same community; Pre-war data indicates
studies that control for pre-war covariates; Sensitivity is an indicator for studies that conduct various robustness tests
to strengthen main results.
† This matrix excludes crime data.
                                                                                                          42




                                                            3
                                                                           Figure 1: Meta-analysis results, war exposure and cooperation



                                                                                                                                                         ●   Fixed effects
                                            0.3
Effect of exposure to violence (sd units)




                                                                                                                                                             Random effects
                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                .18
                                                                                              .17                     .17 ●
                                                                                     .16 ●
                                                                              .12
                                                                   .11 ●
                                            0.1




                                                   .07 ●     .08
                                                                                                                                                              .06 ●
                                                                                                                                       .02 ●                           .02
                                            0.0




                                                                                                       0 ●                                        −.01
                                                                                                               −.04
                                            −0.1
                                            −0.2




                                                           N=17            N=11              N=8             N=9              N=15             N=10                   N=7

                                                      Summary         Social           Community             Trust      Prosocial in           Voting          Knowledge/
                                                        index         group            leadership/                     experimental                              interest
                                                                    participation      participation                      games                                 in politics


Note: The figure plots the meta-analysis results reported in Table 2. The effect of exposure to violence on each outcome is estimated using fixed-effects (blue)
and random-effects (green) meta-analysis models. Results are reported in standard deviation units. The vertical lines denote 95% confidence intervals. N denotes
the number of studies/games included in the meta-analysis for each outcome.
                                                                         Figure 2: Meta-analysis results, in-group versus out-group effects


                                                                                                                                          ●   Fixed effects
                                                     0.3                                                                                      Random effects
         Effect of exposure to violence (sd units)


                                                            .25 ●          .24
                                                     0.2
                                                     0.1




                                                                                                                              .05
                                                                                      .04 ●         .04
                                                     0.0




                                                                                                                                         .01 ●
                                                                                                                0 ●


                                                                                                                                                          −.06
                                                     −0.1
                                                     −0.2




                                                                    N=12                      N=4                       N=7                         N=8


                                                                 Prosocial in              Prosocial in                  Trust                      Trust
                                                                experimental              experimental                (in−group)                 (out−group)
                                                                    games                    games
                                                                  (in−group)               (out−group)

Note: The figure plots the meta-analysis results, broken down by behavior towards in-group and out-group. The effect of exposure to violence on each outcome
is estimated using fixed-effects (blue) and random-effects (green) meta-analysis models. Results are reported in standard deviation units. The vertical lines de-
note 95% confidence intervals. N denotes the number of studies/games included in the meta-analysis for each outcome. A meta-regression test for the difference
in behavior towards in-group and out-group shows that for games, the difference is significant under both fixed-effects and random-effects model assumptions.
For trust we do not find a significant difference in attitudes towards in-group versus out-group members.
                                                                                                                              44
                                   Figure 3: The effect of war violence exposure over time (Panel A) and versus crime-related violenc (Panel B)

                                                                                 A. Persistence
                                                                                            ●                                                                           ●   B. War vs. crime violence
                                                                                (random effects)                                                                                (random effects)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                      0.2                                                                                                      0.2
         Effect of exposure to violence (sd units)




                                                                                                                  Effect of exposure to violence (sd units)
                                                                                    ●                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                    ●                                                                                                   ●




                                                                            ●                                                                                           ●
                                                                                ●                                                                                       ●
                                                                                    ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                      0.1                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                ●           ●   ●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                ●                                                                       ●
                                                      0.0       ●                                                                                              0.0      ●




                                                     −0.1                           ●
                                                                                            ●                                                                 −0.1      ●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●




                                                     −0.2                                                                                                     −0.2

                                                            0           2       4       6       8   10   12                                                            War                           Crime
                                                                                                                                                                     violence                       violence
                                                                                Years since war                                                                      exposure                       exposure

Note: Figure 3A presents the meta-analytic scatterplot of the observed effects estimated for individual studies, where the dependent variable is an index of all
cooperation outcomes, plotted against the length of time between the end of the conflict and the timing of each study. Figure 3B plots the observed effects against
an indicator of war/crime violence exposure. The point sizes are proportional to the inverse of the standard errors, which means that studies with larger samples
tend to have visually larger points. The predicted average effects are included (with corresponding 95% confidence intervals), calculated from the random effects
meta-analysis model. Grosjean (2014) is dropped from analysis in Figure 3A because of high variability in the years-since-war across the 35 countries studied.
                                                                                                                                                                            45
