NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON CONDITIONAL PRICING PRACTICES
Bogdan Genchev
Julie Holland Mortimer
Working Paper 22313
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22313

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

The authors thank Tim Lee and Xiaojie Li for excellent research assistance. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Bogdan Genchev and Julie Holland Mortimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Empirical Evidence on Conditional Pricing Practices
Bogdan Genchev and Julie Holland Mortimer
NBER Working Paper No. 22313
June 2016, Revised August 2016
JEL No. K0,K2,K20,K21,L0,L4,L42
ABSTRACT
Conditional pricing practices allow the terms of sale between a producer and a downstream
distributor to vary based on the ability of the downstream firm to meet a set of conditions put
forward by the producer. The conditions may require a downstream firm to accept minimum
quantities or multiple products, to adhere to minimum market-share requirements, or even to deal
exclusively with one producer. The form of payment from the producer to the downstream firm
may take the form of a rebate, marketing support, or simply the willingness to supply inventory.
The use of conditional pricing practices is widespread throughout many industries, and the
variety of contractual forms used in these arrangements is nearly as extensive as the number of
contracts. This paper reviews empirical evidence on these arrangements.

Bogdan Genchev
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Ave
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
genchev@bc.edu
Julie Holland Mortimer
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
julie.mortimer.2@bc.edu

EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON CONDITIONAL PRICING
PRACTICES
BOGDAN GENCHEV
JULIE HOLLAND MORTIMER *
Conditional pricing practices (CPPs) allow the terms of sale between a producer
and a downstream firm to vary based on the ability of the downstream firm to meet a set
of conditions put forward by the producer. The conditions may require a downstream
firm to accept minimum quantities or multiple products, to adhere to minimum marketshare requirements, or even to deal exclusively with one producer. Payment from the
producer to the downstream firm may take the form of a discount at the time of purchase,
a rebate paid after a period of time, or marketing support and training. The use of CPPs is
widespread throughout many industries, and the variety of contractual forms used in
these arrangements is nearly as extensive as the number of contracts.
CPPs have been challenged in courts many times over the years, but there is no
consensus among either law practitioners or academics on how they should be analyzed.
Fundamentally, adjudication seeks to determine whether a given CPP harms or benefits
competition. Under U.S. law, this means determining whether a practice reduces or
improves consumer welfare. To a large degree, practitioners’ ability to consider this
question has rested on two approaches: applying theoretical models of the potential
mechanisms behind CPPs, or using evidence from prior litigated contracts. In this article,
we consider the effects of CPPs through a third lens: empirical research on CPPs
covering several different industries and contractual forms.
Empirical research provides unique insight into understanding the effects of
CPPs, which is complementary to the insights gained through theoretical analysis and
case discussions. Theoretical models predict a wide range of mechanisms through which
CPPs may affect welfare, with the potential for multiple theoretical models to be relevant
for analyzing any given CPP. Court cases provide empirical evidence on actual CPPs, but
are selected through the process of litigation, with no guarantee of being representative of
the wider population of contractual arrangements between firms. Empirical research
addresses these limitations, while simultaneously highlighting the wide variety of settings
in which CPPs are used. Correspondingly, a limitation of the empirical literature is that it
cannot necessarily address the full range of potential settings or contractual forms that
one may ultimately want to analyze. Relatedly, the heterogeneity highlighted in this
literature does not necessarily lend itself to a single unifying framework by which to
adjudicate future contracts.
Some of the terms used to describe CPPs include vertical rebates, which can be
structured as “loyalty contracts” or “all-units discounts;” vertical bundling, which
includes “full-line forcing” and bundled discounts; and exclusive dealing. 1 Exclusive
*

Bogdan Genchev is a PhD student in economics, Boston College; Julie Holland Mortimer is
Associate Professor of Economics, Boston College, and is an NBER Research Associate. We thank Tim
Lee and Xiaojie Li for excellent research assistance. Any errors or omissions are our own.
1

We refer to a vertical rebate as a loyalty contract if it is conditional on a market-share requirement,
and an all-units discount if it is conditional on a quantity requirement.

dealing can be considered as a loyalty contract with a 100-percent market-share
requirement and an “all-or-nothing” clause. 2 The latter can be explicit or implicit. For
instance, a non-contract price at which the buyer’s demand is zero can achieve the same
effect as an explicit all-or-nothing requirement. Thus, the discount that the exclusive
dealing contract provides is the difference between the high non-contract price and the
contract price.
Table 1 presents a selected group of CPPs and the range of industries they cover,
based on both court-based evidence and empirical research. Vertical rebates have been
used, for example, in the truck transmission, microprocessor, and confections industries.
Vertical bundling contracts have been observed in the markets for video rentals, boat
engines, tape products, and some pharmaceutical products, among others. Exclusive
dealing has been used in the video game, smartphone, and auto refrigerant equipment
industries. 3 A much richer set of contracts is employed across many more industries in
reality.
TABLE 1
EVIDENCE ON CONDITIONAL PRICING PRACTICES
Industry
Court-based Evidence:
Truck Transmissions (ZF Meritor v. Eaton Corp.) 4
Auto Refrigerant Equip (SPX Corp. v. Mastercool Inc.) 5
Tape Products (LePage’s v. 3M) 6
Boat Engines (Concord Boat v. Brunswick Corp.) 7
Anticoagulants (Eisai v. Sanofi Aventis) 8
Cephalosporins (SmithKline v. Eli Lilly) 9
Microprocessors (three Intel cases) 10
Hospital Services (Cascade Health Solutions v. PeaceHealth)11

Product
Coverage

Nature of
Restriction

Downstream
Competition

Single
Single
Multiple
Multiple
Single
Multiple
Single
Multiple

Share
Exclusive
Quantity
Share
Share
Quantity
Share
Share

Standard
Standard
Standard
Standard
[1]
[1]
Standard
[2]

2

Supra note 1. A contract with a very high, but not 100-percent, market-share requirement and an allor-nothing clause is considered de facto exclusive dealing.
3
The Department of Justice defines exclusive dealing as “an arrangement whereby one party's
willingness to deal with another is contingent upon that other party (1) dealing with it exclusively or (2)
purchasing a large share of its requirements from it.” U.S. Dep't of Justice, Competition and Monopoly:
Single-Firm Conduct Under Section 2 of the Sherman Act (2008), usdoj.gov/atr/public/reports/236681.htm.
4

696 F.3d 254 (3d Cir. 2012).

5

No. 3:10 CV 1266, 2011 WL 2532889, at *1 (ND Ohio June 24, 2011).

6

324 F.3d 141(3d Cir. 2003).

7

207 F.3d 1039, 1061 (8th Cir. 2000).

8

No. 14-2017 (3d Cir. May 4, 2016).

9

427 F. Supp. 1089 (E.D. Pa. 1976), aff’d, 575 F.2d (3d Cir. 1978).

10

See Intel Corp., Analysis of Proposed Consent Order & Aid to Public Comment, FTC Docket No.
9341 (Aug. 4, 2010) ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cases/2010/08/100804intelanal_0.pdf; Settlement
Agreement, AMD v. Intel, 05-441 (D. Del. Nov. 11, 2009); sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/
50863/000005086309000213/exh101.htm; Case COMP/C-3/37.990—Intel, Comm’n Decision, 2009 O.J.
(C 277) 13, ec.europa.eu/competition/sectors/ICT/intel_provisional_decision.pdf.

Catheters (Southeast Missouri Hospital v. C.R. Bard Inc.) 12
Airline Reservations (two British Airways cases) 13
Mobile Phones (Korean Fair Trade Commission fine) 14
Empirical Research:
Confections 15
Video Rentals 16
Video Games 17
Smartphones 18
Beer 19

Multiple
Single
Multiple

Share
Quantity
Share

[2]
Standard
Standard

Multiple
Multiple
Single
Single
Multiple

Quantity
Quantity
Exclusive
Exclusive
Share

[3]
Standard
[4]
[5]
Standard

“Product coverage” indicates whether the contract governs purchases of a single product or requires the purchase of
multiple products. “Nature of the restriction” describes the condition that a downstream firm must meet to qualify for
payment. “Share” indicates a market-share requirement, often referred to as a “Loyalty” contract; “Quantity” indicates
a minimum (or maximum) quantity requirement, used in all-units discounts, full-line-forcing, or other contractual
forms; “Exclusive” indicates exclusive dealing. “Downstream competition” is noted as “Standard” when
downstream firms compete on price. Alternative forms of downstream competition vary by industry and are described
as follows:
[1] Product administered to patients in hospitals. Insurers reimburse hospitals for a patient’s treatment.
[2] Insurers reimburse hospitals for services associated with patient treatment.
[3] Retail prices rarely vary across products or time.
[4] Gaming consoles are durable; consumer demand responds to current and expected future prices.
[5] Carriers subsidize the purchase price of a handset when a consumer agrees to a two-year service plan.

A brief review of cases involving CPPs illustrates the difficulties that courts have
faced in adjudicating these legal disputes and the concomitant lack of consensus on an
appropriate analytical framework. In LePage’s Inc. v. 3M, 3M was the dominant player in
the market for branded tape products, but was facing competitive pressure from private
11

515 F.3d 883 (9th Cir. 2007).

12

642 F.3d 608 (8th Cir. 2010).

13

See Virgin Atl. Airways v. British Airways, 257 F.3d 256 (2d Cir. 2001); Case C-95/04P, British
Airways plc v. Comm’n, 2007 E.C.R. I-2331 (CJ).
14

Fine levied against Qualcomm. See Press Release, S. Kor. Fair Trade Comm’n, Qualcomm’s Abuse
of Market Dominance (July 23, 2009), eng.ftc.go.kr/bbs.do.
15

Christopher T. Conlon & Julie Holland Mortimer, Efficiency and Foreclosure Effects of Vertical
Rebates: Empirical Evidence (Apr. 2015),
http://juliemortimer.weebly.com/uploads/7/2/4/8/72489725/submit_rebates_feb2015.pdf.
16
Katherine Ho, Justin Ho & Julie Holland Mortimer, The Use of Full-Line Forcing Contracts in the
Video Rental Industry, 102 AM. ECON. REV. 686 (2012) [hereinafter Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Video Rental
Industry]; Katherine Ho, Justin Ho & Julie Holland Mortimer, Analyzing the Welfare Impacts of Full-line
Forcing Contracts, 60 J. INDUS. ECON. 468 (2012) [hereinafter Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Welfare Impacts].
17

Robin S. Lee, Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets, 103 AM.
ECON. REV. 2960 (2013).
18

Michael Sinkinson, Pricing and Entry Incentives with Exclusive Contracts: Evidence from
Smartphones (Jan. 2014), assets.wharton.upenn.edu/~msink/exclusive_handsets.pdf.
19

Chia-Wen Chen, Estimating the Foreclosure Effect of Exclusive Dealing: Evidence from the Entry of
Specialty Beer Producers, 37 INT’L. J. INDUS. ORG. 47 (2014); Tim R. Sass, The Competitive Effects of
Exclusive Dealing: Evidence from the U.S. Beer Industry, 23 INT’L. J. INDUS. ORG. 203 (2005); John Asker,
Measuring Cost Advantages from Exclusive Dealing: An Empirical Study of Beer Distribution (Jan. 2004)
[hereinafter Asker, Measuring Cost Advantages], chicagobooth.edu/research/workshops/AppliedEcon/
archive/WebArchive20032004/asker.pdf; John Asker, Diagnosing Foreclosure due to Exclusive Dealing, J.
INDUS. ECON. (forthcoming) [hereinafter Asker, Diagnosing Foreclosure].

label tape manufacturer LePage’s. 20 3M responded by entering the private label tape
market and offering clients discounts on bundles consisting of private label tape and other
of its office products. LePage’s could not match this strategy because of its limited
product line, and filed suit claiming that its rival’s pricing scheme was exclusionary. 3M
argued that its conduct was not anticompetitive because it did not sell transparent tape
below cost. The Third Circuit rejected the defendant’s argument and ruled in favor of the
plaintiff despite the absence of below-cost pricing. However, the ruling was widely
criticized for failing to provide sufficiently clear guidance on when bundled rebates
violate antitrust law.
The Ninth Circuit adopted a different approach in Cascade Health Solutions v.
PeaceHealth. 21 In this case, the plaintiff and the defendant were the only health care
providers in Lane County, Oregon. Whereas Cascade Health offered primary and
secondary care, PeaceHealth offered tertiary care as well. The latter offered insurance
companies substantial discounts if they made it their sole provider of all three levels of
health services. In response, Cascade Health challenged the practice as exclusionary. In a
break with the Third Circuit’s reasoning, the Ninth Circuit argued that the conduct could
not be ruled anticompetitive without demonstrating that it lowered prices below “an
appropriate measure of cost.” Using a discount attribution test, it ruled in favor of the
defendant and reversed the district court’s decision.
The lack of agreement on the correct principles for adjudicating conditional
pricing practices applies not only to multiproduct discounts, but to single-product loyalty
contracts as well. ZF Meritor v. Eaton Corp. was a lawsuit brought against the dominant
manufacturer of heavy-duty truck transmissions by a rival firm. 22 The contention was that
the long-term contracts that the defendant signed with the four major truck manufacturers
amounted to de facto exclusive dealing. These contracts provided rebates to the truck
manufacturers if they satisfied a high minimum-share purchase requirement, treated
Eaton’s products preferentially in their sales catalogs, and priced them lower than the
plaintiff’s products. The Third Circuit ruled against the defendant after applying a rule of
reason analysis and declining to employ the price cost test because it found that price was
not the primary method of exclusion.
The outcome was different in Eisai Inc. v. Sanofi Aventis. 23 In this case, the
defendant offered hospitals a discount on its drug Lovenox if they made 90 percent or
more of their total anticoagulant drug purchases from Sanofi. Eisai had exclusive
distribution rights to Pfizer’s competing product, Fragmin, and alleged that Sanofi’s
conduct bundled customers’ contestable and incontestable demand for Lovenox and
amounted to de facto exclusive dealing. Because Eisai’s claims related to the alleged
bundling aspect of Sanofi’s conduct and not to its pricing practices, the Third Circuit
analyzed the conduct under the rule of reason rather than applying a price-cost test. It
concluded that there was no evidence of either restriction of consumer choice or
substantial anticompetitive effect and ruled in favor of the defendant.
20

LePage’s Inc. v. 3M, 324 F.3d 141(3d Cir. 2003).

21

PeaceHealth, 515 F.3d 883.

22

ZF Meritor, 696 F.3d 254.

23

Eisai, No. 14-2017.

One reason for the lack of agreement on the appropriate framework of analysis of
CPPs is that there is no such agreement in the theoretical literature either. Economists
have found both procompetitive and anticompetitive justifications for these contracts.
However, empirical analyses that give more credibility to one theory or another are
relatively scarce.
In this article, we provide background on the theoretical literature addressing
CPPs and review the existing empirical literature. We identify market features that affect
the likelihood that a CPP will have an adverse impact on consumer welfare. We find that
anticompetitive effects are more likely when CPPs are used by a dominant firm, and
when buyers have limited capacity to carry multiple products. The existence of substitute
products or alternative distributors can also influence the impact of conditional pricing on
competition. The list of relevant market characteristics demonstrates just a few of the
factors that should be considered in the analysis of CPPs. Furthermore, the empirical
analyses reveal that different contract terms have different exclusionary effects and
should be studied in conjunction with market characteristics. The wide array of
contractual forms and market settings prevents broad generalizations and suggests that
the effects of conditional pricing can differ case-by-case, based on the specifics of the
contract and the market.
I. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Interest in CPPs has generated a large amount of scholarly work, but there is no
consensus on their predominant competitive effect or on an appropriate analytical
framework to be used in a litigation setting. In this section, we review the prevalent
points of view on these questions in the theoretical literature, first for single-product and
then for multiproduct CPPs.
A. SINGLE-PRODUCT CONDITIONAL PRICING PRACTICES
Benjamin Klein and Andres Lerner view single-product loyalty contracts as a
commitment device that allows a seller and a buyer to achieve a mutually beneficial
equilibrium off the demand curve. 24 Without commitment, a seller facing a downwardsloping demand curve sells the quantity at which marginal cost equals marginal revenue
and charges the price indicated by the demand curve. However, it can do better by
writing a contract that offers a lower price only if the buyer agrees to purchase a larger
quantity. The seller is better-off, as it sells a sufficiently larger quantity to offset profit
foregone through the lower price. The buyer also benefits, as the discount it receives on
the units it would purchase in the absence of the contract and the additional units it buys
at the discounted price outweighs the negative surplus on units that it values at less than
the discounted price. 25 The reason why the buyer can move off the demand curve is that
24

Benjamin Klein & Andres V. Lerner, Price-Cost Tests in Antitrust Analysis of Single Product
Loyalty Contracts, 80 ANTITRUST L. J. 631 (2016). A similar procompetitive justification of conditional
pricing is given in Kevin M. Murphy, Edward A. Snyder & Robert H. Topel, Competitive Discounts and
Antitrust Policy, in THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF INTERNATIONAL ANTITRUST ECONOMICS (Roger D. Blair
& D. Daniel Sokol eds., 2015), at 94–98.
25

Klein & Lerner, supra note 24, at 641–47.

it is not a final consumer, but rather a downstream firm that subsequently resells the
product as a component in a different product or service. The model assumes that final
consumers are unlikely to substitute to a competing product because of a single
component, thus conferring a degree of loyalty to the buyer. 26 The buyer can exploit this
loyalty to shift purchases from one seller to another. Sellers compete for these salesshifting services and compensate the buyer through the loyalty discount. 27
Despite this procompetitive justification of loyalty contracts, Klein and Lerner
acknowledge that loyalty contracts can also be used anticompetitively. In their analysis of
antitrust liability, they distinguish between two types of contract terms: performance and
incentive. Performance terms stipulate the conditions that a buyer needs to meet, such as
market-share, preferential treatment of certain products, and retail pricing requirements. 28
Incentive terms specify what happens if the buyer does not satisfy the performance
requirements: for example, it may be forced to forfeit the discount or may even face
restricted supply. 29 The authors argue that if the loss of a discount is the only incentive
mechanism, the contract resembles predatory pricing, and a “discount attribution test”
can be applied. 30 However, if the loyalty contract includes non-price incentive terms,
such as a threat to restrict or terminate supply, or if the list price is much higher than what
would prevail in the absence of the contract, the authors recommend a rule of reason
analysis. 31
Other scholars recognize that many CPPs resemble both predatory pricing,
through the discount terms, and exclusive dealing, through the exclusivity or near
exclusivity requirements, but argue that a rule of reason standard better captures the
various mechanisms through which CPPs may affect consumer welfare. 32 In a predatory
26

For instance, patients will not change the hospital they go to because it does not carry the patient’s
preferred brand of blood-clotting drug. Similarly, a truck buyer will not go to a rival manufacturer only
because it offers different transmissions. Id. at 647.
27

Id. at 647–51. The authors assume that any disadvantages to consumers from increases in the list
(non-contract) price, by either the seller or its competitor, are outweighed by the benefits from the contract.
In order for the contract to be procompetitive, the model must implicitly assume that at least some portion
of the discount is passed on to consumers. This need not always be the case (e.g., if consumers are lockedin to the buyer for some reason).
28

Id. at 632.

29

Id.

30

Id. at 634. The test applies the full amount of discounts to the contestable portion of sales and
compares the discounted price to marginal cost, where contestable sales are those for which the rival can
“reasonably compete.” Id. at 639. If the discounted price is lower than marginal cost, then the loyalty
discount is likely predatory and the next step in the analysis is to determine if the dominant firm will be
able to eventually recoup its “investment.” Id. at 665.
31

Id. at 673 and note 28. The authors explain that before weighing pro- and anticompetitive effects, the
analysis needs to determine whether the contractual arrangement constitutes de facto exclusive dealing,
which is the case when the contract gives the buyer no economic choice but to accept the offered terms if
the buyer wants to deal with the seller.
32

Steven C. Salop, The Raising Rivals’ Cost Foreclosure Paradigm, Conditional Pricing Practices
and the Flawed Incremental Price-Cost Test (Georgetown Law Faculty Publications and Other
Works. Paper 1620, 2016), scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/facpub/1620/; Joshua D. Wright, Simple but
Wrong or Complex but More Accurate? The Case for an Exclusive Dealing-Based Approach to Evaluating
Loyalty Discounts, Remarks at the Bates White 10th Annual Antitrust Conference (June 3, 2013),

pricing setting, a firm lowers its price below cost, drives equally efficient rivals out of the
market, then raises its price to a supracompetitive level and recoups the profit lost while
pricing below cost. The mechanisms that harm consumer welfare are the exclusion of
rivals and subsequent higher prices. This is the reason predatory pricing analyses proceed
by comparing price to cost, and if price is lower, assessing whether the predator can
recoup its “investment.” 33
Unlike predatory pricing, exclusive dealing can lead to exclusion of rivals without
below-cost pricing. 34 Moreover, exclusive dealing can also impair competition without
inducing full exclusion in the market. By restricting rivals’ access to vital inputs or a
sufficient customer base, exclusive dealing may effectively raise their costs, forcing them
to increase their prices and reducing the competitive constraint they can impose. 35
Similarly, the ability of rivals to compete can be limited if they are relegated to a niche
position in the market with limited access to customers. A reduced customer base can
also diminish rivals’ incentives to invest and innovate, which in turn may lead to less
investment and innovation by the dominant firm. 36 Exclusive dealing requires a different
analytical framework than predatory pricing because it can lead to competitive harm in
more varied ways. Steven Salop follows this logic to argue that a rule of reason standard
of adjudication is appropriate, as it can account for the various mechanisms through
which harm can occur. 37
While exclusive dealing can induce foreclosure or raise rivals’ costs, this need not
automatically translate into consumer harm. For this to happen, the seller employing the
contract needs to have “power over price.” 38 Such power may not exist if competitors are
not significantly disadvantaged by the conduct, if there is sufficient competition from
non-foreclosed competitors, or if there are substitute products. 39 Another reason why
ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/public_statements/simple-wrong-or-complex-more-accurate-caseexclusive-dealing-based-approach-evaluating-loyalty/130603bateswhite.pdf.
33

Salop, supra note 32, at 4–7.

34

The theoretical literature on the exclusionary effects of exclusive dealing is sizeable. Authors in the
tradition of the “Chicago School” argued that exclusive dealing cannot lead to the exclusion of an equally
efficient rival because compensating the downstream firm for accepting the arrangement makes it
unprofitable for the upstream firm to offer it in the first place. Other authors have used models with scale
economies and externalities across buyers to show that anticompetitive exclusion is possible. See, e.g.,
ROBERT H. BORK, THE ANTITRUST PARADOX 299–309 (2d ed. 1993), RICHARD A. POSNER, ANTITRUST
LAW: AN ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE 171–211 (1st ed. 1976), Philippe Aghion & Patrick Bolton, Contracts as
a Barrier to Entry, 77 AM. ECON. REV. 388 (1987), Eric B. Rasmusen, J. Mark Ramseyer & John S. Wiley,
Jr., Naked Exclusion, 81 AM. ECON. REV. 1137 (1991), Ilya R. Segal & Michael D. Whinston, Naked
Exclusion: Comment, 90 AM. ECON. REV. 296 (2000), and the discussion in MICHAEL D. WHINSTON,
LECTURES ON ANTITRUST ECONOMICS 133–97 (2008).
35

Through these effects, exclusive dealing arrangements fit into the “raising rivals’ costs” paradigm.
Salop, supra note 32, at 2.
36

Id. at 14–31 (also discusses other ways exclusive dealing can harm competition).

37

Id. at 10. Salop also discusses various reasons why the price-cost can give too many false positives
and false negatives, which makes it unsuitable as a method to analyze alleged anticompetitive conduct
related to CPPs. Salop, supra note 32, at 40–60.
38

Id. at 39.

39

Id.

consumers may not be harmed by exclusive dealing is that such arrangements can be
efficiency-inducing. For example, exclusive dealing can intensify competition among
suppliers, provide incentives for better products, service, and increased promotion, and
reduce free riding. 40 These procompetitive effects need to be included in the evaluation of
the net impact of exclusive dealing on competition.
There is also a growing theoretical literature that focuses specifically on the
effects of CPPs that are not as restrictive as exclusive dealing. This literature has found
conditions under which loyalty discounts, among a broader group of vertical contracting
practices, can lead to foreclosure. 41 However, conditional pricing, and AUDs in
particular, can also arise in the absence of an exclusionary motive as a more effective
way to price discriminate than a menu of two-part tariffs. 42 Furthermore, CPPs can have
procompetitive effects by addressing upstream and downstream moral hazard and by
inducing more downstream effort. 43
B. MULTIPRODUCT CONDITIONAL PRICING PRACTICES
Multiproduct CPPs (or bundled discounts) condition a buyer’s discount on his
ability to purchase multiple different products. 44 As is the case with single-product CPPs,
there is no established consensus on how multiproduct CPPs should be analyzed. Some
courts and scholars have recommended using a predatory pricing-based price-cost test.45
Others, however, have pointed out that multiproduct CPPs can have exclusionary effects
even without below-cost pricing and are best considered as forms of tying. 46
Tying can have both exclusionary and nonexclusionary rationales, and can either
40

Id. at 31–33 and note 93 referencing Daniel P. O’Brien & Greg Shaffer, Nonlinear Supply Contracts,
Exclusive Dealing, and Equilibrium Market Foreclosure, 6 J. ECON. & MGMT. STRATEGY 755 (1997);
Howard P. Marvel, Exclusive Dealing, 25 J.L. & ECON. 1 (1982); Benjamin Klein and Andres V. Lerner,
Expanded Economics of Free-Riding: How Exclusive Dealing Prevents Free-Riding and Creates
Undivided Loyalty, 74 ANTITRUSTL.J. 473 (2007), and Benjamin Klein, Exclusive Dealing as
Competition for Distribution “On the Merits”, 12 GEO. MASON. L. REV. 119 (2003).
41

John Asker & Heski Bar-Isaac, Raising Retailers’ Profits: On Vertical Practices and the Exclusion
of Rivals, 104 AM. ECON. REV. 672 (2014) and Zhijun Chen & Greg Shaffer, Naked Exclusion with
Minimum-Share Requirements, 45 RAND J. ECON. 64 (2014).
42

Sreya Kolay, Greg Shaffer & Janusz A. Ordover, All-Units Discounts in Retail Contracts, 13 J.
ECON. MANAG. STRATEG. 429 (2004).
43

Daniel P. O’Brien, All-units Discounts and Double Moral Hazard (2013), papers.ssrn.com/sol3
/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2228746 and David E. Mills, Inducing Downstream Selling Effort with Market
Share Discounts, 17 INT. J. ECON. BUS. 129.
44

Some authors use the term “bundling” to describe selling packages of multiple units of the same
product and the term “tying” for selling packages of different products. Others do not stick to this
convention and use “bundling” for selling different products together. See, e.g., OZ SHY, INDUSTRIAL
ORGANIZATION: THEORY AND APPLICATIONS 362 (1996).
45

See discussion in Patrick Greenlee, David Reitman & David S. Sibley, An Antitrust Analysis of
Bundled Loyalty Discounts, 26 INT. J. IND. ORGAN 1132, at 1133–35.
46
Id. and Dennis W. Carlton, Patrick Greenlee & Michael Waldman, Assessing the Competitive Effects
of Multiproduct Pricing, 53 THE ANTITRUST BULLETIN 587, at 589. Carlton, Greenlee, and Waldman point
out additional weaknesses of the price-cost test at 606–10.

increase or decrease consumer welfare. Firms can tie products to attain efficiencies in
production stemming from scale economies, to price discriminate, or to achieve greater
product differentiation. 47 While these exemplify nonexclusionary uses of tying, bundled
discounts can also be used anticompetitively in a variety of ways. For instance, a firm
active in a monopoly market for a primary good and a duopoly market for a
complementary good can use tying to extend its monopoly power to the “adjacent”
market by denying scale to its rival. 48 A firm can also use tying to strengthen its market
power by excluding producers of complementary goods, thus making it harder for firms
that need the complements to compete in the primary market. 49 Finally, tying can be used
to deter entry in the complementary and primary goods markets. 50
II. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
Economic theory suggests that conditional pricing can have positive and negative
effects on competition. In reality, both types of effects are likely to occur simultaneously,
so that the net impact of a given CPP becomes an empirical question. Empirical work is
also helpful for establishing the channels through which CPPs affect consumer welfare.
As discussed in the preceding section, below-cost pricing is one mechanism that can lead
to rival exclusion, but not the only one. Furthermore, even in the presence of foreclosure,
consumer welfare may not be harmed. Thus, empirical work that investigates the net
impact and the different mechanisms through which CPPs affect competition can inform
both the general attitude of the courts to these types of contracts, and the particular
framework to be used in analyzing their impact.
While existing case law illustrates the issues raised by CPPs and the methods used
to analyze them, it need not be indicative of the competitive effects of CPPs at large
because of sample selection bias. 51 For this reason, independent empirical research is
47

Id. at 598–601. A firm can differentiate a homogenous product by tying it to a product over which it
has monopoly power. Id. at 601.
48

An important requirement is that the complement can be used without the monopoly good.
Otherwise the monopolist can achieve the same or higher profit without tying, i.e. tying is a feasible but not
necessarily profitable monopolization strategy, an example of the “one monopoly rent” critique. Id. at 601–
602 and notes 28–29, referencing Michael D. Whinston, Tying, Foreclosure, and Exclusion, 80 AM.
ECON. REV. 837 (1990).
49

Id. at 603–604. This can also be seen as an example of raising rivals’ costs.

50

Id. at 604. Carlton, Greenlee, and Waldman examine the conditions under which a bundled discount
is likely to be anticompetitive. These include situations in which rivals face economies of scale, the
discounting firm has market power, the price of the tied good increases for consumers that do not buy the
tying good, and rivals exiting or facing increased marginal costs because of the bundled discount. Id. at
610–16. Greenlee, Reitman, and Sibley examine the impact of bundled discounts when the adjacent market
is perfectly competitive. Greenlee, Reitman & Sibley, supra note 45, at 1138 and 1148.
51

The fact that certain instances of conditional pricing end up in court suggests that these cases may be
more likely to be anticompetitive, because plaintiffs expend the effort to litigate. Possible selection bias
from relying on litigated cases is discussed in Pauline M. Ippolito, Resale Price Maintenance: Empirical
Evidence from Litigation, 34 J.L. & ECON. 264–65 (1991). Sample selection bias is an independent issue
from whether or not courts reach the correct conclusion about alleged anticompetitive effects. There is a
tradeoff between ensuring that courts adjudicate a given practice correctly, and having predictable and
easily implementable, albeit occasionally incorrect, court decisions. A thorough evaluation of this tradeoff

essential for shedding light on the impact of these practices. Such inquiries, however,
face a variety of challenges, which makes them scarce. First, data are often proprietary
and difficult to obtain. Second, when data are available, lack of variation in prices and
choice sets often hinders demand estimation. Third, supply-side estimation becomes
problematic when agents’ actions are endogenous or difficult to observe. Finally, the
wide variety of contracts and institutional settings makes it difficult to generalize results
and extrapolate from one industry or type of contract to another.
Despite these challenges, economists have made progress in empirically assessing
the impact of CPPs. Earlier work primarily consists of “reduced-form” analyses, while
more recently researchers have used “structural” models, which allow one to conduct
counterfactual experiments and study more closely the mechanisms that affect consumer
welfare. 52 There have been empirical studies of the effects of CPPs, including loyalty
contracts, all-units discounts, and exclusive dealing. We organize the discussion of these
studies by industry and other market features that have implications for the effects of
CPPs.
A. CONFECTIONS AND BEER
The confections and beer industries are traditional food and beverage
manufacturing industries. New product introductions are relatively infrequent, but there
are plenty of imperfect substitutes. In the studies we consider, CPPs are offered by
dominant firms, and there is evidence that the arrangements may foreclose rivals under
certain conditions. However, the estimated impact on consumer welfare is positive in the
case of confections, and negative but small in the case of beer.
1. Confections
Christopher Conlon and Julie Holland Mortimer study the efficiency and
foreclosure effects of an AUD used by the dominant firm in the vending channel of the
confections industry. 53 The main upstream players are Mars, Nestle, and Hershey. 54 The
dominant firm, Mars, offers a per-unit rebate on the total quantity purchased in a given
fiscal quarter. To qualify for the rebate, a vending operator needs to meet or exceed a
customized quarterly purchase target, which applies to the total across all varieties of

is beyond the scope of this article.
52

Structural models typically specify the behavior for both firms and consumers. If these behavioral
models are correct, the researcher can estimate parameters of the objective functions of firms and
consumers that are robust to policy changes. Knowledge of these “primitives” allows the researcher to
conduct counterfactual analyses; thus, one can change a particular feature of the world and predict what
market outcomes will be. The parameters estimated in reduced-form models may lack policy robustness
and need not reveal anything about agents’ objective functions, ruling out the ability to explore
counterfactual simulations. However, reduced-form analyses do not require explicit behavioral models of
agents in the market.
53

Conlon & Mortimer, supra note 14, at 1–2.

54

Id. at 12, 41 tbl.1.

Mars candy, and satisfy a facing requirement, which specifies that he carry at least six
Mars products in each vending machine. 55
The effect of the AUD on firm profits and consumer utility is theoretically
ambiguous. On one hand, the AUD requirements can induce the retailer to restock its
vending machines more frequently and reduce the likelihood of a stockout. 56 The
increased level of effort also increases consumer welfare, as it ensures customers can buy
their top choice of candy. The AUD also mitigates downstream moral hazard, which
occurs when the retailer lacks the incentive to exert the level of effort optimal for the
manufacturer. For example, if a Mars product is out of stock and customers are forced to
substitute to a competing product with a higher margin, the retailer will not restock. This
leaves Mars worse-off and the retailer and the competing manufacturer better-off. The
AUD rebate effectively increases the retailer’s margin on the Mars products, creating an
incentive for him to restock more frequently. 57
On the other hand, AUDs can also have anticompetitive effects. The rebate,
quantity threshold, and facing requirement can induce a retailer to replace Hershey or
Nestle products with Mars candy bars. 58 Such foreclosure reduces the profits of Mars’
competitors, but the sign of its impact on consumers is unclear. Whether consumer
welfare increases or decreases depends on whether consumers like the Mars product(s)
better than the Nestle/Hershey products that are displaced.
An important feature of the setting, as it relates to the impact of the AUD on
consumer welfare, is that downstream prices are the same across products and rarely vary
over time. The reasons for the lack of variation in prices are technical difficulties in
providing change and the fact that service contracts sometimes require the vendor to
commit to a price structure over a multi-year period. 59 Thus, the AUD can affect
consumer welfare through product availability and assortment, but not through retail
prices.
To assess the impact on consumer welfare and firm profits, Conlon and Mortimer
combine a model of demand for different candy bars and a model of restocking. The
demand model estimates consumer preferences for different products for one retailer,
while the restocking model estimates the optimal time between service visits for the
retailer, weighing the cost of a visit against the benefits of extra sales from avoiding a
stockout. 60 The authors focus on a representative vending machine carrying five base
55

Id. at 11.

56

When the vendor restocks a machine, it replenishes all products, not only the ones manufactured by
the firm offering the AUD. Id. at 3.
57

The increased level of retailer effort tends to increase the profits of the dominant manufacturer,
whose products are likely to stock out first, and decrease the profits of competing manufacturers. However,
this may not be true under all circumstances. If the initial frequency of restocking is so low that Mars,
Hershey, and Nestle products all stock out between visits, then an increase in the level of retailer effort can
increase the profits of all upstream firms. Conlon and Mortimer provide evidence that this does not occur in
the market they study, so that increased retailer effort increases Mars profits, while decreasing Nestle and
Hershey profits. Id. at 23.
58

Id. at 4 and 24–26.

59

Id. at notes 4 and 25.

60

Id. at 18–20.

candy products, and estimate the optimal level of retailer effort and the optimal
assortment choice for the last two candy products under different vertical payment
structures. 61
Based on this model, the authors analyze the welfare impact of the AUD. In its
absence, the retailer’s optimal assortment is to carry two Hershey products, Reese’s
Peanut Butter Cups and Payday, in addition to the five base products. The motivating
factor is that even though demand for the Hershey products is slightly lower than for the
Mars replacement products, the profit margin on the Hershey products is higher. 62 When
Mars offers the AUD, the combination of the per-unit rebate, the quantity threshold, and
the facing requirement induces the retailer to increase his restocking frequency and to
stock two Mars products, Three Musketeers and Milky Way, instead of Hershey products
in the last two slots. This increases the profits realized by the retailer and Mars, but
decreases Hershey’s and Nestle’s profits. 63 The impact on Hershey’s bottom line is
especially stark, as it loses distribution for two products. Further analysis reveals that as
long as the marginal cost per candy bar is above 13 cents, there is no price above
marginal cost that Hershey can charge in the presence of the AUD, which would
convince the retailer to carry its products. 64 Thus, there is evidence of foreclosure. 65
Despite the presence of foreclosure, the authors find that consumers are not
harmed by the AUD. Retail prices are assumed fixed, so consumer welfare is affected
only by the increased level of effort and by the changed assortment. While more retailer
effort has an unambiguously positive effect for consumers (by decreasing the number of
stockouts and thus increasing availability), the effect of changes in product assortment
can be either positive or negative. In the Conlon and Mortimer setting, consumers are
better off when the retailer carries Three Musketeers and Milky Way (Mars products)
than when it carriers Reese’s and Payday (Hershey products) and maintains the same
restocking frequency. 66 Thus, the estimate of the overall effect of Mars’ AUD on
consumer welfare is positive. 67
2. Beer
61

Id. at 20–21. The base products are Snickers, Peanut M&Ms, Twix, Plain M&Ms (owned by Mars),
and Raisinets (owned by Nestle).
62

Id. at 24.

63

Id. at 25.

64

Id. at 27 and 45, tbl. 10.

65

These analyses assume that wholesale prices remain unchanged in the counterfactual world without
the AUD. While all three firms can adjust their prices in real life, such adjustments make finding an
equilibrium a very difficult problem computationally. The authors conduct an additional analysis in which
Hershey’s and Nestle’s wholesale prices are fixed, but Mars’ is not. In this case, Mars lowers its price to
undercut Hershey and ensure that the retailer carries two Mars products in the last slots. Once again,
Hershey is foreclosed, since it cannot offer a price above marginal cost that would induce the retailer to
carry its products. Id. at 28–29 and 45, tbl. 12.
66

Id. at 44, tbl. 9.

67
Price-cost tests are not designed to shed light on product availability and consumer preferences,
which in this case determine the effect of conditional pricing on consumer surplus. Therefore, a price-cost
test would be uninformative about the competitive impact of the AUD in this setting.

The beer industry is another traditional manufacturing industry dominated by a
small number of major producers and many smaller ones. Products are differentiated, but
there are many close substitutes. The market is characterized by a three-tier vertical
structure composed of brewers, distributors, and retailers. 68 Some of the largest brewers,
such as Anheuser-Busch and Miller, enter into exclusive agreements with their
distributors. 69 The effects of these arrangements have been studied by three authors. Tim
Sass summarizes the theoretical literature on exclusive dealing and uses reduced-form
analyses to determine which theory best describes the observed market outcomes. 70
Using structural models, Chia-Wen Chen and John Asker study the welfare effects of
exclusive dealing and analyze whether such contracts lead to the foreclosure of rivals. 71
Sass organizes the rationales for using exclusive dealing into three types: to align
its distributors’ incentives with those of the upstream firm, to foreclose rivals, or to
dampen competition among producers. 72 Each of these theories makes predictions about
the effect of exclusivity on prices and output, which the author evaluates using data from
a survey of 391 U.S. beer distributors. 73 Reduced-form analyses indicate that exclusive
dealing tends to increase the prices charged by brewers and distributors, as well as total
quantity sold. 74 At the same time, there is no evidence that exclusivity increases the
prices of rival brewers and distributors. 75 These results suggest that efficiency-enhancing
motives are an important rationale for the use of exclusive dealing in this industry. 76
John Asker provides further evidence on the effects of exclusive dealing in the
market for beer. He focuses on the Greater Chicago area, in which the exclusive contracts
68

In most states, owning firms across different tiers is either expressly prohibited or restricted. See,
e.g., Chen, supra note 18, at note 16, and Asker, Diagnosing Foreclosure, supra note 18, at 4.
69

Perhaps the most famous campaign to boost a company’s number of exclusive distributors is
Anheuser-Busch’s “100% share of mind.” This campaign was started in 1997, and offered distributors
discounts, extended credit, and marketing support in exchange for carrying only Anheuser-Busch products.
Even though the contracts between the brewer and its distributors are usually referred to as “exclusive
dealing,” they do not match the definition used by the DOJ (supra note 2). In particular, Anheuser-Busch
either did not threaten to or did not carry out a threat to stop dealing with a distributor if it refused the
contract, which is supported by the fact that the brewer worked with many non-exclusive distributors even
two years after the beginning of the campaign. Thus, Anheuser-Busch’s contracts resemble loyalty
contracts with a 100% market-share requirement more than exclusive dealing. See, e.g., Sass, supra note
18, at 211 and note 9, and Asker, Diagnosing Foreclosure, supra note 18, at 1 and note 4.
70

Sass, supra note 18.

71

Chen, supra note 18; Asker, Diagnosing Foreclosure, supra note 18; and Asker, Measuring Cost
Advantages, supra note 18.
72

Sass, supra note 18, at 204–08.

73

Sass, supra note 18, at 214.

74

Id. at 204, 218–19.

75

Id. at 219.

76

Id. at 216, 221–22. Sass’ analysis does not include a formal evaluation of the impact of exclusive
dealing on consumer welfare. The findings suggest an efficiency-enhancing motivation, but it is unclear
whether the net effect of higher prices (if higher wholesale prices are passed on to consumers) and
increased quantity will be positive or negative.

used by Anheuser-Busch and some other upstream firms raised concerns about the
potential foreclosure of rival brewers. 77 Combining a model of consumer demand for
beer and a supply-side model of brewer profit maximization, Asker calculates brewer and
distributor marginal costs. 78 The results show that brewers that use exclusive dealing
enjoy both a cost and a service advantage over their rivals. These advantages can stem
from investments that the brewers make in their exclusive distributors, or from two types
of foreclosure: cost-based or promotion-based. 79 The article develops tests for each type
of foreclosure. The idea behind the test for cost-based foreclosure is to compare the
distribution costs of brewers that do not employ exclusives, in markets with and without
exclusive distributors. Assuming distribution costs are identically distributed across
markets (in the statistical sense), these brewers will face higher costs of distribution on
average in markets with exclusives if foreclosure occurs. Specifically, they will not be
able to access the most cost-efficient distributors. 80 By contrast, this will not be the case
if brewers use exclusive arrangements to protect investments they have made in their
distributors. 81 The test for promotion-based foreclosure is based on the same reasoning.
Once implemented, the two tests indicate that cost and promotional advantages are not
caused by exclusivity-induced foreclosure, and support the conclusion that exclusive beer
distribution in metropolitan settings should not raise antitrust concerns. 82
Asker also conducts two counterfactual analyses in which exclusive dealing is
banned. 83 In the first, the cost advantage from using exclusive dealers is attributed
entirely to additional brewer investment in the distributor. A ban on exclusives in such a
case eliminates the cost benefits enjoyed by brewers using exclusive dealers. As a result,
Anheuser-Busch and Miller’s prices to distributors and retailers increase. These increases
are passed on to consumers. Overall, Asker estimates that the ban would lead to a 20
percent decrease in consumer welfare, retailer profits, and total brewer profits. 84 In the
second counterfactual, the cost advantage is attributed entirely to foreclosure. Removing
exclusive dealing leads to lower costs for brewers that do not use exclusives, increasing
consumer surplus, retailer profits, and brewer profits by 40 percent. 85 The results indicate
the potential benefits that an intervention by the antitrust authority can bring if
foreclosure is present. However, given that the test results provide no support to the
77

Id. at 1. The period under study is 1994.

78

Id. at 8–14 and 19–20 for details on the model and its estimation. Distributors in the model are
“passive” in that it is not them, but brewers that set the prices charged to retailers. This feature of the model
is supported by the fact that brewers provide strong guidelines to distributors about preferred wholesale
prices. Id. at 7.
79

Cost-based foreclosure occurs if a rival cannot access low-cost distributors because of the exclusive
arrangement, while promotion-based foreclosure occurs if a rival cannot access the distributors most adept
at selling its product.
80

The distribution of distributor costs will be truncated from the left. Id. at 6.

81

Id.

82

Id. at 25.

83

Asker, Measuring Cost Advantages, supra note 18, at 40–41.

84

Id. at 43.

85

Id.

foreclosure hypothesis, the author concludes that the most likely outcome of an
intervention is a welfare loss. 86
Chia-Wen Chen offers additional insights into the impact of exclusive dealing by
examining the effect of Anheuser-Busch’s exclusive arrangements on microbrewers’
entry decisions in Northern California markets. 87 This setting allows her to consider
foreclosure effects in both metropolitan and rural areas, which complements Asker’s
results. 88
Chen’s analysis utilizes a model of consumer demand for beer combined with a
model of a microbrewer’s decision to enter a market, which depends on the expected
demand for its product and on the entry decisions of other microbrewers. 89 The demand
and entry models recover the impact of exclusivity on the fixed cost and probability of
entry. The results highlight two facts. First, the interdependence of firms’ entry decisions
is important. There are substantial spillover effects of entry into a market: the more
microbrewers there are in a market, the easier it is for others to enter, and the harder it is
for another firm to deter entry. 90 Strategic interactions are also important because they
affect the estimates of the impact of Anheuser-Busch’s exclusive arrangements. The
article finds that if strategic interactions are not taken into consideration, there are no
estimated foreclosure effects of exclusivity. However, when such interactions are
accounted for, the results provide a more nuanced picture: foreclosure is present in rural
areas, outside of the Bay Area and Sacramento counties. 91 Where a foreclosure effect is
present, exclusivity decreases the probability of a specialty beer producer’s entry by six
percentage points—a substantial effect given a base entry probability of 28 percent. 92 A
possible reason for the presence of such an effect is that there are relatively fewer
distributors in rural counties than in metropolitan areas. 93
Despite the finding of foreclosure in some areas, Chen concludes that foreclosing
rivals is not the main motivation behind the use of exclusive distributors. 94
Counterfactual simulations show that banning exclusivity does not have a big impact on
86

Id.

87

Chen, supra note 18, at 47. The period under study is April 2006 to April 2008 (id. at 50). Each store
that sells beer is considered a separate market (id. at 56).
88

Foreclosure in this setting occurs if a microbrewer cannot obtain distribution at a particular store
because of exclusive dealing. This definition differs from Asker’s, which focuses on the cost-efficiency or
marketing aptitude of distributors.
89

Id. at 48, 51–58 (detailing the model and its estimation). The article studies only the entry decisions
of specialty brewers. The large national brewers enter essentially all markets. Id. at 51.
90

Id. at 60.

91

Id. at 60–61.

92

Id. at 61.

93

Thus, the existence of a foreclosure effect does not contradict Asker’s article, which finds no
foreclosure in Greater Chicago. In that area, it seems that the relative abundance of distributors helps
prevent foreclosure. In particular, even though Anheuser-Busch uses eight, and Miller uses five, exclusive
distributors, there are 29 other distributors to serve the rest of the brewers. Asker, Diagnosing Foreclosure,
supra note 18, at tbl. 1.
94

Id. at 62.

entry behavior, as at most one additional brewer enters a market. 95 Furthermore, the
consumer welfare benefit of the expanded product variety is negligible. Even if all
specialty beers are stocked, the potential increase in consumer welfare remains fairly
inconsequential. 96 The likely reason for such a limited impact is the presence of many
substitute products, and the fact that many of the specialty brewers are fringe firms that
cater to a small segment of the market. Moreover, as small players in the market,
microbreweries have minimal impact on equilibrium prices. 97 Finally, demand
substitution estimates indicate that by foreclosing a specialty brewer, Anheuser-Busch
can sell at most 31 additional six-packs per store per quarter, a negligible amount for a
firm of its size. 98 Such a strategy to increase sales seems inefficient. Together with the
rest of the results, this suggests that foreclosure is more likely to be a side effect rather
than the main rationale for using exclusive dealing, and gives credibility to an efficiencyinducing motivation.
Some conclusions can be drawn from the analyses of AUDs in the confections
industry and exclusive dealing in the beer industry. First, CPPs can lead to foreclosure of
rivals, but need not cause substantial (or any) harm to consumers. Second, the channels
through which consumer welfare is affected are retail prices, product availability and
variety. Whether the contract affects retail prices (Sass’s and Asker’s articles) or not
(Conlon and Mortimer’s and Chen’s articles) has implications for consumer welfare.
Third, foreclosure is more likely when there are fewer distributors available. Thus, even
though Hershey is foreclosed by Mars’ AUD from accessing a particular retailer, it may
be able to find other distributors in the same area. Fourth, the existence of many close
substitutes attenuates the effect of changes in product variety and availability on
consumer welfare. For instance, in Conlon and Mortimer’s article, the change in product
variety actually benefits consumers, while in Chen’s article the exclusion of specialty
beers decreases consumer surplus minimally.
B. VIDEO RENTALS
The movie industry differs from traditional manufacturing industries in that the
product is an information good. Having “consumed” the content of the product, a
consumer does not need to obtain it again. 99 This feature forces producers to continually
update their products. The result of this constant “churn” is that firms are only as good as
their last few products. As their product lines change, firms face different incentives to
use conditional pricing.
The use of full-line forcing contracts (FLFs) in the video rental industry and their
95

Id.

96

Id. In particular, a ban on exclusives will lead to a $15 increase in consumer surplus per store per
quarter. The potential increase if all specialty brewers are stocked at a given store is $45 per store per
quarter. These results assume exclusive dealing has no procompetitive effects. If it does, banning exclusive
dealing may increase consumer welfare less or may even decrease it.
97

Id. at 62, 56, and tbl. 5.

98

Id. at 62.

99

Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Video Rental Industry, supra note 15, at 687.

welfare effects are the focus of two articles by Katherine Ho, Justin Ho, and Julie
Holland Mortimer. 100 The wide spread of the internet and advances in information
technology in the late 1990s, which facilitated tracking transactions from a distance,
allowed movie distributors to offer rental stores two new contract types, revenue sharing
(RS) and FLF, in addition to traditional linear pricing. FLF and RS contracts are similar,
in that they offer lower upfront prices per tape in exchange for a portion of the revenue
and a commitment to buy a minimum (or a maximum) number of tapes. The difference
between the two contract types is that FLFs offer more generous per-tape prices and
revenue-sharing terms in exchange for the rental store’s agreeing to carry all movies
released by a distributor over a year. This bundling feature, together with the minimum
and maximum purchase requirements, is what makes FLFs a form of conditional
pricing. 101
The authors estimate a flexible demand system and a model of retailers’ portfolio
and contract choices and use it to analyze the competitive effects of FLF contracts. 102
Theoretically, there are three potential effects. An efficiency effect occurs when a FLF
contract allows a rental store to keep a higher level of inventory of a given title,
increasing its availability to consumers. A market coverage effect is observed when a
store signs a FLF contract with a distributor and carries more titles from that distributor
than it would otherwise. Finally, a leverage effect is present if a rental store drops titles
from one distributor when it enters into a FLF contract with another. 103
The findings indicate that FLFs have positive effect on consumer surplus. 104 First,
the results indicate that the leverage effect is negligible, positive for some distributors and
negative for others. 105 This is not obvious and perhaps a bit surprising, as one might
expect the costs of holding the tapes of the additional movies taken under the FLF to
force rental stores to drop titles by rival distributors. However, the empirical evidence
suggests that the advantageous FLF terms generate savings which the stores use to
purchase additional titles from competing distributors. 106 Second, the article finds that the
market coverage effect is substantial. 107 The bundling aspect of the contract induces
stores to carry more movies by an FLF distributor than they would otherwise. The effect
is bigger for relatively “weak” distributors as stores carry many of the stronger
100

Id. and Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Welfare Effects, supra note 15, at 468.

101

Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Video Rental Industry, supra note 15, at 690.

102

Id. at 697–712 gives details about the model and its estimation. The article also analyzes the
optimality of the distributors’ decisions to offer FLF contracts and finds that, for all but one distributor,
their real-world decisions are profit-maximizing. Id. at 716-718. Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Welfare Effects,
supra note 15, at 491–96 discusses the welfare implications of using FLF contracts.
103

Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Welfare Effects, supra note 15, at 470–71.

104

We focus on the impact on consumer surplus because it is the quantity relevant for antitrust analysis
under U.S. law. However, the effect on total welfare can be negative if the profit losses to a distributor are
larger than the gains to rental stores and consumers. This can happen if the distributors that do not offer
FLFs in the real world offered FLFs in a counterfactual scenario. In such a case, the losses from lower
upfront tape prices may outweigh the gains from selling more titles. Id. at 496.
105

Id. at 493–95.

106

Id. at 495.

107

Id. at 493.

distributors’ titles even without an FLF. 108 The negligible leverage effect and the strong
market coverage effect expand the assortment of titles, which increases consumer
surplus. 109
Third, the analysis also finds that there is a positive efficiency effect, which is
driven by the fact that lower upfront per-tape prices paid by stores ameliorate the double
marginalization problem. 110 The impact of this efficiency effect is particularly large for
titles that a store would have taken on a linear pricing (as opposed to RS) contract in the
absence of a FLF contract. 111 Furthermore, the efficiency effect under a FLF, which
forces a store to buy all of a distributor’s titles, is much larger than what a RS contract
can achieve, because stores purchase the most popular titles on linear pricing contracts to
avoid sharing the revenue. 112 The increased holdings of inventories induced by FLFs
improve the availability of products, which further increases consumer surplus. 113
A more detailed look at the FLF contract reveals the different channels through
which its terms affect consumer welfare. 114 The bundling aspect of the contract is the
main factor driving the market coverage effect. By forcing a store to forego taking a title
on a linear pricing contract, bundling also strengthens the efficiency effect. The lower
upfront price, the revenue-sharing terms, and the minimum purchase requirement also
induce firms to buy larger inventories. Finally, the bundling term strengthens the leverage
effect, while the lower upfront price and revenue sharing weaken it.
Aside from the contract terms, there are a few other factors that determine the
overall competitive effect of FLFs. First, movie distributors introduced the FLF contract
to augment existing pricing options available to rental stores rather than to replace them.
As long as linear prices remain the same, this likely benefits rental stores and final
consumers. 115 Furthermore, linear prices can “discipline” the terms of the FLF contract,
108

Indeed, it is these relatively weak distributors that benefit from offering FLF contracts. The stronger
movie distributors do not benefit and do not offer FLFs in the real world. See Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Video
Rental Industry, supra note 15, at 716.
109

The effect on consumer surplus is nevertheless constrained by the fact that rental stores are
predicted to carry the most popular titles even without FLF contracts. Thus, the additional movies that
stores take as a result of the FLF contract tend to cater to smaller audiences with idiosyncratic preferences,
which contributes only marginally to the estimate of overall consumer surplus. Ho, Ho & Mortimer,
Welfare Effects, supra note 15, at 496.
110

Id. at 480 and 495. Double marginalization occurs when an upstream firm sells inputs to a
downstream firm with a markup and the downstream firm charges final consumers a markup as well. This
is suboptimal for the upstream firm, because the downstream firm purchases fewer inputs compared to
what a vertically integrated firm would choose.
111

This is true because the drop in the upfront price is much larger under linear pricing than under RS.

112

Id. at 495.

113

Id. at 496. The authors assume that retailers do not re-optimize their rental prices when they adopt a
FLF contract. This assumption rules out impacts on consumer surplus through the retail price channel. Id. at
492 and note 24.
114

Id. at 472.

115
Of course, it is also possible that distributors simultaneously introduce a FLF and raise linear prices
to force rental stores to accept the FLF contract. Such a strategy can have anticompetitive effects. A similar
situation is analyzed by Greenlee, Reitman, and Sibley, supra note 45.

because stores can choose linear pricing if they are not satisfied with the FLF terms.116
Second, one of the factors driving the negligible leverage effect is the low cost of holding
inventory. The authors explain that a store effectively faces no capacity constraints as it
can display titles spine-forwards or put additional tapes in a storage room. 117 If this were
not so, the cost of storage would be higher, possibly giving rise to a leverage effect that
could harm consumers. Lastly, the lack of anticompetitive effect, and the fact that nondominant distributors offer FLFs, reinforces the idea that such contracts are less likely to
harm competition when used by weaker, rather than dominant, players.
C. OCEAN SHIPPING
Ocean shipping differs from all other industries considered in this article by the fact that
it enjoys partial exemption from antitrust laws. In particular, ocean carriers are allowed to
participate in legal cartels, called “conferences,” and to engage in price and quantity fixing. 118
The impact of the conferences’ preferred form of pricing, dual-rate loyalty contracts, is analyzed
by Pedro Marin and Richard Sicotte. 119 Under this form of conditional pricing, a cartel offers

its customers a lower rate for shipping services as long as they do not use the services of
non-cartel carriers. If customers do not satisfy the exclusivity requirement, they must pay
the higher, non-contract, rate. 120 The use of dual-rate contracts was the focus of a
protracted legal and legislative battle that lasted from the late 1950s to the early 1960s.
Proponents of the contracts argued that such contracts allowed carriers to provide stable
rates and regular shipping services of high quality. Opponents, on the other hand, claimed
the main purpose of the contracts was to deter entry and augment cartel members’ market
power. 121
The authors identify seven court actions and legislative developments that
affected the likelihood of the dual rate contracts remaining legal. If the purpose of the
contracts was to prevent entry and raise rates without providing a substantial benefit to
customers, any event that calls into question the legality of dual-rate contracts should
harm the financial prospects of cartel members and improve them for customers (i.e.
exporting firms). This in turn should be reflected in these firms’ stock returns. The
authors conduct an event study and confirm that the stock indexes of ocean shippers and
net exporting industries moved in opposite directions during the seven selected
periods. 122 This leads them to conclude that loyalty contracts enhanced market power but

116

Ho, Ho & Mortimer, Video Rental Industry, supra note 15, at 691.

117

Id. at 696.

118

Pedro L. Marin & Richard Sicotte, Exclusive Contracts and Market Power: Evidence from Ocean
Shipping, 51 J. INDUS. ECON. 193 (2013), at 196. Ocean shipping benefits from antitrust exemptions not
only in the United States but in European and other countries as well. Id. at note 3.
119

Id. at 193 and 197.

120

In some cases, customers that break the contract must pay even larger damages. Id. at 197.

121

Id.

122
Id. at 205–08. The authors focus on net exporting industries because they surmise that a decrease in
rates brought about by a ban on dual-rate contracts should benefit exporting firms but harm importing
firms, thus benefiting the industry on net. Id. at 202.

did not lead to efficiencies that were passed on to customers. 123 Even though these results
may not currently apply to the ocean shipping industry, as the legal framework has been
amended since the 1960s, they provide evidence of the potential negative effect of
conditional pricing on competition in an industry that enjoys some protection from
antitrust laws.
D. SMARTPHONES AND VIDEO GAMES
A distinctive feature of the mobile telecommunications and video games
industries is the presence of network effects. 124 This characteristic encourages rivals to
compete for larger customer bases. The competition for customers can be a motivating
factor in firms’ decisions to use conditional pricing.
1. Smartphones
Michael Sinkinson provides an inquiry into the competitive effects of exclusive
contracts in the telecommunications industry. 125 The focus of his study is on the
agreement between AT&T and Apple for the exclusivity of the first-generation iPhone,
which attracted a lot of attention when it was announced in 2007. Opponents of the deal
were concerned that it would lead to higher prices and limited choice for consumers,
while proponents claimed that it would encourage wireless carriers to innovate. 126
Sinkinson builds a model in which exclusivity allows a carrier to differentiate the
handset-network bundles it offers consumers not only through the quality of wireless
service but also through product variety. 127 This additional differentiation may allow a
carrier to charge a higher markup. Furthermore, if prices are strategic complements, the
higher price on the differentiated bundle leads to higher prices on all other bundles in
equilibrium. 128 This effect is known as “softening of price competition.” If demand for
handsets is less sensitive to price than demand for wireless service, softened price
competition for wireless service can increase a carrier’s profits to such an extent that it
can compensate the handset manufacturer for the foregone opportunity to sell to other
wireless carriers. 129
123
The authors conduct a similar analysis with net importing industries, whose stock indexes should
move in the same direction as those of the ocean shippers. It provides weaker support for the hypothesis
that loyalty contracts are used for exclusionary purposes. The authors speculate that a possible reason for
this is that the largest firms in net importing industries drive movements in the industry indexes and are
also large exporters who might benefit from abolishing dual-rate contracts. Id. at 210.
124

See, e.g., JEAN TIROLE, THE THEORY OF INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION 404-409 (1988). Positive
network externalities, or network effects, exist when a good or service becomes more valuable as more
people use it.
125

Sinkinson, supra note 17, at 1.

126

Id. at 2–3.

127

Id. at 2-4 and 6-7. His model builds on the model developed in Patrick Rey & Joseph Stiglitz, The
Role of Exclusive Territories in Producers’ Competition, 26 RAND J. ECON. 431 (1995).
128

In game theory, players’ actions (usually choice of price or quantity) are strategic complements if
an increase by one player leads the other players to increase their strategic variable as well.
129

Sinkinson, supra note 17, at 3–4.

The author estimates a model of consumer demand that accounts for the durable
nature of the good and uses it to simulate counterfactual scenarios and measure the
effects of exclusivity. 130 The first analysis calculates AT&T’s and Verizon’s willingness
to pay for the exclusive contract by comparing each firm’s profits when it obtains
exclusive rights to sell the iPhone to its profits when its rival obtains the exclusive
rights. 131 The outcome is that AT&T has higher willingness to pay only after equilibrium
price adjustments are taken into account, which underscores the importance of modeling
the equilibrium price changes. The results are driven by the fact that AT&T offers lower
quality service than Verizon, and without the iPhone it attracts fewer customers and has
to cut its monthly service fees. 132 At the same time, Verizon’s higher quality network
insulates it from price competition and makes it less dependent on the iPhone in the
counterfactual. Thus, exclusivity raises retail prices and limits consumer choices, which
decreases consumer welfare. Restricting choice by making the iPhone available on only
one carrier harms consumers that switch to AT&T to get the iPhone by forcing them to
pay early termination fees (if they are on two-year contract) and by reducing the quality
of their network (if they switch from a carrier with a higher-quality network). Non-AT&T
consumers who would have purchased the iPhone from their carrier in the absence of the
exclusive deal are also harmed by being constrained to using a less preferred handset. 133
Another counterfactual reveals that manufacturers of Android-based smartphones
would make approximately $1.4 billion less in profits if the iPhone were available on all
carriers. 134 This demonstrates that the exclusive contract between AT&T and Apple
created strong incentives for entry into the smartphone market. The article does not
estimate the net welfare effect of exclusivity because the change in the likelihood of entry
brought about by the exclusive contract cannot be estimated given the available data. 135
However, the counterfactual analyses demonstrate that exclusivity can generate powerful
competing forces by restricting choice and softening price competition, which harms
consumers in a static setting, and by creating entry and innovation incentives, which
benefits consumers in a dynamic setting. 136
2. Video Games and Consoles
Robin Lee conducts another study of the effects of exclusivity in an industry with

130

Id. at 4, and 16–23 (detailing the model and its estimation).

131

Id. at 25.

132

Id. at 25–6.

133

The exclusive dealing arrangement between Apple and AT&T can be a seen as a way to raise
rivals’ costs by foreclosing their access to an important input, which limits their ability to differentiate the
network-handset bundles they offer. However, the existence of substitute handsets and the ability of the
other carriers to differentiate their offerings through exclusive contracts of their own limits the impact of
AT&T’s exclusivity.
134

Id. at 26–27.

135

Id. at note 10.

136

Id. at 29.

network effects, video games. 137 The industry is comprised of console manufacturers,
who produce the platform needed to play games, developers, who create games, and
publishers, who bring games to market. 138 A title can become exclusive to a particular
console as a result of vertical integration, a contract, or a voluntary decision by the
developer. 139 The author focuses specifically on the sixth generation of the industry
during which Sony released PlayStation 2 (PS2), the successor to the highly successful
PlayStation, while Nintendo and Microsoft entered the market a year later with their own
platforms, Game Cube (GC) and Xbox (XB). 140 This setting allows the author to
empirically analyze the possible pro- and anticompetitive effects of exclusivity. In the
context of the video game industry, theory predicts that exclusive arrangements can limit
consumer choice and lead to entry deterrence and rival foreclosure, but also that they can
encourage investment, solve coordination problems, and help entrants gain a foothold in
an established industry. 141
The author estimates a model of dynamic consumer demand for both video games
and consoles, which takes into account the fact that consumers are forward-looking and
platforms are durable goods; and a model of hardware adoption by software developers,
who weigh the costs and benefits of exclusivity and multihoming. 142 Modeling both sides
of the market allows agents to react to past and future actions of other agents, which is an
important feature of consumer and firm behavior. Based on these models, the author
analyzes the set of market outcomes that would have been obtained in the absence of
exclusive arrangements. The counterfactuals indicate that a ban on exclusives benefits the
incumbent firm at the expense of entrants, while also increasing consumer surplus. 143
Hardware and software sales increase by 7 percent and 58 percent, respectively, both
driven by higher PS2 and lower GC and XB sales of consoles and titles. Consumer
welfare increases by $1.5 billion.
Two facts are driving the counterfactual results. First, in the real world GC and
XB have a higher-quality stock of exclusive titles than PS2. 144 As a result, PS2 benefits
more by gaining access to its rivals’ exclusive titles than by retaining exclusivity over its
137

Lee, supra note 16, at 2960.

138

Id. at 2965.

139
Video games created by a vertically integrated entity are called “first-party” titles, while those
produced by independent developers are called “third-party” titles. In some cases, the console manufacturer
and the developer sign a contract that makes a title exclusive to the particular console in exchange for
financing. In other cases, the developer voluntarily makes the title exclusive if the “porting” costs of
making the title compatible with other platforms (“multihoming”) exceed the benefits of reaching a wider
audience. Id.
140

Id. at 2966. Over that year Sony sold 5 million PS2 consoles.

141

Id. at 2961.

142

Id. at 2969–83 (detailing the model and its estimation).

143

Id. at 2992–93 and tbl.8. We focus on the results from the counterfactual in which all titles are free
to re-optimize the set of consoles to support. In addition, Lee considers two other counterfactuals as well:
one in which PS2 loses its exclusive titles while GC and XB keep theirs; and another one in which all titles
are forced to be compatible with all consoles. In all three counterfactuals, banning exclusives increases
consumer welfare.
144

Id. at 2993.

own. Second, as the incumbent, PS2 has a larger installed base that attracts developers
who want to reach a wider audience. 145 As almost all hit titles become available for PS2
following the ban on exclusives, the incentive to purchase competing consoles
disappears. The two factors together lead to the large increase in sales of PS2 consoles
and titles at the expense of GC and XB. The same mechanisms also drive the gains in
consumer surplus. PS2 owners get access to a much wider range of hit titles, while most
consumers who own multiple platforms can play their preferred games on PS2 without
the need to purchase additional consoles. 146
The telecommunications and video game industries illustrate how firms can use
exclusivity to differentiate themselves and expand their customer base. In particular,
exclusive arrangements can lead to higher prices and limited choice, while also creating
entry incentives and helping entrants compete against an incumbent. Evaluating the
impact of such conduct is particularly challenging, as it requires weighing short-term
harm against possible long-term benefits to consumers.
V. CONCLUSION
The reviewed empirical articles demonstrate the range of competitive effects that
CPPs can have. Full-line forcing contracts are estimated to have a positive effect on
consumer welfare in the video rental industry. In the confections industry, all-units
discounts can have exclusionary effects, but they also motivate the downstream firm to
exert more effort, and may benefit consumers through better availability and variety of
products. Exclusive dealing can similarly foreclose rivals in the beer industry, but only in
rural areas where there are presumably fewer available distributors. Despite the presence
of foreclosure, this conduct has a very small negative impact on consumer welfare and is
likely to have an important efficiency-inducing motivation. The impact of exclusivity is
more difficult to evaluate in the video game and smartphone industries, because it leads
to short-run consumer harm while simultaneously creating entry incentives that can have
beneficial effects in the long run. Finally, loyalty contracts can have anticompetitive
effects as suggested by the case of ocean shipping.
The empirical work reveals not only the variety of possible effects, but the variety
of CPPs as well: AUDs, FLFs, dual-rate contracts, and various exclusive arrangements
are a small sample of all contracts used in the real world. A closer look at the contractual
terms shows that the various aspects of these contracts may have different potential to
induce anticompetitive effects. In the confections industry, for instance, an unconditional
rebate cannot profitably exclude Hershey. However, once quantity or facing requirements
are included, an AUD can lead to foreclosure and be profitable for Mars. Furthermore, a
quantity threshold may provide a more flexible way to influence the amount of effort
145
146

Id.

The counterfactual analysis is “partial,” which means that the quality and set of products are kept
fixed, and that platform manufacturers are not strategic. Modeling all these decisions is computationally
infeasible, but the author conducts robustness checks in which he varies the price of consoles, the quality of
first-party titles, and the magnitude of the porting costs. The results indicate that the prohibition of
exclusives is still detrimental to entrants and beneficial to consumers, although consumer welfare gains are
substantially diminished in some cases. Id. at 2994–95.

exerted by the retailer. In the video rental industry, the lower upfront price, revenue
sharing format, and minimum purchase requirement of the FLF induce rental stores to
purchase larger inventories, increasing product availability and consumer welfare. The
bundling aspect of the contract also benefits consumers by strengthening the market
coverage and efficiency effects, but has the potential to make stores drop competing
distributors’ titles and thus lead to foreclosure.
The reason why the FLF used in the video rental industry has no leverage (or
foreclosure) effect is that rental stores face very low costs of holding additional tapes.
Similarly, Mars can partially exclude Hershey because vending machines have only a
limited number of slots. The reviewed articles reveal other common features of the
markets that influence whether CPPs have a negative effect on competition. For example,
the studies of the confections, beer, and video rental industries confirm that conditional
pricing is of greater concern if it is exercised by a dominant firm. In particular, the
contracts used by Mars and Anheuser-Busch show potential to exclude rivals, while the
ones used by relatively weak movie distributors do not. The existence of many substitute
products is another characteristic that reduces the likelihood of consumer harm. The
study of exclusive beer distribution in Northern California shows that foreclosed brands
add little to consumer utility if they are included in consumers’ choice sets. Lastly, the
beer industry articles suggest that distribution foreclosure is more difficult when there are
many active distributors in the market, as is the case in metropolitan areas.
This list of market characteristics that affect the likelihood and degree to which
CPPs can have anticompetitive effects is by no means exhaustive. Rather, it points out
only some of the market features that should be considered when evaluating the impact of
conditional pricing. The multiplicity of relevant market characteristics and the wide
variety of contractual terms make reaching general conclusions about the competitive
effects of CPPs very challenging, and suggest that analyses of the effects of CPPs should
take into account the specifics of each case.

