                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              MACROECONOMICS AND HOUSEHOLD HETEROGENEITY

                                        Dirk Krueger
                                        Kurt Mitman
                                        Fabrizio Perri

                                      Working Paper 22319
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22319


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2016




We wish to thank the editors John Taylor and Harald Uhlig, discussants of the chapter, Carlos
Thomas, Claudio Michelacci, Tony Smith and Chris Tonetti, as well as seminar participants at
several conferences and institutions for many useful comments and Simone Civale for
outstanding research assistance. Krueger gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF
under grants SES 1123547 and SES 1326781. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Dirk Krueger, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomics and Household Heterogeneity
Dirk Krueger, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri
NBER Working Paper No. 22319
June 2016
JEL No. E21,E32,J65

                                         ABSTRACT

The goal of this chapter is to study how, and by how much, household income, wealth, and
preference heterogeneity amplify and propagate a macroeconomic shock. We focus on the U.S.
Great Recession of 2007-2009 and proceed in two steps. First, using data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics, we document the patterns of household income, consumption and wealth
inequality before and during the Great Recession. We then investigate how households in
different segments of the wealth distribution were affected by income declines, and how they
changed their expenditures differentially during the aggregate downturn. Motivated by this
evidence, we study several variants of a standard heterogeneous household model with aggregate
shocks and an endogenous cross-sectional wealth distribution. Our key finding is that wealth
inequality can significantly amplify the impact of an aggregate shock, and it does so if the
distribution features a sufficiently large fraction of households with very little net worth that
sharply increase their saving (i.e. they are not hand-to mouth) as the recession hits. We document
that both these features are observed in the PSID. We also investigate the role that social
insurance policies, such as unemployment insurance, play in shaping the cross-sectional income
and wealth distribution, and through it, the dynamics of business cycles.


Dirk Krueger                                       Fabrizio Perri
Economics Department                               Research Department
University of Pennsylvania                         Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
160 McNeil Building                                90 Hennepin Avenue
3718 Locust Walk                                   Minneapolis MN 55401
Philadelphia, PA 19104                             fperri@umn.edu
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu

Kurt Mitman
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
kurt.mitman@iies.su.se
JEL Classifications: E21, E32, J65




1     Introduction

How important is household heterogeneity for the amplification and propagation of
macroeconomic shocks? The objective of this chapter is to give a quantitative answer
to a narrower version of this broad question.1 Specifically, we narrow the focus of this
question along two dimensions. First, we mainly focus on a specific macroeconomic
event, namely the U.S. Great Recession of 2007-2009.2 Second, we focus on specific di-
mensions of household heterogeneity, namely that in earnings, wealth, and household
preferences, and their associated correlations with, and consequences for, the cross-
sectional inequality in disposable income and consumption expenditures.3
The Great Recession was the largest negative macroeconomic downturn the United
States has experienced since World War II. The initial decline in economic activity was
deep and had an impact on all macroeconomic aggregates—notably private aggregate
consumption and employment—and the recovery has been slow. Is the cross-sectional
distribution of wealth an important determinant of the dynamics of the initial down-
turn and the ensuing recovery? That is, does household heterogeneity matter in terms
of aggregate economic activity (as measured by output and labor input), its composi-
tion between consumption and investment, and, eventually, the cross-sectional distri-
bution of consumption and welfare?
To address these questions empirically, we make use of recent waves of the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics (PSID), which provides household-level panel data on earnings,
income, consumption expenditures, and wealth for the United States. To answer these
questions theoretically and quantitatively, we then study various versions of the canoni-
cal real business cycle model with aggregate technology shocks and ex-ante household
heterogeneity in preferences and ex-post household income heterogeneity induced by

1   In this chapter we focus on household heterogeneity. A sizeable literature has investigated similar
    questions in models with firm heterogeneity. Representative contributions from this literature in-
    clude Khan and Thomas (2008) and Bachmann, Caballero and Engel (2013). We abstract from firm
    heterogeneity in this chapter, but note that the methodological challenges in computing these classes
    of models are very similar to the ones encountered here.
2   By focusing on a business cycle event, and macroeconomic fluctuations more generally, we also ab-
    stract from the interaction between income or wealth inequality and aggregate income growth rates
    in the long run. See Kuznets (1955), Benabou (2002) or Piketty (2014) for important contributions to
    this large literature.
3   Excellent earlier surveys of different aspects of the literature on macroeconomics with microeco-
    nomic heterogeneity are contained in Deaton (1992), Attanasio (1999), Krusell and Smith (2006),
    Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2009), Attanasio and Weber (2010), Guvenen (2011) as well as
    Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2015).


                                                    2
the realization of uninsurable idiosyncratic labor earnings shocks, as in Krusell and
Smith (1998). In the model, a recession is associated with lower aggregate wages and
higher unemployment (i.e. a larger share of households with low labor income). The
main empirical and model-based focus of the chapter is on the dynamics of macroe-
conomic variables—specifically, aggregate consumption, investment, and output—in
response to such a business cycle shock. Specifically, we investigate the conditions
under which the degree of wealth inequality plays a quantitatively important role for
shaping this response. We also study how a stylized unemployment insurance pro-
gram shapes the cross-sectional distribution of wealth and welfare, and how it affects
the recovery of the aggregate economy after a Great Recession-like event.
We proceed in four steps: First, we make use of the PSID earnings, income, consump-
tion and wealth data to document three sets of facts related to cross-sectional inequal-
ity. We summarize the key features of the joint distribution of income, wealth, and
consumption prior to the Great Recession (i.e. for the year 2006). Next, we show
how this joint distribution changed during the recession—over the 2006–2010 period—
exploiting the panel dimension of the data to investigate how individual households
fared and adjusted their consumption-savings behavior. The purpose of this empirical
analysis is two fold. First, we believe the facts are interesting in their own right, as
they characterize the distributional consequences of the Great Recession. Second, the
facts serve as important moments for the evaluation of the different versions of the
quantitative heterogeneous household model we study next.
In the second step, then, we construct, calibrate, and compute various versions of the
canonical Krusell-Smith (1998) model and study its cross-sectional and dynamic prop-
erties. We first revisit the well-known finding that idiosyncratic unemployment risk
and incomplete financial markets alone are insufficient to generate a sufficiently dis-
persed model-based cross-sectional wealth distribution. The problem is two fold: in
the model, the very wealthy are not nearly wealthy enough, and the poor hold far too
much wealth relative to the data. We argue that it is the discrepancy at bottom of the
distribution that implies that the model generates an aggregate consumption response
to a negative technology shock that is essentially identical to the response in a repre-
sentative agent model.
We then study extensions of the model in which preference heterogeneity, idiosyncratic
labor productivity risk conditional on employment, and a stylized life-cycle structure
interact with the presence of unemployment insurance and social security to deliver
a wealth distribution that is consistent with the data. In these economies, the decline
in aggregate consumption is substantially larger than in the representative agent econ-
omy, by approximately 0.5 percentage points. This finding is primarily due to these
economies now being populated by more wealth-poor households whose consump-
tion responds strongly to the aggregate shock, both for those households that expe-
rience a transition from employment to unemployment, but also for households that
have not lost their job, but understand they are facing a potentially long-lasting reces-


                                           3
sion with elevated unemployment risk. We also stress that data and theory show that
these wealth poor households do not behave as hand-to-mouth consumers, but are the
group that reduces their expenditure rates strongly as their recession hits. This behav-
ior implies that our benchmark model has quantitatively very different implications
relative to a model where a large fraction of households is exogenously assumed to be
hand-to-mouth consumers.
The more severe consumption declines in economies with larger wealth inequality im-
ply a smaller collapse in investment, and thus a faster recovery from the recession,
although this last effect is quantitatively small.
In light of the previous finding that larger wealth inequality—specifically, the impor-
tance of a large fraction of wealth-poor households—is an important contributor to
an aggregate consumption collapse in the Great Recession, in the third step we deter-
mine whether public unemployment insurance is important for the dynamics of the
economy in response to an aggregate shock. The answer to this question depends cru-
cially on whether the distribution of household wealth has had a chance to respond to
changes in the policy. In the short run, an unexpected cut or expiration of unemploy-
ment insurance benefits induces a significantly larger negative consumption response.
These dynamics are explained by forward-looking households responding to lower
public insurance by increasing their precautionary savings. The increased investment
generates a medium-run boost to output, at the cost of a slow recovery of consumption.
In the long run, the new ergodic distribution of wealth features fewer people with zero
or few assets. The consumption dynamics in response to a negative technology shock
under this rightward shift in the wealth distribution are less severe than in they are in
response to an unexpected shock, but still larger than in the economy with high unem-
ployment insurance. Thus, for a given wealth distribution a cut in social insurance will
result in a larger aggregate consumption drop. However, since social insurance poli-
cies themselves shape the ergodic distribution of wealth, and especially influence the
share of households with zero or close to zero net worth, the aggregate consumption
response across different economies is partially offset by these distributional shifts.
In the models considered thus far, the wealth distribution has had a potentially large
effect on the division of aggregate output between consumption and investment, but
not on output itself. In the final step, we therefore study an economy with a New
Keynesian flavor—we introduce an aggregate demand externality that makes output
partially demand-determined and generates an endogenous feedback effect from pri-
vate consumption to total factor productivity, and thus output. In this model, social
insurance policies might not only be beneficial in providing public insurance, but can
also serve a potentially positive role for stabilizing aggregate output. We find that the
output decline with an unemployment insurance benefit replacement rate of 50% to a
Great Recession-like shock is 1 percentage point smaller on impact than in an economy
with a replacement rate of 10%.



                                           4
This work is part of a broader research agenda (and aims to partially synthesize it)
that seeks to explore the importance of micro heterogeneity in general, and household
income and wealth heterogeneity in particular, for classic macroeconomic questions
(such as the impact of a particular aggregate shock) that have traditionally been an-
swered within the representative agent paradigm (i.e. goes from micro to macro). It
also builds upon, and contributes to, the related but distinct literature that studies the
distributional consequences of macroeconomic shocks (i.e. goes from macro to micro).
The chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 documents key dimensions of hetero-
geneity among U.S. households, prior to and during the Great Recession. Sections 3
and 4 present our benchmark real business cycle model with household heterogene-
ity and discuss how we calibrate it. Section 5 studies to what extent the benchmark
model is consistent with the cross-sectional facts presented in section 2, and section
6 studies how the aggregate consumption response to a large shock depends on the
cross-sectional wealth distribution. In section 7 we augment the model with demand
externalities in order to investigate the importance of cross-sectional wealth hetero-
geneity for the dynamics of aggregate output. Section 8 concludes, and the appendix
contains details about the construction of the empirical facts, about the theory, and the
computational algorithm used.



2     The Great Recession: a Heterogeneous Household Per-
      spective

In this section we present the basic facts about the cross-sectional distribution of earn-
ings, income, consumption, and wealth before and during the Great Recession. The
main data set we employ is the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID) for the years
2004, 2006, 2008, and 2010. This data set has two key advantages for the purpose
of this study. First, it contains information about household earnings, income, a broad
and comprehensive measure of consumption expenditures, and net worth for a sample
of households representative of the U.S. population. Second, it has a panel dimension
so we can, in the same data set, both measure the key dimensions of cross-sectional
household heterogeneity as well as investigate how different groups in the income
and wealth distribution changed their consumption expenditure patterns during the
Great Recession.4
The purpose of this empirical section is to provide simple and direct evidence for the
importance of household heterogeneity for macroeconomic questions. It complements

4   Empirical analyses of the joint wealth, income, and consumption distribution using the same panel
    data set are also contained in Fisher, Johnson, Smeeding and Thompson (2015) for the United States,
    and in Krueger and Perri (2011) for Italy. See Skinner (1987), Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008)
    and Smith and Tonetti (2014) for an alternative method for constructing an income-consumption
    panel using both the PSID and the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE).


                                                    5
the large empirical literature documenting inequality trends in income, consumption
and wealth in the United Sates and around the world.5 If, as we will document, there
are significant differences in behavior (for example, along the consumption and sav-
ings margin) across different groups of the earnings and wealth distribution during the
Great Recession, then keeping track of the cross-sectional earnings and wealth distribu-
tion and understanding their dynamics is likely important for analyzing the unfolding
of the Great Recession from a macroeconomic and distributional perspective.


2.1    Aggregates

We start our analysis by comparing the evolution of basic U.S. macroeconomic aggre-
gates from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) with the aggregates for
the same variables obtained from the PSID. In Figure 1 we compare trends in aggre-
gate per capita disposable income (panel A) and per capita consumption expenditures
(panel B) from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) with the corresponding series
obtained by aggregating household level in the PSID, for the years 2004 through 2010,
the last available data point for the PSID.6
The main conclusion we draw from figure 1 is that both the NIPA and the PSID paint
the same qualitative picture of the U.S. macroeconomy over the period 2004-2010. Both
disposable income and consumption expenditures experience a slowdown, which is
somewhat more pronounced in the PSID. Furthermore, PSID consumption expendi-
ture data also display a much weaker aggregate recovery than what is observed in the
NIPA data.7


2.2    Inequality before the Great Recession

In this section we document basic inequality facts in the United States for the year 2006,
just before the Great Recession hit the economy. Since the Great Recession greatly af-
fected households in the labor market, and our models below focus on labor earnings
risk, we restrict attention to households with heads between ages 25 and 60, which
in 2006 represents slightly less than 80% of total households in the PSID. Table 1 re-
ports statistics that characterize, for this group of households, the distributions of
four key variables: earnings, disposable income, consumption expenditures, and net
worth. Our definition of earnings captures income sources that we will model as ex-

5   For representative contributions, see e.g. Piketty and Saez, 2003, Krueger and Perri, 2006, Krueger,
    Perri, Pistaferri and Violante 2010, Piketty, 2014, Aguiar and Bils, 2015, Atkinson and Bourguignon,
    2015 and Kuhn and Rios-Rull, 2015.
6   In section A.1 in the data appendix, we describe in detail how these series are constructed.
7   As Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2010) document, this discrepancy between macro data and aggre-
    gated micro data is also observed in previous recoveries from U.S. recessions.


                                                    6
                      Figure 1: The Great Recession in the NIPA and in the PSID Data

                                              A. Per Capita Disposable Income
                          1.18
                          1.16
                          1.14
                          1.12                                BEA
                           1.1                                                  PSID
           2004=1




                          1.08
                          1.06
                          1.04
                          1.02
                            1
                          0.98
                                       2004                  2006                 2008                 2010
                                                                       Period

                            Note: In 2004 the per capita level in PSID is $21364, in BEA is $24120

                                       B. Per Capita Consumption Expenditures
                          1.18
                          1.16
                          1.14
                          1.12
            2004‐2005=1




                           1.1
                                                                                BEA
                          1.08
                          1.06
                          1.04
                          1.02                                                                PSID
                            1
                          0.98
                                     2004‐2005            2006‐2007             2008‐2009            2010‐2011
                                                                       Period
                Note: In 2004‐05 the per capita level in PSID is $15084, in BEA is $18705




ogenous to household choices; they include all sources of labor income plus transfers
(but not including unemployment benefits) minus tax liabilities.8 Disposable income
includes earnings plus unemployment benefits, plus income from capital, including
rental equivalent income of the main residence of the household. Consumption ex-
penditures include all expenditure categories reported by the PSID i.e. cars and other
vehicles purchases, food at home and away, clothing and apparel, housing including
rent and imputed rental services for owners, household equipment, utilities and trans-
portation expenses. Finally, net worth includes the value of the sums of households’

8   During the Great Recession, transfers and taxes have played an important role in affecting household
    income dynamics. See, for example, Perri and Steinberg, 2012.




                                                                         7
   assets minus liabilities.9

                          Table 1: Means and Marginal Distributions in 2006

                                                                     Variable
                     Earn.               Disp Y                       Cons. Exp                       Net Worth
Source               PSID              PSID       CPS                 PSID       CE                  PSID   SCF(2007)
Mean (2006$)        54,349            64,834    60,032               42,787   47,563               324,951     538,265
% Share by:
Q1                      3.6               4.5          4.4               5.6          6.5               -0.9          -0.2
Q2                      9.9               9.9         10.5              10.7         11.4                0.8           1.2
Q3                     15.3              15.3         15.9              15.6         16.4                4.4           4.6
Q4                     22.7              22.8         23.1              22.4         23.3               13.0          11.9
Q5                     48.5              47.5         46.0              45.6         42.4               82.7          82.5

90 − 95                10.9              10.8         10.1              10.3         10.2               13.7          11.1
95 − 99                13.1              12.8         12.8              11.3         11.1               22.8          25.3
Top 1%                  8.0               8.0          7.2               8.2          5.1               30.9          33.5
Gini                   0.43              0.42        0.40              0.40         0.36               0.77           0.78
Sample Size           6,232             6,232      54,518             6,232        4,908              6,232          2,910


   Table 1 reports, for each variable (earnings, disposable income, consumption expen-
   ditures, and net worth), the cross-sectional average (in 2006 dollars), as well as the
   share of the total value held by each of the five quintiles of the corresponding distri-
   bution. At the bottom of the table, we also report the share held by the households
   between the 90th and 95th percentile, between the 95th and 99th percentile, by those
   in the top 1% of the respective distribution, and the Gini index of concentration. All
   statistics are computed from PSID data, but for disposable income, consumption ex-
   penditures, and net worth we also compare the statistics from the PSID with the same
   statistics computed from alternative micro data sets. In particular, for disposable in-
   come we use households from the 2006 Current Population Survey (CPS), which is a
   much larger sample often used to compute income inequality statistics. For consump-
   tion expenditures we use household data from the 2006 Consumer Expenditure Survey
   (CE). Finally, for net worth we use the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which
   is the most commonly used dataset for studying the U.S. wealth distribution.

   9   Assets include the value of farms and of any businesses owned by the household, the value of check-
       ing/saving accounts, the value of stocks or bonds owned, the value of primary residence and of other
       real estate assets, the value of vehicles, and the value of individual retirement accounts. Liabilities in-
       clude any form of debt including mortgages on the primary residence or on other real estate, vehicle
       debt, student loans, medical debt, and credit card debt.


                                                         8
The table reveals features that are typical of distributions of resources across house-
holds in developed economies. Earnings and disposable income are both quite concen-
trated, with the bottom quintiles of the respective distributions holding shares smaller
than 5% (3.6% and 4.5% to be exact) and the top quantiles holding almost 50% (48.5%
and 47.5% to be precise). The distributions of earnings and disposable income look
quite similar, since for the households in our sample (ages 25 to 60), capital income is a
fairly small share of total disposable income (constituting only roughly 1/6 of dispos-
able income).10 Note also that the distributions of disposable income in PSID and CPS
look quite similar.11
The table also shows that consumption expenditures are less unequally distributed
than earnings or income, with the bottom quintile accounting for a bigger fraction
(5.6%) of total expenditures. The distributions of consumption expenditures in the
PSID and the CE are also fairly comparable.
Finally, net worth is by far the most concentrated variable, especially at the top of
the distribution. The bottom 40% of households hold essentially no net worth at all,
whereas the top quintile owns 83% of all wealth, and the top 10% holds around 70% of
total wealth. Comparing the last two columns demonstrates that, although the average
level of wealth in the PSID is substantially lower than in the SCF, the distribution of
wealth across the five quintiles lines up quite closely between the two data sets, sug-
gesting that the potential underreporting or mismeasurement of wealth in the PSID
might affect the overall amount of wealth measured in this data set, but not the cross-
sectional distribution too significantly, which is remarkably comparable to that in the
SCF.
Although the marginal distributions of earnings, income, and wealth are interesting in
their own right, the more relevant object for our purposes is the joint distribution of
wealth, earnings, disposable income, and consumption expenditures.12 To document
the salient features of this joint distribution, we divide the households in our 2006 PSID
sample into net worth quintiles, and then for each net worth quintile we report, in Table
2, key differences across these wealth groups.
The table shows two important features of the data. The first is that, perhaps not sur-

10   Recall that our definition of earnings is net of taxes and it already includes government transfers.
11   The CPS income has a lower mean because it does not include the rental equivalent from the main
     residence. Notice also that both distributions are much less concentrated at the top than are income
     distributions computed ny using tax returns, as in Piketty and Saez, (2008). Two reasons account for
     this difference. The first is that Piketty-Saez focus on income measures before taxes and transfers,
     whereas here we restrict attention to after-tax and after-transfers income, which is less concentrated;
     the second is that they focus on tax units, which is a unit of a analysis different than households. See
     Burkhauser et al. (2012) for more on this distinction.
12   The class of models we will construct below will have wealth – in addition to current earnings – as
     the crucial state variable, and thus we stress the correlation of net worth with earnings, income, and
     especially consumption here.



                                                      9
          Table 2: PSID Households across the net worth distribution: 2006

              % Share of:                       % Expend. Rate                 Head’s
 NW Q       Earn.    Disp Y    Expend.          Earn.  Disp Y           Age      Edu (yrs)
 Q1           9.8        8.7       11.3          95.1     90.0          39.2            12
 Q2          12.9       11.2       12.4          79.3     76.4          40.3            12
 Q3          18.0       16.7       16.8          77.5     69.8          42.3          12.4
 Q4          22.3       22.1       22.4          82.3     69.6          46.2          12.7
 Q5          37.0       41.2       37.2          83.0     62.5          48.8          13.9
             Correlation with net worth
             0.26       0.42       0.20


prisingly, households with higher net worth tend to have higher earnings and higher
disposable incomes. The last row of the table shows more precisely the extent to which
earnings and disposable income are positively correlated with net worth. One simple
explanation for this is that wealthier households tend to be older and more educated,
as confirmed by the last two columns of the table. The second observation is that con-
sumption expenditures are also positively correlated with net worth, but less so than
the two income variables. The reason is that, as can be seen in the last two columns
of the table, the lower is net worth, the higher the consumption rate. We measure the
consumption rate by computing total consumption expenditures for a specific wealth
quintile and then dividing it by total earnings (or disposable income) in that wealth
quintile. The differences in the consumption rates across wealth quintiles are econom-
ically significant: for example, between the bottom and the top wealth quintile, the
differences in the consumption rates range between 20% and 30%.
Another way to look at the same issue is to notice that the households in the bottom
two net worth quintiles, basically hold no wealth (see table 1 above), but are responsi-
ble for 11.3% + 12.4% = 23.7% of total consumption expenditures (see table 2), making
this group quantitatively consequential for aggregate consumption dynamics. The dif-
ferences across groups delineated by wealth constitute prima facie evidence that the
shape of the wealth distribution could matter for the aggregate consumption response
to macroeconomic shocks such as the ones responsible for the Great Recession.
In the next subsection, we will go beyond household heterogeneity at a given point
in time and empirically evaluate how, during the Great Recession, expenditures and
saving behavior changed differentially for households across the wealth distribution.




                                          10
2.3     The Great Recession across the Income and Wealth Distributions

In table 3 we report for all households, and for households in each of the five quintiles
of the net worth distribution, the changes (both percentages and absolute) in net worth,
percentage changes in disposable income, and consumption expenditures and change
in consumption expenditure rates (in percentage points).13 For each variable we first
establish a benchmark (the growth rate in a non-recession period) by reporting the
change or growth rate for the 2004-2006 period, and then report the same variable for
the 2006-2010 period, which covers the whole recession. To make the two measures
comparable, all changes are annualized.14


        Table 3: Annualized Changes in Selected Variables across PSID Net Worth

                             Net Worth∗              Disp Y (%)          Cons. Exp.(%)          Exp. Rate (pp)
                         (1)         (2)              (3)      (4)          (5)     (6)            (7)      (8)
                      04-06       06-10            04-06    06-10        04-06   06-10          04-06    06-10
       All       15.7 44.6    -3.0 -10               4.1      1.2          5.6     -1.3           0.9      -1.6
     NW Q
       Q1        NA 12.9           NA 6.6             7.4        6.7        7.1        0.6        -0.2       -4.2
       Q2       121.9 19.5         24.4 3.7           6.7        4.1        7.2          2         0.3       -1.3
       Q3        32.9 23.6          4.3 3.3           5.1        1.8          9          0         2.3       -1.1
       Q4        17.0 34.7          1.7 3.8           5.0        1.7        5.9       -1.5         0.5         -2
       Q5       11.6 132.2          -4.9 -68.4        1.8       -1.2        2.7       -3.5         0.5       -1.4

∗The first figure is the percentage change (growth rate), the second is the change in 000’s of dollars

Table 3 reveals a number of interesting facts that we want to highlight. From the first
four columns of the table, notice that all groups of households experienced increases
in net worth between 2004 and 2006, likely mainly because of the rapid growth in
asset prices (stock prices and especially real estate prices) during this period, with
low-wealth households experiencing the strongest percentage growth in wealth (but
of course starting from very low levels: see again table 1). Turning to disposable in-
come (second variable of table 3), we observe that households originally at the bottom
of the wealth distribution experience faster disposable income growth than those in
the highest wealth quintile (7.4% v/s 1.8%). This is most likely due to mean reversion

13   To construct these changes, we keep the identity of the households fixed; for example, to compute
     the 2004-2006 change in net worth for Q1 of the net worth distribution, we select all households in
     the bottom quintile of the wealth distribution in 2004, compute their average net worth (or income or
     consumption) in 2004 and 2006, and then calculate the percent difference between the two averages.
     For the consumption expenditure rates, we report percentage point differences.
14   Table A2 in the data appendix reports bootstrap standard errors for all figures in table 3. In tables
     A3 and A4, we separately report the changes for the 2006-2008 and 2008-2010 time periods.


                                                    11
in income: low-wealth households are also low-income households, and on average
low income households experience faster income growth. Finally, expenditure growth
roughly tracked the growth of income variables between 2004 and 2006, and as a re-
sult the consumption rates of each group remained roughly constant, perhaps with
the exception of households initially in the middle quintile who experienced strong
consumption expenditure growth, and thus their consumption rate displays a marked
rise.
Now we turn to the dynamics in income, consumption, and wealth during the Great
Recession. The columns labeled 06-10 display very significant changes in the dynamics
of household income, consumption, and net worth throughout the wealth distribution,
relative to the previous time period. Growth in net worth slowed down substantially
for all households (it actually turned negative, from +15.6% to -3%) and most signifi-
cantly so at the top of the wealth distribution. In fact, for households initially (that is, in
2006) in the top wealth quintile net worth fell 4.9% per year over the period 2006-2010.
Income growth also slowed down, although not uniformly across the wealth distribu-
tion. Table 3 shows that the slowdown in income growth is modest at the bottom of
the wealth distribution (from 7.4% to 6.7%), whereas the middle and top quintiles ex-
perience a more substantial slowdown. For example, the fourth wealth quintile went
from annual disposable income growth of 5% between 2004 and 2006 to a growth rate
of 1.7% between 2006 and 2010.
Most important for our purposes is the change in consumption expenditures at dif-
ferent points in the wealth distribution, especially in relation to the magnitude of the
associated earnings and disposable income changes (as evident in the movement of the
consumption rates over time). The first fact we want to highlight is that, overall, PSID
households cut the growth in expenditures from +5.6% to -1.3%. Although the decline
in the growth rate of consumption expenditures is sizeable across all quintiles, the fall
is most pronounced at the bottom of the wealth distribution. To highlight the starkest
differences across the wealth distribution, focus on the difference between the top and
the bottom wealth quintile. Between 2004 and 2006 the households in both the bottom
and the top wealth quintiles display small (less than 0.5 percentage point) changes
in the consumption rate (out of disposable income). By contrast, between 2006 and
2010, households at the bottom end of the 2006 wealth distribution reduced the change
in their consumption rate by 4 percentage points (from -0.2% to -4.2%), whereas the
top quintile’s change in the consumption rate declined by only 1.9 percentage points
(from 0.5% to -1.4%). In other words, during the Great Recession saving rates increased
across the wealth distribution, but more strongly so at the bottom of the wealth distri-
bution.15
To investigate the sources of the decline in expenditures growth across the wealth dis-
tribution in greater detail, we now decompose the difference in consumption growth

15   Heathcote and Perri (2015) also document a similar pattern using data from the Consumer Expendi-
     ture Survey.


                                                 12
across the two periods as follows:

                                                        ρit − ρit−1 ρit−1 − ρit−2
                  gc,it − gc,it−1 ' gy,it − gy,it−1 +              −              ,                (1)
                                                            ρit−1       ρit−2
                  C −C
where gc,it = itC it−1 is the growth rate of consumption expenditure for group i (for
                     it−1
example households in the first wealth quintile in period t − 1) across periods t and
t − 1, gy,it is the same measure for disposable income, and ρit = CYit is the consumption
                                                                    it
rate out of disposable income for group i in period t.
The first column of table 4 reports the changes in consumption growth rates for all
households and for each group, i.e. the term gc,it − gc,it−1 , which is the difference be-
tween column (6) and column (5) in table 3. The second and third columns of the
table report the two right-hand-side terms from equation (1): the first term, labeled
as change in disposable income growth Y, and the second term, labeled as change in
the growth of the expenditure rate C/Y. Intuitively, if we see group i’s consumption
growth slowing down, it could be because its income growth is slowing down, i.e.
gy,it − gy,it−1 falls, or because, keeping income growth fixed, the growth in its expen-
                     ρ −ρ
diture rates, i.e. itρ it−1 , falls. The numbers in parentheses in the table represent the
                         it−1
relative contribution of each term.16
Overall table 4 portrays a clear message. Households in the PSID reduce their expen-
diture growth significantly more than the slowdown in their disposable income alone
would suggest (-6.9% v/s 2.9%). This implies that, overall, households increase their
saving rate. However, the increase in saving rates, although present among all wealth
quintiles, is quantitatively most potent for the first quintile, i.e. for those households
entering the recession with the lowest net worth. Indeed, for these households the in-
crease in the saving rate accounts for over two-thirds (69%) of the consumption growth
decline, whereas for the other wealth groups consumption expenditure growth fell be-
cause both income growth slowed down and saving increased. We believe this fact is
especially interesting, since it suggests that the decline in consumption at the bottom of
the wealth distribution is not simply explained by standard hand-to-mouth behavior
(i.e. the decline in income of these households), but primarily by changes in consump-
tion behavior though a decline in expenditure rates.
Having documented the salient features of the joint wealth, income, and consumption
distribution in the United States prior to the Great Recession and their dynamics over
the course of the downturn, we now proceed with a quantitative evaluation of how
well standard economic theory, in the form of the canonical heterogeneous household
business cycle model with uninsurable idiosyncratic earnings risk, can explain these
patterns. We then use this model as a quantitative laboratory to assess the importance
of cross-sectional household heterogeneity for aggregate business cycles.

16   The relative contributions do not sum to 1 as the decomposition in 1 is not exact, and it excludes
     terms that involve the product of growth rates.



                                                  13
                     Table 4: Decomposing changes in expenditure growth

                Change C Growth            Change Y Growth            Change C/Y Growth
                                                                        ρit −ρit−1       ρit−1 −ρit−2
                         gc,t − gc,t−1             gy,t − gy,t−1           ρit−1     −       ρit−2

       All                        -6.9               -2.9 (42%)                          -3.8 (55%)
     NW Q
       Q1                         -6.5               -0.7 (11%)                          -4.5 (69%)
       Q2                         -5.2               -2.6 (50%)                          -2.3 (44%)
       Q3                         -9.0               -3.3 (37%)                          -5.2 (58%)
       Q4                         -7.4               -3.3 (48%)                          -3.8 (55%)
       Q5                         -6.2               -3.0 (42%)                          -3.4 (55%)


3      A Canonical Business Cycle Model with Household Het-
       erogeneity

In this section we lay out the benchmark model on which this chapter is built. The
model is a slightly modified version of the original Krusell and Smith (1998) real busi-
ness cycle model with household wealth and preference heterogeneity17 and shares
many features of the model recently studied by Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka and White
(2015).


3.1     Technology

In the spirit of real business cycle theory, aggregate shocks take the form of productiv-
ity shocks to the aggregate production function

                                            Y = Z ∗ F (K, N ).                                          (2)

Total factor productivity Z ∗ in turn is given by

                                               Z ∗ = ZC ω ,                                             (3)

where the exogenous part of technology Z follows a first-order Markov process with
transition matrix π ( Z 0 | Z ). Here C is aggregate consumption and the parameter ω ≥
0 measures the importance of an aggregate demand externality. In the benchmark
model, we consider the case of ω = 0 in which case total factor productivity is ex-
ogenous and determined by the stochastic process for Z (and in which case we do not

17   Krusell and Smith (1998) in turn build on stationary versions of the model with household wealth
     heterogeneity, and thus on Bewley (1986), Imrohoroglu (1989), Huggett (1993, 1997) and Aiyagari
     (1994). See Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1992, 1997) for important early partial equilibrium treatments.


                                                    14
distinguish between Z and Z ∗ ). In section 7 we consider a situation with ω > 0. In
that case current TFP and thus output is partially determined dy demand (aggregate
consumption).
In either case, in order to aid the interpretation of the results, we will mainly focus on
a situation in which the exogenous technology Z can take two values, Z ∈ Zl , Zh . We
then interpret Zl as a severe recession and Zh as normal economic times.
Finally, we assume that capital depreciates at a constant rate δ ∈ [0, 1].


3.2     Household Demographics, Endowments and Preferences

3.2.1   Demographics and the Life Cycle

In each period a measure 1 of potentially infinitely lived households populates the
economy. Households are either young, working households (denoted by W) and par-
ticipate in the labor market or are old and retired (and denoted by R). We denote a
household’s age by j ∈ {W, R}. Young households have a constant probability of retir-
ing 1 − θ ∈ [0, 1], and old households have a constant probability of dying 1 − ν ∈ [0, 1].
Deceased households are replaced by new young households. Given these assump-
tions, the distribution of the population across the two ages is given by


                                          1−θ
                              ΠW =
                                    (1 − θ ) + (1 − ν )
                                         1−ν
                              ΠR =                     .
                                   (1 − θ ) + (1 − ν )

This simple structure captures the life cycle of households and thus their life-cycle
savings behavior in a parsimonious way.


3.2.2   Preferences

Households do not value leisure, but have preferences defined over stochastic con-
sumption streams, determined by a period utility function u(c) with the standard con-
cavity and differentiability properties, as well as a time discount factor β that may be
heterogeneous across households (but is fixed over time for a given household). De-
note by B the finite set of possible time discount factors.


3.2.3   Endowments

Since households do not value leisure in the utility function, young households supply
their entire time endowment (which is normalized to 1) to the market. However, they

                                            15
face idiosyncratic labor productivity and thus earnings risk. This earnings risk comes
from two sources. First, households are subject to unemployment risk. We denote by
s ∈ S = {u, e} the current employment status of a household, with s = u indicat-
ing unemployment. Employment follows a first-order Markov chain with transitions
π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ) that depend on the aggregate state of the world. This permits the depen-
dence of unemployment-employment transitions on the state of the aggregate business
cycle.
In addition, conditional on being employed, a household’s labor productivity y ∈ Y
is stochastic and follows a first order Markov chain; denote by π (y0 |y) > 0 the con-
ditional probability of transiting from state y today to y0 tomorrow, and by Π(y) the
associated (unique) invariant distribution. In the benchmark model we assume that,
conditional on being employed, transitions of labor productivity are independent of
the aggregate state of the world.18
For both idiosyncratic shocks (s, y) we assume a law of large numbers, so that idiosyn-
cratic risk averages out, and only aggregate risk determines the number of agents in
a specific idiosyncratic state (s, y) ∈ S × Y. Furthermore, we assume that the share of
households in a given idiosyncratic employment state s only depends on the current
aggregate state19 Z, and thus denote by Π Z (s) the deterministic fraction of households
with idiosyncratic unemployment state s if the aggregate state of the economy is given
by Z. We denote the cross-sectional distribution over labor productivity by Π(y); by
assumption this distribution does not depend on the aggregate state Z.
Households can save (but not borrow)20 by accumulating (moderately risky) physi-
cal capital21 and have access to perfect annuity markets.22 We denote by a ∈ A the
asset holdings of an individual household and by A the set of all possible asset hold-
ings. Households are born with zero initial wealth, draw their unemployment status
according to Π Z (s) and their initial labor productivity from Π(y). The cross-sectional
population distribution of employment status s, labor productivity y, asset holdings a,
and discount factors β is denoted as Φ and summarizes, together with the aggregate
shock Z, the aggregate state of the economy at any given point in time.
18   Even for the unemployed, the potential labor productivity y evolves in the background and deter-
     mines the productivity upon finding a job, as well as unemployment benefits while being unem-
     ployed, as described below.
19   This assumption imposes consistency restrictions on the transition matrix π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ). By assump-
     tion, the cross-sectional distribution over y is independent of Z to start with.
20   We therefore abstract from uncollateralized household debt, as modeled in Chatterjee et al. (2007)
     and Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt (2007). Herkenhoff (2015) provides an investigation of the impact
     of increased access to consumer credit on the U.S. business cycle.
21   We therefore abstract from household portfolio choice. See Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005)
     for the analysis of portfolio choice in a canonical partial equilibrium model with idiosyncratic risk,
     and Krusell and Smith (1997) and Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2007) for general equilibrium
     treatments.
22                                                                                1
     Thus the capital of the deceased is used to pay an extra return on capital   ν   of the retired survivors.


                                                      16
3.3     Government Policy

3.3.1    Unemployment Insurance

The government implements a balanced budget unemployment insurance system whose
                                                  b(y,Z,Φ)
size is parametrized by a replacement rate ρ = w(Z,Φ)y that gives benefits b as a fraction
of potential earnings wy of a household, with ρ = 0 signifying the absence of public
social insurance against unemployment risk.23 These benefits are paid to households
in the unemployment state s = u and financed by proportional taxes on labor earn-
ings with tax rate τ ( Z, Φ). Taxes are levied on both labor earnings and unemployment
benefits.
Recall that by assumption the number of unemployed Π Z (u) only depends on the
current aggregate state. The budget constraint of the unemployment insurance system
then reads as
                                   "                                                #
Π Z (u) ∑ Π(y)b(y, Z, Φ) = τ ( Z, Φ)       ∑ Π(y) [ΠZ (u)b(y, Z, Φ) + (1 − ΠZ (u)) w(Z, Φ)y]           .
          y                                 y

Exploiting the fact that b(y, Z, Φ) = ρw( Z, Φ)y and that the cross-sectional distribution
over y is identical among the employed and unemployed we can simply write


                          Π Z (u)ρ = τ ( Z, Φ) [Π Z (u)ρ + (1 − Π Z (u))]

and conclude that the tax rate needed to balance the budget satisfies
                                                              
                           Π Z (u)ρ
                                          
                                                     1
   τ ( Z, Φ; ρ) =                            =                 = τ ( Z; ρ) ∈ (0, 1).          (4)
                    1 − Π Z (u) + Π Z (u)ρ      1+
                                                   1 − Π Z (u)
                                                            Π Z (u)ρ

That is, the tax rate τ ( Z; ρ) only depends (positively) on the exogenous policy param-
eter ρ measuring the size of the unemployment system as well as (negatively) on the
                                                   1− Π ( u )
exogenous ratio of employed to unemployed Π (Zu) , which in turn varies over the
                                                      Z
business cycle.


3.3.2    Social Security

The government runs a balanced budget PAYGO system whose size is determined by
a constant payroll tax rate τSS (that applies only to labor earnings). Social security
benefits bSS ( Z, Φ) of retirees are assumed to be independent of past contributions, but
because of fluctuations in the aggregate tax base will vary with the aggregate state

23   Recall that even unemployed households carry with them the idiosyncratic state y even though it
     does not affect their current labor earnings since they are unemployed.


                                                 17
of the economy Z. The budget constraint then determines the relationship between
benefits and the tax rate according to

                                                      "                                                     #
                   bSS ( Z, Φ)Π R = τSS ΠW                ∑ Π(y) (1 − ΠZ (u)) w(Z, Φ)y                          ,
                                                          y

Note that in the absence of unemployment (and with average labor productivity of
working people equal to 1), we have

                                                          bSS ( Z, Φ) Π R
                                                τSS =
                                                           w( Z, Φ) ΠW

In this case the social security tax rate is simply equal to the average replacement rate
bSS ( Z,Φ)                                      ΠR
 w( Z,Φ)
           times the old age dependency ratio Π  W
                                                   .


3.4     Recursive Competitive Equilibrium

As is wellknown, the state space in this economy includes the entire cross-sectional
distribution Φ of individual characteristics,24 ( j, s, y, a, β). Since the dynamic program-
ming problems of young, working age households and retired households differ signif-
icantly from each other (in terms of both individual state variables as well the budget
constraint) it makes notation easier to separate age j ∈ {W, R} from the other state
variables. The dynamic programming problem of retired households then reads as

                                                (                                                                   )
               v R ( a, β; Z, Φ) = max
                                      c,a0 ≥0
                                                    u(c) + νβ       ∑
                                                                    0
                                                                           π ( Z 0 | Z )v R ( a0 , β; Z 0 , Φ0 )
                                                                   Z ∈Z
subject to

                           c + a0 = bSS ( Z, Φ) + (1 + r ( Z, Φ) − δ) a/ν
                              Φ0 = H ( Z, Φ0 , Z 0 )

For working household households, the decision problem is given by



vW (s, y, a, β; Z, Φ) = { max u(c) + β
                            c,a0 ≥0
                                                                   ∑                π ( Z 0 | Z )π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z )π (y0 |y)
                                                        ( Z 0 ,s0 ,y0 )∈( Z,S,Y )

24   In order to make the computation of a recursive competitive equilibrium feasible, we follow Krusell
     and Smith (1998), and many others since, and define and characterize a recursive competitive equi-
     librium with boundedly rational households who use only a small number of moments (and con-
     cretely here, just the mean) of the wealth distribution to forecast future prices. For a discussion of
     the various alternatives in computing equilibria in this class of models, see the January 2010 special
     issue of the Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.


                                                              18
                                         × [θvW (s0 , y0 , a0 , β; Z 0 , Φ0 ) + (1 − θ )v R ( a0 , β; Z 0 , Φ0 )]}

subject to

      c + a0 = (1 − τ ( Z; ρ) − τSS )w( Z, Φ)y [1 − (1 − ρ)1s=u ] + (1 + r ( Z, Φ) − δ) a
          Φ0 = H ( Z, Φ0 , Z 0 ),

where 1s=u is the indicator function that takes the value 1 if the household is unem-
ployed, and thus labor earnings equal unemployment benefits b(y, Z, Φ) = ρw( Z, Φ)y.

Definition 1 A recursive competitive equilibrium is given by value and policy functions of
working and retired households, v j , c j , a0j , pricing functions r, w, and an aggregate law of motion
H such that

     1. Given the pricing functions r, w, the tax rate given in equation (4), and the aggregate law
        of motion H, the value function v solves the household Bellman equation above and c, a0
        are the associated policy functions.

     2. Factor prices are given by

                                 w( Z, Φ) = ZFN (K ( Z, Φ), N ( Z, Φ))
                                  r ( Z, Φ) = ZFK (K ( Z, Φ), N ( Z, Φ)).

     3. Budget balance in the unemployment system: equation (4) is satisfied

     4. Market clearing


                                  N ( Z, Φ) = (1 − Π Z (u))           ∑ yΠ(y)
                                                                     y ∈Y
                                                    Z
                                  K ( Z, Φ) =           adΦ.

     5. The aggregate law of motion H is induced by the exogenous stochastic processes for id-
        iosyncratic and aggregate risk as well as the optimal policy function a0 for assets.25


3.5     A Taxonomy of Different Versions of the Model

Table 5 summarizes the different versions of the model we will study in this chapter, in-
cluding the section of the chapter in which it will appear. We start with a version of the
model in which total factor productivity is exogenous. The only source of propagation
of the aggregate shocks is the capital stock, which is predetermined in the short run

25   We give the explicit statement of the law of motion H in appendix B.


                                                    19
(and thus output is exogenous), but responds in the medium run to technology shocks
and/or reforms of the social insurance system. We study two versions of the model,
the original Krusell-Smith (1998) economy without preference heterogeneity (which
we will alternatively refer to as the KS economy, the low–wealth inequality economy,
or the homogeneous discount factor economy), and a model with permanent discount
factor heterogeneity (which we refer to as the high–wealth inequality economy, the
heterogeneous discount factor economy, or simply the benchmark economy). The lat-
ter economy also features an unemployment insurance system whose size is consistent
with U.S. data. In section 5.1 we discuss the extent to which both versions of this model
match the empirically observed U.S. cross-sectional wealth distribution, and in section
6.1 we trace out the model-implied aggregate consumption, investment, and output
dynamics in response to a Great Recession type shock.


       Table 5: Taxonomy of Different Versions of the Model Used in the Paper

           Name          Discounting                 Techn.   Soc. Ins.   Section
           KS            β = β̄                      ω=0      ρ = 1%      Sec. 6.1
           Het. β        β ∈ [ β̄ − e β̄ + e]        ω=0      ρ = 50%     Sec. 6.1
           Het. β        β ∈ [ β̄ − e β̄ + e]        ω=0      ρ = 10%     Sec. 6.3
           Dem. Ext.     β ∈ [ β̄ − e β̄ + e]        ω>0      ρ = 50%     Sec. 7

In order to assess the interaction of wealth inequality and social insurance policies
for aggregate macro dynamics, in section 6.3 we study a version of the heterogeneous
discount factor economy with smaller unemployment insurance. In section 7 the as-
sumption of exogenous TFP is relaxed, and we present a version of the model in which
TFP and thus output is partially demand-determined. In this version of the model,
household heterogeneity has a potential impact not only on the size of the consump-
tion recession, but also on the magnitude of the output decline, and by stabilizing in-
dividual consumption demand, unemployment insurance may act as a quantitatively
important source of macroeconomic stabilization.



4    Calibration of the Benchmark Economy

In this section we describe how we map our economy to the data. Since we want to
address business cycles and transitions into and out of unemployment, we calibrate
the model to quarterly data.




                                                20
4.1     Technology and Aggregate Productivity Risk

Following Krusell and Smith (1998), we assume that output is produced according to
a Cobb-Douglas production function


                                            Y = ZK α N 1−α .                                         (5)

We set the capital share to α = 36% and assume a depreciation rate of δ = 2.5% per
quarter. For the aggregate technology process, we assume that aggregate productivity
Z can take two values Z ∈ { Zl , Zh }, where we interpret Zl as a potentially severe
recession. The aggregate technology process is assumed to follow a first-order Markov
chain with transitions

                                                                 !
                                                 ρl   1 − ρl
                                      π=                             .
                                               1 − ρh   ρh

The stationary distribution associated with this Markov chain satisfies


                                                   1 − ρh
                                         Πl =
                                                 2 − ρl − ρh
                                                   1 − ρl
                                         Πh    =
                                                 2 − ρl − ρh

With the normalization that E( Z ) = 1, the aggregate productivity process is fully de-
termined by the two persistence parameters ρl , ρh and the dispersion of aggregate pro-
ductivity, as measured by Zl /Zh .
For the calibration of the aggregate productivity process, we think of a Z = Zl realiza-
tion as a severe recession such as the Great Recession or the double-dip recession of the
early 1980s (and a realization of Z = Zh as normal times). In this interpretation of the
model, by choice of the parameters ρl , ρh , Zl /Zh we want the model to be consistent
with the fraction of time periods spent in severe recessions, their expected length con-
ditional on slipping into one, and the decline in GDP per capita associated with severe
recessions.26
For this we note that with the productivity process set out above, the fraction of time
spent in severe recessions is Πl , whereas, conditional on falling into one, the expected
length is given by

                                                                           1
                        ELl = 1 × 1 − ρl + 2 × ρl (1 − ρl ) + ... =             .                    (6)
                                                                         1 − ρl
26   This chapter shares the focus on rare but large economic crises with the body of work on rare disas-
     ters, see e.g. Rietz (1988), Barro (2006) and Gourio (2013).


                                                   21
This suggests the following calibration strategy:

     1. Choose ρl to match the average length of a severe recession ELl . This is a measure
        of the persistence of recessions.

     2. Given ρl , choose ρh to match the fraction of time the economy is in a severe reces-
        sion, Πl .

     3. Choose ZZl to match the decline in GDP per capita in severe recessions relative to
                 h
        normal times.

In order to measure the empirical counterparts of these entities in the data, we need an
operational definition of a severe recession. This definition could be based on GDP per
capita, total factor productivity, or unemployment rates, given the model assumption
that the aggregate unemployment rate Π Z (yu ) is only a function of the aggregate state
of the economy Z.
We chose the latter and define a severe recession to be one where the unemployment
rate rises above 9% at least for one quarter and determine the length of the recession to
be the period for which the unemployment rate remains above 7%. Using this defini-
tion over period from 1948.I to 2014.III we identify two severe recession periods: from
1980.II to 1986.II and from 2009.I to 2013.III. This delivers a frequency of severe reces-
sions of Πl = 16.48% with expected length of 22 quarters. The average unemployment
rate in these severe recession periods is u( Zl ) = 8.39% and the average unemployment
rate in normal times is u( Zh ) = 5.33%. The implied Markov transition matrix that de-
livers this frequency and length of severe recessions has ρl = 0.9545 and ρh = 0.9910
and thus is given by

                                                                   !
                                                0.9545 0.0455
                                      π=                               .
                                                0.0090 0.9910

For the ratio ZZl we target a value of YYl = 0.9298, that is, a drop in GDP per capita of
                 h                       h
7% relative to normal times.27 With average labor productivity if employed equal to 1
and if unemployed equal to zero, unemployment rates in normal and recession states
equal to u( Zl ) = 8.39% and u( Zh ) = 5.33%, and a capital share α = 0.36, this requires
Zl
Z = 0.9614, which, together with the normalization
 h

                                           Zl Πl + Zh Πh = 1.

determines the levels of Z as Zl = 0.9676, Zh = 1.0064. Note that because of endoge-
nous dynamics of the capital stock which falls significantly during the recession, the
27   This is the decline in real GDP per capita during the two recession periods we identified, after GDP
     per capita is linearly detrended. The exact magnitude of the real GDP per capita decline is not crucial
     for our results, but it is important that severe recessions are deeper and (especially) more persistent
     than regular business cycle fluctuations.


                                                     22
dispersion in total factor productivity is smaller than what would be needed to engi-
neer a drop in output by 7% only through TFP and increased unemployment (which is
the drop in output on impact, given that the capital stock is predetermined).28


4.2      Idiosyncratic Earnings Risk

Recall that households face two types of idiosyncratic risks: countercyclical unemploy-
ment risk described by the transition matrices π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ) and, conditional on being
employed, acyclical earnings risk determined by π (y0 |y). We describe both compo-
nents in turn.


4.2.1    Unemployment Risk

Idiosyncratic unemployment risk is completely determined by the four 2 by 2 tran-
sition matrices π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ) summarizing the probabilities of transiting in and out of
unemployment for each ( Z, Z 0 ) combination. Thus π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ) has the form

                                              "
                                                   Z,Z   0        Z,Z   0   #
                                                  πu,u           πu,e
                                                   Z,Z   0        Z,Z   0       ,           (7)
                                                  πe,u           πe,e

                         Z,Z    0
where, for example, πe,u     is the probability that an unemployed individual finds a
job between one period and the next, when aggregate productivity transits from Z to
Z 0 . Evidently each row of this matrix has to sum to 1. Note that, in addition, the
restriction that the aggregate unemployment rate only depends on the aggregate state
of the economy imposes one additional restriction on each of these 2 by 2 matrices, of
the form

                                     Z,Z  0           Z,Z                       0
                         Π Z0 (u) = πu,u × Π Z (u) + πe,u × (1 − Π Z (u)).                  (8)

Thus, conditional on targeted unemployment rates in recessions and expansions, (Πl , Πh )
                                               Z,Z 0    Z,Z 0
this equation imposes a joint restriction on (πu,u   , πe,u   ) for each ( Z, Z 0 ) pair. With

28   In the short run,
                                                                                    0.64
                                                                 1 − u( Zl )
                                                             
                                          Yl  Z
                                             = l
                                          Yh  Zh                 1 − u ( Zh )
     so that in order to generate a drop in output of 7% in the short run would require

                                         Zl      0.9298
                                            =         0.64 = 0.9496.
                                         Zh     0.9161
                                                    0.9467

     .




                                                             23
these restrictions, the idiosyncratic transition matrices are uniquely pinned down by
  Z,Z 0
πu,e    , i.e. the job-finding rates.29
We compute the job finding rate for a quarter as follows. We consider an individual
that starts the quarter as unemployed and compute the probability that at the end of the
quarter that individual is still unemployed. The possible ways that this can happen are
(denoting as f 1 , f 2 , f 3 and as s1 , s2 , s3 the job-finding and job-separation rates in months
1,2, and 3 of the quarter):


     1. Does not find a job in month 1, 2, or 3, with probability (1 − f 1 ) × (1 − f 2 ) × (1 −
        f 3 ).

     2. Finds a job in month 1, loses it in month 2, does not find in month 3, with proba-
        bility f 1 × s2 × (1 − f 3 ).

     3. Finds a job in month 1, keeps it in month 2, loses it in month 3, with probability
        f 1 × (1 − s2 ) × s3 .

     4. Finds a job in month 2, loses it in month 3, with probability (1 − f 1 ) × f 2 × s3 .


Thus the probability that someone that was unemployed at the beginning of the quar-
ter is not unemployed at the end of the quarter is:



     f = 1 − ((1 − f 1 )(1 − f 2 )(1 − f 3 ) + f 1 s2 (1 − f 3 ) + f 1 (1 − s2 )s3 + (1 − f 1 ) f 2 s3 )    (9)

We follow Shimer (2005) to measure the job-finding and separation rates from CPS dat
as averages for periods corresponding to specific Z, Z 0 transitions.a30 Equating these
       Z,Z 0
with πu,e    delivers the following employment-unemployment transition matrices:


     • Aggregate economy is and remains in a recession: Z = Zl .Z 0 = Zl
                                                     !
                                     0.3378 0.6622
                                                                                                           (10)
                                     0.0606 0.9394
                                                       Z,Z   0
29   One could alternatively use job-separation rates πe,u .
30   Let ut = unemployment rate and uSt = short-term unemployment rate (people who are unemployed
     this month, but were not unemployed last month). Then we can define the monthly job-finding
     rate as 1 − (ut+1 − uSt+1 )/ut and the separation rate as uSt+1 /(1 − ut ). The series we use from the
     CPS are the unemployment level (UNEMPLOY), the short-term unemployment level (UNEMPLT5)
     and civilian employment (CE16OV). There was a change in CPS coding starting in February 1994
     (inclusive), so UNEMPLT5 in every month starting with February 1994 is replaced by UEMPL5 ×
     1.1549.




                                                      24
     • Aggregate economy is and remains in normal times: Z = Zh .Z 0 = Zh
                                                    !
                                     0.1890 0.8110
                                                                                                        (11)
                                     0.0457 0.9543

     • Aggregate economy slips into recession: Z = Zh .Z 0 = Zl
                                                     !
                                       0.3382 0.6618
                                                                                                        (12)
                                       0.0696 0.9304

     • Aggregate economy emerges from recession: Z = Zl .Z 0 = Zh
                                                   !
                                    0.2220 0.7780
                                                                                                        (13)
                                    0.0378 0.9622

We observe that the resulting matrices make intuitive sense. One possible (but quanti-
tatively minor) exception is that the job-finding rate is higher if the economy remains
in normal times than if it emerges from a recession. On the other hand, the lower
job-finding rate is consistent with the experience during the Great Recession per our
definition, as job-finding rates did not recover until well into 2014, whereas by our
calibration the recession ended in 2013.


4.2.2    Earnings Risk Conditional on Employment

In addition to unemployment risk, we add to the model earnings risk, conditional
on being employed. This allows us to obtain a more empirically plausible earnings
distribution and makes earnings risk a more potent determinant of wealth dispersion
(and thus reduces the importance of preference heterogeneity for this purpose). We
assume that, conditional on being employed, log-labor earnings of households follow
a process with both transitory and persistent shocks.31 The process is specified as
                                           log(y0 ) = p + e                                             (14)
                                                 p0 = φp + η                                            (15)
with persistence φ and innovations of the persistent and transitory shocks (η, e), re-
spectively.32 The associated variances of the shocks are denoted by (ση2 , σe2 ), and there-
fore the entire process is characterized by the parameters (φ, ση2 , σe2 ). We estimate

31   The formulation of log-earnings or log-income as a stochastic process with transitory and persistent
     (or fully permanent) shocks follows a large empirical literature in labor economics. See Meghir and
     Pistaferri (2004), Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004a), Guvenen (2009) and the many references
     discussed therein.
32   Note that we assume that the variance and persistence of this process are independent of the state
     of the business cycle. Earnings risk in the data is countercyclical, as stressed by Storesletten, Telmer
     and Yaron (2004b, 2007) and Guvenen, Ozkan and Song (2014); in our benchmark model earning risk
     is also countercyclical but only because of countercyclical unemployment risk.


                                                     25
this process for household labor earnings after taxes (after first removing age, edu-
cation and time effects) from annual PSID data and find estimates of φ, ση2 , σe2 equal to
0.9695, 0.0384 and 0.0522 respectively. 33 Next we translate these estimates into a quar-
terly persistence and variance.34 We then use the Rouwenhorst procedure to discretize
the persistent part of the process into a seven-state Markov chain.35 The iid shock only
enters the computation of the expectation on the right-hand side of the Euler equa-
tion.36 We approximate the integral calculating the expectation using a Gauss-Hermite
quadrature scheme with three nodes. Thus, we effectively approximate the continuous
state space process by a discrete Markov chain with 7 × 3 = 21 states.37


4.3     Preferences and the Life Cycle

In the benchmark economy we assume that the period utility function over current
consumption is given by a constant relative risk aversion utility function with param-
eter σ = 1. As described above, we study two versions of the model: the original
Krusell-Smith (1998) economy in which households have identical time discount fac-
tors, and a model in which households, as in Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka and White
(2015) have permanently different time discount factors (and die with positive proba-
bility, in order to ensure a bounded wealth distribution).
For the model with preference heterogeneity, we assume that households at the be-
ginning of their life draw their permanent discount factor β from a uniform distribu-

33   For the exact definition of the labor earnings after taxes, sample selection criteria and estimation
     method, please see appendix A.
34   In order to ensure that quarterly log-earnings has the same persistence as annual log-earnings, we
                                                                  1
     choose the persistence of the quarterly AR(1) to be φ = φ̂ 4 . For the variances, we note that the
     main purpose of the earnings shocks is to help deliver a plausible cross-sectional distribution of
     labor income. Therefore we aim to maintain the same cross-sectional distribution of earnings at the
     quarterly frequency as we estimate at the annual frequency. Choosing a quarterly transitory variance
     equal to its annual counterpart and
                                                  ση2      σ̂η2
                                                       =
                                                1 − φ2   1 − φ̂2
     achieves this goal.
35   See Kopecky and Suen (2010) for a detailed description and evaluation of the Rouwenhorst method.
36   This is because we use cash at hand and the persistent income state as state variables in the individual
     household dynamic programming problem.
37   For the computation of the distributional statistics we simulate a panel of households. In this simu-
     lation, realizations of the persistent shock remain on the grid, but the transitory shock is drawn from
     a normal distribution and thus is not restricted to fall on one of the quadrature points.




                                                     26
tion38 with support [ β̄ − e, β̄ + e] and choose ( β̄, e) so that the model wealth distri-
bution (with an unemployment insurance replacement rate of 50%) has a Gini coeffi-
cient for the working age population of 77% as in the data and a quarterly wealth-to-
output ratio of 10.26 (as in Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka and White, 2015) This requires
( β̄ = 0.9864, e = 0.0053) and implies that annual time discount factors in this economy
range from β = 0.9265 to β = 0.9672. Finally, households in the working stage of their
life cycle face a constant probability 1 − θ of retiring, and retired households face a
constant probability 1 − ν of dying. For our quarterly model we choose 1 − θ = 1/160,
implying an expected work life of 40 years, and 1 − ν = 1/60, with a resulting retire-
ment phase of 15 years in expectation.
For the original Krusell-Smith economy, we choose the common quarterly discount
factor β = 0.9899 to ensure that the capital-output ratio in this economy (again at
quarterly frequency) equals that in the heterogeneous β economy. In this economy
households neither retire nor die.


4.4     Government Unemployment Insurance Policy

The size of the social insurance (or unemployment insurance, more concretely) system
is determined by the replacement rate ρ. For the benchmark economy that we assume
ρ = 50% (see, e.g. Gruber (1994)). We will also consider a lower value of ρ = 10%,
motivated by the observation that many households qualifying for unemployment in-
surance benefits fail to claim them (see, e.g. Blank and Card, 1991 or Chodorow-Reich
and Karabarbounis, 2016).
Finally, the payroll tax rate for social security is set to τSS = 15.3%. This choice implies
an average (over the business cycle) and empirically plausible replacement rate of the
social security system of approximately 40%. In the KS economy, in order to avoid
numerical problems with zero consumption, we include a minimal unemployment in-
surance system with a replacement rate of ρ = 1%.

38   In practice we discretize this distribution and assume that each household draws one of five possi-
     ble β’s with equal probability; thus B = { β 1 , ...β 5 } and Π( β) = 1/5. We also experimented with
     stochastic β’s as in Krusell and Smith (1998) but found that the formulation we adopt enhances the
     model’s ability to generate sufficiently many wealth-poor households. The results for the stochastic
     β economy generally lie in between those obtained in the original Krusell and Smith (1998) econ-
     omy documented in detail in this chapter, and the results obtained in the model with permanent β
     heterogeneity, also documented in great detail below.




                                                   27
5       Evaluating the Benchmark Economy

5.1     The Joint Distribution of Earnings, Income, Wealth and Con-
        sumption in the Benchmark Economy

In this section we evaluate the extent to which our benchmark model is consistent
with the main empirical facts characterizing the joint distribution of wealth, income,
and consumption expenditures, as well as the changes in this distribution when the
economy is subjected to a large negative aggregate shock.


5.1.1    Wealth Inequality in the Benchmark Economy

We have argued in the introduction that a model-implied cross-sectional wealth dis-
tribution that is consistent with the empirically observed concentration, and especially
with a share of wealth of the bottom 40% of close to zero, is crucial when using the
model as a laboratory for studying aggregate fluctuations. We now document that our
benchmark economy has this property, whereas an economy akin to the one studied in
Krusell and Smith’s (1998) original work in which wealth inequality is entirely driven
by idiosyncratic unemployment shocks and incomplete financial markets does not.39


                      Table 6: Net Worth Distributions: Data v/s Models

                                              Data                        Models
               % Share held by:        PSID, 06    SCF, 07             Bench     KS
               Q1                            -0.9         -0.2            0.3       6.9
               Q2                             0.8          1.2            1.2      11.7
               Q3                             4.4          4.6            4.7      16.0
               Q4                            13.0         11.9           16.0      22.3
               Q5                            82.7         82.5           77.8      43.0

               90 − 95                       13.7         11.1           17.9      10.5
               95 − 99                       22.8         25.3           26.0      11.8
               T1%                           30.9         33.5           14.2       5.0

               Gini                          0.77         0.78           0.77      0.35

39   We retain our calibration of idiosyncratic unemployment risk, and thus the cross-sectional wealth
     distribution in our version of the Krusell-Smith economy differs from their original numbers, but
     not in a magnitude substantial enough to change any of the conclusions below.




                                                    28
Table 6 reports selected statics for the wealth distribution, those computed from the
data (PSID and SCF) as well as those from two model economies, the original Krusell-
Smith (1998) economy and our benchmark model with idiosyncratic income risk, in-
complete markets, a rudimentary life cycle structure, unemployment insurance, and
heterogeneous discount factors.40 As indicated in the calibration section, through ap-
propriate choice of the time discount factor(s), both economies have the same average
(over the business cycle) capital-output ratio, and the benchmark economy displays a
wealth Gini coefficient in line with the micro data from the PSID. All other moments
of the empirical cross-sectional wealth distribution were not targeted in the calibration
of the models.
From the table we note that, overall, the benchmark model fits the empirical wealth
distribution in the data quite well (albeit not perfectly), especially at the bottom of the
distribution. Specifically, it captures the fact that households constituting the bottom
two quintiles of the wealth distribution hardly have any wealth, but also that the top
wealth quintile holds approximately 80% of all net worth in the U.S. economy. We
also acknowledge that the benchmark model makes the wealth upper middle class
(quintile 4 and also the bottom part of quintile 5) somewhat too wealthy. For exam-
ple, households between the 90th and 99th percentiles of the net worth distribution
account for about 36% of wealth in the data, but 44% in the model. Most problemati-
cally, the benchmark model still misses the wealth concentration at the very top of the
distribution significantly. In the data the top 1% wealth holders account for over 30%
of overall net worth in the economy, whereas the corresponding figure in the model
is only 14.0%. A histogram of the model-implied wealth distribution can be found in
figure 10 below.41
Finally, table 6 reproduces the well-known—since Krusell and Smith (1998)—result
that transitory unemployment risk and incomplete financial markets alone are inca-
pable of generating sufficient wealth dispersion. The problem relative to the data
is two-fold: households at the top of the wealth distribution are not nearly wealthy
enough, and, as we will argue, more importantly for the results to follow, households
at the bottom of the distribution hold significantly too much wealth in the model. Rel-
ative to SCF or PSID micro data, in the model the bottom 40% own about 19% of net
worth in the economy, whereas in the data that share is approximately 0. As a sum-
mary measure of wealth inequality, whereas the wealth Gini in the data is well above
0.7, the original Krusell-Smith model delivers a number of only 0.35.

40   Recall that in the data, we restrict attention to working-age households. Consequently, when we
     report cross-sectional statistics from the benchmark model (which includes a retirement phase), we
     restrict attention to households in the working stages of their life.
41   Although this is clearly a shortcoming, note that in this range of wealth levels, the consumption
     function is essentially linear (as we will display below) and thus mechanically reshuffling wealth be-
     tween the top 1% and the top 20% through top 1% would not alter aggregate consumption responses
     to shocks significantly. We will return to this point in section 6.2.




                                                    29
In the next section we now decompose which model elements in the benchmark econ-
omy are responsible for generating a more realistic wealth distribution than in the orig-
inal Krusell-Smith economy. We then turn to an evaluation of the benchmark model’s
success in reproducing the empirical joint distribution of earnings, income, consump-
tion, and wealth in the data.


5.2     Inspecting the Mechanism I: What Accounts for Wealth Inequal-
        ity in the Benchmark Economy?

A substantial literature, recently surveyed in De Nardi (2015), De Nardi, Fella and
Yang (2015) and Benhabib and Bisin (2016), explores alternative mechanisms for gen-
erating the empirically observed high wealth concentration in the data.42 These mech-
anisms include the use of very large but transient income realizations that the PSID
misses out on (as in Castaneda, Diaz-Gimenez and Rios-Rull, 2003, Kindermann and
Krueger (2015) or Brueggemann and Yoo, 2015), large uninsured or only partially in-
sured medical expenditure shocks in old age (see e.g. De Nardi, French and Jones, 2010,
or Ameriks, Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro and Tonetti, 2015), the intergenerational transmis-
sion of wealth through accidental and intended bequests (as e.g. in De Nardi, 2004), the
interaction between wealth accumulation and entrepreneurship (see Quadrini, 2000,
Cagetti and De Nardi 2006 and Buera 2009) or idiosyncratic shocks to investment op-
portunities or its returns, as in Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011).
In our benchmark model, we instead follow the sizeable literature that has explored
the potential importance of empirically realistic, highly persistent earnings risk (con-
ditional on employment) as well as preference heterogeneity in general, and cross-
sectional dispersion in patience specifically, for generating an empirically plausible
cross-sectional wealth distribution. Household heterogeneity in time discount factors
had already been explored by the original Krusell and Smith (1998) paper, and has
been further analyzed by Hendricks (2007) and Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka and White
(2015); the latter also incorporates a stochastic earnings process in the analysis.
In the previous section, we argued that preference heterogeneity, when combined with
idiosyncratic unemployment and earnings shocks as well as rudimentary life cycle
elements43 and social insurance policies, generates a wealth distribution that resembles
the data in 2006 well, both at the bottom and at the top of the distribution. In table 7

42   Gabaix, Lasry, Lions and Moll (2014) evaluate whether the existing theories discussed there are con-
     sistent with the secular rise in the share of income and wealth accruing to the top 1% of households,
     and argue that only theories embedding "superstar" phenomena are capable of reproducing the facts
     at the very top of these distributions.
43   The literature on quantitative studies of the cross-sectional wealth distributions in general equilib-
     rium life-cycle economies with uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk starts with Huggett (1996).




                                                    30
we now show precisely which model elements are responsible for this finding.44


Table 7: Net Worth Distributions and Consumption Decline: Different Versions of the
Model

                                                Models*
     % Share:                KS      +σ(y)       +Ret.  +σ( β)             +UI
     Q1                     6.9       0.7           0.7          0.7        0.3
     Q2                    11.7       2.2           2.4          2.0        1.2
     Q3                    16.0       6.1           6.7          5.3        4.7
     Q4                    22.3       17.8         19.0         15.9       16.0
     Q5                    43.0       73.3         71.1         76.1       77.8

     90 − 95               10.5        17.5        17.1         17.5       17.9
     95 − 99               11.8        23.7        22.6         25.4       26.0
     T1%                    5.0        11.2        10.7         13.9       14.2

     Wealth Gini          0.350       0.699       0.703       0.745      0.767
*The KS model only has unemployment risk and incomplete markets, and thus the first column repeats
information from table 6. The column +σ (y) adds idiosyncratic earnings shocks (transitory and per-
manent) while employed. The column +Ret. adds the basic life cycle structure (positive probability of
retirement and positive probability of death, plus social security in retirement). The column +σ ( β) in-
corporates preference heterogeneity into the model, and finally the column +UI raises the replacement
of the unemployment insurance system from 1% to 50%; the resulting model is therefore the benchmark
model, with results already documented in table 6. In all models, the (mean) discount factor is calibrated
so that all versions have the same capital-output ratio.

The table (which partially repeats information from table 6 to facilitate comparisons
across different model economies) displays the share of net worth held by the five
wealth quintiles, the wealth Gini, and more detailed information about the top of the
net worth distribution, in the data and in a sequence of models, ranging from the orig-
inal Krusell-Smith (1998) economy to our benchmark economy in the last column.
The table contains several important quantitative lessons. First, comparing the first
and the second model columns, we see that the inclusion of highly persistent earnings
risk, in addition to unemployment risk, increases wealth dispersion very significantly,
relative to the economy with only unemployment risk. Consistent with a sizeable lit-
erature estimating stochastic labor earnings or income processes (see e.g. Storeslet-
ten, Telmer and Yaron, 2004a) we find that the persistent component is indeed very
persistent, with an annual autocorrelation (conditional on remaining employed) of

44   Castaneda, Diaz-Gimenez and Rios-Rull (1998) provide a decomposition similar in spirit, but focus
     on the evolution of the cross-sectional income distribution over the cycle.


                                                   31
0.97. Thus, the economy contains a share of households with close to permanently
low earnings, even in the absence of unemployment. These households, located pre-
dominantly in the lowest wealth quintile, have had no opportunity to accumulate sig-
nificant wealth.45 Consequently the share of wealth held by the poorest households
shrinks to fairly close to zero with idiosyncratic income risk, as observed in the data.
At the same time, the top wealth quintile is populated with households with high earn-
ings realizations for whom the risk of a persistent fall in earnings provides motivation
to accumulate substantial wealth. As a result, the wealth Gini doubles in the economy
with earnings risk, relative to the original Krusell-Smith unemployment-only model.
Second, adding a more explicit life-cycle structure does not change the wealth distribu-
tion (of the working-age population) much, but as we will see in the next section, will
imply a more plausible joint wealth-consumption distribution, by adding a life-cycle
savings for retirement motive to the precautionary saving motive. It also somewhat
reduces wealth concentration at the top of the distribution, since earnings risk ceases
with retirement and thus trims the precautionary motive of the wealth-rich.46
Third, as the examination of the very top of the wealth distribution in the first three
columns of table 7 reveals, income risk and life-cycle elements alone are insufficient
to generate the very high wealth concentration observed in the data. This is where
the discount factor heterogeneity in the benchmark model plays a crucial role. It cre-
ates a class of households that are patient and have a high propensity to save, and the
fact that in addition to a precautionary saving motive, they also save for retirement
(a phase they value highly because of their patience) ensures that they do not start to
decumulate wealth even at high wealth levels. As table 7 displays (comparing the last
two columns), the model with both features (the life cycle and preference heterogene-
ity) is able to generate the wealth concentration at the top quintile of the distribution
close to what is observed in U.S. data (albeit not at the very top of the distribution).
Finally, inserting an unemployment insurance system into the model further reduces
the wealth held by the bottom two quintiles of the distribution, since now losing a job
with little net worth is not nearly as harmful. In Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016) we
argue that the size of the unemployment insurance system not only crucially shapes
the bottom of the wealth distribution, but also has a strong impact on the welfare losses
from severe recessions in the class of heterogeneous household macro models we study
in this chapter.

45   And if an unemployment insurance system with replacement rate of ρ = 50% is in place, as in the
     benchmark economy, they have no strong motive, either.
46   Our model imposes substantial structure on the link between idiosyncratic income shocks and con-
     sumption over the life cycle. In methodologically complementary work, Arellano, Blundell and
     Bonhomme (2015) estimate a more flexible nonlinear empirical model of household earnings and
     consumption over the life cycle.




                                                 32
5.2.1   Income and Consumption at Different Points of the Wealth Distribution

In this section we evaluate the ability of the benchmark model to reproduce key fea-
tures of the joint distribution of income, consumption, and wealth in the PSID data. To
do so, table 8 reports the share of earnings, disposable income, consumption expendi-
tures, and the expenditure rates for the five quintiles of the wealth distribution, both
for the data (as already contained in table 2) and for the benchmark model.


              Table 8: Selected Variables by Net Worth: Data v/s Models

                                % Share of:                               % Expend. Rate
            Earnings          Disp Y             Expend.           Earnings          Disp Y
  NW Q      Data    Mod       Data     Mod       Data       Mod    Data       Mod    Data     Mod
  Q1          9.8       6.5    8.7        6.0        11.3    6.6   95.1       96.5   90.0     90.4
  Q2         12.9      11.8   11.2       10.5        12.4   11.3   79.3       90.3   76.4     86.9
  Q3         18.0      18.2   16.7       16.6        16.8   16.6   77.5       86.0   69.8     81.1
  Q4         22.3      25.5   22.1       24.3        22.4   23.6   82.3       87.3   69.6     78.5
  Q5         37.0      38.0   41.2       42.7        37.2   42.0   83.0    104.5     62.5     79.6
            Correlation with net worth
             0.26      0.46   0.42       0.67        0.20   0.76


On the positive side, first, the model is consistent with the significantly positive cor-
relation between net worth on the one hand, and earnings, disposable income and
consumption expenditures on the other. The shares of the latter three variables are
all increasing with the net worth quintiles. Second, as in the data, disposable income
(which includes capital income) displays a higher correlation with net worth than with
labor earnings. Third, the model reproduces the crucial fact that the bottom two wealth
quintiles, while accounting for essentially zero net worth, contribute a very significant
share to aggregate consumption expenditures. In the data, that share is 23.7%, and in
the model it is still highly significant at 17.9%. Since, as we will show below, this low-
wealth group has the largest declines in their consumption, the fact that it accounts for
a substantial part of aggregate consumption to start with is in turn crucial for the macro
responses to an aggregate shock in the model. Fourth, turning to the consumption ex-
penditure rates, the model is broadly consistent with the levels found in the data, and
is broadly consistent with the empirical finding in the data that these rates decline with
net worth. However, the wealth gradient is not quite as steep in the model as it is in
the data, and in the model the top wealth quintile has expenditure rates that are higher
than the forth quintile (very slightly so in relation to disposable income, much more
strongly so in relation to labor earnings).
For this last finding, the inclusion of a retirement phase and thus a life cycle sav-
ings motive into the model is absolutely crucial. A pure infinite horizon version of
the model, even with idiosyncratic income shocks and preference heterogeneity, dis-

                                                33
plays expenditure rates that are significantly too high—averaging 100% across wealth
quintiles—and implies expenditure rates that are U-shaped with respect to net worth.
Absent the life-cycle savings motive, households accumulate wealth exclusively for
the purpose of smoothing out negative income fluctuations, and thus individuals in
the fourth and fifth wealth quintiles, having accumulated enough net worth for this
purpose, display very high expenditure rates (in fact, significantly larger than 100%)—
especially with respect to labor earnings. Preference heterogeneity mitigates this effect
somewhat, but the resulting model still displays grossly counterfactual expenditure
rates, whereas the version of the model with stochastic retirement brings the impli-
cations of the model much closer to their empirical counterpart, and is our primary
justification for the presence of this model element.
We would also like to flag another dimension along which the model is not fully suc-
cessful in capturing the empirical facts. First, although the model does generate con-
sumption expenditure shares that are strongly increasing with wealth, not only are the
wealth-poor too consumption-poor in the model (as already discussed above), but also
the wealth rich (quintile 5) consume too much in the model (42% relative to 37.2% in
the data). This is true even though the model captures the earnings and income share
of this group of households quite well. This problem of the model is summarized by
the fact that the correlation between net worth and consumption expenditures is posi-
tive in the model, as it is in the data, but is much larger than it is in the PSID.
We conclude this section with the overall assessment that the benchmark model cap-
tures well many qualitative features of the cross-sectional joint distribution of net worth,
earnings, income and consumption expenditures, but fails to quantitatively match the
joint distribution of net worth and expenditures, with the wealth poor consuming too
little, and the wealth rich consuming too much, relative to the data.


5.3   The Dynamics of Income, Consumption and Wealth in Normal
      Times and in a Recession

The previous section studied the joint distribution of the key economic variables at a
given point in time (2006 in the data, a period after a long sequence of normal macroe-
conomic performance in the model). We now put the model to a more ambitious (and
to our knowledge novel) test and assess whether the dynamics of wealth, income and
consumption implied by the model can match those observed in the data. We ask this
question both for a period of macroeconomic stability (in section 5.3.1), and then, in
section 5.3.2, for a period characterized by a severe macroeconomic crisis. Note that
none of the empirical moments along this dimension were targeted in the calibration
of the model.




                                            34
5.3.1      Normal Times: 2004-2006

In the data we are somewhat limited in our choices by the sparse time series dimen-
sion of the PSID (for which comprehensive consumption data are available). We take
normal times in the data to be the period from 2004 to 2006; we map this period into
the model by studying an episode of eight quarters of good productivity, Z = Zh ,
which in turn followed a long sequence of good aggregate shocks so that aggregates
and distributions have settled down prior to this episode.


Table 9: Annualized Changes in Selected Variables by Net Worth in Normal Times
(2004-2006): Data v/s Model

                  Net Worth (%)          Disp Y (%)             Expend (%)             Exp. Rate (pp)
      NW Q        Data       Model       Data       Model       Data      Model        Data      Model
      Q1          NaN             44       7.4          7.2       7.1          6.7      -0.2         -0.4
      Q2            122           33       6.7          3.1       7.2          3.6       0.3         0.5
      Q3             33           20       5.1          1.6         9          2.5       2.3         0.8
      Q4             17            9         5          0.5       5.9          1.7       0.5         1.2
      Q5             12            3       1.8         -1.0       2.7          0.5       0.5         1.4
      All            16            5       4.1          0.7       5.6          1.8       0.9         0.7


Table 9 reports the statistics for the data (and thus repeats the information from table 3
above) together with the model.47 Recall from the description of table 9 that for a given
variable x (wealth, income, and consumption) and each wealth quintile we compute
the quintile average for x in 2004 and the average x for the same households48 in 2006
and then report the annualized percentage difference between the two figures. For the
expenditure rates, which are already in percentage units, we compute the annualized
percentage point differences between 2004 and 2006.
For net worth, the model captures the fact that in good economic times, wealth-poor
households accumulate wealth at a faster rate than wealth-poor households. The per-
centage increase in wealth for all groups is lower in the model than in the data. We
should note that in the data, the 2004-2006 period was one of rapid appreciation of
house prices and financial asset valuations, whereas in our model the relative price of
wealth (capital) is constant at one, and thus an increase in net worth during normal
times in the model has to come from net capital accumulation of households.49

47   Since in tables 9 and 10 the statistics for earnings and disposable income are quite similar, we only
     report those for disposable income.
48   These households would typically not be in the same wealth quintile in 2006 as they were in 2004.
49   In a model without retirement and thus without life-cycle saving, generating positive changes in net
     worth for all wealth quintiles is of course very difficult; justifying again the inclusion of a basic life
     cycle element into the economy.


                                                      35
In terms of earnings (not reported) and disposable income, the model displays the
substantial mean reversion built into the estimates of the idiosyncratic unemployment
and earnings process, with income of the lowest wealth quintile rising fast (7.2%) and
income of the highest wealth group actually falling (by 1%) even though aggregate
incomes do not. This is because low wealth households tend to be low labor earnings
and thus low income households with income. As we saw earlier, this is qualitatively
consistent with the data, but quantitatively the model implies differences in income
growth between the top and the bottom of the wealth distribution that are too large. In
other words, the model implies slightly too much downward and upward mobility in
incomes when households are ranked by wealth.50
Finally, for changes in consumption expenditures, table 10 reveals that during normal
times, as in the data (and as for disposable income), consumption growth is strongest
at the low end of the wealth distribution. The wealth gradient of the consumption
growth rates (again, as for disposable income), is somewhat steeper in the model. As
in the data, the expansion of consumption for households in the lowest (in 2004) wealth
quintile falls short of their income growth and thus the expenditure rate of this group
falls during normal times. The opposite is true for the wealthiest group of households
in the population: as in the data, the expenditure rate of this group expands as the
macro economy remains in normal times. The reason for this differential behavior in
expenditure rates between the wealth-poor and the wealth-rich is intuitive from the
perspective of the model: low wealth households have had, on average, unfortunate
earnings realizations and their wealth is below their target wealth. Therefore, these
households cut their expenditure to re-build their wealth buffers. The opposite logic
applies to households at the top of the wealth distribution. This implication of the
model matches the data, although quantitatively, the difference in changes in expendi-
ture rates between the top and the bottom wealth quintiles is a bit larger in the model
than in the data.


5.3.2    A Great Recession

After documenting the dynamics of wealth, income, and consumption (ordered by
wealth) in normal times, table 10 displays the same model statistics during a period
in which the macro economy undergoes a large recession, induced by a transition of
aggregate TFP from Z = Zh to Z = Zl .51 To facilitate comparisons between the two
tables, we display the difference in the growth rates between the recession period and
normal times in table 11.
50   Ranking households by earnings or income would make this statement even stronger.
51   In the model the Great Recession hits in Q.I, 2009, consistent with our calibration. In that quarter,
     Z switches from Z = Zh to Z = Zl and remains there until Q.III, 2013. The statistics are based on
     comparing the average of the four 2010 quarters to the average of the four 2008 quarters. In the
     data, as discussed in section 2, we consider the period from 2006 to 2010 because of the timing of the
     income and consumption data. Note that in the data, changes are all annualized.


                                                    36
Again, first focusing on net worth, the key endogenous state variable in our model that
underlies the dynamics of all other economic variables, we observe that as in normal
times (as in the data), the growth rate of net worth is declining in the level of net
worth. And as in the data, the Great Recession significantly slows down the pace
of wealth accumulation across all quintiles, and turns it negative for the wealthiest
households, although the reduction predicted by the model is smaller than in the data.
In the model, the wealth of the top net worth quintile declines by 1%, relative to the 3%
growth in normal times. For the same quintile, annual wealth growth in the data slows
down from 12% to -5% over a two-year period. As discussed above, in the data a large
part of this reduction in wealth at the top of the distribution is likely the consequence
of asset price movements which are, by construction, absent in the one-asset model
studied here.52

Table 10: Annualized Changes in Selected Variables by Net Worth in a Severe Reces-
sion: Data v/s Model

                 Net Worth (%)       Disp Y (%)          Expend.(%)          Exp. Rate (pp)
      NW Q       Data     Model      Data     Model      Data     Model      Data      Model
      Q1         NaN          24       6.7         4.9     0.6        4.5      -4.2       -0.4
      Q2           24         15       4.1         0.3     2.0        1.2      -1.3       0.8
      Q3             4          8      1.8        -2.4     0.8        0.0      -1.1       2.2
      Q4             2          4      1.7        -4.0    -1.7        -1.5     -2.0       3.2
      Q5            -5         -1     -1.2        -6.4    -3.7        -3.5     -1.4       4.6
      All           -3          1      1.2        -3.7    -1.3        -0.8     -1.6       2.0


The two other empirical facts we have documented in section 2.3 were that income
declines in the recession hit the top wealth quintiles more than the bottom quintiles,
and that households in the bottom quintiles cut expenditure rates more than house-
holds in the top quintiles. Comparing disposable income growth rates in tables 9 and
10, we observe that the first fact is captured well by the model, at least qualitatively.
In the model, the decline in the income growth rate is 2.3 percentage points for the
lowest wealth quintile, but 5.4 percentage points for the highest wealth quintile (and
the decline is monotonically increasing in wealth in between these two extreme wealth
quintiles). In the data, the wealth-poorest 20% of the working-age population see their
income growth rate slow down by 0.7 percentage point, whereas for the wealthiest
households, income growth slows down by 3.0 percentage points.
In contrast, the performance of the model with respect to the changes in consumption
rates is more mixed. In the model, in the recession households all increase consump-
tion by more, or cut consumption by less, than disposable income, resulting in a rise

52   Huo and Rios-Rull (2016) and Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2016) investigate the role of price
     movements in housing in explaining aggregate consumption dynamics in the Great Recession.


                                                  37
Table 11: Difference in Annualized Growth Rates between Recession Period and Nor-
mal Times: Data and Model

              Net Worth (%)      Disp Y (%)          Expend.(%)          Exp. Rate (pp)
    NW Q      Data     Model     Data     Model      Data    Model       Data    Model
    Q1        NaN         -20     -0.7        -2.3    -6.5        -2.2    -4.0       0.0
    Q2          -98       -18     -2.6        -2.8    -5.2        -2.4    -1.6       0.3
    Q3          -29       -12     -3.3        -4.0    -9.0        -2.7    -3.4       1.4
    Q4          -15        -5     -3.3        -4.5    -7.4        -2.8    -2.5       2.0
    Q5          -17        -4     -3.0        -5.4    -6.2        -2.9    -1.9       3.2
    All         -19        -4     -2.9        -4.4    -6.9        -2.6    -2.5       1.3


in consumption rates, with the increase in consumption rates being smallest at the
low end of the wealth distribution. In the data, all groups instead cut their consump-
tion rates, the more so the less wealthy they are. Thus, although the model is consis-
tent with the relative movement (in the recession vis-á-vis normal times) in consump-
tion rates across wealth levels, with the wealth-poor decreasing consumption rates the
most—in the data—or increasing them the least—in the model, the latter overstates
consumption growth in the recession and thus underpredicts the decline in expendi-
ture rates evident in the data.
In the model, when the recession hits and thus incomes decline (or grow less) rela-
tive to normal times, households have strong incentives to use their wealth to smooth
consumption. This is especially true for those falling into unemployment. On the
other hand, since the recession is long-lasting and comes with elevated unemploy-
ment risk, the motive to engage in precautionary saving against future unemployment
spells increases, especially among those with little wealth coming into the recession.
For high wealth households, the first motive dominates and the consumption rates of
these households increase in the recession, whereas for low-wealth households both
motives roughly balance out, leaving consumption rates roughly unchanged across
the two time periods. We will show below that in an economy with less generous
unemployment insurance, the precautionary savings motive becomes more potent, es-
pecially at the low end of the wealth distribution, and low-wealth households indeed
cut their consumption rates during recessions, as is the case in the data.
We conclude this section by briefly summarizing the strengths and shortcomings of our
baseline model when confronted with the PSID earnings, income, consumption, and
wealth data. The model succeeds in replicating the observed cross-sectional wealth
distribution (except at the very top) and does well in capturing the salient features of
the joint distribution of wealth, income, and expenditures. It also replicates the relative
movements of expenditure rates by wealth as the economy falls into a recession. How-
ever, it fails to predict the decline in consumption expenditure rates during recessions
and fails to capture the large movements in wealth we see in the data during the years

                                              38
2006-2010, since it abstracts from asset price movements.
In the next section we use the benchmark model and some of its variants to quantify
the extent to which wealth inequality is important in determining the magnitude of
aggregate consumption movements in response to a Great Recession type business
cycle shock in TFP.



6      Cross-Sectional Household Heterogeneity and the Ag-
       gregate Dynamics of Consumption and Investment in
       a Severe Crisis

In this section we argue that the cross-sectional distribution of households across in-
dividual characteristics (primarily in wealth and impatience) is a crucial determinant
of the aggregate consumption and investment response to a negative business cycle
shock. In addition, we show that in the presence of such significant household het-
erogeneity, the generosity of social insurance policies strongly affects the dynamics of
macroeconomic aggregates.
Our focus on the impact of household heterogeneity in wealth for the aggregate con-
sumption dynamics during large recession is shared with a number of recent studies,
including Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2012), Glover, Heathcote, Krueger and Rios-Rull
(2014), Heathcote and Perri (2015) as well as Berger and Vavra (2015).
When exploring the role that social insurance policies can play in shaping the aggre-
gate consumption (and, in the next section, output) response to adverse business cycle
shocks in economies with household heterogeneity we build, on the work by Krusell
and Smith (2006), which also focuses on income insurance programs, and more con-
cretely, unemployment insurance.53 Our work is also related to McKay and Reis (2016),
who conduct a comprehensive study of automatic stabilization programs on business
cycle dynamics, to Heathcote (2005), Kaplan and Violante (2014) and Jappelli and Pista-
ferri (2014), who study the role of discretionary changes in income taxation on aggre-
gate consumption, and Brinca, Holter, Krusell and Malafry (2016), who investigate the
magnitude of aggregate fiscal multipliers in this class of heterogeneous agent models.

53   As we do, Auclert (2014), Auclert and Rognlie (2016) and Kekre (2016) also stress the importance
     of the heterogeneity in the marginal propensity to consume across households for the dynamics of
     aggregate demand and the impact of redistributive policies. Wong (2015) stresses the heterogeneity
     in age across households for the transmission of monetary policy shocks to aggregate consumption.




                                                  39
6.1     Benchmark Results

We consider two thought experiments, both of which take as an initial condition the
wealth distribution after a long sequence of good shocks so that the cross-sectional
distribution has settled down. Then a severe recession hits. In the first thought exper-
iment, productivity returns to the normal state Z = Zh after one quarter (and remains
there forever after). Although this thought experiment is not a good depiction of the
actual Great Recession because of the short duration of the downturn, it displays the
mechanics of the model recession most clearly.54 In the second thought experiment we
plot the responses of the economy to a Great Recession of typical length (according to
our calibration) that lasts for 5.5 years (22 quarters). In both cases we trace out the im-
pulse response functions (henceforth IRF) for the key macroeconomic aggregates. The
main focus of interest is on the extent to which the aggregate consumption and invest-
ment responses differ across two economies that differ fundamentally in their extent
of household heterogeneity.


Figure 2: Impulse Response to Aggregate Technology Shock in two Economies: One
time Technology Shock


                                 Productivity IRF                                   Consumption IRF
                    1                                                  1

                 0.995
                                                                 0.995
                  0.99

                 0.985                                               0.99
                  0.98
                                                             C
             Z




                 0.975                                           0.985

                  0.97
                                                                     0.98
                 0.965                                                                                     KS
                                                                                                           Bench
                  0.96                                           0.975
                         1   2          3           4   5                   1   2          3           4           5
                                 Time (quarters)                                     Time (quarters)



                                   Output IRF                                        Investment IRF
                    1                                                1.05


                  0.99
                                                                       1

                  0.98
                                                                     0.95
                  0.97
             Y




                                                                 I




                                                                      0.9
                  0.96

                                                                     0.85
                  0.95


                  0.94                                                0.8
                         1   2          3           4   5                   1   2          3           4           5
                                 Time (quarters)                                     Time (quarters)




54   Of course, households form expectations and make decisions based on the persistent Markov chain
     for Z driving the model even in this thought experiment.



                                                            40
To make our main point, we perform both experiments for two model economies: the
original Krusell-Smith economy without preference heterogeneity, life-cycle structure,
and only modest unemployment insurance, and our benchmark model that includes
these features and therefore, as documented above, provides a model wealth distribu-
tion that matches its empirical counterpart very well. We will also show that the aggre-
gate consumption and investment behavior over the business cycle in the KS economy
approximates an economy with representative agents (RA) very well (as already noted
in the original Krusell and Smith (1998) paper), and thus as far as macroeconomic ag-
gregates are concerned, the KS and the RA economy can be treated as quantitatively
equivalent.
In figure 2 we plot the model impulse response to a onetime negative technology shock
in which Z switches to Zl after a long spell of good realizations Zh . The upper left panel
plots the time series of TFP Z fed into the model, and the remaining sub-plots show the
model-implied dynamics of aggregate consumption, investment, and output induced
by the Great Recession type TFP shock. By construction the time paths of exogenous
TFP Z are identical in both economies in the short run; for output they are identical on
impact and virtually identical over time. Since TFP and labor supply are exogenous
in both economies and follow the same time path, capital is predetermined on impact,
and the one time shock is not sufficient to trigger a substantially different dynamics
of the capital stock, the time path of output is virtually identical in both economies.
Thus, the key distinction between both economies is the extent to which a very similar
decline and recovery in output is reflected in lower aggregate consumption rather than
aggregate investment.
The key observation we want to highlight is that the aggregate consumption (and thus
investment) response to the negative productivity shock differs substantially between
the two economies. In the benchmark model, consumption falls by 2.4% in response
to a technology shock that induces a decline in output by 6% on impact. The same
fall in output triggers a decline of only 1.9% in the original Krusell-Smith (labeled as
KS) economy. Thus the impact of the recession on aggregate consumption increases by
0.5% percentage points more in the economy with empirically plausible wealth hetero-
geneity. Given that output is exogenous in the short run, and is used for consumption
and investment only in this closed economy, the investment impulse response neces-
sarily shows the reverse pattern: the decline in investment is much weaker in the high
wealth inequality economy. This in turn triggers a less significant decline and more
rapid recovery of the macro economy once the recession has ended. However, given
that new investment is only a small fraction of the capital stock, these differential ef-
fects on capital, and thus output, are quantitatively minor, at least in the case in which
the recession is short-lived.55
55   In section C.4 we argue that the fact that the wealth distribution is quantitatively important for the
     current aggregate consumption response to a TFP shock does not imply that higher moments of the
     wealth distribution are needed to accurately forecast future wages and interest rates.



                                                    41
Figure 3: Impulse Response Functions (IRF) to Aggregate Technology Shock in KS and
RA Economies


                              Productivity IRF                                   Consumption IRF
                 1                                                  1

              0.995

               0.99                                           0.995

              0.985

               0.98                                               0.99




                                                          C
          Z




              0.975

               0.97                                           0.985

              0.965                                                                                     KS
                                                                                                        Rep Agent
               0.96                                               0.98
                      1   2          3           4   5                   1   2          3           4               5
                              Time (quarters)                                     Time (quarters)



                                Output IRF                                        Investment IRF
                 1                                                1.05


               0.99
                                                                    1

               0.98
                                                                  0.95
               0.97
          Y




                                                              I




                                                                   0.9
               0.96

                                                                  0.85
               0.95


               0.94                                                0.8
                      1   2          3           4   5                   1   2          3           4               5
                              Time (quarters)                                     Time (quarters)




Note that for all practical purposes, in what follows the KS economy displays aggre-
gate consumption-investment dynamics that are very close to those in a representa-
tive agent (RA) economy. Figure 3 shows this fact by displaying impulse responses
to a one-period recession shock in the KS and RA economies. Although not identical,
the impulse responses are quantitatively very close. For example, the aggregate con-
sumption decline in the RA economy amounts to 1.78%, relative to a fall in aggregate
consumption of 1.9% in the KS economy.
In figure 4, we display the dynamics of macroeconomic aggregates in a prolonged and
severe recession, with a length of 22 quarters, under our operational definition of a
severe recession. It demonstrates that in a Great Recession lasting several years, the
differences in capital and output dynamics across the low-wealth inequality KS econ-
omy and the high inequality benchmark are now more noticeable, especially toward
the end of the recession. As a result, the recovery after TFP has turned back up again
is substantially stronger in the benchmark economy, by approximately 1 percentage
point for capital and 0.3 percentage point for output in the period in which the reces-
sion ends.
Since the KS economy and the benchmark differ along several model dimensions, in

                                                         42
Figure 4: Impulse Response to Aggregate Technology Shock in Two Economies: "Typ-
ical" Severe Recession Technology Shock


                               Productivity IRF                                           Consumption IRF
                 1                                                          1
                                                                                                                  KS
              0.995                                                       0.99                                    Bench

               0.99
                                                                          0.98
              0.985
                                                                          0.97
               0.98




                                                                      C
          Z




                                                                          0.96
              0.975
                                                                          0.95
               0.97

              0.965                                                       0.94

               0.96                                                       0.93
                      5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20     25    30   35      40
                               Time (quarters)                                             Time (quarters)



                                    Output IRF                                             Investment IRF
                 1                                                        1.05

               0.99
                                                                            1
               0.98

               0.97                                                       0.95
               0.96
           Y




                                                                      I




               0.95                                                        0.9

               0.94
                                                                          0.85
               0.93

               0.92                                                        0.8
                      5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20     25    30   35      40
                               Time (quarters)                                             Time (quarters)




the next section we break down the reasons for the differential aggregate consump-
tion response, again focusing on the interaction between the aggregate movement in
consumption in a Great Recession and the cross-sectional wealth distribution prior to
it.


6.2   Inspecting the Mechanism II: What Accounts for the Size of the
      Aggregate Consumption Recession

The key finding from the last section is that the aggregate consumption recession in
our benchmark economy with preference and realistic wealth heterogeneity is more
than twice as deep as it is in the corresponding RA economy (which in turn displays
aggregate time series that are very close to those in the original KS economy). In this
section, we dissect the reasons behind this finding. To start, in figure 5, we display the
consumption functions and wealth distributions for both the KS and the benchmark
economy. The left panel shows the consumption functions (plotted against individual
wealth on the x-axis) in the original KS economy for three combinations of idiosyn-
cratic employment and aggregate productivity states. For a given wealth level, the

                                                                 43
vertical difference between the consumption functions for the employed in aggregate
state Z = Zh (blue dashed line) and the employed in aggregate state Z = Zl (red dot-
dashed line) gives the consumption drop in the Great Recession, conditional on not
losing a job. In the same way, the vertical distance between the blue-dashed consump-
tion function and the orange solid consumption function (for the unemployed in the
recession) gives the consumption decline for those households that lose their jobs in a
recession. The figure also contains the pre-recession wealth distribution, displayed as
a histogram, with the mass of a particular wealth bin being measured on the right y-
axis.56 The right panel displays the same information, but for our benchmark economy,
for working-age households with median earnings state y and mean discount factor β̄.

Figure 5: Consumption Function and Wealth Distribution: Krusell-Smith (left panel),
Benchmark (right panel)

                     3                                                               0.6                  3                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                   Employed, Z=ZH
                                                                                                                   Employed, Z=ZL
                                                                                                                   Unemployed, Z=ZL
                    2.5                                                              0.5                 2.5                                                              0.5



                     2                                                               0.4                  2                                                               0.4
      Consumption




                                                                                           Consumption




                                                                 Employed, Z=ZH
                    1.5                                          Employed, Z=ZL      0.3                 1.5                                                              0.3
                                                                 Unemployed, Z=ZL


                     1                                                               0.2                  1                                                               0.2



                    0.5                                                              0.1                 0.5                                                              0.1



                     0                                                                0                   0                                                                0
                          0   2   4   6   8    10      12   14     16     18        20                         0   2      4         6   8    10      12   14   16   18   20
                                              Wealth                                                                                        Wealth




The first observation we make is that, for a given level of wealth, the drop in individ-
ual consumption as the KS economy falls into a Great Recession is substantially larger
than in our benchmark economy.57 This is especially true for households with little
wealth that lose their jobs at the onset of the recession, because of the virtual absence
of unemployment insurance.
The observation of larger individual consumption declines in the KS economy would
suggest that the aggregate consumption recession is actually larger than it is in the
benchmark economy, in contrast to the result documented in the previous section.
However, as figure 5 (and table 6 above) display clearly, the cross-sectional wealth dis-
tribution places almost no mass on households with very little net worth, exactly the
56   The aggregate capital stock associated with these plots is the pre-recession capital stock; note that
     both economies, by virtue of the calibration, have the same average (over the cycle) capital stock.
57   Figure 5 displays the consumption functions in the benchmark economy for individuals with me-
     dian (y, β), but the same statement applies, qualitatively, to the consumption functions for house-
     holds with other (y, β) characteristics. Recall that there is no (y, β) heterogeneity in the original KS
     economy.


                                                                                     44
households with the largest consumption declines. In contrast, the benchmark model
with realistic wealth inequality places substantial probability mass at zero or close to
zero wealth where the individual consumption losses are significant, especially (but
not only) for newly unemployed households.58 Note that average net worth is the
same in both economies: we truncate the plots at net worth twenty times average in-
come in order to make the individual consumption declines at the low end more clearly
visible, but the benchmark economy has a fat right-tailed wealth distribution that is
well approximated by a Pareto distribution (as in the data, see e.g. Benhabib and Bisin,
2016), whereas the original KS economy displays a wealth distribution whose right tail
more closely resembles that of a log-normal distribution. Thus, both distributions have
the same mean even though, as clearly visible from the figure, the benchmark economy
has substantially more mass of households at low levels of net worth.
As we will see in subsection 6.3, public social insurance programs will affect both the
determinants of the aggregate consumption dynamics—the consumption response to
aggregate shocks for a given wealth level—and the wealth distribution itself. Both
components are crucial when determining the overall impact of unemployment insur-
ance policies on the macro economy over the business cycle. Before turning to this
point, we first further explore the precise reasons behind the significant differences
in aggregate and distributional characteristics between the original KS economy and
our benchmark, thereby pinpointing precisely which model elements (and their inter-
action) are responsible for the differences in aggregate consumption dynamics across
different economies.
Recall that relative to the KS model, our benchmark includes idiosyncratic earnings
shocks, a rudimentary life cycle structure with social security system, permanent pref-
erence heterogeneity as well as a more generous unemployment insurance system.
In table 12 we repeat the information from table 7 on the wealth distribution in differ-
ent versions of the model, but now we also document the magnitude of the aggregate
consumption response on impact in a Great Recession. Figure 6 displays the associ-
ated impulse responses. From the table and figure we observe that the introduction of
persistent idiosyncratic income risk on top of unemployment risk significantly ampli-
fies the aggregate consumption response above that of the original KS model. In fact,
the magnitude of the aggregate consumption response is larger than that obtained in
the benchmark (the second to last column in the table). This is perhaps not surprising
given our arguments thus far, as this version of the model generates significantly larger
wealth inequality—and importantly—the two lowest wealth quintiles that hold very
little net worth.59
58   The wealth distribution in the right panel of figure 5 is for the entire working-age population, rather
     than conditioning on the specific (y, β) types for which the consumption functions are displayed.
59   Note, however, that this mechanism is insufficient to generate the very high wealth concentration,
     as the examination of the wealth share very top of the wealth distribution reveals.




                                                     45
                            Figure 6: Consumption Recessions in Various Versions of the Model


                                                                                      Consumption IRF
                                      1



                                0.995



                                    0.99


                                                                                                                                                  KS
                                                                                                                                                  KS+<(y)
                                0.985
                            C




                                                                                                                                                  KS+<(y)+Ret+<(-)
                                                                                                                                                  Benchmark


                                    0.98



                                0.975



                                    0.97
                                           1       1.5               2               2.5                3                       3.5           4            4.5            5
                                                                                           Time (quarters)




Figure 7: Consumption Function and Wealth Distribution: KS (left panel) and KS
w/Income Risk (right panel)

                   3                                                                              0.6                      3                                                                       0.6



                  2.5                                                                             0.5                     2.5                                                                      0.5



                   2                                                                              0.4                      2                                                                       0.4
    Consumption




                                                                                                            Consumption




                                                                              Employed, Z=ZH                                                                                   Employed, Z=ZH
                  1.5                                                         Employed, Z=ZL      0.3                     1.5                                                  Employed, Z=ZL      0.3
                                                                              Unemployed, Z=ZL                                                                                 Unemployed, Z=ZL


                   1                                                                              0.2                      1                                                                       0.2



                  0.5                                                                             0.1                     0.5                                                                      0.1



                   0                                                                               0                       0                                                                        0
                        0       2      4       6   8    10      12       14     16     18        20                             0     2   4       6    8     10      12   14     16     18        20
                                                       Wealth                                                                                               Wealth




Figure 7 compares the consumption functions and equilibrium wealth distributions in
the KS economy and the KS economy with just persistent earnings shocks added. In
the latter, the policy functions are displayed for the median y realization. Whereas

                                                                                                  46
Table 12: Net Worth Distributions and Consumption Decline: Different Versions of the
Model

                                        Models*
  % Share:               KS    +σ(y)     +Ret.     +σ( β)      +UI     KS + Top 1%
  Q1                     6.9    0.7         0.7      0.7        0.3              5.0
  Q2                    11.7    2.2         2.4      2.0        1.2              8.6
  Q3                    16.0    6.1         6.7      5.3        4.7             11.9
  Q4                    22.3    17.8       19.0     15.9       16.0             16.5
  Q5                    43.0    73.3       71.1     76.1       77.8             57.9

  90 − 95               10.5     17.5      17.1       17.5     17.9              7.4
  95 − 99               11.8     23.7      22.6       25.4     26.0              8.8
  T1%                    5.0     11.2      10.7       13.9     14.2             30.4

  Wealth Gini         0.350     0.699     0.703     0.745     0.767            0.525

  ∆C                  -1.9%     -2.5%     -2.6%     -2.9%    -2.4%            -2.0%


the consumption policy functions look broadly similar in both economies, the mass of
households with low wealth and thus a large consumption response to the recession
shock increases very substantially relative to the original KS economy. In this vari-
ant, the wealth distribution at the bottom looks already quite similar to the benchmark
economy, although the absence of significant unemployment insurance implies that the
mass of households at exactly zero wealth is negligible. On the other hand, because of
the absence of unemployment insurance, the consumption drop of the wealth-poor for
a given wealth level is comparable in magnitude to that in the original KS economy.
Figure 8, which displays the consumption functions and wealth distributions for two
different types households in the KS + σ(y) economy, clarifies the interaction between
earnings inequality and wealth inequality. Households with low current (and very per-
sistent) income realizations are highly concentrated at the low end of the wealth dis-
tribution. But even among households with contemporaneous median income, there
is significantly more mass in the wealth region where consumption falls substantially
upon unemployment.
Moving to the third column of table 12, we see that although the introduction of life-
cycle elements is crucial for delivering joint income-consumption distributions, their
impact on the dynamics of aggregate consumption in the recession is limited. In con-
trast, adding preference heterogeneity to the model helps to amplify the consumption
drop. Crucially, now the economy is populated by a share of highly impatient house-


                                          47
Figure 8: Consumption Function and Wealth Distribution: KS Low Income (left panel)
and KS Median Income (right panel)

                     3                                                                0.6                  3                                                                0.6



                    2.5                                                               0.5                 2.5                                                               0.5



                     2                                                                0.4                  2                                                                0.4
      Consumption




                                                                                            Consumption
                                                                 Employed, Z=Z                                                                         Employed, Z=Z
                                                                                 H                                                                                     H
                    1.5                                          Employed, Z=ZL       0.3                 1.5                                          Employed, Z=ZL       0.3
                                                                 Unemployed, Z=ZL                                                                      Unemployed, Z=ZL


                     1                                                                0.2                  1                                                                0.2



                    0.5                                                               0.1                 0.5                                                               0.1



                     0                                                                 0                   0                                                                 0
                          0   2   4   6   8    10      12   14     16     18         20                         0   2   4   6   8    10      12   14     16     18         20
                                              Wealth                                                                                Wealth




holds at the bottom of the wealth distribution. In normal times, unemployment risk is
low and these households consume at a high rate because of their impatience, ending
up with little or no wealth. When the economy falls into the recession, idiosyncratic
unemployment risk goes up significantly for the "foreseeable future" from the point
of view of impatient households. Faced with the elevated chance of becoming un-
employed, impatient households who have not yet lost their jobsand have currently
medium to high income realizations start to save more for precautionary reasons.60
For more patient employed households, the increase in precautionary saving and re-
sulting drop in consumption at the onset of the recession is not quite as severe. These
households were already saving a larger fraction of their income even in good times,
since their patience makes them more focused on the long horizon. Because the per-
sistent idiosyncratic income component is more persistent than the recession, patient
households with high current income expect to have high income even when exiting
the recession, so the short-run possibility of increased unemployment is not as big of a
concern to them.
Figure 9 displays the consumption policy functions for patient and impatient house-
holds, as well as the wealth distribution among these households. The key obser-
vation is that consumption falls more pronouncedly for impatient households when
the aggregate state turns bad, even conditional on not losing a job. Also, not unex-
pectedly, among impatient households wealth levels tend to be lower, as the group-
specific wealth distributions underneath the consumption functions in figure 9 show.
As a broad summary measure of this differential effect, the contribution to the aggre-

60   The small share of impatient, low-wealth households that do in fact lose their jobs at the onset of
     the recession behave like hand-to-mouth consumers instead, cutting their consumption one for one
     with income, and consume whatever little wealth they might have at the beginning of the recession.


                                                                                      48
gate decline in consumption is more than twice as large for the most impatient group
of households than for the most patient group, even though that they constitute equal
shares of the population.


Figure 9: Consumption Function and Wealth Distribution: Patient Households (left
panel) and Impatient Households (right panel)

                  2.5                                                              0.6                 2.5                                                              0.6



                                                                                   0.5                                                                                  0.5


                   2                                                                                    2
                                                                                   0.4                                                                                  0.4
    Consumption




                                                                                         Consumption
                                                               Employed, Z=ZH                                                                       Employed, Z=ZH
                                                               Employed, Z=ZL      0.3                                                              Employed, Z=ZL      0.3
                                                               Unemployed, Z=ZL                                                                     Unemployed, Z=ZL
                  1.5                                                                                  1.5

                                                                                   0.2                                                                                  0.2



                                                                                   0.1                                                                                  0.1
                   1                                                                                    1



                                                                                    0                                                                                    0
                        0   2   4   6   8    10      12   14     16     18        20                         0   2   4   6   8    10      12   14     16     18        20
                                            Wealth                                                                               Wealth




In the aggregate, the decline in aggregate consumption in the economy with income
and preference heterogeneity amounts to 2.9%, and is thus a full 1 percentage point
larger than in the KS economy, and 1.11% larger than in the representative agent econ-
omy. Both dimensions of heterogeneity are quantitatively important for the magnitude
of the aggregate fluctuations, and so is their interaction, as the previous discussion of
the importance of the impatient, employed with high income has indicated.
Finally, the second to last column of table 12 raises the unemployment insurance re-
placement rate to our benchmark value of 50%. As we discuss and quantify in the next
part of the chapter, section 6.3, this change in the generosity of social insurance has
a two-fold impact on the economy: for a given wealth level it softens the decline in
household consumption in the recession, but it also shifts the wealth distribution to-
ward wealth levels that imply a large decline in consumption and thus make the reces-
sion more costly in welfare terms. The first effect reduces the aggregate consumption
response to the Great Recession shock, the second magnifies it. As table 12 shows, the
net effect is a reduction of aggregate consumption volatility (with a decline of 2.4%),
bringing the implications of the benchmark economy closer to that of the RA and KS
economies with absent or limited wealth heterogeneity.
To summarize the main lessons from this section, the key aspects of the benchmark
model that make its implied consumption dynamics different from its RA counter-
part in a quantitatively meaningful way are a) an equilibrium wealth distribution that
makes the wealth-poor poor enough and has them cut consumption more significantly
than the average household when the recession hits; and b) that these wealth-poor

                                                                                   49
households make up a significant share of aggregate consumption. These requirements
are achieved through highly persistent income shocks that generate a set of households
that are born wealth-poor and never accumulate much wealth, and are compounded
by the presence of impatient households that do not want to accumulate much wealth.
If these households do not have access to generous unemployment insurance, their
consumption falls a lot more than that of the representative household in a recession,
either because they have in fact lost their jobs (and the incidence of job loss is higher in
recessions), or because they have not lost their job, but have cut consumption to hedge
against a now more likely job loss in the future.
Preference heterogeneity produces not only impatient households with the character-
istics discussed thus far, but also patient households that find it optimal to accumulate
large amounts of wealth, thereby contributing significantly to wealth inequality. How-
ever, it is the lack of wealth at the bottom, as opposed to significant concentration at
the very top, that is crucial for explaining aggregate consumption dynamics. To make
this point sharply, we consider a version of the model that is identical to the original
KS model but adds limited preference heterogeneity. Specifically, it constructs a model
in which 99% of the population has a lower time discount factor β l than the remaining
1% of the population. The two discount factors are chosen to match the capital-output
ratio in the benchmark economy (which essentially pins down β l ) and the share of
wealth held by the top 1%–30%–as in the PSID data (whereas in the benchmark econ-
omy, we match the capital-output ratio and the wealth Gini). This pins down the time
discount factor β h of the remaining 1% of the population.
The purpose of this economy is to evaluate the importance of the wealth concentration
at the very top of the distribution for the aggregate consumption decline in a Great Re-
cession (and to demonstrate that it is straightforward, with appropriate preference het-
erogeneity in time discount factors, to generate a wealth distribution as concentrated
at the top as it is in the data). The wealth distribution and aggregate consumption de-
cline from this version of the model are reported in the last column of table 12. Since
consumption functions are approximately linear for households with above-median
wealth, and the individual consumption drop in a recession is roughly invariant to net
worth at that level, it does not matter much for aggregate consumption dynamics if the top
of the wealth distribution is populated by 1% of astronomically wealthy households,
or by 20% of merely super rich households. Consequently, the consumption response
is roughly the same in this variant of the model and in the original KS economy (and
the RA economy for that matter).


6.2.1   The Importance of Precautionary Saving vs. "Hand-to-Mouth" Consumers

Given the importance we assigned to households with little net worth in our discussion
above, in this subsection we briefly ask whether a model with a fixed fraction of house-
holds κ that always have zero wealth and thus simply consume their income in every


                                            50
period has the same implications for the consumption dynamics as our benchmark
model.61
We have resolved our model under the assumption that the bottom κ = 40% of the
wealth distribution in model period t − 1 just consumes their earnings and unemploy-
ment benefits (if applicable) from period t on, whereas the remainder of the distribu-
tion (in period t − 1) continues to follow the intertemporally optimal decision rules
from the benchmark economy.
The drop of consumption in a one-period Great Recession now amounts to 2%, relative
to the decline in the benchmark economy of 2.4%. The drop is larger in the benchmark
economy since households at the bottom of the wealth distribution on average (and
especially those not currently unemployed) find it optimal to reduce consumption rates
for precautionary reasons: the Great Recession is expected to last a long time, and
those not yet affected by a job loss try to build a buffer to hedge against the increased
risk of being laid off in the future.62 This precautionary saving motive in the face of
increased idiosyncratic risk in recessions, also discussed lucidly in a recent paper by
McKay (2015), is absent among households that follow a mechanical hand-to-mouth
consumption rule and is responsible for the deeper recession in the benchmark econ-
omy.63 We will return to this point in the next section, where we study the impact
of the generosity of unemployment insurance on our results, and will show that with
less generous unemployment insurance benefits, the additional precautionary savings
motive from elevated unemployment risk is more potent, and the divergence between
the class of models studied here and hand-to-mouth consumer models is even more
significant.
It is important to note that in our formulation the share of households that behave
as hand-to-mouth consumers is exogenous. In recent work Kaplan and Violante (2014)
and Bayer, Lütticke, Pham-Dao and Tjaden (2015) construct models with wealthy hand-
to-mouth consumers where a share of households endogenously choose to behave like
hand to mouth consumers despite having non-trivial net worth. However, since their

61   This question is interesting from a modeling perspective since a model in which a fixed fraction
     of hand-to-mouth households and the remaining fraction employs permanent income consumption
     and savings functions (which are linear in wealth with identical marginal propensities to consume
     out of wealth, given our model) would give rise to easy aggregation.
62   In the versions of the model studied here, labor supply is exogenous (but its productivity fluctuating
     over the cycle), and thus saving is the only possible household response to hedge against higher
     idiosyncratic risk. In models with endogenous labor supply choice, such as the ones studied in
     Chang and Kim (2007) and Athreya, Owens and Schwartzman (2015), households have another
     margin of adjustment and thus the impact of elevated risk on precautionary saving will be smaller.
     For a model that combines household precautionary saving and frictional labor markets, see Krusell,
     Mukoyama and Sahin (2010).
63   Obviously, the magnitude of this effect depends on the share of hand-to-mouth consumers κ. In
     the limit, as κ = 0 we are back in the benchmark economy. For κ = 20% the fall in aggregate
     consumption is 2.1%, about halfway between the RA economy and the benchmark.



                                                    51
net worth is primarily in the form of assets that are costly to liquidate (think of owner-
occupied real estate and tax-favored retirement accounts), the consumption behavior
of this group of households approximates that of the hand-to-mouth consumers mod-
eled here, especially for income shocks of moderate magnitude.


6.3     The Impact of Social Insurance Policies

In this section we ask how the presence of public social insurance programs affects
the response of the macro economy to aggregate shocks in a world with household
heterogeneity.64 We focus specifically on the effects of government-provided, and tax-
financed unemployment insurance. We will argue that the impact of this policy is
two-fold: it changes the consumption-savings response of a household with a given
wealth level to income shocks, and it changes the cross-sectional wealth distribution in
society, at least in the medium to long run. In order to decompose the overall impact
of social insurance into these two effects, we consider two thought experiments. In
the first, we simply compare the dynamics of macroeconomic aggregates of the bench-
mark economy with that of an identical economy that has a lower unemployment in-
surance replacement rate of ρ = 10%. We interpret the latter economy as providing
basic social insurance (as embedded in basic welfare programs), or alternatively, as a
world where a significant share of households do not claim unemployment benefits
despite being entitled to it.65 This thought experiment will encompass the effect of
unemployment insurance both on individual consumption behavior as well as on the
equilibrium wealth distribution. To isolate the former effect, we will also consider an
economy with low unemployment insurance, but entering the recession with the same
pre-recession wealth distribution as in the benchmark economy.66
In the left panel of figure 10, we plot, against wealth, the consumption functions (for the
unemployed in the low and the employed in the high aggregate shock, with the mean
discount factor) as well as the wealth histogram in the benchmark economy (with a
replacement rate of 50%). This was the right panel of figure 5. The right panel of figure
10 does the same for an economy with an unemployment insurance system of only

64   The purpose of this analysis is purely positive in nature, and limited in scope by the assumption that
     transitions between employment and unemployment are exogenous and thus policy-invariant. See
     Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii and Mitman (2013) and Hagedorn, Manovskii and Mitman (2015)
     for an analysis of the effects of unemployment benefit extensions on vacancy creation and employ-
     ment.
65   We prefer to model a replacement rate of ρ = 10% rather than ρ = 1% as in the original Krusell-Smith
     economy studied in the previous subsection, since we think ρ = 10% is a more empirically relevant
     case. The resulting macro effects will lie right in between that of the benchmark economy, and the
     economy with a replacement rate of ρ = 1% displayed in the forth column (the σ( β) economy) of
     table 12.
66   One can interpret this thought experiment as a surprise permanent removal (or a surprise failure of
     extension) of unemployment benefits exactly in the period in which the recession hits.


                                                    52
10%. We chose to display the consumption function for the employed in an expansion
and the unemployed in a recession because this helps us to best to understand what
drives the aggregate consumption impulse response below.67


Figure 10: Consumption Function and Wealth Distribution: Benchmark (left panel)
and Low UI (right panel)

                     3                                                               0.6                  3
                              Employed, Z=ZH
                              Employed, Z=ZL
                              Unemployed, Z=ZL
                    2.5                                                              0.5                 2.5



                     2                                                               0.4                  2
      Consumption




                                                                                           Consumption
                                                                                                                                                      Employed, Z=ZH
                    1.5                                                              0.3                 1.5                                          Employed, Z=ZL      0.3
                                                                                                                                                      Unemployed, Z=ZL
                                                                                                                                                                          0.25

                     1                                                               0.2                  1                                                               0.2

                                                                                                                                                                          0.15

                    0.5                                                              0.1                 0.5                                                              0.1

                                                                                                                                                                          0.05

                     0                                                                0                   0                                                                0
                          0   2      4         6   8    10      12   14   16   18   20                         0   2   4   6   8    10      12   14     16     18        20
                                                       Wealth                                                                      Wealth




We want to highlight three observations. First, in the high unemployment insurance
economy, households with low wealth consume much more than in the economy with
small unemployment insurance. Second, and relatedly, the decline in consumption
for low-wealth households from experiencing a recession with job loss is much more
severe in the low-benefit economy. Third, the size of the social insurance system how-
ever, by affecting the extent to which households engage in precautionary saving, is
a crucial determinant of the equilibrium wealth distribution. In the benchmark econ-
omy (as in the data), a sizeable mass of households has little or no wealth, whereas
in the no-benefit economy this share of the population declines notably. Specifically.
average assets increase by 0.5% relative to the benchmark economy, and only 0.9% of
the population holds exactly zero assets, relative to 3.1% in the benchmark economy.
The difference in the consumption decline in a recession across the two economies can
then be decomposed into the differential consumption response of households, inte-
grated with respect to the same cross-sectional wealth distribution (which is a counter-
factual distribution for one of the two economies), and the effect on the consumption
response stemming from a policy-induced difference in the wealth distribution coming
into the recession. As it turns out, both effects (the change in the consumption func-
tions and the change in the wealth distribution) are quantitatively large, but partially
offset each other.
In order to isolate the first effect, we now plot, in figure 11, the recession impulse

67   Setting ρ = 0 would create the problem of zero consumption in some of the decomposition analyses
     we conduct later on.


                                                                                     53
response for the benchmark economy and the economy with low unemployment in-
surance, but starting at the same pre-recession wealth distribution as in the benchmark
economy. Under this fixed wealth distribution scenario, the consumption response in
both cases is given by the difference in the consumption functions (in both panels) in-
tegrated with the wealth distribution of the high UE insurance economy. We find that
consumption declines much more substantially in the economy with a low replace-
ment rate, by 4.6%, relative to 2.4% in the benchmark economy. This is, of course,
exactly what the consumption functions in figure 10 predict.


Figure 11: Impulse Response to Aggregate Technology Shock with and without Gener-
ous Unemployment Insurance, Fixed Wealth Distribution: Onetime Technology Shock


                              Productivity IRF                                     Consumption IRF
                 1                                                  1.01

              0.995
                                                                      1
               0.99
                                                                    0.99
              0.985

               0.98                                                 0.98
                                                                C
          Z




              0.975
                                                                    0.97
               0.97
                                                                    0.96
              0.965                                                                                        UI Shock
                                                                                                           Baseline
               0.96                                                 0.95
                      0   5         10           15   20                   0   5          10          15              20
                              Time (quarters)                                       Time (quarters)



                                Output IRF                                          Investment IRF
               1.01                                                 1.05

                 1
                                                                      1
               0.99

                                                                    0.95
               0.98
          Y




                                                                I




               0.97
                                                                     0.9

               0.96
                                                                    0.85
               0.95

               0.94                                                  0.8
                      0   5         10           15   20                   0   5          10          15              20
                              Time (quarters)                                       Time (quarters)




To further quantify what drives this differential magnitude in the consumption re-
sponse, in table 13 we display the fall in consumption for four groups in the popu-
lation that differ in their transitions between idiosyncratic employment states as the
aggregate economy slips into a recession. The share of households undergoing a spe-
cific transition is exogenous and the same across both economies, and is given in the
second column of the table. Most (88.1%) households retain their jobs even though
the aggregate economy turns bad. In contrast, the fraction of households making the
transition from employment to unemployment is only 6.6% (and 3.5% of households
make the reverse transition), but based on the consumption functions we expect them
to display the largest decline in individual consumption.

                                                           54
Table 13: Consumption Response by Group in three Economies: Share of Total Decline

     Transitions        Pop. Share       ρ = 50%, Φρ=0.5       ρ = 10%, Φρ=0.5        ρ = 10%, Φρ=0.1
     s = e, s0 = e         88.1%              79.8%                  72.8%                 71.6%
     s = e, s0 = u          6.6%              13.8%                  18.5%                 21.8%
     s=   u, s0   =e        3.5%               2.5%                  2.9%                   0.3%
     s=   u, s0   =u        1.8%               3.8%                  5.8%                   6.3%
     Total Decline         100%                -2.4%                 -4.6%                 -2.7%


The aggregate consumption decline documented in the last row of table 13 corresponds
to the impulse responses of figure 11. The rows above give the share of the consump-
tion decline accounted for by each of the four groups, so that the sum of the rows adds
up to 100%. Similarly, table 14 summarizes the percentage consumption decline of
each of the four groups and gives, in the second column, the pre-recession population
shares of each of these four groups.


Table 14: Consumption Response by Group in 3 Economies: Consumption Growth
Rates of Different Groups

     Transitions        Pop. Share       ρ = 50%, Φρ=0.5       ρ = 10%, Φρ=0.5        ρ = 10%, Φρ=0.1
     s = e, s0 = e         88.1%               -1.5%                 -2.3%                 -1.5%
     s = e, s0 = u          6.6%               -3.5%                 -7.6%                 -6.1%
     s=   u, s0=e           3.5%               -1.2%                 -2.3%                 -0.0%
     s = u, s0 = u          1.8%               -3.5%                 -8.8%                 -6.8%
     Total Decline         100%                -2.4%                 -4.6%                 -2.7%

From both tables we observe that, even though the share of households that become
newly unemployed (6.6% of the population, s = e, s0 = u) and remain unemployed
(1.8% of the population, s = u, s0 = u) is relatively small, these groups account for a
disproportionately large fraction of the overall consumption collapse in both the econ-
omy with generous, and in the economy with modest unemployment insurance.68 See
columns 3 and 4 of table 13 (which are based on the same pre-recession wealth distri-
bution).
These two groups of households make up 8.4% of the population, but in the benchmark
economy (column 3, table 13) account for 17.6% of the consumption drop. Carrying
out the same decomposition for the economy with a small unemployment insurance
system (column 4, table 13) we observe that the total drop in consumption is about

68    For a recent empirical study on the link between unemployment and consumption expenditures, see
      Ganong and Noel (2015), who find reductions in consumption expenditures that are quantitatively
      similar to the ones our model with low unemployment insurance predicts.


                                                  55
twice as large now, as already displayed in the impulse response plot. Now the (newly
and existing) unemployed have significantly larger percentage consumption drops (see
the fourth column of table 14) and the share of the (now larger) consumption drop rises
to 24.3%. Of course, the more pronounced consumption drop of the unemployed in a
low UI benefit environment (and holding the wealth distribution fixed) is exactly what
one would expect, and is already apparent in the policy functions of figure 10.
Table 14 contains a second important observation that we wish to stress. Looking at the
magnitude of the consumption drops of households that have not yet lost their jobs as
the economy falls into the recession (households with the idiosyncratic state transitions
s = u, s0 = e and s = e, s0 = e), we observe that these households, which constitute the
vast majority of the population, also cut their consumption much more significantly
in the (surprise) low-benefit economy, again comparing columns 3 and 4 of table 14.
This is true even though these groups in both economies start with the same wealth
distribution (by construction of the thought experiment) and experience the same in-
come loss coming from a modest decline in aggregate wages. The lower UI benefits
do not have an immediate impact on the earnings of these households, since they are
currently employed even though the macro economy is doing poorly. The larger cuts
in consumption of these groups instead emerge because future unemployment risk has
gone up for these households as the economy falls into the highly persistent recession,
and the potential future income losses from unemployment are larger in the economy
with low unemployment insurance. Employed households, especially those with little
new worth to start with, respond by elevating their saving and cutting their consump-
tion rates, and since employed households make up 91.6% of the population, the extra
fall in consumption of about 1 percentage point (in the economy with low UI, relative
to the economy with high UI) is an important contributor to the overall larger decline
of aggregate consumption in the low UI economy.
Finally, we document what happens if the wealth distribution is determined endoge-
nously and responds to the absence of an unemployment insurance system. Figure 12
displays the impulse responses for the benchmark economy (again) and the no-benefits
economy with a pre-recession wealth distribution that emerges in that economy after a
long period of economic prosperity.69 Column 5 of tables 13 and 14 breaks down the
consumption response by subgroups. Overall we observe that the endogenous shift in
the wealth distribution to the right that is due to the less generous unemployment in-
surance partially offsets the larger individual consumption declines in the no-benefits
economy for a given wealth level.
To see this more precisely, compare the third and fifth columns of table 14. The ag-
gregate consumption decline in the economy with little unemployment insurance is
somewhat larger than in the benchmark economy (by 0.3 percentage point). But very
notably, in this economy the unemployed (both newly and already existing ones) ac-
count for a substantially larger share of the reduction in consumption, even though this

69   That wealth distribution was displayed in the right panel of figure 10.


                                                    56
Figure 12: Impulse Response to Aggregate Technology Shock with and without Gen-
erous Unemployment Insurance: Onetime Technology Shock


                              Productivity IRF                                   Consumption IRF
                 1                                                  1

              0.995
                                                              0.995
               0.99
                                                                  0.99
              0.985

               0.98                                           0.985




                                                          C
          Z




              0.975
                                                                  0.98
               0.97
                                                              0.975                                     Low UI
              0.965
                                                                                                        Bench
               0.96                                               0.97
                      1   2          3           4   5                   1   2          3           4            5
                              Time (quarters)                                     Time (quarters)



                                Output IRF                                        Investment IRF
                 1                                                1.05


               0.99
                                                                    1

               0.98
                                                                  0.95
               0.97
           Y




                                                              I




                                                                   0.9
               0.96

                                                                  0.85
               0.95


               0.94                                                0.8
                      1   2          3           4   5                   1   2          3           4            5
                              Time (quarters)                                     Time (quarters)




group understands the possibility of a Great Recession and has access to self-insurance
opportunities to prepare for it. This is primarily because the employed, now fully
aware of the fact that unemployment benefits will be low if they happen to become
unemployed in the recession, enter the recession with larger wealth levels and do not
cut their consumption as much as when they were surprised by the expiration of their
benefits (compare columns 4 and 5 in table 14 for the employed, s0 = e). Thus, all of the
larger magnitude of the aggregate consumption decline with low UI benefits is driven
by the small group of unemployed (compare columns 3 and 5 of table 14). The end ef-
fect is an aggregate consumption decline of 2.7% that is somewhat larger, but broadly
consistent with that in the benchmark economy even though individual consumption
responses to the crisis differ markedly across the two economies for the unemployed.


6.3.1   Revisiting the Importance of “Hand-to-Mouth" Consumers

In the absence of a generous unemployment insurance system, not only is the decline
in aggregate consumption larger, as the previous section has argued, but the wealth-
poor, not yet unemployed households have a greater incentive to save for now more


                                                         57
likely unemployment spells. As such, our economy with low replacement rate re-
sponds to aggregate shocks more strongly, relative to an economy with hand-to-mouth
consumers, than the benchmark economy with ρ = 50%. Recall that with ρ = 50%
the aggregate consumption decline was 2.4%, relative to a fall of 2% in an economy
with 40% hand-to-mouth consumers. With ρ = 10%, the fall amounts to 2.7% in our
economy and 2.1% in the hand-to-mouth consumer economy, and thus the divergence
between the two models becomes stronger, on account of the elevated importance of
the precautionary savings behavior of the wealth-poor, which is absent in models with
exogenously given fixed shares of hand-to-mouth consumers. The recent papers by
Ravn and Sterk (2013), McKay (2015) and Den Haan, Rehndal and Riegler (2016) are
important examples that have stressed the importance of precautionary savings in the
face of increased idiosyncratic risk for the dynamics of macro aggregates. 70



7      Inequality and Aggregate Economic Activity

In the model studied so far, the wealth distribution did potentially have an important
impact on the dynamics of aggregate consumption and investment, but—by construction—
only a fairly negligible effect on aggregate economic activity. Output depends on cap-
ital, labor input, and aggregate TFP, and in the previous model the latter two are ex-
ogenously given. The capital stock is predetermined in the short run, and even in the
medium run only responds to net investment, which is a small fraction of the overall
capital stock. So the output response to a negative productivity shock is exogenous
on impact and, to a first approximation, exogenous (to the wealth distribution and to
social insurance policies) even in the medium run. That is why in the previous section
we focused on the distribution of the output decline between aggregate consumption
and investment.
In the models discussed so far, aggregate demand played no independent role in shap-
ing business cycle dynamics and, by construction, government demand management
is ineffective. We now present a version of the model in which the output response to
a negative shock is endogenous even in the short run, and thus potentially depends on
the wealth distribution in the economy as well as policies that shape this distribution.
The model retains the focus on real, as opposed to nominal, factors.71
The aggregate production function continues to be given by

70   In related work Harmenberg and Oberg (2016) analyze the dynamics of consumption expenditures
     on durables in the presence of time-varying income risk.
71   In this chapter we abstract completely from nominal frictions that make output partially demand-
     determined. Representative papers that contain a lucid discussion of the demand- and supply-side
     determinants of aggregate output fluctuations in heterogeneous agent New Keynesian models are
     Gornemann, Kuester and Nakajima (2012), Challe, Matheron, Ragot and Rubio-Ramirez (2015) and
     Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2016).



                                                 58
                                            Y = Z ∗ F (K, N )
with Z ∗ = ZC ω and ω > 0,
but now consider a world in which ω > 0 and thus TFP Z ∗ = ZC ω endogenously
responds to the level of aggregate demand. A decline in aggregate consumption trig-
gered by a fall in Z and an ensuing reduction of aggregate wages and household in-
comes endogenously reduces TFP and thus output further. This model with aggregate
demand externalities is in the spirit of Bai, Rios-Rull and Storesletten (2012), Huo and
Rios-Rull (2013) and Kaplan and Menzio (forthcoming), who provide micro founda-
tions for the aggregate productivity process we are assuming here.72
Since in this model a reduction in aggregate consumption C (say, induced by a nega-
tive Z shock) feeds back into lower TFP and thus lower output, government “demand
management" might be called for, even in the absence of incomplete insurance markets
against idiosyncratic risk. A social insurance program that stabilizes consumption de-
mand of those adversely affected by idiosyncratic shocks in a crisis might be desirable
not just from a distributional and insurance perspective, but also from an aggregate
point of view. In the model with consumption externalities, in addition to providing
consumption insurance it increases productivity and accelerates the recovery.73
We now first discuss the calibration of the extended model before documenting how
the presence of the demand externality affects our benchmark results.


7.1     Calibration Strategy

We retain all model parameters governing the idiosyncratic shock processes (s, y), but
recalibrate the exogenous part of aggregate productivity Z. In addition we need to spec-
ify the strength of the externality ω. Our basic approach is to use direct observations
on TFP to calibrate the exogenous process Z and then choose the magnitude of the
externality ω such that the demand externality model displays the same volatility of
output as the benchmark model which (as the reader might recall) was calibrated to
match the severity of the two severe recession episodes we identified in the data.74

72   We are certainly not claiming that our and their formulations are isomorphic on the aggregate level;
     rather, their work provides the fully micro-founded motivation for the reduced form approach we
     are taking in this section.
73   We think of this model as the simplest structure embedding a channel through which redistribution
     affects output directly and in the short run.
74   An alternative approach would have been to retain the original calibration of the Z process, choose
     a variety of ω values, and document how much amplification, relative to the benchmark model, the
     externality generates. The drawback of this strategy is that output is counterfactually volatile in
     these thought experiments unless ω = 0.




                                                   59
7.1.1    Exogenous TFP Process Z

For comparability with the benchmark results, we retain the transition matrix π ( Z 0 | Z )
but recalibrate the states ( Zl , Zh ) of the process. To do so, we HP-filter the Fernald
(2012) data for total factor productivity, identify as severe recessions the empirical
episodes with high unemployment as in the benchmark analysis, and then compute
average TFP (average percentage deviations relative to the HP-trend) in the severe re-
cession periods, identified from unemployment data, as well as in normal times. This
delivers

                                      Zl   1 − 1.84%
                                         =           = 0.9781.
                                      Zh   1 + 0.36%

Thus, the newly calibrated exogenous TFP process is significantly less volatile than
in the benchmark economy, where the corresponding dispersion of TFP was given by
 Zl
Z = 0.9614.
 h




7.1.2    Size of the Spillover ω

Given the exogenous TFP process, we now choose ω such that the externality economy
has exactly the same output volatility as the benchmark economy. This requires ω =
0.30.


7.2     Results

7.2.1    Aggregate Dynamics

In figure 13 we display the dynamics of a typical Great Recession (22 quarters of
low TFP) in both the baseline economy and the demand externality economy (labeled
C ω ).75 The upper left panel shows that, as determined in the calibration section, a sig-
nificantly smaller exogenous shock (2.2% as opposed to a 3.9% fall in TFP) is needed
in the externality economy to generate a decline in output (and thus consumption and
investment) of a given size. The impulse response functions are qualitatively similar
in both economies, but with important quantitative differences.
First, the average decline in output in a Great Recession is the same across both economies
since this is how ZZl was calibrated in the externality economy. However, since ag-
                     h
gregate consumption declines during the course of a Great Recession and aggregate
consumption demand impacts productivity, the decline in output is more pronounced
and the recovery slower in the externality economy. Thus, the consumption externality

75   The figure for a one-quarter Great Recession is qualitatively similar, but less useful in highlighting
     the differences between both economies.


                                                    60
Figure 13: Impulse Response to Aggregate Technology Shock: Comparison between
Benchmark and Demand Externality Economy


                               Productivity IRF                                           Consumption IRF
                 1                                                          1
                                                                                                                  Benchmark
              0.995                                                       0.99                                    C!

               0.99
                                                                          0.98
              0.985
                                                                          0.97
               0.98




                                                                      C
          Z




                                                                          0.96
              0.975
                                                                          0.95
               0.97

              0.965                                                       0.94

               0.96                                                       0.93
                      5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20     25    30       35      40
                               Time (quarters)                                             Time (quarters)



                                    Output IRF                                             Investment IRF
                 1                                                        1.05

               0.99

               0.98                                                         1

               0.97
                                                                          0.95
               0.96
          Y




                                                                      I




               0.95
                                                                           0.9
               0.94

               0.93                                                       0.85
               0.92

               0.91                                                        0.8
                      5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20     25    30       35      40
                               Time (quarters)                                             Time (quarters)




adds endogenous persistence to the model, over and above the channel already present
through endogenous capital accumulation.
Of course, the demand externality mechanism also adds endogenous volatility to the
model, but the fact that, via calibration, both models have the same output volatility
obscures this fact. In figure 14 we display the magnitude of this amplification by com-
paring the impulse responses in two economies with the same exogenous TFP process
(the one recalibrated for the demand externality economy), but with varying degrees
of the externality (ω = 0 and ω = 0.30).
In contrast to figure 13, now the differences in the dynamics of the time series are
purely driven by the presence of the demand externality. The amplification of the
exogenous shock is economically important: the initial fall in output, consumption
and investment is substantially larger (5.0%, 2.1% and 14.5% versus 4.2%, 1.7% and
11.8%, respectively). In addition, and consistent with figure 13, these larger output
and consumption losses are more persistent in the economy with negative feedback
effects from aggregate demand on productivity and thus production.




                                                                 61
Figure 14: Impulse Response to Identical Aggregate Technology Shock: Comparison
between Economies with and without Demand Externality


                                Productivity IRF                                                 Consumption IRF
                  1                                                          1

                                                                           0.99
               0.995
                                                                           0.98

                0.99
                                                                           0.97




                                                                       C
           Z




                                                                           0.96
               0.985

                                                                           0.95
                0.98
                                                                           0.94

               0.975                                                       0.93
                       5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10         15    20     25    30   35   40
                                Time (quarters)                                                   Time (quarters)



                                     Output IRF                                                   Investment IRF
                  1                                                        1.05

                0.99                                                                  C !=0
                                                                                      C !=0.36
                0.98                                                         1

                0.97
                                                                           0.95
                0.96
           Y




                                                                       I




                0.95
                                                                            0.9
                0.94

                0.93                                                       0.85
                0.92

                0.91                                                        0.8
                       5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10         15    20     25    30   35   40
                                Time (quarters)                                                   Time (quarters)




7.2.2   On the Importance of the Wealth Distribution when Output is Partially Demand-
        Determined

In principle, the previous results measuring the importance of aggregate consumption
demand for output fluctuations did not require household heterogeneity at all. How-
ever, in the previous part of the chapter, we argued that the wealth distribution is a cru-
cial determinant of aggregate consumption fluctuations, so it stands to reason the same
is true with output fluctuations in economies where GDP is demand-determined. In fig-
ure 15 we verify this point, by displaying the aggregate impulse responses to a Great
Recession in both the externality economy with plausible wealth heterogeneity and a
version of the original Krusell-Smith economy, but also including the demand exter-
nality. The underlying exogenous TFP process is identical in both economies (and the
same as in figure 14), and to display the differences between the models most clearly,
we display the dynamics of the macro economy through a 22-quarter Great Recession.
As the figure clearly indicates, in the economy with realistic wealth inequality, the out-
put recession is significantly greater, with output losses of 5.0% on impact and 8.8% at
the end of the recession, compared with declines of 4.8% and 8.0% in the original KS


                                                                  62
Figure 15: Impulse Response to Identical Aggregate Technology Shock: Comparison
between Economies with High and Low Wealth Inequality


                                  Productivity IRF                                           Consumption IRF
                    1                                                          1
                                                                                                                     KS C !
                                                                             0.99                                    Bench C !
                 0.995
                                                                             0.98

                  0.99
                                                                             0.97




                                                                         C
             Z




                                                                             0.96
                 0.985

                                                                             0.95
                  0.98
                                                                             0.94

                 0.975                                                       0.93
                         5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20     25    30      35       40
                                  Time (quarters)                                             Time (quarters)



                                       Output IRF                                             Investment IRF
                    1                                                          1

                  0.99                                                       0.98
                  0.98
                                                                             0.96
                  0.97
                                                                             0.94
                  0.96
                                                                             0.92
              Y




                                                                         I




                  0.95
                                                                              0.9
                  0.94
                                                                             0.88
                  0.93

                  0.92                                                       0.86

                  0.91                                                       0.84
                         5   10   15      20    25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20     25    30      35       40
                                  Time (quarters)                                             Time (quarters)




economy (but with demand externality).76 In table 15 we summarize the consumption
and output declines (on impact, and at the end of a Great Recession) for both the origi-
nal KS and the benchmark economy, both with and without consumption externality.77
It reconfirms the main message of figure 15: larger wealth dispersion, and especially
lower wealth at the bottom of the wealth distribution, amplifies aggregate consump-
tion recessions, as well as aggregate output recessions if the level of production is par-
tially demand-determined. In the latter case, lower output in turn feeds back into an
even more severe consumption recession. The magnitude of the differences is quanti-
tatively significant, amounting to an additional drop of aggregate (and thus per capita)
consumption of 0.9% at the end of the recession, because of larger wealth inequality
induced by more realistic household heterogeneity (again comparing the benchmark
model with the original KS economy).

76   As in the economy without externality, the KS version of the model provides a very good approx-
     imation, as far as macroeconomic aggregates are concerned, for the corresponding representative
     agent economy.
77   It is important to note that the results with ω = 0 and ω = 0.3 are not directly comparable, since
     in the economy with demand externality we feed in smaller TFP fluctuations, as described in the
     calibration section.


                                                                    63
           Table 15: Consumption and Output Declines in Four Economies

                Economy              ∆1 C         ∆1 Y    ∆22 C   ∆22 Y
                KS, ω = 0            -1.9%        -5.8%   -6.0%   -8.0%
                Bench., ω = 0        -2.4%        -5.8%   -6.1%   -7.8%
                KS, ω = 0.3          -1.9%        -4.8%   -6.0%   -8.0%
                Bench., ω = 0.3      -2.1%        -5.0%   -6.9%   -8.8%


7.2.3   On the Interaction of Social Insurance and Wealth Inequality with Demand
        Externalities

In section 6.3 we demonstrated that the presence of social insurance policies has a
strong impact on the aggregate consumption response to an adverse aggregate shock
for a given wealth distribution, but also alters the long-run wealth distribution in the
economy. With output partially demand-determined, these policies indirectly impact
aggregate productivity and thus output. As the previous figures suggested, the ef-
fects are particularly important in the medium run due to the added persistence in the
demand externality economy.
In figure 11 above we documented that, holding the wealth distribution fixed, the size
of the social insurance system matters greatly for the aggregate consumption (and thus
investment) response to an aggregate productivity shock. Figure 16 repeats the same
thought experiment (an impulse response to a TFP shock in economies with ρ = 50%
and ρ = 10% with the same pre-recession wealth distribution), but now for the con-
sumption externality model.
The key observations from figure 16 are that now, in the consumption externality
model, the size of the unemployment insurance system affects not only the magni-
tude of the aggregate consumption decline on impact, but also aggregate output, and
the latter effect is quite persistent.
This can perhaps be more clearly seen in figure 17, which displays the difference in the
impulse response functions for output and consumption between economies with ρ =
50% and ρ = 10%, for both the benchmark model and the demand externality model.
The presence of sizeable unemployment insurance stabilizes aggregate consumption
more in the externality economy (the UI-induced reduction in the fall of C is 2.3%
on impact and 1.3% after ten quarters of the initial shock in the externality economy,
relative to 1.9% and 0.5% in the benchmark economy).
In addition, whereas in the benchmark economy more generous social insurance has no
impact on output in the short run (by construction) and a moderately negative impact
in the medium run (since investment recovers more slowly in the presence of more gen-
erous UI), with partially demand-determined output, UI stabilizes output significantly


                                             64
Figure 16: Impulse Response to Aggregate Technology Shock with and without Gener-
ous Unemployment Insurance in Consumption Externality Model, Fixed Wealth Dis-
tribution


                             Productivity IRF                                 Consumption IRF
                    1                                              1.01


                                                                     1
                 0.995

                                                                   0.99
                  0.99
                                                                   0.98




                                                               C
             Z




                 0.985
                                                                   0.97

                  0.98
                                                                   0.96                               UI Shock
                                                                                                      C!
                 0.975                                             0.95
                         5        10            15   20                   5         10           15              20
                             Time (quarters)                                   Time (quarters)



                               Output IRF                                      Investment IRF
                  1.01                                             1.05

                    1

                                                                     1
                  0.99

                  0.98
                                                                   0.95
              Y




                                                               I




                  0.97

                  0.96
                                                                    0.9

                  0.95

                  0.94                                             0.85
                         5        10            15   20                   5         10           15              20
                             Time (quarters)                                   Time (quarters)




(close to 1% on impact, with the effect fading away only after 20 quarters—despite the
fact that the shock itself only lasts for one quarter in this thought experiment.
Finally, we want to make a perhaps somewhat unexpected observation that turns
out to be important for the calculation of the welfare losses of Great Recessions that
we pursue in Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016).78 The surprise removal of unem-
ployment benefits leaves households—especially those at the low end of the wealth
distribution—with suboptimally small assets. These households start to save mas-
sively, especially in light of the elevated unemployment risk. Thus, in the medium
run, wealth (the capital stock) and therefore aggregate consumption starts to rise. And
since total factor productivity is linked to aggregate consumption demand (and since

78   In that paper, we contribute to the very large literature that studies the normative consequences of
     social insurance policies (such as unemployment insurance, social security and progressive income
     taxation) in quantitative heterogeneous household models. See Domeij and Heathcote (2004), Cau-
     cutt, Imrohoroglu and Kumar (2006), Conesa, Kitao and Krueger (2009), Peterman (2013), Heathcote,
     Storesletten and Violante (2014), Mitman and Rabinovich (2015), Bakis, Kaymak and Poschke (2015),
     Karabarbounis (2016), Krebs, Kuhn and Wright (2015), and Krueger and Ludwig (2016) for recent
     representative contributions to this literature.


                                                          65
Figure 17: Difference in IRF between ρ = 50% and ρ = 10%, with and without Con-
sumption Externality


                                             Benchmark                                                C!
                           0.005                                                   0.005



                               0                                                       0



                           -0.005                                                  -0.005
           PP Difference




                                                                   PP Difference
                            -0.01                                                   -0.01

                                                              C
                                                              Y
                           -0.015                                                  -0.015



                            -0.02                                                   -0.02



                           -0.025                                                  -0.025
                                    0   10      20       30   40                            0   10    20     30   40
                                        Time (quarters)                                         Time (quarters)




the capital stock in the economy increases), aggregate wages and output rise strongly
in the medium run in the externality economy with low unemployment insurance ben-
efits.79 As long as households are sufficiently patient80 and have not lost their job in
the recession, the stronger recovery of the macro economy with low unemployment
benefits might make these households prefer less generous unemployment insurance,
despite the fact that unemployment insurance benefits act as effective aggregate de-
mand stabilizers in the short run (again as figure 17 clarifies).
This last finding, discussed in much greater length in Krueger, Mitman and Perri
(2016), leads us back to the main overall theme of this chapter: we have demonstrated
that the extent of household heterogeneity with respect to income, wealth and prefer-
ences, in a canonical heterogeneous household business cycle model, determines the
aggregate consumption and output dynamics over the business cycle in a quantita-
tively significant way. It gives social insurance policies that shape the income, con-
sumption and wealth distributions a potentially important role in aggregate consump-

79   Mitman and Rabinovich (2014) argue, reversely, that the extension of unemployment benefits goes a
     long way towards explaining recent slow recoveries in U.S. data.
80   Recall that the population is heterogeneous with respect to the time discount factor.


                                                                   66
tion and output stabilization and has (as we show in our companion work) welfare
implications that vary strongly across households with different characteristics. Mod-
elling microeconomic heterogeneity explicitly in the analysis of Great is therefore po-
tentially quantitatively important, even if the object of research interest is purely ag-
gregate in nature.



8      Conclusion

In this chapter we used PSID data on earnings, income, consumption, and wealth as
well as different versions of a canonical business cycle model with household earn-
ings and wealth heterogeneity to study the conditions under which the cross-sectional
wealth distribution shapes the business cycle dynamics of aggregate output, consump-
tion and investment in a quantitatively meaningful way. We argued that the low end
of the wealth distribution is crucial for the answer to this question. We studied mech-
anisms that helped to generate close to 40% of households without significantly pos-
itive net worth, including highly persistent earnings shocks, preference heterogene-
ity and publicly provided social insurance programs. We showed that the decline in
consumption of this group of wealth-poor households at the onset of the recession
generates a significantly larger aggregate consumption drop than in a representative-
household version of the neoclassical growth model. The same is true for output if it
is partially demand-determined. We argued that the key mechanism underlying this
result is increased precautionary savings against elevated unemployment risk, and we
investigated the extent to which social insurance programs impact the strength of this
channel.
Our work suggests that there are at least three important research directions that could
yield new insights on the role of heterogeneity for macro outcomes.81
The first is the introduction of additional dimensions of household heterogeneity, so
that the model can better capture the joint distribution of wealth, income and expendi-
ture we observe in the data. A more accurate mapping between the model and house-
hold micro data might change our quantitative conclusions regarding the impact of
household heterogeneity on macro dynamics.
The second dimension is the introduction of a richer model of the labor market, with
elastic labor supply and other frictions impacting equilibrium hours and unemploy-
ment. Doing so would allow us to better understand the link between changes in
aggregate consumption expenditures and changes in aggregate output, which in this
chapter we have modeled in a very reduced form way.
The final direction for promising work is the explicit introduction of aggregate shocks
to the net worth of households (which one may call financial shocks). The micro data

81   We fully acknowledge that exciting work in all these dimensions is already under way.


                                                  67
on the dynamics of household wealth have shown that during the Great Recession
large changes in the net worth of households occurred, and the current model with
only one asset does not capture these changes. Introducing a mechanism that can gen-
erate these fluctuations in the price of different assets could modify the mechanisms
leading from the micro wealth distribution to aggregate consumption and output de-
scribed in this chapter.
More generally, the emergence of new rich household and firm-level data sets, cou-
pled with continuous theoretical and computational advances in the solutions of macro
models with micro heterogeneity, as well as renewed scientific and popular interest in
distributional questions, make the research field of quantitative heterogeneous agent
macroeconomics an exciting area for future inquiry.




                                         68
References
 [1] Aguiar, M., and M. Bils (2015), “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income
     Inequality?”, American Economic Review 105: 2725-2756.

 [2] Aiyagari, S. R. (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 659-684.

 [3] Ameriks, J., J. S. Briggs, A. Caplin, M. D. Shapiro and C. Tonetti (2015), “Long-
     Term Care Utility and Late in Life Saving, ”NBER working paper No.20973.

 [4] Arellano, M., R. Blundell and S. Bonhomme (2015), “Household Earnings and
     Consumption: A Nonlinear Framework”, Working paper.

 [5] Athreya, K., A. Owens and F. Schwartzman (2015), “Does Redistribution Increase
     Output? The Centrality of Labor Supply”, Working paper.

 [6] Atkinson, A. B., and F. Bourguignon, eds. (2015), Handbook of Income Distribu-
     tion, Vol. 2 North-Holland, Amsterdam.

 [7] Attanasio, O. (1999), “Consumption”, in: J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Hand-
     book of Macroeconomics, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam.

 [8] Attanasio, O. P., and G. Weber (2010), "Consumption and Saving: Models of In-
     tertemporal Allocation and Their Implications for Public Policy", Journal of Eco-
     nomic Literature 48: 693-751.

 [9] Auclert, A. (2014), “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel” Working
     paper.

[10] Auclert, A. and M. Rognlie (2016), “Inequality and Aggregate Demand ”, Working
     paper.

[11] Bachmann, R., R. J. Caballero and E. Engel (2013), “Aggregate Implications of
     Lumpy Investment: New Evidence and a DSGE Model”, American Economic Jour-
     nal: Macroeconomics 5: 29-67.

[12] Bai, Y., J.-V. Rios Rull and K. Storesletten (2012), “Demand Shocks as Productivity
     Shocks”, Working Paper.

[13] Bakis, O., B. Kaymak and M. Poschke (2015), “Transitional Dynamics and the Op-
     timal Progressivity of Income Redistribution,”Review of Economic Dynamics, 18:
     679-693.

[14] Barro, R. J. (2006), “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Cen-
     tury,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 121: 823-866.




                                          69
[15] Bayer, C., R. Lütticke, L. Pham-Dao and V. Tjaden (2015), “Precautionary Savings,
     Illiquid Assets, and the Aggregate Consequences of Shocks to Household Income
     Risk”, Working paper.

[16] Benabou, R. (2002), “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Econ-
     omy: What Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?", Econo-
     metrica 70: 481-517.

[17] Benhabib, J., and A. Bisin (2016), “Skewed Wealth Distributions: Theory and Em-
     pirics”, NBER working paper No. 21924.

[18] Benhabib, J., A. Bisin and S. Zhu (2011), “The Distribution of Wealth and Fiscal
     Policy in Economies with Finitely Lived Agents ”, Econometrica 79: 123-157.

[19] Berger, D., and J. Vavra (2015), “Consumption Dynamics During Recessions”
     Econometrica 83: 101-154.

[20] Bewley, T. (1986), “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of Inde-
     pendently Fluctuating Consumers”, in: W. Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell, eds.,
     Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu North-Holland
     Amsterdam, 79-102.

[21] Blank, R. M. and D. E. Card (1991), “Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Un-
     employment: Is There an Explanation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:1157-
     1190.

[22] Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri and I. Preston (2008), “Consumption Inequality and Par-
     tial Insurance” American Economic Review 98:1887-1921.

[23] Brinca, P., H. A. Holter, P. Krusell and L. Malafry (2016), “Fiscal Multipliers in the
     21st Century“ Journal of Monetary Economics 77:53-69.

[24] Brüggemann, B., and J. Yoo (2015), “Aggregate and Distributional Effects of In-
     creasing Taxes on Top Income Earners ”, Working paper.

[25] Buera, F. (2009), “A Dynamic Model of Entrepreneurship with Borrowing Con-
     straints: Theory and Evidence”, Annals of Finance 5: 443-464.

[26] Burkhauser, R. V., J. Larrimore and K. Simon (2012), “A ’Second Opinion’ on the
     Economic Health of the American Middle Class ”, National Tax Journal 65: 7-32

[27] Cagetti, M., and De Nardi, M. (2006), “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth”,
     Journal of Political Economy, 114, 835-870.

[28] Carroll, C. (1992), “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Ev-
     idence” , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1992: 61-135.

[29] Carroll, C. (1997), “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
     Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1-55.

                                            70
[30] Carroll, C. D., J. Slacalek, K. Tokuoka and M. White (2015), “The Distribution of
     Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume”, Working paper.

[31] Castaneda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez and J.-V. Rios-Rull (1998), “Exploring the Income
     Distribution Business Cycle Dynamics”, Journal of Monetary Economics42: 93-130.

[32] Castaneda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2003), “Accounting for the
     U.S. Earnings and Wealth Inequality”, Journal of Political Economy 111:818-857.

[33] Caucutt, E., S. Imrohoroglu and K. Kumar (2006), “Does the Progressivity of In-
     come Taxes Matter for Human Capital and Growth?”, Journal of Public Economic
     Theory 8: 95-118.

[34] Challe, E., J. Matheron, X. Ragot and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2015), “Precautionary
     Saving and Aggregate Demand”, Working Paper.

[35] Chang, Y., and S.-B. Kim (2007), “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implications
     for Labor-Market Fluctuations”, American Economic Review 97:1939-1956.

[36] Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2007), “A Quantita-
     tive Theory of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default”Econometrica,
     75:1525-1590.

[37] Chodorow-Reich G. and L. Karabarbounis (2016), “The Cyclicality of the Oppor-
     tunity Cost of Employment ”, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming

[38] Cocco, J. F., F. J. Gomes and P. J. Maenhout (2005), “Consumption and Portfolio
     Choice over the Life-Cycle”, Review of Financial Studies 18: 491-533.

[39] Conesa, J. C., S. Kitao and D. Krueger (2009), “Taxing Capital? Not a Bad Idea
     after All!” American Economic Review, 99, 25-48.

[40] Deaton, A. (1991), “Saving and Liquidity Constraints” Econometrica 59: 1221-1248.

[41] Deaton, A. (1992), Understanding Consumption, Oxford University Press, New
     York.

[42] De Nardi, M. (2004), “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links”, Review of
     Economic Studies 71: 743-768.

[43] De Nardi, M. (2015), “Quantitative Models of Wealth Inequality: A Survey”,
     NBER working paper No. 21106.

[44] De Nardi, M., G. Fella and F. Yang (2015), “Piketty’s Book and Macro Models of
     Wealth Inequality”, NBER working paper No. 21730.

[45] De Nardi, M., E. French and J. B. Jones (2010), “Why Do the Elderly Save? The
     Role of Medical Expenses ”, Journal of Political Economy 118: 39-75.


                                         71
[46] Den Haan, W. J. (2010), “Assessing the Accuracy of the Aggregate Law of Motion
     in Models with Heterogeneous Agents ”, Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control
     34: 79-99.

[47] Den Haan, W., P. Rendahl and M. Riegler (2016), “Unemployment (Fears), Precau-
     tionary Savings, and Aggregate Demand”, Working paper.

[48] Domeij, D. and J. Heathcote (2004), “On the Distributional Effects of Reducing
     Capital Taxes”, International Economic Review 45: 523-554.

[49] Fernald, J. (2012), “Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the
     Great Recession”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-18.

[50] Fisher, J., D. Johnson, T. Smeeding and J. Thompson (2015), “Inequality in 3D:
     Income, Consumption and Wealth”, Presentation at 2015 NBER Summer Institute.

[51] Gabaix, X., J. Lasry, P. Lions and B. Moll (2014), “The Dynamics of Inequality”,
     Working paper.

[52] Ganong, P., and Noel, P. (2015), “How Does Unemployment Affect Consumer
     Spending?”, Working paper.

[53] Glover, A., J. Heathcote, D. Krueger and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2014), “Inter-generational
     Redistribution in the Great Recession”, Working paper.

[54] Gomes, F., and A. Michaelides (2008), “Asset Pricing with Limited Risk Sharing
     and Heterogeneous Agents”, Review of Financial Studies 21: 415-448.

[55] Gornemann, N., K. Kuester and M. Nakajima (2012), “Monetary Policy with Het-
     erogeneous Agents”, Working Paper.

[56] Gourio, F. (2013), “Credit Risk and Disaster Risk”, American Economic Journal:
     Macroeconomics, 5: 1-34.

[57] Gruber, J. (1994). “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment In-
     surance,“NBER working paper No. 4750.

[58] Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2012), “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and
     the Liquidity Trap”, Working Paper.

[59] Guvenen, F. (2009), “An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes”, Re-
     view of Economic Dynamics 12: 58-79.

[60] Guvenen, F. (2011), “Macroeconomics with Heterogeneity: A Practical Guide”,
     Economic Quarterly 97: 255-326.

[61] Guvenen, F., S. Ozkan and J. Song (2014), “The Nature of Countercyclical Income
     Risk”, Journal of Political Economy 122: 621-660.


                                           72
[62] Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii and K. Mitman (2013), “Unemployment
     Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects”,
     NBER working paper No. 19499.

[63] Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii and K. Mitman (2015), “The Impact of Unemploy-
     ment Benefit Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment Miracle?”, NBER
     working paper No. 20884.

[64] Harmenberg, K. and E. Oberg (2016), “Durable Expenditure Dynamics under
     Time-Varying Income Risk”, Working Paper.

[65] Heathcote, J. (2005), “Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents and Incomplete
     Markets”, Review of Economic Studies 72: 161-188.

[66] Heathcote, J., and F. Perri (2015), “Wealth and Volatility”, NBER working paper No.
     20994.

[67] Heathcote, J., Perri, F., and Violante, G. (2010), “Unequal We Stand: An Empir-
     ical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967-2006”, Review of
     Economic Dynamics 13: 15-51.

[68] Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten and G. Violante (2009), “Quantitative Macroeco-
     nomics with Heterogeneous Households”, Annual Review of Economics 1: 319-354.

[69] Heathcote, J., S. Storesletten and G. Violante (2014), “Optimal Tax Progressivity:
     An Analytical Framework,”Working paper.

[70] Hendricks, L. (2007), “How Important Is Discount Rate Heterogeneity for Wealth
     Inequality?, ”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 31: 3042-3068.

[71] Herkenhoff, K. (2015), “The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on Unemploy-
     ment,”Working paper.

[72] Huggett, M. (1993), “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-
     Insurance Economies”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17: 953-969.

[73] Huggett, M. (1996), “Wealth Distribution in Life-Cycle Economies”, Journal of
     Monetary Economics 38: 469-494

[74] Huggett, M. (1997), “The One-Sector Growth Model with Idiosyncratic Shocks:
     Steady States and Dynamics”, Journal of Monetary Economics 39:385-403.

[75] Huo, Z. and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2013), “Paradox of Thrift Recessions ”, Working Paper.

[76] Huo, Z. and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2016), “Balance Sheet Recessions ”, Working Paper.

[77] Imrohoroglu, A. (1989), “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquid-
     ity Constraints”, Journal of Political Economy 97: 1364-1383.


                                          73
[78] Jappelli, T., and L. Pistaferri (2014), “Fiscal Policy and MPC Heterogeneity”, Amer-
     ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6: 107-136.

[79] Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2014), “Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Un-
     employment Fluctuations”, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

[80] Kaplan, G., K. Mitman and G. Violante (2016), “Consumption and House Prices
     in the Great Recession: Model Meets Evidence”, Working paper.

[81] Kaplan, G., B. Moll and G. Violante (2016), “Monetary Policy According to HANK
     ”, NBER working paper No. 21897

[82] Kaplan, G. and G. Violante (2014), “A Model of the Consumption Response to
     Fiscal Stimulus Payments”, Econometrica 82: 1199-1239.

[83] Karabarbounis, M. (2015), “A Road Map for Efficiently Taxing Heterogeneous
     Agents”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

[84] Kekre, R. (2015), “Unemployment Insurance in Macroeconomic Stabilization ”,
     Working paper

[85] Khan, A. and J. K. Thomas (2008), “Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of Noncon-
     vexities in Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics ”, Econometrica 76: 395-436.

[86] Kopecky, K. and R. Suen (2010), “Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to
     Highly Persistent Processes ”, Review of Economic Dynamics 13: 701-714.

[87] Krebs, T., M. Kuhn and M. Wright (2015), “Human Capital Risk, Contract Enforce-
     ment and the Macroeconomy ”, American Economic Review 105: 3223-3272.

[88] Krueger, D. and A. Ludwig (2016), “On the Optimal Provision of Social Insurance:
     Progressive Taxation versus Education Subsidies in General Equilibrium ”, Journal
     of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

[89] Krueger, D., K. Mitman and F. Perri (2016), “On the Distribution of the Welfare
     Losses of Large Recessions ”, Proceedings of the Econometric Society World Congress
     2016, forthcoming.

[90] Krueger, D., and F. Perri (2006), “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption
     Inequality? Evidence and Theory”, Review of Economic Studies 73: 163-193.

[91] Krueger, D., and F. Perri (2011), “How Do Households Respond to Income
     Shocks? ”, Working Paper.

[92] Krueger, D., F. Perri, L. Pistaferri and G. Violante (2010), “Cross-Sectional Facts
     for Macroeconomists”, Review of Economic Dynamics 13: 1-14.

[93] Krusell, P, T. Mukoyama and A. Sahin (2010), “Labour-Market Matching with Pre-
     cautionary Savings and Aggregate Fluctuations”, Review of Economic Studies 77:
     1477-1507.

                                           74
[94] Krusell, P. and A. Smith (1997),“Income and Wealth Heterogeneity, Portfolio
     Choice, and Equilibrium Asset Returns”, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1: 387-422.

[95] Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith Jr. (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
     Macroeconomy”, Journal of Political Economy 106: 867-896.

[96] Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith. Jr. (2006), “Quantitative Macroeconomic Models with
     Heterogeneous Agents”, in: Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and
     Applications, Ninth World Congress.

[97] Kuhn, M. and V. Rios-Rull (2015), “2013 Update on the U.S. Earnings, Income, and
     Wealth Distributional Facts: A View from Macroeconomic Modelers”, Working
     Paper.

[98] Kuznets, S. (1955), “Economic Growth and Income Inequality”, American Economic
     Review 45: 1-28.

[99] Livshits, I., J. MacGee and M. Tertilt (2007), “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh
     Start”, American Economic Review 97: 402-418.

[100] Maliar, L., S. Maliar and F. Valli (2010), “Solving the Incomplete Markets Model
     with Aggregate Uncertainty Using the Krusell-Smith Algorithm”, Journal of Eco-
     nomic Dynamics and Control 34: 42-49

[101] McKay, A. (2015), “Time-Varying Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Consump-
     tion Dynamics”, Working Paper.

[102] McKay, A., and R. Reis (2016), “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S.
     Business Cycle”, Econometrica, 84:141-194.

[103] Meghir, C., and L. Pistaferri (2004), “Income Variance Dynamics and Hetero-
     geneity”, Econometrica 72: 1-32

[104] Mitman, K., and S. Rabinovich (2014), “Do Unemployment Benefit Extensions
     Explain the Emergence of Jobless Recoveries?”, Working Paper.

[105] Mitman, K., and S. Rabinovich (2015), “Optimal Unemployment Insurance in an
     Equilibrium Business-Cycle Model”, Journal of Monetary Economics 71: 99-118.

[106] Perri F., and J. Steinberg (2012), “Inequality and Redistribution during the Great
     Recession ”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Economic Policy Paper.

[107] Peterman, W. B. (2013), “Determining the Motives for a Positive Optimal Tax on
     Capital”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37: 265-295.

[108] Piketty, T. (2014), Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Belknap Press, Cambridge,
     MA.



                                          75
[109] Piketty, T., and E. Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-
     1998”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118:1-41.

[110] Quadrini, V. (2000), “Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility”, Review of
     Economic Dynamics 3: 1-40.

[111] Quadrini, V., and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2015), “Inequality in: Macroeconomics”, in A.
     B. Atkinson and F. J. Bourguignon, eds., Handbook of Income Distribution, Volume
     2B, North Holland, Amsterdam 1229-1302.

[112] Ravn, M. and V. Sterk (2013), “Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions”, Working
     Paper.

[113] Rietz., T. (1988), “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution”, Journal of Monetary
     Economics 22:117-131.

[114] Shimer, R. (2005), “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
     Vacancies”, American Economic Review 95: 25-49.

[115] Skinner, J. (1987), “A Superior Measure of Consumption from the Panel Study of
     Income Dynamics”, Economics Letters 23: 213-216.

[116] Smith, M. and C. Tonetti (2014), “A Bayesian Approach to Imputing a
     Consumption-Income Panel Using the PSID and CEX”, Working Paper.

[117] Storesletten, K. C. I. Telmer and A. Yaron (2004a), “Consumption and Risk Shar-
     ing over the Life Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51:609-633

[118] Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer and A. Yaron (2004b), “Cyclical Dynamics in Id-
     iosyncratic Labor Market Risk,” Journal of Political Economy 112: 695-717.

[119] Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer and A. Yaron (2007), “Asset Pricing with Idiosyn-
     cratic Risk and Overlapping Generations,” Review of Economic Dynamics 10:519-
     548.

[120] Wong, A. (2015), “Population Aging and the Transmission of Monetary Policy to
     Consumption ”, Working Paper.

[121] Young, E. R. (2010), “Solving the Incomplete Markets Model with Aggregate
     Uncertainty using the Krusell-Smith Algorithm and Non-Stochastic Simulations,
     ”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34: 36-41.




                                         76
A      Data and Estimation Appendix

A.1     Aggregates in PSID and BEA

The series for disposable income from the BEA is Disposable Personal Income minus
Medicare and Medicaid transfers, which are not reported in the PSID. The disposable
income series from the PSID is constructed by adding, for each household and from
all members, wage and salary income, income from business and farm, income from
assets (including the rental equivalent for the main residence for home owners), and
all money transfers minus taxes (computed using the NBER TAXSIM calculator).
The series for consumption expenditures (from both the BEA and the PSID) includes
the following expenditures categories: cars and other vehicles purchases, food (at
home and away), clothing and apparel, housing (including rent and imputed rental
services for owners), household equipment, utilities, transportation expenses (such as
public transportation and gasoline), and recreation and accommodation services. In
the PSID, imputed rental services from owners are computed using the value of the
main residence times an interest rate of 4%. Total consumption expenditures are re-
ported for a two-year period because of the timing of reporting in the PSID. In the
PSID, some expenditures categories (food, utilities) are reported for the year of the
interview, while others are reported for the year preceding the interview, so total ex-
penditures span a two-year period. The measure of total consumption from the BEA is
constructed by aggregating the different categories using PSID timing; so, for example,
total expenditures in 2004-2005 include car purchases from 2004 and food expenditures
from 2005. We have excluded health services because PSID only reports out-of-pocket
expenditures and insurance premia. All PSID observations are aggregated using sam-
ple weights. Table A1 reports the 2004 levels of the per capita variables plotted in
figure 1, alongside, for comparison purposes, the level of food expenditures from both
sources and the total household personal consumption expenditures from the BEA.

 Table A1. Per capita levels in 2004: BEA v/s PSID
                                                 BEA        PSID
 1.   Disposable income                          $24120     $21364
 2.   Personal Consumption (PSID aggregate)      $18705     $15889
 3.   Food Expenditures                          $3592      $2707
 4.   Personal Consumption (Total)               $27642     -
Table A1 suggests that the levels from the PSID and the BEA are not too far off, al-
though there are differences. In particular, the aggregated PSID data are different from
the aggregates from the BEA for two reasons. Comparing lines 2-3 across columns, we
see that for a given category, the average from the PSID is different (typically lower)
than that reported by the BEA. This discrepancy between aggregate and aggregate
survey data has been widely documented before. The second reason is that some cate-


                                          77
                   0.08


                   0.06


                   0.04
     Growth rate




                   0.02


                      0
                           2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                   ‐0.02


                   ‐0.04
                                              PSID Aggregate       Total


                       Figure A.1: BEA consumption growth for two different aggregates


gories are not included in our PSID aggregate, either because they are mismeasured in
the PSID (e.g., Health expenditures) or because they are not reported by the PSID (e.g.,
expenditures in financial services). One might wonder whether these omitted cate-
gories matter for the aggregate pattern of expenditures. Figure A1 reports the growth
rate of total household personal consumption expenditures from the BEA, along with
the growth rate for the BEA consumption expenditures that are included in the PSID
aggregate defined above. Table A1 suggests that categories included in the PSID aggre-
gate cover only about 65% of the total consumption expenditures; Figure A.1 however,
shows that the cyclical pattern of total expenditures is similar to the one in the PSID
aggregate, suggesting that the missing consumption categories in the PSID aggregate
should not make a big difference for our results.




                                                                  78
          A.2      Standard Errors and Additional Tables

    Table A2. Annualized changes in variables across PSID net worth (2004-06 v/s 2006-10)
    with standard errorsa
           Net Worthb                                   Disp Y (%)                 Cons. Exp.(%)             Exp. Rate (pp)
           (1)                    (2)                   (3)       (4)              (5)      (6)              (7)       (8)
           04-06                  06-10                 04-06     06-10            04-06    06-10            04-06     06-10
            15.7 44.6              −3.0 −10.2            4.1       1.2              5.6       −1.3            0.9       −1.6
  All
            (4.4) (12.4)           (1.6) (6.4)           (1.5)     (0.3)            (1.0)     (0.5)           (0.9)     (0.3)

            N A 12.9               N A 6.6                7.4          6.7          7.1          0.6          −0.2        −4.2
  Q1
                  (1.5)                 (1.5)             (1.0)        (0.8)        (1.2)        (0.7)        (0.9)       (0.7)
            121.9 19.5             24.4 3.7               6.7          4.1          7.2          2.0          0.3         −1.3
  Q2
            (38.3) (5.9)           (5.2) (0.8)            (1.0)        (0.6)        (1.4)        (0.6)        (1.0)       (0.4)
            32.9 23.6              4.3   3.3              5.1          1.8          9.0          0.0          2.3         −1.1
  Q3
            (3.7) (3.1)            (1.5) (1.1)            (0.7)        (0.4)        (4.1)        (0.7)        (2.6)       (0.4)
            17.0 34.7              1.7   3.8              5.0          1.7          5.9          −1.5         0.5         −2.0
  Q4
            (2.1) (4.4)            (1.7) (3.7)            (0.6)        (0.4)        (1.8)        (0.5)        (1.1)       (0.3)
            11.6 132.2             −4.9 −68.4             1.8          −1.2         2.7          −3.5         0.5         −1.4
  Q5
            (5.5) (63.3)           (1.7) (31.5)           (3.2)        (0.6)        (1.7)        (1.1)        (1.7)       (0.8)


a Standard errors (in parentheses) are computed using bootstrapping with 50 sample replications

b The first figure is the percentage change (growth rate), the second is the change in 000’s of dollars. Standard errors for

those figures are also in 000’s of dollars

            Table A3. Annualized changes in variables across PSID net worth (2006-08)
                     Net Wortha          Disp Y (%)       Cons. Exp. (%)          Exp. Rate (pp)
            All      -5.1 -17.3                  2.5                 -3.3                    -3.6
            Q1       NA 7.7                       8.6                    -0.7                   -7.0
            Q2       131.3 19.0                   7.7                     2.9                   -3.1
            Q3       18.5 13.8                    3.4                    -3.4                   -4.2
            Q4       10.4 23.0                    3.2                    -1.6                   -3.0
            Q5       -10.8 -150                  -1.1                    -7.3                   -3.7
          a The first figure is the percentage change (growth rate), the second is the change in 000’s of dollars.




                                                              79
  Table A4. Annualized changes in variables across PSID net worth (2008-10)
          Net Wortha          Disp Y (%)        Cons. Exp. (%)          Exp. Rate (pp)
  All     0.5 1.3                    -0.2                   1.3                    0.9
  Q1      NA      14.7                  5.4                    1.8                   -2.4
  Q2      101.5    5.6                  0.6                    3.4                    2.0
  Q3      24.2    11.6                  0.7                    1.4                    0.4
  Q4      12.7    20.4                  0.2                    2.8                    1.5
  Q5      -4.2    -44.6                -2.6                   -0.8                    1.0
a The first figure is the percentage change (growth rate), the second is the change in 000’s of dollars.




A.3     Estimation of Earnings Process for employed households

To estimate the income process for employed households, we use annual household
data from the PSID from 1970 to 1997. (These are all the years the PSID survey was
conducted annually and for which we can construct comparable data.) We select all
households with a head between ages 25 to 60. For each household, we compute total
household labor income as the sum of the labor income of the head, the labor income
of the spouse, income from farm and business, plus transfers. We then compute tax
liabilities for each household using the TAXSIM (ver. 9) tax calculator and subtract
it from household labor income to construct household disposable labor income. We
then deflate disposable income using the CPI and divide it by the number of members
in the household to obtain a measure of per capita real disposable household income.
We then exclude the household/years observations where the head of the household
is unemployed and where the wage (computed as the head’s labor income divided by
the head’s total hours worked) is below half the minimum wage for that year. On this
sample, we regress the log of per capita real disposable income on age dummies, ed-
ucation dummies, interaction of age and education dummies, and year dummies. Be-
fore proceeding with estimation we exclude all household income sequences that are
shorter than five years. This leaves us with our final sample of 3878 household/years
sequences, of an average length of 13.1 years. On these data, we compute the first dif-
ferences and then the autocovariance matrix of the first differences. We then estimate
the stochastic process specified in the text using generalized method of moments, tar-
geting the covariance matrix. The weighting matrix is the identity matrix. Many thanks
to Chris Tonetti for providing the Matlab routines that perform the estimation.




                                                    80
B       Theoretical Appendix

B.1      Explicit Statement of Aggregate Law of Motion for Distribution

Since the extent of heterogeneity and the choice problem of young and old households
differ significantly, it is easiest to separate the cross-sectional probability measure Φ
into two components (ΦW , Φ R ) and note that the measures integrate to ΠW and Π R ,
respectively. First define the Markov transition function, conditional on staying in the
young age group j = W as

                                                              (
                                                                                                   0 ( s, y, a, β; Z, Φ ) ∈ A, β ∈ B
                                                                   π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z )π (y0 |y) : aW
QW,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) ((s, y, a, β), (S , Y , A, B)) =      ∑0                           0                                    else
                                                s0 ∈S ,y ∈Y



and for the old, retired age group, as

                                                            (
                                                                1 : a0R ( a, β; Z, Φ) ∈ A, β ∈ B
                Q R,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) (( a, β), (A, B)) =
                                                                 0                 else

For each Borel sets (S , Y , A, B) ∈ P(S) × P(Y ) × B(A) × P(B), the cross-sectional
probability measures of the young and old tomorrow are then given by82


                                                   Z
                     0
       HW ( Z, Φ, Z )(S , Y , A, B) = θ                    QW,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) ((s, y, a, β), (S , Y , A, B))dΦW
                                          + (1 − ν)1{0∈A}                 ∑
                                                                          0
                                                                                Π Z (s0 )   ∑
                                                                                            0
                                                                                                   Π(y0 )   ∑
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                   Π( β0 )
                                                                         s ∈S               y ∈Y            β ∈B


and


                                          Z
                         0
        HR ( Z, Φ, Z )(A, B) = ν                Q R,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) (( a, β), (A, B))dΦ R
                                                       Z
                                   + (1 − θ )               QW,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) ((s, y, a, β), (S, Y, A, B))dΦW .




82   These expressions capture the assumption that in each period, a measure 1 − nu of newborn house-
     holds enter the economy as workers, with zero assets and with idiosyncratic productivities and
     discount factors drawn from the stationary distributions, and that a fraction 1 − θ of working house-
     holds retire, and that the retirement probability is independent of all other characteristics.


                                                              81
C      Computational Appendix

The computational strategy follows the framework developed initially in Krusell and
Smith (1998), which was further adapted by Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2007) and
Gomes and Michaelides (2008). In particular, we employ the computational strategy
outlined in Maliar, Maliar and Valli (2010), focusing on the nonstochastic simulation
algorithm first introduced by Young (2010).


C.1     The individual problem

We approximate the true aggregate state (S=( Z, Φ)) by Ŝ, whose specific form depends
on which version of the model we solve, which is detailed explicitly later. Thus, the
household state is determined by (s, y, a, β; Ŝ) in working life and ( a, β; Ŝ) when retired.
The solution method from Maliar, Maliar and Valli (2010) is an Euler equation algo-
rithm that takes into account occasionally binding borrowing constraints. The problem
to be solved is as follows:



                     Retired:
                c R ( a, β; Ŝ)−σ − λ = νβE[(1 − δ + r 0 (Ŝ0 ))c0R ( a0R , β; Ŝ0 )−σ ]
         a0R ( a, β; Ŝ) + c R ( a, β; Ŝ) = bSS (Ŝ) + (1 + r (Ŝ) − δ) a/ν
                         a0R ( a, β; Ŝ) ≥ 0
                                   λ ≥ 0,            λa0R ( a, β; Ŝ) = 0


                   Working:
           cW (s, y, a, β; Ŝ)−σ − λ = θβE[(1 − δ + r 0 (Ŝ0 ))cW
                                                                0
                                                                  ( s 0 , y 0 , aW
                                                                                 0
                                                                                   , β; Ŝ0 )−σ ]
                                            +(1 − θ ) βE[(1 − δ + r 0 (Ŝ0 ))c0R ( aW
                                                                                    0
                                                                                      , β; Ŝ0 )−σ ]
 0
aW (s, y, a, β; Ŝ) + c(s, y, a, β; Ŝ) = (1 − τ ( Z; ρ))w(Ŝ)y [1 − (1 − ρ)1s=u ] + (1 + r (Ŝ) − δ) a
                    0
                   aW (s, y, a, β; Ŝ) ≥ 0
                                                       0
                                   λ ≥ 0,            λaW (s, y, a, β; Ŝ) = 0,

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing constraint.
We eliminate consumption via the budget constraint and then guess a policy rule for
 0 ( s, y, a, β; Ŝ ) and a0 ( a, β; Ŝ ). We then substitute the policy rule to compute a00 ( s0 , y0 , a0 , β; Ŝ0 ),
aW                            R                                                            W              W
a00R ( aW
        0 , β; Ŝ0 ) and a00 ( a0 , β; Ŝ0 ), and use the Euler equation to back out the implied pol-
                          R R
icy rule for a0 . If the implied policy rule is the same as the conjectured policy rule, we
have computed the optimal policy; if not, we update the guess and repeat.




                                                    82
C.2     The simulation algorithm

In order to simulate the model, we pick a grid on A and fix a distribution of workers
Φ0 ∈ S × Y × A × B space. We fix a long time series for the realization of the aggregate
shock, Z. Using the realization Zt and Φt , we can compute Ŝt and then apply the policy
rules from the individual problem and the Markov transition matrices associated with
s and y to compute Φt+1 by interpolating onto the grid points in A.


C.3     Approximating the Aggregate Law of Motion

C.3.1   KS and Benchmark Economies

For the KS and benchmark economies, we approximate the true aggregate state with
Ŝt = ( Z, K̄t ) where K̄t is the average capital in the economy. Agents need to forecast the
evolution of the capital stock. We conjecture that the law of motion in capital depends
only on the Z and K̄:


                           log(K̄t+1 ) = a0 ( Zt ) + a1 ( Zt ) log(K̄t )

We conjecture coefficients a0 and a1 , solve the household problem, and simulate the
economy. Then, using the realized sequence of Ŝ, we perform the previous regression
and check whether the implied coefficients are the same as the conjectured ones. If
they are, we have found the law of motion; if not, we update our guess and repeat.
For the KS economy, the computed law of motion is as follows:



                 log(K̄t+1 ) = 0.1239 + 0.9652 log(K̄t )             if Zt = Zl
                 log(K̄t+1 ) = 0.1334 + 0.9638 log(K̄t )             if Zt = Zh .

The R2 for both regressions are in excess of 0.999999. Note, however, that Den Haan
(2010) points out that despite having large R2 values, the accuracy of the solution can
still be poor, and suggests simulation of the capital stock under the policy rule and
comparing it with the capital stock that is calculated by aggregating across the distri-
bution. We do this for 3000 time periods. The average error between the implied law
of motion from the forecast equations and the computed law of motion is 0.02%, with
a maximum error of 0.10%.
For the benchmark economy, the computed law of motion is as follows:



                 log(K̄t+1 ) = 0.0924 + 0.9716 log(K̄t )              if Zt = Zl

                                                83
                   log(K̄t+1 ) = 0.0929 + 0.9723 log(K̄t )             if Zt = Zh

The R2 for both regressions are in excess of 0.99999. Similar to the previous compu-
tation, we check the accuracy of the law of motion. We find that the average error
between the implied law of motion and the actual capital stock computed from the
distribution is 0.01%, with a maximum error of 0.07%.


C.3.2   Consumption Externality Economy

In the economy with the aggregate consumption externality, we add contemporane-
ous consumption as a state variable in our approximation of the true aggregate state,
Ŝ = ( Z, K̄, C ). We therefore need an additional law of motion for how aggregate con-
sumption evolves. We conjecture the same form of law of motion for the average cap-
ital stock; however, we allow the evolution of aggregate consumption to depend on
both the average capital stock and aggregate consumption:



        log(K̄t+1 ) = a0 ( Zt ) + a1 ( Zt ) log(K̄t )
        log(Ct+1 ) = b0 ( Zt , Zt+1 ) + b1 ( Zt , Zt+1 ) log(K̄t ) + b2 ( Zt , Zt+1 ) log(Ct ).



Note that because capital is predetermined in the current period, the forces rule for
capital depends only on contemporaneous variables. Because aggregate consumption
is an equilibrium outcome in the next period, we allow for the forecast to depend
on the subsequent period’s realization of the Z shock. Thus, there are four sets of
coefficients to be estimated for the law of motion for consumption. The computed
forecast equations are as follows:



                   log(K̄t+1 ) = 0.0872 + 0.9736 log(K̄t )             if Zt = Zl
                   log(K̄t+1 ) = 0.0626 + 0.9816 log(K̄t )             if Zt = Zh

and



  log(Ct+1 ) = −0.0205 + 0.0023 log(K̄t ) + 0.9675 log(Ct )                 if( Z, Z 0 ) = ( Zl , Zl )
  log(Ct+1 ) = −0.5061 + 0.2882 log(K̄t ) + 0.5297 log(Ct )                 if( Z, Z 0 ) = ( Zl , Zh )
  log(Ct+1 ) = −0.3560 + 0.1893 log(K̄t ) + 0.6626 log(Ct )                 if( Z, Z 0 ) = ( Zh , Zl )
  log(Ct+1 ) = −0.0506 + 0.0360 log(K̄t ) + 0.9295 log(Ct )                  if( Z, Z 0 ) = ( Zh , Zh )



                                                  84
with R2 in excess of 0.9999, 0.9999999, 0.9999, 0.9999, 0.99999, 0.99999, respectively. As
before, we check the accuracy of the two laws of motion. We find that the average er-
ror between the implied law of motion and the actual capital stock computed from the
distribution is 0.02%, with a maximum error of 0.30%, and for the path of aggregate
consumption the mean error is 0.02% with a maximum error of 0.24%. Although the
externality economy has slightly larger forecast errors, the fit of the predicted aggre-
gates is still excellent.


C.4      Digression: Why Quasi-Aggregation?

One of the implications of the results in the main text is that the wealth distribution
(and especially the fraction of the population with little or no wealth) is quantitatively
important for the macroeconomic consumption and investment response to an aggre-
gate technology shock. This, however, does not imply that Krusell and Smith’s (1998)
original quasi-aggregation result fails.83 Recall that this result states that only the mean
of the current wealth distribution (as well as the current aggregate shock Z) is required
to accurately predict the future capital stock and therefore future interest rates and
wages.
The previous experiment compared consumption and investment dynamics in two
economies that differed substantially in their wealth distributions. For a given economy,
if the wealth distribution does not move significantly in response to aggregate shocks,
then it would be irrelevant for predicting future aggregates and prices. However, in
the high-wealth-inequality economy, the wealth distribution does move over the cycle.
For example, the share of households at the borrowing constraint displays a coefficient
of variation of 7%. However, what is really crucial for quasi-aggregation to occur is
whether the movement, over the cycle, in the key features of the wealth distribution is
explained well by movements in Z and K, the state variables in the forecast equations
of households. We find that it is, even in the high-wealth-inequality economy.
For example, if we regress the fraction of people at the borrowing constraint tomorrow
on Z in simulated data, we obtain an R2 of around 0.8. Therefore, the vast majority
of the variation in households at the borrowing limit is very well predicted by the
aggregate state variables ( Z, K ). This finding is robust to alternative definitions of con-
strained households (households exactly at wealth 0, households who save less than
1%, less than 10%, or less than 25% of the quarterly wage) and alternative moments
of the wealth distribution. It is this finding that makes quasi-aggregation hold, de-
spite the strong impact of the wealth distribution on the aggregate consumption and
investment response to aggregate technology shocks.

83   In fact, our computational method that follows theirs rather closely relies on quasi-aggregation con-
     tinuing to hold.




                                                    85
C.5    Recovering the Value Function

As we solve the model by exploiting the Euler equation, in order to perform the welfare
calculations in section 6.4, we need to recover the value functions as a function of the
idiosyncratic and aggregate states. To calculate them, we use policy function iteration.
We make an initial guess for the value function, v0 , then calculate v1 by solving the
recursive household decision problem (we need not perform the maximization, since
we have already computed the optimal policy function). We approximate the value
function with a cubic spline interpolation in assets, as well as in aggregate capital (and
for the demand externality model, we also aggregate consumption). If v1 is sufficiently
close to v0 (in the sup-norm sense), we stop; otherwise, we proceed to compute v2 tak-
ing v1 as the given value function. We proceed until convergence. For the economies
with retirement, we first recover the value function for retired households, v R , and
then proceed to recover the value function for working-age households, vW .




                                           86
