                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                     TUSKEGEE AND THE HEALTH OF BLACK MEN

                                       Marcella Alsan
                                     Marianne Wanamaker

                                      Working Paper 22323
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22323


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 2016, Revised June 2017


We thank the editor, Lawrence Katz, and four anonymous reviewers for constructive comments
that improved the paper. For detailed feedback at an early stage of our work, we thank Nathan
Nunn, Arun Chandrasekhar, Martha Bailey, Pascaline Dupas and William Collins. We are also
grateful to John Parman, Achyuta Adhvaryu, Rebecca Diamond, Claudia Goldin, Melanie
Morten, Mark Duggan, Mark Cullen, Melissa Dell, Nancy Qian, Ran Abramitzky, Rema Hanna,
Grant Miller and seminar participants at NBER DAE, NBER Cohort Studies, University of
Tennessee, Vanderbilt Health Policy, Carnegie Mellon and University of Pittsburgh Joint
Seminar, University of Copenhagen, University of Pennsylvania Health Policy, ASSA 2016,
PACDEV 2016, Berkeley Population Center, University of Chicago Harris School of Public
Policy, Stanford Health Policy, University of California-Davis, University of Maryland
Population Center, Stanford Social Science and History Workshop, University of South Carolina,
Florida State University, University of Richmond, Highland Hospital of Oakland, Dartmouth
College, Harvard Medical School, University of Michigan, University of California Berkeley,
Simon Fraser University and CIREQ Montreal for constructive comments. We thank the CDC for
providing access and the administrators at the Atlanta and Stanford Census Research Data
Centers for their help in navigating the restricted data. We thank Michael Sinkinson, Martha
Bailey, Andrew Goodman-Bacon and Walker Hanlon for sharing data and methods. Mario Javier
Carrillo, Anlu Xing and Afia Khan provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marcella Alsan and Marianne Wanamaker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tuskegee and the Health of Black Men
Marcella Alsan and Marianne Wanamaker
NBER Working Paper No. 22323
June 2016, Revised June 2017
JEL No. I14,O15

                                         ABSTRACT

For forty years, the Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male passively monitored
hundreds of adult black males with syphilis despite the availability of effective treatment. The
study’s methods have become synonymous with exploitation and mistreatment by the medical
profession. To identify the study’s effects on the behavior and health of older black men, we use
an interacted difference-in-difference-in-differences model, comparing older black men to other
demographic groups, before and after the Tuskegee revelation, in varying proximity to the study’s
victims. We find that the disclosure of the study in 1972 is correlated with increases in medical
mistrust and mortality and decreases in both outpatient and inpatient physician interactions for
older black men. Our estimates imply life expectancy at age 45 for black men fell by up to 1.5
years in response to the disclosure, accounting for approximately 35% of the 1980 life expectancy
gap between black and white men and 25% of the gap between black men and women.


Marcella Alsan
Stanford Medical School
Center for Health Policy/PCOR
117 Encina Commons, Room 218
Stanford, CA 94304
and NBER
malsan@stanford.edu

Marianne Wanamaker
Department of Economics
University of Tennessee
524 Stokely Management Center
Knoxville, TN 37996
and NBER
wanamaker@utk.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22323
                                           I.    Introduction

      The Tuskegee Study became a symbol of their mistreatment by the medical estab-
      lishment, a metaphor for deceit, conspiracy, malpractice, and neglect, if not outright
      genocide.
      Corbie-Smith et al. (1999)


   African-American men have the worst health outcomes of all major ethnic, racial, and demo-

graphic groups in the United States.1 Although recent trends have shown signs of improvement,

particularly at younger ages, the gradients for older men are still sobering; the expectation of life

for black men at age 45 is three years less than for their white male peers and …ve years less than

for black women (Murphy 2013). Compared to other demographic groups, black men have higher

death rates from chronic conditions such as HIV/AIDS, heart disease, and cancer, including lung,

prostate, and colon (Kaiser Family Foundation 2007). Many factors contribute to such disparities,

including lower income and education, lack of health insurance, and higher rates of disengagement

from the labor force. But socioeconomic status is not fully determinant of these gaps (Adler et

al. 1993; Cutler, Lleras-Muney, and Vogl 2011) and a growing qualitative literature suggests that

mistrust of healthcare institutions partially contributes to these inequities. Yet empirical evidence

on the causal role of medical mistrust for racial health disparities remains thin.

   This study uses the historical disclosure of an unethical and deadly experiment, the Tuskegee

Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male (TSUS), to identify the relationship between med-

ical mistrust and racial disparities in health-related behaviors and health outcomes. For 40 years,

between 1932 and 1972, the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) followed hundreds of poor, black

men in Tuskegee, Alabama, the majority of whom had syphilis, for the stated purpose of under-

standing the natural course of the disease. The men were denied highly e¤ective treatment for

their condition (most egregiously, penicillin, which became standard of care by the mid-1940s) and

were actively discouraged from seeking medical advice from practitioners outside the study (Brandt

1978). Participants were subjected to blood draws, spinal taps, and, eventually, autopsies by the

study’s primarily white medical sta¤. Survivors later reported that study doctors diagnosed them

with "bad blood" for which they believed they were being treated. Compensation for participation


   1. For a comprehensive review of racial inequalities in U.S. medical care, see Institute of Medicine (2003).


                                                          1
included hot meals, the guise of treatment, and burial payments. News of the Tuskegee Study

became public in 1972 in an exposé by Jean Heller of the Associated Press, and detailed narratives

of the deception and its relationship to the medical establishment were widespread. By that point,

the majority of the study’s victims were deceased, many from syphilis-related causes.

   In the years following 1972, journalists, social scientists, and medical researchers have repeat-

edly pointed to the Tuskegee experiment as a reason African-Americans remain wary of mainstream

medicine. For example, as HIV disproportionately ravaged black communities in the U.S., a number

of observers conjectured that the Tuskegee Study’s legacy had hampered public health education

e¤orts in the black community, contributing to the epidemic’s spread (Gaston and Alleyne-Green

2013). A recent resurgence of tuberculosis in Marion County, Alabama is similarly attributed

(Blinder 2016). Qualitative research aimed at understanding the reluctance of black men, in par-

ticular, to participate in medical research or engage in preventive care often produces unprompted

reference to Tuskegee (Corbie-Smith et al. 1999). In sum, the Tuskegee Study is an often-cited

contributor to delays and avoidance in care seeking, wariness of public health campaigns, low

participation in clinical trials, and overall worse health indicators among black men.

   To empirically investigate whether the study’s disclosure contributed to racial disparities in

health and healthcare utilization in the years following 1972, we rely on a variety of survey and

administrative data, including measures of trust in doctors from the General Social Survey (GSS)

(Smith et al. 2015), health seeking behavior reported in the National Health Interview Survey

(NHIS) (Minnesota Population Center 2012), and mortality data available by race, age group,

gender, and cause from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC 2014). We focus our

attention on these measures for older (45-74) individuals, using other age groups as placebo tests

since the mortality and health-seeking behavior of younger individuals is generally driven by acute

conditions such as childbirth or trauma in which the needs for care are urgent and the bene…ts

immediate. Because mistrust is more likely to discourage preventive and non-emergency medical

care, we report results for both all-cause mortality and chronic disease mortality outcomes.

   To generate testable predictions beyond those implied by the timing of the disclosure in 1972,

we use race and sex as additional treatment indicators. This approach is based, in part, on the

supposition that individuals for whom the news of the Tuskegee Study’s abuses was more salient

should exhibit a more robust behavioral response. Economic models of trust formation and social

                                                 2
identi…cation (e.g., Tabellini 2008) and a vast psychology literature (e.g., Gutsell and Inzlicht 2010;

Singer et al. 2006) indicate that individuals tend to be more a¤ected by news if they can identify

with the subject. We posit that individuals might perceive themselves at higher risk of medical

mistreatment if they share socio-demographic characteristics with the study’s victims. In this

view, the Tuskegee abuses became a signal for how black men might expect the medical system

to treat them. A simple Bayesian, multi-period model of belief formation regarding physician

trustworthiness implies that, under certain conditions, agents having previous experience with

the medical system, e.g., child-bearing women, are less dissuaded from seeking medical treatment

by bad news, again implying stronger responses among men than women.2 The model and all

supplementary materials are available in an Online Appendix.

    As a …nal exposure to treatment, we interact these demographic characteristics with a location-

based measure of proximity: geographic distance to Macon County, Alabama, which contains

Tuskegee. In doing so, we test whether black men living in closer proximity to the study’s vic-

tims were more heavily in‡uenced by the TSUS revelation. Such a pattern would be observed if,

for example, individuals in closer geographic proximity believe the event is more instructive for

how they may anticipate being treated by their local medical system. For an alternative proximity

measure, we substitute the share of black migrant in‡ows from the state of Alabama to an indi-

vidual’s local geography. The Great Migration was characterized by strong chain migration and

by substantial amounts of return migration such that individuals living in locations with higher

rates of black migration from Alabama would have experienced a lasting information network, in

addition to any additional salience arising from these connections.

    We test these hypotheses using an interacted di¤erence-in-di¤erence-in-di¤erences framework

that captures post-1972 changes in the racial and gender gaps in healthcare utilization and health

outcomes for those in varying proximity to the event. Whenever feasible, we condition on a rich

set of control variables found to be correlated with individual health seeking behavior, including

education (Aizer and Stroud 2010), income (Deaton 2002), marital status (Holt-Lunstad, Birming-

ham, and Jones 2008), and urbanization. Race-gender-location, race-gender-time and location-time

…xed e¤ects non-parametrically control for time-invariant factors that in‡uence outcomes for a spe-


   2. In our model of medical mistrust, we consider Bayesian updating as the benchmark, although behavioral models
could deliver similar results (e.g. Becker and Rubinstein 2011).


                                                        3
ci…c demographic group in a given locale and for changes in public health and other government

policies that might have di¤erentially a¤ected members of each group in each year. The …nest

level of geography observable in the utilization regressions is a respondent’s state, and we use ob-

servations at the county or state economic area level for mortality outcomes. We focus on the

short- and medium-term impact of the disclosure on health behaviors and outcomes; given the data

limitations, persistent causal impacts are more di¢ cult to identify.

   Our estimates imply that a one-standard deviation increase in geographic proximity to Macon

County, Alabama, reduced utilization of routine care (outpatient physician contacts) among older

black males by 0:90 interactions per year, a 22% reduction in utilization relative to the pre-disclosure

mean value for black men. These utilization e¤ects are driven by the behavior of black men with

lower levels of education and income. We also …nd weaker evidence of a reduction in the probability

that black men were admitted to the hospital, though their length of stay was signi…cantly longer,

consistent with more advanced disease upon presentation. Mortality outcomes indicate that a one

standard deviation increase in geographic proximity to Tuskegee was associated with a spike in the

post-1972 age-adjusted mortality penalty for black men of 4 log points. Our estimates imply that

the Tuskegee Study disclosure contributed to widening health disparities between 1970 and 1980,

accounting for approximately 35% of the 1980 life expectancy gap between black and white men

and 25% of the gap between black men and women.

   An alternative explanation for our …ndings is that access to healthcare was deteriorating for

blacks relative to whites in this period, particularly in the South, and black men were precluded from

obtaining routine medical care regardless of their underlying demand. But controlling for public

health expenditures and for the availability of hospital services has little e¤ect on our estimates,

and this alternative explanation is inconsistent with other research concluding that access to health

services and health outcomes for black Americans improved substantially in the years immediately

after the Civil Rights Act (Goodman-Bacon 2015; Almond, Chay, and Greenstone 2006; Cascio and

Washington 2014). Our results indicate that the Tuskegee revelation stalled the overall pattern

of convergence for older black men, producing a drag on healthcare utilization for this speci…c

demographic group and contributing to an abrupt divergence in their mortality patterns.

   We pursue a number of strategies to provide further evidence that the correlations we …nd are

indeed causal. First, the results we …nd are speci…c to black men; coe¢ cient estimates for the

                                                   4
post-1972 treatment e¤ect of being "black and female" or "white and male" in closer proximity to

Macon County, Alabama, are generally not economically or statistically signi…cant, do not exhibit

an observable break in 1972, and are often opposite-signed to the main treatment e¤ects. In

additional tests, we show that our …ndings are robust to estimation on a within-South sample and

that the baseline coe¢ cients for mortality (utilization) based on geographic proximity to Macon

County, Alabama, are larger (smaller) than 96% of placebo tests substituting proximity to all other

geographies in the data. Thus the e¤ects we measure are speci…c to black men and to geographic

proximity to central Alabama, not to a post-1972 condition a¤ecting the South overall.

   Finally, to evaluate whether the behavioral responses we observe are driven by medical mistrust,

we use survey data from the 1998 wave of the GSS on whether individuals trust a doctor’s judgment

and whether they suspect that the medical establishment will deny them necessary treatment

or services. When we interact race and gender indicators with a measure of the distance of an

individual from Macon County, Alabama, we …nd the same geographic gradient apparent in our

baseline utilization and mortality results. This geographic gradient in mistrust is not present for

general mistrust as revealed in the respondents’answers to other survey questions.

   This paper builds on and contributes to several literatures in economics. First, our …ndings

elucidate factors in‡uencing healthcare demand and medical outcomes among minorities in the

United States and deepen our understanding of how this watershed event a¤ected the relationship

between black Americans and the U.S. healthcare system. Second, and more broadly, our study

is motivated by the theoretical contributions of Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) regarding

the transmission and updating of beliefs and empirical work by Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)

regarding the role of previous exploitation in shaping interpersonal mistrust in Africa. Our …ndings

also connect to rich empirical evidence on the importance of trust for economic development (Knack

and Keefer 1997; Fafchamps 2006; Greif 1989). Finally, these …ndings shed light on questions in

development economics regarding low demand for products that have been shown to improve health

(Dupas 2011; Chapter 3 of Banerjee and Du‡o 2011). The …ndings presented herein suggest that

historical exploitation and its enduring impact on beliefs may explain some of the uptake paradox.




                                                 5
                                              II.     Context

    The following section places the study in historical and medical context by providing background

on the pathology of syphilis and the TSUS experiment, prior literature on the legacy of Tuskegee,

and health patterns across demographic groups in the years surrounding the disclosure.


II.A.      Background on the Tuskegee Study

    The Tuskegee Study was designed to trace the course of untreated syphilis in black men. The

organism that causes the disease is related to that causing Lyme disease, and both bacteria manifest

themselves in stages. The …rst stage of sexually acquired syphilis is often an ulcer, followed by a full

body rash that includes the palms and soles. However, it is the tertiary (or late-stage) syphilis that

in‡icts the most damage. The third stage is characterized by gummas (syphilitic tumors teeming

with the bacteria) which coalesce and eat away at bone (frequently the nasal bridge) as well as other

organs and show a predilection for the arch of the aorta often leading to hemorrhage. Neurosyphilis

(an attack on the nervous systems) presents in late-stage syphilis with paresis, gait disturbance,

blindness, and dementia (Mandell, Bennett, and Dolin 2009).3

    According to Jones (1992), much of the natural history of syphilis outlined above was known

at the time the study commenced:


        "The germ that causes syphilis...and the complications that can result from untreated

        syphilis were all known to medical science in 1932 –the year the Tuskegee Study began.

        Since the e¤ects of the disease are so serious, reporters in 1972 wondered why the men

        agreed to cooperate. The press quickly established that the subjects were mostly poor

        and illiterate, and the PHS had o¤ered them incentives to participate."


    These incentives included physical exams, hot meals, and burial stipends that would be paid

to their survivors. Most of the men also believed they were receiving some form of treatment.

Approximately 600 black men (approximately two-thirds of whom had syphilis) were recruited to

the study using these techniques and followed passively for forty years while the disease took its

toll.

   3. Syphilis can also be transmitted mother to child and cause severe congenital problems, including stillbirth.


                                                         6
    In 1972, news of the Tuskegee Study was leaked to the press and quickly spread, including

reporting from the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times, via the Associated Press wire, on

broadcast television, via congressional hearings, and, of course, by word of mouth. The study was

halted that same year, but few of the original test subjects were alive and dozens of their wives and

children had been infected (Heintzelman 2003). Medical historian Allan Brandt (1978) summarizes

the study as follows: "In retrospect the Tuskegee Study revealed more about the pathology of racism

than the pathology of syphilis; more about the nature of scienti…c inquiry than the nature of the

disease process. . . . The degree of deception and the damages have been severely underestimated."

Those damages may include a legacy of medical mistrust among black Americans. The Final Report

of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study Legacy Committee (1996) noted that "the Study continues to cast

a long shadow over the relationship between African-Americans and the biomedical professions,"

and was "a signi…cant factor in the low participation of African-Americans in clinical trials, organ

donation e¤orts, and routine preventive care."4

    Despite the Committee’s conclusions, the empirical evidence of a link between the Tuskegee

Study and medical mistrust has been mixed and su¤ers from several limitations. First, and perhaps

most crippling, all quantitative and qualitative studies of the relationship between medical mistrust

and awareness of Tuskegee’s abuses are dated 20 or more years after 1972. By this time, the link

between medical mistrust and knowledge of Tuskegee may have faded for a number of reasons,

including a socialization of mistrust without an accompanying socialization of the relevant history.5

Second, a correlation between medical mistrust and knowledge of the Tuskegee Study provides no

information on the direction of causation; distrustful individuals may do more to collect information

on past abuses. Third, the extant literature focuses on participation in clinical trials rather than

medical mistrust per se. Although these outcomes are likely to be correlated, it is the mistrust of

care providers that directly impacts health conditions. Finally, samples used in these studies are

frequently restricted to particular geographies.

    4. This lack of minority representation in clinical trials may have important spillover e¤ects, including on the
speed and direction of innovation for ailments that heavily a- ict their communities. See Hamilton et al. (2016) for
a structural estimation of these losses.
    5. Vann Newkirk II (2016) highlights the cultural role of Tuskegee, even in the absence of speci…c details, saying:
"Like me, several other black men that I interviewed throughout the rural South were either inculcated from birth
or from experience living in 1972 with the idea that the American health-care system is not for them. Young boys
and old men felt it alike, and even if the Tuskegee Study was not known by name, it was a de…nite part of a vivid
shared cultural memory. References to injection of ‘bad blood’, government research, or conspiracies about HIV were
clearly in‡uenced by details of Tuskegee, even if the details weren’t always quite right."


                                                          7
    With these quali…cations in mind, the earliest quantitative study on this topic is from 1994

(22 years following the disclosure). Researchers surveyed residents of Je¤erson County, Alabama

(Green et al. 1997). Although 55% of the sample held knowledge of the Tuskegee Study, and the

rate was no higher for black men and women than for whites, knowledge of the study by black men

increased with age, reaching 74% for those aged 46-64 (who would have been 24-42 at the time of

the study). The sample’s age distribution di¤ered substantially by race, and the survey write-up

does not include a conditional relationship between race, age, sex, and knowledge of Tuskegee, nor

does it give a conditional relationship between willingness to participate in health research and

Tuskegee knowledge. But unconditional cross tabulations indicate that 27% of black men were less

interested in participation as a result of the study, compared to 20% of black women and 10% of

whites. Among all African Americans (male and female), this disinterest was highest for individuals

with a high school degree, but no college, and among those aged 31-65. These survey responses

also indicate signi…cant racial gaps in respondents’perceptions of the fairness of medical care and

research.6

    In addition to the Green et al. study, Brandon, Isaac, and LaVeist (2005) surveyed 401 black

and white adults living in Baltimore, Washington D.C., and New York City in 2003 and found that

blacks were far less likely to report knowledge of Tuskegee than whites (74% vs. 25%), a statistic

uncovered by White (2005) in his critique of their paper. This result, along with the survey’s high

refusal rate, led White to cast doubt on the study’s methods. Brandon et al. also reported that

blacks with knowledge of the study were 50% more likely to believe the PHS researchers injected

the men with syphilis (75.3% vs. 52.8%) and to believe Tuskegee could "occur today" (76.6% vs.

47.2%). In this study, medical mistrust was positively related to black race, male sex and lower

education, but not signi…cantly related to knowledge of the Tuskegee Study. Shavers, Lynch, and

Burmeister (2002) found the opposite: a greater unwillingness to participate in medical research

among blacks who knew about the study. The Tuskegee Legacy Project of 2003, which interviewed

black, white, and Hispanic men and women, found that blacks were more likely to have a higher

"guinea pig fear factor" score than whites and were more likely to have knowledge of the Tuskegee

Study than whites or Hispanics (56.2% vs. 38.5% and 24.3%, respectively) (McCallum et al. 2006).

    6. For example, 75% of black men believed that "African Americans are more likely to be treated poorly in health
research studies" compared to 58% of black women and 37% of whites. Sample sizes here are quite small, however,
so caution is warranted.


                                                         8
    As best we can ascertain, Freedman (1998) is the earliest qualitative research on the relationship

between medical research mistrust and the Tuskegee Study. Freedman asserts that the Tuskegee

legacy is not enough to fully explain racial di¤erences in participation in medical research, yet

cites interviewees who explicitly and vividly expressed their unwillingness to participate in medical

studies in connection with the Tuskegee Syphilis experiment. Additional qualitative evidence links

mistrust associated with the Tuskegee Study with take-o¤ of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in minority

communities. On May 12, 1992, the New York Times published poll results wherein blacks were

more likely to believe in conspiracy theories related to HIV/AIDS, including that the virus was a

genocide tool designed to limit the number of blacks in America. (These results have been replicated

many times over.) According to Quinn (1997), resulting letters to the editor "clearly placed the

origin of such attitudes within the historical context of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study".7 At the

height of the HIV/AIDS crisis in the U.S., health publications implored medical professionals to

directly confront these conspiracy theories with facts, and correct the common misconception that

the Tuskegee abuses included infecting study subjects with syphilis. "Public health professionals

must recognize that Blacks’belief in AIDS as a form of genocide is a legitimate attitudinal barrier

rooted in the history of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study" (Thomas and Quinn 1991).

    In addition to speci…c Tuskegee legacy studies, the public health literature provides ample

documentation that being black and male is an important predictor of health disparities, including

those in life expectancy, survival rates within disease category, and health-promoting behavior.

Black men are less likely to know their cholesterol levels, engage in blood pressure monitoring, or

otherwise bene…t from early detection of chronic conditions than their white male peers (Sandman,

Simantov, and An 2000; Viera, Thorpe, and Garrett 2006). Although reasons for these disparities

are multifactorial, the legacy of medical exploitation (represented in part by the Tuskegee Study) has

led to research on whether medical mistrust is particularly heightened among black men (Carlson

and Chamberlain 2004). Indeed, black men exhibit higher levels of medical mistrust which are

correlated with reduced probabilities of routine, preventive, and early-stage disease care.8 Medical


    7. Additional beliefs were that "HIV was deliberately created in a laboratory in order to infect black people, that
AZT is a plot to poison them, that condom distribution campaigns are a scheme to reduce the number of black
babies, and that needle distribution programs are a plot to encourage drug abuse," (Quinn 1997). Similar Tuskegee-
attributed mistrust related to the origins of the HIV virus emerged in a 1996 ABC News 20/20 forum and in a 1997
Atlanta-based forum audience.
    8. The life expectancy gap between black and white men can be substantially reduced by controlling for stage


                                                          9
mistrust among black men is also correlated with poor compliance with treatment plans, conditional

on diagnosis, for a range of diseases including HIV/AIDS, cancer, and hypertension.9


II.B.     Patterns of Healthcare Utilization and Mortality

    Prior to the Tuskegee experiment revelation, the 1960s marked an era of rapid convergence

in healthcare access and utilization for black Americans relative to whites. Hospitals gradually

integrated over the 1950s and early 1960s, a process that culminated not with the Civil Rights

Act of 1964, but with President Lyndon Johnson’s insistence that any hospital receiving Medicare

funding fully desegregate by July 1966. This process was quicker in the North than in the South;

separate hospital wings were present in 75% of hospitals in the South as late as April of 1966.

Still, full compliance appears to have been achieved by July of the same year. These decades

also witnessed expansions in public health insurance coverage and services, some of which favored

black Americans, including the establishment of Medical Assistance for the Aged (a precursor

to Medicare), establishment of and expansions in Medicare and Medicaid (Goodman-Bacon 2015),

local health center construction (Bailey and Goodman-Bacon 2015), and the expansion and funding

of public hospitals.

    By 1970, black Americans had gained substantial ground in terms of healthcare utilization,

even if the quality of the services they acquired lagged behind their white peers.10 Using data

from the NHIS, among individuals ages 45 to 74, the percentage of black women who did not have

recent contact with a medical professional declined between 1964 and 1971 by about 6 percentage

points. The improvements for black men were similarly impressive; the same metric declined by

8 percentage points. These gains were three to four times as large as those experienced by white

males and females over the same time period.11 The convergence of black and white healthcare


at diagnosis. See American Cancer Society (2008) and Silber et al. (2014). For evidence on these racial gaps, see
Boulware et al. (2003); Wiltshire, Person, and Allison (2011); and Hood et al. (2012).
    9. In a 2016 study of low adherence to antiretroviral treatment among HIV-positive black men, researchers doc-
umented that 63% of the study’s subjects held a "conspiracy belief", for example that the federal government was
responsible for HIV’s introduction into the black population. These beliefs, in turn, were associated with a reduced
likelihood of adhering to a physician-prescribed treatment regimen (Bogart et al. 2016). See also Halbert et al.
(2009), Kayaniyil et al. (2009); and Laveist, Nickerson, and Bowie (2000).
   10. Blacks were more likely than whites to utilize public and community-based healthcare resources, including
charity clinics, public health departments, community health centers, and city and county hospitals and less likely to
make use of private and non-pro…t hospitals. Some of this di¤erence was the result of rapid suburbanization of the
white population (Byrd and Clayton 2002, p. 391).
   11. The level of utilization for black (and white) men is lower than for women in every period. Note that we do


                                                         10
utilization rates in the years prior to the Tuskegee disclosure was closely mirrored by convergence

in mortality rates. Using CDC-provided annual county-level mortality statistics by age, race, and

gender, as described above, we plot the racial di¤erence in age-speci…c mortality rates (ASMR)

(black minus white) for both men (solid line) and women (dashed line) in Figure I. Panels A and

B demonstrate that, for infants and children 1 to 4 years of age, there was a marked reduction in

racial health disparities that continued, uninterrupted, after the 1972 disclosure. But the pattern

for adult mortality is starkly di¤erent. Panels C and D plot the same data for adults aged 55-64

and 65-74. At these ages, convergence at the beginning of the period is followed by a striking

divergence in the mortality rates for black men relative to white men beginning in the early 1970s,

a pattern which is not re‡ected in the di¤erences between black and white women. The mortality

patterns for other ages (contained in Appendix Figure A.2) mimic those for infants and children.12

Unlike younger ages, where parental behavior (for early childhood) and unintentional injuries (for

young adults) play key roles in determining mortality, premature and preventable mortality in older

adults is more frequently driven by health behaviors and physician involvement, including timely

diagnosis and management of illness. To facilitate comparisons across age groups, the mortality

rates represented by Figure I are those from all causes of death; speci…c cause-of-death is available

in the underlying data and utilized later in the paper. These stark mortality patterns for black

men relative to both black women and white men motivate the paper’s focus on health behaviors

and outcomes of black men in particular.



                                                 III.      Data

    The paper’s empirical approach focuses on changes in health-seeking behavior and health out-

comes as a result of the Tuskegee disclosure. We measure health-seeking behavior using data on

healthcare utilization from the NHIS. The survey is a repeated cross-sectional sample of Ameri-

cans which began in 1963. The survey is taken by household visit, and we use the individual-level

respondent data in our analysis. We rely on a harmonized data source, the Integrated Health



not have a continuous series of outpatient utilization data in the pre-1969 period.
  12. The Appendix also contains …gures for Southerners alone (Appendix Figure A.1). In Appendix Figure A.2,
younger black men exhibit an increase in relative mortality beginning in the 1980s. This is likely due to the evolving
HIV/AIDS crisis in this community. Appendix Section V.A. contains more detail.


                                                         11
Interview Series (IHIS), provided by the University of Minnesota, which is based on the NHIS

public-use data (Minnesota Population Center 2012). Consistent, harmonized responses regarding

the utilization of medical services are available from 1969.13 The public-use samples are stripped

of geographic identi…ers necessitating the use of restricted access for these data from the National

Center for Health Statistics (NCHS).14 One important caveat with using these data is that PHS,

the same entity that carried out the Tuskegee Study, sponsored the survey, although the interviews

were conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. If mistrustful individuals refused to answer the survey,

our estimates may represent attenuated behavioral responses. In a simple di¤erence-in-di¤erence-

in-di¤erences (DDD) speci…cation where we regress the NHIS sample weight for each individual on

year …xed e¤ects, an indicator for black, an indicator for male, an indicator for black-male, and an

indicator for post-1972 interacted with each of the demographic indicators, we …nd that the survey

weights for black men in the sample after 1972 rose by a statistically insigni…cant 0.3%.

    Each individual in the survey self-reported the interval since their last doctor’s visit or physical,

the number of physician visits and other physician interactions (including phone calls) in the last

12 months, as well as the frequency and duration of hospital admissions. The data also contain

detailed demographic information, including age, family structure, income, education, and veteran

status.15 As discussed previously, we focus on men aged 45 to 74 to capture the e¤ects on men

(and women) in the age range most likely to bene…t from preventive and early-stage disease care.

We distinguish between non-veteran and veteran men given di¤erences in their previous physician

interactions. Our baseline utilization results are for non-veteran males, and we present results by

veteran status later in the paper.

    Because morbidity data is di¢ cult to interpret in this context (disease diagnosis would generally

require a physician’s visit), we rely on separate mortality data to assess whether the changes in

  13. The question we use regarding outpatient interactions is unchanged between 1969 to 1981. In 1978 the race
categorization changed, with mutiple categories included, making 1977 a natural stopping point. But we have also
extended our analysis to 1981 (the year the question on doctor visits changes and harmonization is no longer possible)
and obtain similar (though not disclosed) results. Inpatient (hospital) utilization data is available prior to 1969 and
the broad patterns are discussed in Section II.B. Our results are robust to the inclusion of these earlier data. IHIS is
now known as IPUMS Health Surveys: NHIS.
  14. We accessed the IHIS harmonized data, with location-based treatment variables (geographic proximity and
migration shares) attached, inside Census Research Data Centers (RDCs) at Atlanta and Stanford. In later years,
the NHIS data have been linked to mortality …les, but these linked data are not available for our study period.
  15. The NHIS data do not contain consistent measures of individual health insurance coverage over our time period;
however, in all mortality regressions we control for local, time-varying Medicare and Medicaid expenditures, interacted
with race and gender. Because phone calls to medical providers were counted as physician interactions, all NHIS
regressions control for whether the household has a telephone.


                                                          12
beliefs and behaviors which we document below translate into an e¤ect on health. In doing so, we

follow a sizable literature that uses mortality to assess the e¤ectiveness of health interventions.16

County-level mortality statistics by age, race, and gender are available from the CDC for each

year between 1968 and 1988. We merge population data for the same period from the CDC to

calculate mortality rates by age group, race, and gender (CDC 2014). Because some U.S. counties

have small black populations, the per-year mortality counts in some places are quite low, and

sometimes zero. Mortality rates based on a sparse number of events exhibit a large amount of

random variation (Curtin and Klein 1995), thus we follow advice from NCHS and aggregate over

space and time, combining annual county-level mortality counts to the state economic area (SEA)

level and measuring biennial mortality rates.17 We do not observe veteran status in the mortality

…les.

    Our baseline results are for both age-adjusted all-cause and age-adjusted chronic-cause mor-

tality. Chronic causes include cardiovascular disease (including hypertension and stroke), cancer,

smoking-related respiratory disease, ill-de…ned conditions and ongoing symptoms, gastrointestinal

disorders, and diabetes. Chronic mortality therefore includes the leading causes of death for this

cohort and represents diagnoses for which therapies and interventions by health professionals could

plausibly prevent or delay mortality.18 We use age-adjusted mortality rates to account for di¤er-

ences in age structures across groups.19 Since the impact of the Tuskegee revelation might a¤ect

mortality with a lag and last longer than the impact of utilization, we include mortality rates from

1968 to 1987 in our main analysis.20



   16. Recent examples include Almond, Chay, and Greenstone (2006); Alsan and Goldin (2015); Bhalotra and
Venkataramani (2011); Bailey and Goodman-Bacon (2015); and Goodman-Bacon (2015).
   17. State economic areas are groups of counties re‡ecting relatively homogenous areas within states. Results using
county-level and annual mortality rates are in Appendix Table A.5.
   18. Some examples include blood pressure and glucose control for the management and prevention of cardiovascular
and diabetic complications such as heart attack, stroke, and kidney failure, as well as counseling on prevention, early
detection, and treatment of cancers. See Appendix Section IV for a discussion of medical and public health innovations
over this time period.
   19. Brie‡y, to construct age-adjusted rates, age-speci…c mortality rates, calculated as deaths per 1000 relevant at
risk population, are weighted by a reference population. We follow the demographic literature and use the standard
1940 population for weighting. See the Appendix for further details.
   20. After 1987, the paper’s conclusions are likely to be compromised by the evolving HIV/AIDS epidemic. But in
the 1981-1987 period, HIV/AIDS was a nascent health threat, particularly among older black men. In this period,
there were roughly 9,000 AIDS-infected men older than 45, of which perhaps 25% were black (CDC 2001). Young
people were at higher risk of acquiring HIV, and by 1994 AIDS had become the leading cause of death among black
males aged 25-44. This increased mortality among younger black males in the late 1980s is apparent in Appendix
Figure A.2.


                                                          13
                 IV.      Estimating Equation and Identification

    Our main speci…cation is an interacted DDD comparing di¤erences across race (…rst di¤erence)

and gender (second di¤erence) before versus after the study disclosure (third di¤erence), inter-

acted with a continuous, location-based measure of salience, either geographic proximity to Macon

County, Alabama, or the share of black migrants originating from Alabama.

    Why might the disclosure of the Tuskegee Study fuel mistrust in medicine particularly among

black men? First, as discussed in the introduction, models of social identi…cation and studies of

empathy demonstrate that individuals are more responsive to injustices perpetrated against their

own group and more empathetic to individuals in closer "proximity" to themselves. Distance

between agents, as described by Tabellini (2008), "could refer to geography, but also to social or

economic dimensions such as religion, ethnicity and class." Second, in recent work on the formation

of trust, psychologists have noted that men tend to form collective trust (with "categories" of

people rather than individuals), while women form individual-speci…c relational trust (Maddux and

Brewer 2005). Third, even in the absence of di¤erences in trust formation, ceteris paribus black

women would have had more experience with the healthcare system through previous childbirth

experiences, and this experience may have inoculated them against the Tuskegee Study revelation.

Fourth, men have more elastic demand for health services (Vaidya, Partha, and Karmakar 2012;

Thanakijborisut 2015) and thus are more easily dissuaded from visiting a physician. Finally, and

perhaps obviously, the victims of the Tuskegee Study were black men. The disclosure detailed

how the medical establishment purposefully selected and abused black men and may have therefore

revealed to black men information about how they might expect to be treated.

    Empirically, we build on Tabellini’s description of "distance" by employing both race and gender

as treatment indicators, as well as one of two location-based treatment measures.21 Our primary

measure is linear geographic proximity to Macon County, Alabama (Figure II; Panel A), supported

by the linear relationship between post-1972 mortality changes and distance, as discussed below.22


  21. The Appendix contains a fully-speci…ed model of how prior beliefs, prior experience with the medical profession,
shared characteristics with the Tuskegee study subjects, and proximity to the study interact to determine health-
seeking behavior
  22. Data from the 1979 Survey of Black Americans support the notion that black men from the South identi…ed
more with the men from the study. When asked "how close does the respondent feel to black people who are poor",
78% of black men born in the South answered they felt "very close" compared to 65% of men born elsewhere (Jackson
and Gurin, 1999). We thank Trevon Logan for pointing out this source. As another example, although the Rodney


                                                         14
This continuous proximity metric creates concentric circles of equal proximity around the impact

point of Tuskegee, Alabama. Although we remain agnostic regarding the precise mechanism through

which geographic proximity a¤ects behavior, we note that geography may capture an identi…cation

or empathy response as discussed above. Alternatively, this proximity metric may also re‡ect

information contained in the signal if, for example, individuals at greater geographic distances do

not believe that the Tuskegee experiment disclosure provided relevant information regarding the

trustworthiness of their local medical practitioners.23

    As an alternative measure of salience, we use the fraction of black migrants to a particular state

or SEA from the state of Alabama (Figure II, Panel B). (We drop Alabama observations from the

sample in this analysis.) The Tuskegee disclosure followed several decades of large-scale migration,

particularly among African-American males, and we hypothesize that individuals in locations with

larger numbers of incoming migrants from Alabama will also …nd the study’s revelation more

salient. We take advantage of the complete count version of the 1940 U.S. Census, which contains

a question about 5-year migration patterns with detailed geography measures, to calculate this

statistic.24 Migration rates are highest in young adulthood; thus, the migration patterns from

1935-1940 will be re‡ective of the origins of individuals aged 45-74 in 1972. The 1940 Alabama

migration rates are additionally relevant as migration patterns are roughly stable over time, making

the 1940 patterns a good proxy for patterns in the years subsequent.




King beating, which took place in March 1991, was widely publicized in many media markets, opinions on the police
force shifted most markedly for black men. Though we lack geographic identi…ers in the survey data, comparing 1989
and 1992 polling data, the percentage of people who disagree with the statement: "These days police in most cities
treat Blacks as fairly as they treat Whites" jumped 18% among black men, 7% among black women, and declined
among whites (ABC 1992; NBC 1989).
   23. We exclude the SEAs containing Los Angeles and San Francisco from the analytic sample. These two cities
hold most of the black population in the West region, and they are more connected to Alabama (via migration) than
our distance-based proxy for study salience would suggest (see Appendix Figure A.7). Our migration-based results
are robust to the inclusion of these two cities. See Appendix Table A.5, Column (1).
   24. Using later census years would preclude us from using the detailed geographic information publicly available
for 1940. We normalize by black migrants for two reasons. First, doing so gives a measure of what percentage
of new information is coming from Alabama. (If the denominator was the black population, for example, the new
information measure would be diluted.) Second, and more importantly, we only observe the migration variables in
the …ve year period of 1935 to 1940. But the migration of this generation of men extended from 1918 up through
1960. The patterns of migration were persistent over time, so even though the 1935-1940 measure is not an accurate
measure of the absolute number of migrants, the relative measure (those from Alabama divided by all migrants) is a
good proxy for how connected the stock of black residents in 1972 would have been to Alabama, given several decades
of migration preceding 1972.


                                                        15
IV.A.       Motivating Di¤ erence-in-Di¤ erences Estimates

      Recall from Figure I that black male mortality was converging relative to white men from 1968

through the early 1970s before diverging thereafter. We use a simple di¤erence-in-di¤erences (DD)

framework to explore these changes. Speci…cally, we compare the post-1972 age-adjusted mortality

rates from chronic disease of older black men relative to their white male or black female peers

across SEAs grouped into K bins of 150 kilometers of distance from Macon County, Alabama.25

      To estimate the post-1972 mortality penalty for older black men compared to white men in each
                                    k
bin, we estimate a set of               coe¢ cients from the equation below. Group-speci…c, chronic cause
                           k where a re‡ects the SEA of residence at time of death, t is year of
mortality is re‡ected by Yrat

observation, and r denotes the race of the group:


(1)              k
               Yrat =     +     k
                                        Iblack
                                         r     Ipost
                                                t    +    k
                                                              (Ipost
                                                                t    )+   a;black   + "rat   for k 2 [1; K]:


Iblack
 r     and Ipost
            t    are binary indicators for black and post-1972 observations, respectively, while               a;black

is an SEA-by-race …xed e¤ect common across all years. Regressions are weighted by the relevant

population in each SEA (e.g. 45-74 year old men for the all-male sample).
                          k
      In this equation,       captures the post-1972 e¤ect of being a black male relative to white men,

controlling for time-invariant di¤erences in black and white male mortality in each SEA and for a

general post-1972 mortality e¤ect (           k ).   If mortality rates for black men had continued to converge

in the post-1972 period, we would measure a value of                      less than zero in each bin. Alternatively,

stalled convergence would generate a value of                       greater than or equal to zero. As anticipated,

given the results in Figure I, the full-sample                 (across all values of k) is positive and signi…cant,

indicating post-1972 divergence in mortality for older black men relative to their white peers of

approximately 5:3 log points. This estimate is plotted as a thick line, and both the estimate and

95% con…dence interval are reported in the heading for Figure III, Panel A.

      Yet this average treatment e¤ect of being a black male after 1972 masks signi…cant heterogeneity.

We …nd a strong geographic gradient in the value of                       along a measure of distance from Macon

County, Alabama, with locations closer to Macon County showing stronger evidence of divergence.

   25. Age-adjusted mortality rates for older adults (ages 45-74) are measured at the level of each SEA (denoted a)
for each race (r) and gender (g) combination: black males, black females, white males, white females. Bins in the
middle of the country with few older black men were paired.


                                                               16
In Figure III, Panel A, we plot the value of these coe¢ cients by bin, as well as a (thin, dashed) line

of best …t. Black men in close proximity to Tuskegee saw an increase in relative chronic mortality

of about 10 log points, and the e¤ect declines with distance.

    To compare the post-1972 experience of black men to that of black women, we estimate a
                    k
separate set of         coe¢ cients on a sample of black mortality rates, male and female, replacing

indicators for black with indicators for male in equation (1).26 As indicated in the header for

Panel B of Figure III, black male age-adjusted chronic mortality increased relative to black female

mortality by a statistically signi…cant 9:1 log points after 1972. Here, the geographic gradient is

even more apparent; the value is 17 log points in locations closest to Tuskegee and again declines

with distance.

    These temporal and geographic mortality patterns for black men are not mirrored in other

sub-groups. In Panel C of Figure III, we estimate equation (1) on an all-female sample. In this
        k
case,       coe¢ cients re‡ect the post-1972 convergence or divergence experiences of black women in

each geographic bin. Consistent with Figure I, we …nd that black women continue to converge on

their white peers after 1972, and the average estimated value of                     is     9:2 log points. Moreover,

the geographic gradient in these results is upward-sloping, indicating that black women in closer

proximity to Macon County were converging more quickly than their peers further a…eld. A similar

exercise in Panel D examines the experience of white men relative to white women. Overall, the

gap in age-adjusted chronic mortality for white men relative to white women fell by 5:4 log points,

perhaps as white men became bene…ciaries of medical technologies and advice that spread over this

time period. (See Appendix Section IV.) We see little evidence that proximity to Macon County

was detrimental for the health of white men in the post period. Although the dotted line of best

…t is downward sloping, this result is driven by convergence occurring at distances beyond 2000
                                                        k
kilometers from Alabama; estimated values of                within the South show no geographic gradient.

    To assess whether the observed geographic patterns in health outcomes for black men compared

to black women and white men emerged in the post-1972 period, we look for the same patterns

in the years prior to the Tuskegee disclosure, instituting a false de…nition of Ipost in this set of

observations. We plot estimates of            for the same set of distance buckets in Panels E and F of

                                   k
  26. The estimating equation is Ygat =   +    k
                                                   Imale
                                                    g    Ipost
                                                          t    +   k
                                                                       (Ipost
                                                                         t    )+   a;male   + "rat   for k 2 [1; K], where g
re‡ects gender.


                                                        17
Figure III, de…ning Ipost to be one for all observations after the mid-point of the pre period. These

falsi…cation tests indicate no geographic gradient in the estimates of , and the slope of the line of

best …t is ‡at for both the all-male and all-black speci…cations.


IV.B.        Baseline Estimating Equations

      The geographic gradients documented in Figure III motivate a DDD estimator which interacts

di¤erences over time, race, and gender with a continuous measure of proximity to Macon County,

Alabama. We denote this proximity measure Pj where j 2 s; a represents measurement at the state

or SEA level, respectively. To facilitate interpretation of regression coe¢ cients, geographic distance

is transformed to proximity to Macon County, Alabama, in thousands of kilometers.27 The relevant

estimating equation for healthcare utilization for individual i of race r and gender g measured in

state s at time t (Yigrst ) is:


(2)    Yigrst =       +    1 (Ps    Ipost
                                     t    Iblack
                                           r     Imale
                                                  g    )+                  2 (Ps    Ipost
                                                                                     t    Imale
                                                                                           g    )+   3   Ps Ipost
                                                                                                             t    Iblack
                                                                                                                   r

                    +X0it +        rgt   +   rgs   +   st   + "igrst :


      For mortality outcomes, the vector of covariates (X) must be treated di¤erently, and the esti-

mating equation for the mortality rate of groups characterized by race r and gender g in SEA a at

time t is:


(3)    Ygrat =        +   1 (Pa    Ipost
                                    t    Iblack
                                          r     Imale
                                                 g    )+                   2 (Pa    Ipost
                                                                                     t    Imale
                                                                                           g    )+   3   Pa Ipost
                                                                                                             t    Iblack
                                                                                                                   r

                   +(Iblack
                      r     Imale
                             g    X0at ) +                  rgt   +    rga   +     at   + "grat :


      In both equations, a full set of race-gender-time ( ), race-gender-geography ( ); and geography-

time ( ) …xed e¤ects are included. Race-gender-time …xed e¤ects control ‡exibly for secular changes

that could have di¤erentially a¤ected the health care utilization and mortality of each of the four


   27. Speci…cally, we use max(distance) (distances ) so that locations farthest from Tuskegee receive a proximity value
of 0. Distance is measured at the state level in the utilization data and at the SEA or county level for the mortality
data. In the mortality data, distances are measured from the geographic centroid of each SEA to the centroid of
Macon County, Alabama. For the NHIS outcomes, which are available at the state level, we use county-level black
adult population statistics and geographic county centroids to create black population-weighted state centroids which
are used to construct proximity as above. These centroids represent the average latitude and longitude of black
individuals in each state based on the black population of counties (Haines 2010).


                                                                      18
groups. Race-gender-geography …xed e¤ects absorb time-invariant location-speci…c factors that

could di¤erentially in‡uence the health outcomes of each of the four groups. Local, time-varying

shocks to health outcomes that a¤ect all groups are absorbed by geography-time …xed e¤ects.

   In utilization regressions at the individual level, the vector X includes income, education, age,

whether or not the individual owns a telephone, marital status, as well as an indicator for rural-

urban status. For mortality rates, measured at the SEA level, the model includes SEA-year …xed

e¤ects that control for the changing supply of healthcare across locations over time, provided

those changes a¤ected all demographic groups equally. We add supply measures (the prevalence

of doctors, hospitals, and hospital beds; the presence of community health centers; the log of

total government healthcare expenditures–Medicare, Medicaid, and veterans healthcare; and the

log of Social Security expenditures), each interacted with black and male indicators, to allow for

di¤erences in the e¤ects of these supply measures on each group over time. Practically, they matter

little for the estimates. (See Appendix Table A.3 for results without X variables.)

   We limit our analysis to a window around the disclosure of 1969-1977 for utilization measures

and 1968-1987 for mortality. We do not attempt to model the carry-on e¤ects of TSUS to future

cohorts of black men given that the identifying assumption behind the DDD approach becomes

more tenuous as one moves out in time.


IV.C.      Identi…cation

   The estimates of     1   coming from equations (2) and (3) re‡ect the e¤ect of the Tuskegee Study

disclosure provided there are no other systematic shocks to black men that a¤ected healthcare

utilization and mortality correlated with proximity to Macon County, but not due to the timing

of the study’s disclosure. By conditioning on the …xed e¤ects and covariates described above,

these estimates ‡exibly control for the health penalty associated with being a black male in all

years and for time-varying threats to identi…cation such as national trends in incarceration and

unemployment that a¤ected all black men.28 Similarly, although access to care and insurance

coverage for black men di¤ered from other groups in this period, any time-invariant geographic

di¤erences in these factors are absorbed by the race-gender-location …xed e¤ects. Location-year


  28. In the Appendix, we show that our results are robust to controls for local measures of incarceration and
unemployment as well. See Appendix Table A.5 columns (3) and (6).


                                                     19
e¤ects net out any time-varying health advantages or disadvantages associated with geography that

a¤ected all Americans, such as the rollout of Medicare and Medicaid and their various expansions,

although we note that there is no major expansion or contraction of public insurance in or around

1972 that would serve to confound interpretation of our results. Because we also condition on

supply-side healthcare measures in the mortality regressions, interacted with group indicators, our

speci…cation accommodates changes in healthcare supply that a¤ected black men in particular. If

our attempts to control for these changes are inadequate, most policy changes coinciding with the

timing of the disclosure served to increase access for disadvantaged populations, particularly in the

South, and would therefore bias our estimates towards zero.29

      Together, these controls limit the scope for unobserved factors to those a¤ecting only black

men, but not black women or white men, in closer proximity to Macon County, Alabama, and only

after 1972.



                                                    V.      Results

V.A.       Event Study Estimates

      We …rst present the results of event study versions of equations (2) and (3) in which we generate

a coe¢ cient for the interaction of proximity with black and male indicators for every year, each

relative to 1972, as well as a coe¢ cient for proximity interacted with a black indicator in each year

and a coe¢ cient for proximity interacted with a male indicator in each year, again relative to 1972.

Speci…cally, we estimate:

                                    P       n                                       P
(4)           Yirgst =        +             1 (Ps   It=n Iblack
                                                          r     Imale
                                                                 g    )+                     n
                                                                                             2 (Ps    It=n Imale
                                                                                                            g    )
                                  n6=1972                                         n6=1972
                                  P     n
                          +             3 (Ps   It=n     Iblack
                                                          r     )   +   X0i   +   rgt   +   srg   +   st   + "igrst ;
                              n6=1972


      and a similar equation for mortality. It=n is an indicator for each year (other than 1972), such

that each      coe¢ cient represents the interaction of proximity and group indicators in year n.

   29. We …nd no evidence that expenditure levels for these social programs exhibited a temporal or geographic
pattern mirroring our main empirical results. In Appendix Table A.7, both hospital beds per capita and Medicare
expenditures show a continuous increase over this time period, and more so in locations closer to Tuskegee. But there
is no trend break in 1972 that would have induced utilization and mortality changes in that year. (See Appendix
Figure A.8.)


                                                              20
    Figure IV, Panel A plots estimates of               1,   the di¤erence across genders in the racial gap in

healthcare utilization as a function of distance from Macon County, Alabama, relative to the

di¤erence in 1972, along with 95% con…dence intervals. Panel B plots estimates of                        2,   the gender

gap in health care utilization for whites as a function of distance from Macon County, Alabama,

relative to 1972. Panel C plots estimates of               3;   the di¤erence in health care utilization for black

women versus white women as a function of distance from Macon County, Alabama, relative to

1972. The set of pre-1972            1   coe¢ cients are statistically indistinguishable from zero, with the

exception for the …rst year (1969), but there is a sharp, statistically signi…cant and sustained

change beginning in 1972. Such an abrupt discontinuity after 1972 is not seen in the dynamic

plot of    2   or   3   coe¢ cients, providing evidence that we are not capturing a generic, location-based

shock that a¤ected other groups.

    Panels D through F of Figure IV contain the event studies for mortality. (Recall that the

mortality data have been grouped to measure biennial averages and thus results are relative to

1972/1973.) Just as in Panel A, the plotted            1   coe¢ cients in Panel D are not statistically signi…cant

in the pre-disclosure years. After the disclosure of the Tuskegee Study, however, the di¤erences in

age-adjusted chronic mortality rates for black men relative to white men, compared to black women

relative to white women, (or black men relative to black women, compared to white men relative

to white women) increase with proximity to Macon County, Alabama, as indicated by the positive

and statistically signi…cant         1   coe¢ cients for years after 1973. Panels E and F, which plot the               2

and    3   coe¢ cients for mortality, do not demonstrate an abrupt change in                1972.30


V.B.        Main Estimates

    The event studies contained in Figure IV are consistent with the notion that the Tuskegee

disclosure had an impact on both health-seeking behaviors and mortality. To provide a summary

measure of the impact of the Tuskegee Study revelation, and to subject our results to a battery of


   30. Due to data limitations, we cannot acurately generate a longer pre-period for the mortality or utilization results.
NCHS mortality data are available for earlier years, but the 1960 U.S. Census of Population, from which population
counts would need to be derived for such an exercise, only reports local population counts by age and gender for the
nonwhite population. In an attempt to construct a denominator for black mortality rates for years prior to 1968,
we limit the sample to locations where at least 60% of the 1960 non-white population was black. (Our results are
robust to other choices of this cuto¤.) Extended event study results (in Appendix Figure A.3) generated under these
limitations also demonstrate insigni…cant and relatively ‡at pre-period estimates of the black male mortality penalty
as a function of proximity to Macon County, Alabama.


                                                             21
placebo and other robustness checks, we move to reporting the results of equations (2) and (3).

   Table I reports the    1,   2,   and   3   coe¢ cients in equation (2) for outcomes related to both

health seeking behavior and mortality. We report four utilization outcomes of interest: how many

outpatient physician interactions an NHIS respondent reported in the last 12 months ("Number

Outpatient Visits"), whether an individual reported any outpatient visit with a physician in the last

12 months ("Any Outpatient Visit"), whether an individual reported having been admitted to a

hospital in the past 12 months ("Any Hospital Admission"), and the number of nights spent in the

hospital in the past 12 months ("Number Nights in Hospital"). We report four mortality outcomes

of interest in Table I columns (5) to (8): the log and level of age-adjusted all-cause mortality and

the log and level of age-adjusted chronic mortality for adults 45-74 years of age.

   Estimated coe¢ cients in column (1) of Table I indicate that black men experienced sharp

declines in the probability of visiting a doctor in the years following 1972 as a function of their

proximity to the Tuskegee Study’s location. These estimates indicate that a standard deviation

increase in proximity to the study’s home county was associated with reduced outpatient interac-

tions of 0:9 visits per year — approximately 22% of the pre-disclosure black male sample mean.

From column (2), a one standard deviation increase in proximity to Macon County, Alabama, was

associated with a 2:5 percentage point decline in the probability of having an outpatient doctor’s

visit, approximately 4% of the sample mean.

   For hospitalization outcomes, estimates for        1   in column (3) of Table I indicate a reduction in

the probability of hospital admission for black men after 1972 of 1 percentage point per standard

deviation of geographic distance. These results, although not statistically signi…cant, indicate a

post-Tuskegee Study disclosure reduction in acute medical care of 7% of the pre-disclosure mean.

Although hospital admission rates went down, column (4) of Table I indicates black men appear

to have had more advanced illness on presentation as re‡ected in longer hospital stays: black men

experienced an increase in duration of stay of 0:5 nights per standard deviation. These estimates

are large, representing 22% of the pre-1972 sample mean.

   In Appendix Table A.2, we estimate this baseline equation on another healthcare utilization

outcome less likely to have been a¤ected by the Tuskegee disclosure: dental visits over the last 12

months. This outcome is available for a slightly truncated period of time (1969-1975), and shows

black men in closer proximity to Macon County, Alabama, are slightly more likely to visit the

                                                     22
dentist after 1972, although the estimated coe¢ cient is not statistically signi…cant. This result

provides suggestive evidence that racial gaps in other forms of care stabilized after 1972 and that

relative avoidance was speci…c to institutions most reminiscent of the Tuskegee Study.

      In columns (5) and (7) of Table I, we estimate that a one-standard deviation increase in prox-

imity to Tuskegee was associated with a post-1972 increase in both all-cause and chronic-cause

age-adjusted mortality for black men of 3:7 and 4:5 log points, respectively. When we estimate the

model in levels, we …nd a one standard deviation increase is associated with 1.1 more deaths from

any cause per 1000 population (column (6)) and 0.8 more deaths from chronic causes per 1000

population (column (8)). Based on our estimates, the elasticity of all-cause age-adjusted mortality

with respect to physician visits ranges from 0:14 to 0:18; in other words, a 1% decrease in physician

visits would increase mortality by approximately 0:14                 0:18%.31 We view these estimates as an

upper bound since men might have not only stopped interacting with physicians, they might have

also delayed going to the hospital or heeding public health messaging around smoking, for instance

(see Appendix Table A.2 column (2)). However, this value is consistent with similar estimates

from Medicare and community health center expansion.32 Notably, we do not observe an e¤ect

of the Tuskegee disclosure on mortality rates from acute causes of death associated with violence,

accidents, or other external causes (see Appendix Table A.6). In unreported results, the largest

impacts appear to come from deaths due to cardiac conditions, diabetes, and respiratory diseases.

      In almost all cases, estimates of      2   and    3   are insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero, implying no

systematic post-1972 change in the gender gap in mortality for whites or the racial gap in mortality

for women as a function of proximity to Macon County, Alabama. The estimated value of                             2   is

positive and signi…cant for the log mortality outcomes, but the signi…cance of the coe¢ cient belies

two important observations. First, there is no change in the trajectory of the                 2   coe¢ cient in 1972

(see Figure IV, Panel E). Rather, there is a low, positive rate of growth in the geographic mortality

gradient for white men compared to white women with a slope an order of magnitude smaller than

 1.    Second, unlike the      1   e¤ect, the     2   e¤ect is not centered on Macon County, Alabama, as

   31. The elasticity was obtained by dividing a one standard deviation percent change in all-cause mortality by a
one-standard deviation change percent change in outpatient physician interactions. The range is due to the inclusion
or exclusion of veteran males from the utilization estimates; the higher elasticity is from a sample including veterans
(whose utilization response was more muted).
   32. Bailey and Goodman-Bacon (2015) show that exposure to a community health center in one’s county of residence
between 1965 and 1974 reduced adult all-cause mortality by as much as 2%; implying an elasticity of approximately
-0.18. Lichtenberg (2002) reports an elasticity of -0.095.


                                                            23
demonstrated in Appendix Figure A.5.


V.C.      Heterogeneous E¤ ects

    In Table II, we explore heterogeneous e¤ects by splitting the sample in various ways and re-

porting estimates of      1;   2;   and   3   for these subsamples. First, we explore the roles of income and

education by dividing the sample at the median of black male household income (columns (1) and

(2)) and at the median of black male education (columns (3) and (4)). Because the entire sample

is divided at the black male median, above- and below-median samples are not equally sized. In

both cases, we conjecture that black men lower on the socioeconomic ladder would respond more

strongly to the Tuskegee Study disclosure if the channel for utilization e¤ects is empathy or salience.

Indeed, although the estimates of             1   are negative and signi…cant for both income groups, the point

estimates for the e¤ect of the Tuskegee disclosure on the health seeking behavior of poorer, less

educated black men are signi…cantly distinguishable from higher income, better educated black men

at the 1% level. Black men in the lowest 50th percentile of the income distribution reduce their

utilization by approximately 3 times more than black men in the top half of the income distribution.

At the same time, black men with below-median education reduced their utilization by 1.9 visits

per standard deviation of proximity to Macon County, Alabama, while the upper 50th percentile of

the education distribution exhibits a point estimate of approximately zero.

    Next, we examine the moderating e¤ect of black physicians on our baseline results in columns

(5) and (6) of Table III. We hypothesize that the availability of a black physician would have reduced

the rate at which black men downgraded their expectation of encountering a "good" doctor. For

these results, we utilized data on the number of black and white physicians in each U.S. state

from the 1970 U.S. Census of Population (U.S. Census Bureau 1970). Importantly, these counts

are measured before, and are therefore not endogenous to, the 1972 disclosure. When we split

the sample by places above and below the median number of black doctors (as a percentage of

all doctors), we …nd suggestive, but weak, evidence for a moderating e¤ect of black doctors. The

coe¢ cient for locations above the median is smaller than that for locations below this median,

although these di¤erences are not statistically signi…cant.33


   33. We do not …nd the same pattern if we use black physicians per black capita, suggesting that black men responded
to the "whiteness" of the local medical profession, rather than to the availability of a black physician.


                                                            24
    Last, we divide the sample by marital status. In the absence of individual birth histories in the

NHIS, we use marital status as a proxy for whether or not a woman had given birth. By 1960, 97%

of all births were in hospitals (Feldhusen 2000), and unmarried women had fewer children compared

to married women.34 Thus, if marriage is a proxy for more childbirth-related experience with the

healthcare sector,     2   for unmarried black women should be more similar to               1,   the coe¢ cient for

black men. These results are tested in columns (7) and (8) of Table II. In estimates for                      1,   we

…nd that unmarried men have a more negative response to the news of the Tuskegee Study than

their married counterparts, though the di¤erence is relatively small and not statistically signi…cant.

But unmarried black women, represented by estimated coe¢ cients on Ps Ipost
                                                                       t    Iblack
                                                                             r     in column

(8) of Table II, respond di¤erently from married black women in column (7), both in sign and

magnitude. Mirroring the behavior of black men, unmarried black women reduce health provider

interactions in proportion to their proximity to Macon County, Alabama, whereas married black

women continue to exhibit convergence in the South. For both married and unmarried women, the

size of the coe¢ cient is about a third of that for black men, albeit with opposing signs for married

women.



       VI.      Threats to Identification and Robustness Checks

    We perform several tests to bolster a causal interpretation for our results. First, we test the

robustness of our estimates by incorporating migration networks as an alternative measure of prox-

imity and demonstrating similarly signed and statistically signi…cant estimates. Second, we use

placebo locations to show that the main results are speci…c to gradients of proximity to Macon

County, Alabama. Third, we use placebo populations to demonstrate that the main results for both

utilization measures and mortality rates are not observed when we estimate the baseline equations

on younger population samples. We also show that our results are robust to a South-only sample; to

dropping all control variables; to limiting to non-South observations; and to parametric estimating



   34. In 1965, approximately 75% of black infants were born to married mothers (Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz 1996). In
related work, Thomasson and Treber (2004) …nd that the hospitalization of childbirth in the 1930s and, in particular,
the introduction of sulfa drugs may have disproportionately reduced maternal mortality among black women, despite
the segregation of hospitals and otherwise racially inequitable access. Because older women in our sample would have
given birth between 1925 and 1960 (roughly), a substantial share of them would have bene…ted from this "positive"
healthcare experience.


                                                         25
equations that allow for trends in unemployment and incarceration in the mortality speci…cations.

We discuss the …ndings of the main robustness checks below, and the remainder are described in

the Appendix.


VI.A.     Alternative Measures of Proximity

   The reduction in healthcare utilization and uptick in mortality for black men as a function of

geographic proximity to Macon County, Alabama, is also apparent using an alternative measure of

proximity. Table III, Panel A reports these checks for the utilization results regarding the number of

physician interactions and Panel B provides analogous results for log age-adjusted chronic mortality.

In both cases, we replace the baseline proximity measure, geographic proximity to Macon County,

Alabama, with the percentage of 1935-1940 black migrants to a particular state or SEA who

originated in Alabama. (All Alabama SEAs and the state of Alabama are excluded from this

analysis.) We observe statistically signi…cant di¤erences in the post-1972 utilization of primary

healthcare and in the post-1972 mortality rates for black men as a function of this variable as well.

Speci…cally, we estimate that a 10% increase in the share of black migrants from Alabama reduces

utilization by 1 interaction per year and increases mortality by approximately 2%.


VI.B.     Permutation Tests

   To test whether the geographic gradients documented in our baseline interacted DDD results

are speci…c to distance from Macon County, Alabama, we run placebo regressions, replacing the

baseline proximity measure (proximity to Macon County, Alabama) with proximity to the geo-

graphic centroid of every other state or SEA and re-estimating the model. These regressions serve

as placebo tests, evaluating whether we …nd the same (or stronger) utilization e¤ects as a function

of the gradient to other locations in the U.S. Figure V presents the distribution, in histogram form,

of the estimated values of   1   in each of these tests when the outcome is the intensive margin of

primary care utilization (Panel A) and log age-adjusted chronic mortality (Panel B). The vertical

line indicates the estimated coe¢ cient from Table I when the proximity measure is the baseline

proximity to Macon County, Alabama. In both cases, the value of the Macon County estimate is

greater (in absolute value) than 96% of placebo estimates; other outcomes exhibit similar patterns.

   For the mortality results, we can also display heat maps of the coe¢ cient estimates of   1   as well

                                                  26
as   2   and   3: .   These results, contained in Appendix Figure A.5, Panel B, demonstrate that the

handful of locations where the estimates for               1   are greater than those using proximity to Macon

County, Alabama, are also close geographically and thus highly correlated with the treatment. The

coe¢ cients for       2   and    3: using   these alternative proximity measures exhibit a far smaller range of

estimate values. For            2,   these values are largest in the North Central states, while   3: values   are

actually smallest in the U.S. South.


VI.C.      Robustness Checks

     To evaluate whether the paper’s measured impacts simply re‡ect a general southern e¤ect,

columns (2), (3), (6), and (7) of Table III restrict the analysis sample to southern residents only.

This reduces the scope for identi…cation threats to things correlated with geographic proximity to

Macon County, Alabama, in particular, and not to the South in general. The estimated value of                    1

is relatively unchanged in these speci…cations compared to our baseline estimates, particularly when

using geographic proximity as the treatment variable. In Appendix Table A.3, we include additional

robustness checks for the utilization and mortality outcomes, including dropping the South entirely

and adding interactions between region …xed e¤ects and post, black, and male indicators. Results

are similar to those presented in Tables I and III.

     We next limit the sample to children under 14 years of age for both mortality and utilization

results. The post-1972 di¤erence in outpatient care for black and white male children exhibits no

geographic gradient, nor does the di¤erence in utilization for black male and black female children

as evidenced by coe¢ cients statistically indistinguishable from zero in column (4) of Table III. For

mortality outcomes, there is no di¤erential change in the mortality rate of black male children after

1972 as a function of proximity to Macon County, Alabama, although male children and black

children, in general, experienced lower death rates along this geographic gradient. This result is

based on a mortality outcome in levels (instead of logs) due to the large number of zeroes, but

caution should still be used in interpreting these results given the small death counts compared to

older age groups. The non-result for black male children is consistent with both a lower salience of

the study’s abuses for younger children and with results showing that black married women were

seemingly una¤ected by the study’s disclosure. Although the perceptions of their fathers could

feasibly have a¤ected the demand for children’s healthcare utilization, the non-result here may

                                                               27
indicate that decision-making for children at this time was mostly driven by maternal preferences.

Given these results, the scope of identi…cation threats is narrowed substantially to those factors

correlated with the primary care utilization and mortality rates of older black men centered on

Macon County, Alabama, after 1972 which did not a¤ect child mortality or children’s healthcare

utilization.



                                            VII.        Channels

    Our measure of how much trust one has in their doctor comes from the GSS, a repeated

cross section extending from 1972 to the present. The earliest year questions were asked about

doctors was 1998, when several questions were included. In particular, participants were asked

about whether “doctor’s judgment trusted" and whether "doctors deny me the treatment needed".

As a placebo outcome, we also examine respondents’ views on whether people, in general, can

be trusted.35 Although we do not have data for both before and after the disclosure, we can

test whether individuals living closer to Macon County, Alabama, exhibit greater post-disclosure

mistrust. For this analysis, we ask whether there is a racial (gender) gap in medical trust that

varies across genders (races) as a function of proximity to Macon County, Alabama. The estimating

equation for survey responses for individual i residing in state s of race r and gender g is given by:


(5) M istrustirgs =       +   1 (Ps   Iblack
                                       r     Imale
                                              g    )+   2 (Ps   Iblack
                                                                 r     )+   3 (Ps   Imale
                                                                                     g    )+             0
                                                                                               s + rg + Xi   +   irgs



    where Ps is proximity to Macon County,               represents a current state of residence …xed e¤ect,

and     denotes race-by-gender …xed e¤ects. State …xed e¤ects ensure that                       coe¢ cients capture

the geographic gradient in mistrust for each demographic group net of state-speci…c attitudes

common across all groups. The sample includes individuals at least 10 years of age at the time

of the disclosure.36 X contains age, education, and marital status …xed e¤ects. Standard errors


   35. Individuals who replied "no" or "don’t know" to the question of whether people can be trusted were coded as
1 and those who replied "yes" were coded as 0. A similar coding strategy was applied to the outcome variables for
medical mistrust (measured on a four point Likert scale) so that the coe¢ cients can be easily interpreted as marginal
e¤ects.
   36. This implies that age in the sample ranges from 36 to 89, with an average in the mid-…fties. Note that if we
restrict to age<10 in 1972, those aged 18 to 35 in our sample, our coe¢ cients on medical mistrust and deny treatment
generally have the "wrong sign".


                                                         28
are clustered at the level of treatment (state of residence). The results, contained in Table IV,

demonstrate that black men exhibit a strong, statistically signi…cant geographic gradient in mistrust

of doctors and similar (though not statistically signi…cant) concern regarding treatment denial. A

one standard deviation increase in proximity to Macon County, Alabama, is associated with a 14

percentage point increase in medical mistrust and a similar increase in treatment denial suspicion

among black men as compared to white men, net of such racial gaps for women. Note that                    2   (the

geographic gradient in mistrust for white men as compared to white women) and                  3   (the gradient

for black women compared to white women) are often oppositely signed and not signi…cant. It is

not the case that black men closer to Tuskegee are simply less trusting;           1   in column (3) where the

outcome is general mistrust is opposite signed and not statistically signi…cant.

   Finally, we have posited the impact of Tuskegee would be more poignant for individuals who

had limited experience with the healthcare sector prior to the disclosure. To isolate the role of

experience as a mitigating factor on belief formation, we examine the post-1972 di¤erences in

healthcare utilization between men who have served in the military versus those who have not,

again as a function of proximity to Macon County, Alabama. To do so, we drop women from

the utilization sample, add back veteran men, and replace Imale
                                                           g    in equation (2) with an indicator

variable for whether an individual was a non-veteran, i.e., never drafted or entered into the military.

   Estimated coe¢ cients from this modi…ed speci…cation, contained in Table V, indicate a marked

geographic gradient in the veteran/non-veteran gap in primary care utilization in the years following

the Tuskegee disclosure. This …nding is restricted to black men (as evidenced by the null or

oppositely signed     2   coe¢ cient). Although black men’s utilization declined overall (see                 3   in

columns (1) and (2)), this e¤ect was far more pronounced for non-veterans. For example, veteran

black males reduced the number of outpatient visits per year by 0.59 per thousand kilometer

proximity to Macon County, Alabama, while nonveteran black males reduced their utilization by

about one additional visit per year.37 There are several possible explanations for this observation,

including that veteran black men may have expected doctors to treat them as "veteran patients"

rather than as "black male patients" and were therefore less worried about facing discrimination.

Nevertheless, the results for veterans are consistent with predictions from the multi-period model

wherein past experience with the medical profession dampens the response to the news of Tuskegee.

  37. Appendix Figure A.9 contains event study coe¢ cients for the within-male comparision.


                                                       29
                        VIII.     Effect on Life Expectancy

   The paper’s baseline results for the mortality of older adults, aged 45-74, can be converted into

predicted reductions in life expectancy. To do so, we use levels of all-cause mortality as the outcome

in equation (3). Predictions based on the full complement of terms, including the interaction of

Pa Ipost
    t    Iblack
          r     Imale
                 g    multiplied by c1 , re‡ect mortality with the Tuskegee Study revelation.

Predictions based on equation (3), but without this product, re‡ect counterfactual mortality in the

absence of the revelation. The average value of these predictions are weighted so that they re‡ect

the mortality patterns of black men given their population distribution circa 1970. These predicted

mortality rates allow us to construct abridged, current life tables, in the presence and absence of the

Tuskegee revelation, as described in the London Health Observatory Technical Supplement (2010).

   For black men in our sample, the observed life expectancy, conditional on reaching age 45, is

23:7 years. Counterfactual life expectancy in the absence of the calculated treatment e¤ect is 25:2,

an increase of 1:5 years. This estimated decrease in the life expectancy of black men attributable to

the Tuskegee revelation represents approximately 35% of the racial gap in male life expectancy in

1980 and 25% of the gender gap in black life expectancy at the same juncture (National Center for

Health Statistics 1985). As a benchmark for these results, Black et al. (2015) …nd that migration to

the North in the …rst waves of the Great Migration (1916-1932) resulted in decreased life expectancy

at age 65 of at least 1:5 years. Because their most robust analysis is based on Medicare data, these

authors do not provide a similar estimate for life expectancy at age 45. Another useful benchmark

is the hypothetical removal of smoking, which has been projected to increase life expectancy of an

18-year old by 1:7 years (Stewart, Cutler, and Rosen 2009) .



                                      IX.     Conclusion

   The Tuskegee Study was one of the most egregious examples of medical exploitation in U.S.

history. Our estimates indicate that the years immediately following the study’s disclosure brought

signi…cantly lower utilization of both outpatient and inpatient medical services by older black men

in closer geographic proximity to the study’s subjects. The e¤ects are particularly heightened

among less-educated and lower income men, a socioeconomic pro…le shared by the men targeted

by PHS investigators. Moreover, the reductions in healthcare utilization we document paralleled

                                                  30
a signi…cant increase in the probability that older black men died before the age of 75. The data

indicate no corresponding e¤ects for younger black males or for white males or black women.

Our results are robust to accounting for a wide range of policies, economic forces, and individual

characteristics thought to shape health behaviors. These …ndings underscore the importance of trust

for economic relationships involving imperfect information, including in the provision of medical

care.

   Although our study has focused on how Tuskegee generated mistrust and shaped demand for

healthcare services by blacks, the Tuskegee example also revealed racial inequities inherent in

the provision of healthcare. A modern literature indicates these inequities persist. For example,

Ho¤man et al. (2016) document false beliefs among medical students and residents regarding race-

based biological di¤erences in pain tolerance that resulted in racial di¤erences in treatment. As long

as biased beliefs, policies, and practices are still prevalent in the U.S. healthcare system, mistrust

is a rational response that may continue to contribute to health disparities.

   Marcella Alsan, Stanford University, NBER and BREAD
   Marianne Wanamaker, University of Tennessee, NBER and IZA


                                         References

ABC News/Washington Post, ABC News/The Washington Post: Los Angeles Race Riots [dataset]
   (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY: Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, 1992). Accessed
   August 2015.
Adler, Nancy, Thomas Boyce, Margaret A. Chesney, Sheldon Cohen, Susan Folkman, Robert L.
   Kahn, and S. Leonard Syme, “Socioeconomic Inequalities in Health: No Easy Solution,”Journal
   of the American Medical Association, 269 (1993), 124–163.
Aizer, Anna, and Laura Stroud, “Education, Knowledge and the Evolution of Disparities in Health,”
   NBER Working Paper No.15840, 2010.
Akerlof, George, Janet Yellen, and Michael L. Katz, “An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing
   in the United States,” Quarterly Journal of Economics;111 (1996), 377-317.
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone, “Civil Rights, the War on Poverty
   and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and Mississippi,” MIT
   Working Paper Series No. 07-04, 2006.
Alsan, Marcella, and Claudia Goldin, “Watersheds in Infant Mortality: The Role of E¤ective Water
   and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880 to 1915,” NBER Working Paper No. 21263, 2015.
American Cancer Society, “Colorectal Cancer Facts and Figures 2008-2010,” Colorectal Cancer
   Statistics, 2008.
Bailey, Martha J., and Andrew Goodman-Bacon, “The War on Poverty’s Experiment in Public
   Medicine: Community Health Centers and the Mortality of Older Americans,” American Eco-
   nomic Review, 105 (2015), 1067–1104.


                                                 31
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Du‡o, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight
   Global Poverty (New York: Public A¤airs, 2011).
Becker, Gary, and Yona Rubinstein, “Fear and the Response to Terrorism: An Economic Analysis,”
   Centre for Economic Performance Working Paper No. 1079, 2011.
Bhalotra, Sonia R., and Atheendar Venkataramani, “Shadows of the Captain of the Men of Death:
   Early Life Health Interventions, Human Capital Investments, and Institutions,” IZA DP No.
   6041, 2011.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, Evan J. Taylor, and Lowell J. Taylor, “The Impact of the Great
   Migration on Mortality of African Americans: Evidence from the Deep South,”American Eco-
   nomic Review 105 (2015), 477-503.
Blinder, Alan, “In Rural Alabama A Longtime Mistrust of Medicine Fuels A Tuberculosis Out-
   break,” The New York Times, 2016.
Bogart, Laura M., Glenn J. Wagner Jr., Harold D. Green, Matt G. Mutchler, David J. Klein, Bryce
   McDavitt, Sean J. Lawrence, and Charles L. Hilliard, “Medical Mistrust among Social Network
   Members may Contribute to Antiretroviral Nonadherence in African Americans Living with
   HIV,” Social Science & Medicine, 164 (2016) 133-140.
Boulware, L. Ebony, Lisa A. Cooper, Lloyd E. Ratner, Thomas A. LaVeist, and Neil R Powe, “Race
   and Trust in the Health Care System,” Public Health Reports, 118 (2003), 358–365.
Brandon, Dwayne T., Lydia A. Isaac, and Thomas A LaVeist, “The Legacy of Tuskegee and Trust
   in Medical Care: Is Tuskegee Responsible for Race Di¤erences in Mistrust of Medical Care?,”
   Journal of the National Medical Association, 97 (2005), 951–956.
Brandt, Allan M., “Racism and Research: The Case of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study,”The Hastings
   Center Report, 8 (1978), 21–29.
Byrd, Michael, and Linda A. Clayton, An American Health Care Dilemma: Race Medicine and
   Healthcare in the United States, 1900-2000, Volume II. (New York: Routledge, 2002).
Carlson, Elizabeth D., and Robert M. Chamberlain, “The Black White Perception Gap and Health
   Disparities,” Public Health Nursing, 21 (2004), 372–379.
Cascio, Elizabeth, and Ebonya Washington, “Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution of Voting Rights
   and State Funds following the Voting Rights Act of 1965,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   129 (2014), 379–433.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “HIV/AIDS in the United States: 1981–2000,” Mor-
   bidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 50 (2001), 430–434.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Compressed Mortality Files (CMF 1968-1988, Series
   20, No. 2A, 2000) CDCWONDER Online, 2014.
Corbie-Smith, Giselle, Stephen B. Thomas, Mark V. Williams, and Sandra Moody-Ayers, “Atti-
   tudes and Beliefs of African Americans Toward Participation in Medical Research,” Journal of
   General Internal Medicine, 14 (1999), 537–546.
Curtin, Lester R., and Richard J. Klein, “Direct Standardization (Age-Adjusted Death Rates),”
   Healthy People 2000 Statistical Notes, 6 (1995), 1-10.
Cutler, David, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Tom Vogl, “Socioeconomic Status and Health: Dimen-
   sions and Mechanisms”in The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics, ed. S. Glied and P. Smith
   (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2011).
Deaton, Angus, “Policy Implications of the Gradient of Health And Wealth,” Health A¤ airs, 21
   (2002), 13–30.
Dupas, Pascaline, “Health Behavior in Developing Countries,” Annual Review of Economics, 3
   (2011), 425–449.
Fafchamps, Marcel, “Development and Social Capital,” The Journal of Development Studies, 42
   (2006), 1180–1198.

                                              32
Feldhusen, Adrian E., “The History of Midwifery and Childbirth in America: A Time Line,”
   Midwifery Today, (2000), 1-2.
Freedman, Tovia, “Why Don’t They Come to Pike Street and Ask Us? Black American Women’s
   Health Concerns,” Social Science and Medicine, 47 (1998), 941–947.
Gaston, Gina B., and Binta Alleyne-Green, “The Impact of African Americans’ Beliefs About
   HIV Medical Care on Treatment Adherence: A Systematic Review and Recommendations for
   Interventions,” AIDS Behavior, 17 (2013), 31–40.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew, “Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid Implemen-
   tation,” Working Paper, (2015).
Green, Bernard, Richard Maisiak, Min Qi Wang, Marcia F. Britt, and Nonie Ebeling, “Participation
   in Health Education, Health Promotion, and Health Research by African Americans: E¤ects of
   the Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment,” Journal of Health Education, 28 (1997), 196–201.
Greif, Avner, “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders,”
   The Journal of Economic History, 49 (1989), 857–882.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Alfred Marshall Lecture: Social Capital as Good
   Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6 (2008), 295–320.
Gutsell, Jennifer N., and Michael Inzlicht, “Empathy Constrained: Prejudice Predicts Reduced
   Mental Simulation of Actions During Observation of Outgroups,”Journal of Experimental Social
   Psychology, 46 (2010), 841–845.
Haines, Michael, Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-
   2002, ICPSR Study No. 02896, 2010.
Halbert, Chanita Hughes, Benita Weathers, Ernestine Delmoor, Brandon Mahler, James Coyne,
   Hayley S. Thompson, Thomas Ten Have, David Vaughn, Bruce Malkowicz, and David Lee,
   “Racial Di¤erences in Medical Mistrust among Men Diagnosed with Prostate Cancer,”Cancer,
   115 (2009), 2553–2561.
Hamilton, Barton, Andrews Hincapie, Robert A. Miller, and Nicholas W. Papageorge, “Innovation
   and Di¤usion of Medical Treatment,” Working Paper, 2016.
Heintzelman, Carol, “The Tuskegee Syphilis Study and Its Implications for the 21st Century,”The
   New Social Worker, 10 (2003), 1–2.
Ho¤man, Kelly M., Sophie Trawalter, Jordan R. Axt, and M. Norman Oliver, "Racial bias in
   pain assessment and treatment recommendations, and false beliefs about biological di¤erences
   between blacks and whites," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
   States of America,113 (2016), 4296-4301.
Holt-Lunstad, Julianne, Wendy Birmingham, and Brandon Q. Jones, “Is There Something Unique
   about Marriage? The Relative Impact of Marital Status, Relationship Quality, and Network
   Social Support on Ambulatory Blood Pressure and Mental Health,”Annals of Behavioral Medi-
   cine, 35 (2008), 239–244.
Hood, Kristina B., Alton Hart, Faye Belgrave, Raymond H. Tademy, and Randy A. Jones, “The
   Role of Trust in Health Decision Making Among African American Men Recruited From Urban
   Barber Shops,” Journal of the National Medical Association, 104 (2012), 351-359.
Institute of Medicine, Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health
   Care (Washington, DC: 2003).
Jackson, James S., and Gerald Gurin, National Survey of Black Americans, ICPSR Study No.
   08512, 1999.
Jones, James H., Bad Blood: The Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment (New York: Free Press, 1992).
Kaiser Family Foundation, "The Health Status of African American Men in the United States,"
   Race, Ethnicity, & Health Care Fact Sheet, #7630 (2007).



                                               33
Kayaniyil, Sheena, Shannon Gravely-Witte, Donna E.Stewart, Lyall Higginson, Neville Suskin,
    David Alter, and Sherry L. Grace, “Degree and Correlates of Patient Trust in their Cardiologist,”
    Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 15 (2009), 634–640.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, “Does Social Capital have an Economic Payo¤? A Cross-
    Country Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (1997), 1251–1288.
LaVeist, Thomas A., Kim Nickerson, and Janice Bowie, “Attitudes about Racism, Medical Mistrust
    and Satisfaction with Care among African American and White Cardiac Patients,”Medical Care
    Research Review, 57 (2000), 146–161.
Lichtenberg, Frank, “The E¤ect of Medicare on Health Care Utilization and Outcomes,”Frontiers
    in Health Policy Research, 5 (2002), 27–52.
London Health Observatory, “Calculating Life Expectancy and Infant Mortality Rates–Mapping
    Health Inequalities Across London,” Technical Supplement, 2010.
Maddux, William W., and Marilynn B. Brewer, “Gender Di¤erences in the Relational and Collective
    Bases for Trust,” Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 8 (2005), 159–171.
Mandell, Gerald L, John E. Bennett, and Raphael Dolin, Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Princi-
    ples and Practice of Infectious Diseases 7th edition, Volume 2. (London: Churchill Livingstone,
    2009).
McCallum, Jan, Arekere Dhananjaya, Lee Green, Ralph Katz, and Brian Rivers, “Awareness and
    Knowledge of the U.S. Public Health Service Syphilis Study at Tuskegee: Implications for
    Biomedical Research,” Journal of HealthCare for the Poor and Underserved, 17 (2006), 716–
    733.
Minnesota Population Center and State Access Data Assistance Center, Integrated Health Interview
    Series: Version 5.0. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2012, https://ihis.ipums.org/ihis/,
    date accessed January 12, 2015.
Murphy, Sherry L., Jiaquan Xu, and Kenneth D. Kochanek, “Deaths: Final Data for 2010,” Na-
    tional Vital Statistics Reports, 61 (2013), 1–118.
National Center for Health Statistics, U.S. Decennial Life Tables for 1979-1981; Volume 1, Number
    1 (Hyattsville, Md.: Department of Health and Human Services (PHS), 1985).
NBC, NBC News Poll: R.A.C.E.–Racial Attitudes and Consciousness Exam [USNBC1989-RACE]
    [dataset] (Storrs, CT: The roper Center for Public Opinion Research, 1989). Accessed August
    2015.
Newkirk II, Vann, “A Generation of Bad Blood,” The Atlantic, 2016.
Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon, “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,”
    American Economic Review,101 (2011), 3221–3252.
Quinn, Sarah, “Belief in AIDS as a Form of Genocide: Implications for HIV Prevention Programs
    for African Americans,” Journal of Health Education, 28 (1997), s6–s11.
Sandman, David, Elisabeth Simantov, and Christina An, “Out of Touch: American Men and the
    Health Care System,”Commonwealth Fund Men’s and Women’s Health Survey Findings, 2000.
Shavers, Vickie, L., Charles F. Lynch, and Leon F. Burmesiter, "Racial Di¤erences in Factors that
    In‡uence the Willingenss to Participate in Medical Research Studies," Annals of Epidemiology,
    12 (2002), 248-256.
Silber, Je¤rey H., Paul R. Rosenbaum, Richard N. Ross, Bijan A. Niknam, Justin M. Ludwig, Wei
    Wang, Amy S. Clark, Kevin R. Fox, Min Wang, Orit Even-Shoshan, and Bruce J. Giantonio,
    “Racial Disparities in Colon Cancer Survival: A Matched Cohort Study,” Annals of Internal
    Medicine, 161 (2014), 845–854.
Singer, Tania, Ben Seymour, John P. O’Doherty, Klaas E. Stephan, Raymond J. Dolan, and Chris
    D. Frith, “Empathic Neural Responses are Modulated by the Perceived Fairness of Others,”
    Nature, 439 (2006), 466–469.

                                                 34
Smith, Tom, Peter Marsden, Michael Hout, and Jibum Kim, General Social Surveys, 1972-2014
   [data…le] (Chicago: NORC at the University of Chicago [producer]; Storrs, CT: The Roper
   Center for for Public Opinion Research [distributor], 2015). Accessed May 2015.
Stewart, Susan T., David M. Cutler, and Allison B. Rosen, “Forecasting the E¤ects of Obesity and
   Smoking on U.S. Life Expectancy,” New England Journal of Medicine, 361 (2009), 2252–2260.
Tabellini, Guido, “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, 123 (2008), 905–950.
Thanakijborisut, Yuthapoom, “Estimating Price Elasticity of Demand for Medical Care Services
   in Thailand,” International Journal of Business and Economics, (2015), 19–39.
The New York Times, “The AIDS ‘Plot’Against Blacks,” May 12, 1992.
Thomas, Stephen B., and Sandra Crouse Quinn. “The Tuskegee Syphilis Study, 1932 to 1972:
   Implications for HIV Education and AIDS Risk Education Programs in the Black Community,”
   American Journal of Public Health, 81 (1991), 1500–1501.
Thomasson, Melissa, and Jaret Treber. “From Home to Hospital: The Evolution of Childbirth in
   the United States 1927-1940,” Explorations in Economic History, 45 (2004), 76–99.
Tuskegee Syphilis Study Legacy Committee, “Final Report of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study Legacy
   Committee,” 1996.
U.S. Census Bureau, “Census of Population and Housing Vol. 1: Characteristics of the Population,”
   (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing O¢ ce, 1970).
Vaidya, Varun, Gautam Partha, and Monita Karmakar, “Gender Di¤erences in Utilization of Pre-
   ventive Care Services in the United States,” Journal of Women’s Health, 21 (2012), 140-145.
Viera, Anthony J., Joshua M. Thorpe, and Joanne M. Garrett, “E¤ects of Sex Age and Visits
   on Receipt of Preventive Health Services: A Secondary Analysis of National Data,” BioMed
   Central Health Services Research, 6 (2006), 1–8.
White, Robert M., “Misinformation and Misbeliefs in the Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis Fuel
   Mistrust in the Healthcare System,” Journal of the National Medical Association, 97 (2005),
   1566–1573.
Wiltshire, Jacqueline, Sharina D. Person, and Jeroan Allison, “Exploring Di¤erences in Trust in
   Doctors Among African American Men and Women,” Journal of the National Medical Associ-
   ation, 103 (2011), 845–851.




                                               35
                                                                  X.      Tables

                                         Table I: Baseline Estimates Utilization and Mortality
                                       (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
                                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                    Number          Any                      Number        Log Age -         Level Age-        Log Age-        Level Age-
                                                              Any Hospital
                                   Outpatient    Outpatient                  Nights in    Adjusted All-     Adjusted All-  Adjusted Chronic Adjusted Chronic
                                                               Admission                 Cause Mortality   Cause Mortality    Mortality        Mortality
                                     Visits        Visit                     Hospital

      Mean of Dep Var for Black
                                      4.10          0.62         0.14          2.26           3.42             30.68            3.14             23.37
          Men before 1973

                                                 PANEL A---Utilization                                        PANEL B---Mortality
                                   -1.328***     -0.037***       -0.015       0.738**      0.071***           2.142**         0.087***          1.566**
     Pj*postt *blackr*maleg
                                     (0.354)       (0.007)      (0.013)       (0.363)       (0.023)           (0.851)          (0.022)          (0.770)

                                     -0.022        0.004         0.004         0.067        0.005*             -0.045         0.008***           -0.031




36
     Pj*postt*maleg
                                     (0.080)      (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.075)       (0.003)           (0.047)          (0.003)          (0.040)

                                     -0.052       0.011*         0.006         0.123         -0.017            -0.765           -0.018          -0.682
     Pj*postt*blackr
                                     (0.110)      (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.104)       (0.019)           (0.658)          (0.020)          (0.663)

     Fixed Effects                State-Year , Race-Gender-Year, Race-Gender-State             SEA-Year, Race-Gender-Year, Race-Gender-SEA

     Observations                   220,954       220,954       220,954       220,954       17,737            18,600           17,611           18,600
     No. Clusters                     49            49            49            49           465               465              465              465
     Adj R-squared                   0.017         0.025         0.010         0.010         0.812             0.303            0.804            0.226
     Notes: OLS estimates of equations (2) and (3). Panel (A) presents outcomes on utilization. Utilization data are from the harmonized version of the National Health Interview Survey
     (NHIS) available from IPUMS and merged with restricted identifiers for use in the Restricted Data Center (RDC) and cover the period 1969-1977. Post is an indicator variable equal to
     1 in the years following 1972. The unit of observation is the individual, and the sample includes non-veteran black and white men and women ages 45-74. In column (1) the outcome is
     the number of outpatient physician interactions in the past 12 months. In column (2) the outcome is an indicator variable for any outpatient physician visit in the last 12 months. In
     columns (3) and (4) the outcome variables are any hospital admission and the number of nights in a hospital, respectively. Panel (B) presents outcomes on mortality. Mortality data are
     from the compressed mortality files from the CDC and cover the period 1968-1987. The unit of observation is a demographic group within a state economic area (SEA) and the sample
     includes black and white men and women ages 45-74 who died in the United States. Rates are constructed biennially, and post is an indicator equal to 1 in the years following 1972/1973.
     In columns (5) and (6) the outcomes are the log and level of age-adjusted mortality from all causes, respectively. In columns (7) and (8) the outcomes are the log and level of age-adjusted
     chronic mortality, respectively. In addition to the listed fixed effects, utilization regressions control for age, education, marital status, urbanization, whether the respondent has a telephone
     and income. Mortality regressions include controls for the log of total health (e.g. Medicaid and Medicare) expenditures, the log of Social Security expenditures, the density of hospitals,
     hospital beds and physicians and the presence of community health centers. Regressions using NHIS data are weighted using provided survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at
     the state level or SEA level.
     ***p<0.01 ,** p<0.05 and *p<0.10, respectively.




37
                                                       Table II: Heterogeneous Effects, Utilization
                                   (1)                (2)                   (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)                                  (7)                (8)
                                                                            Dependent Variable: Number Outpatient Visits

                                    By Income Level                       By Educational Status              By Prevalence Black Doctors                    By Marital Status
                                                  income <=
                             income > black                           educ > black       educ <= black         black MD >       black MD <=
                                                  black male                                                                                            married           unmarried
                               male median                            male median         male median            median            median
                                                    median
     Pj*postt                    -0.546           -1.725**               -0.061           -2.801***            -1.359***            -2.052            -1.398***            -1.665
     *blackr*maleg               (0.548)           (0.705)               (0.409)            (0.839)              (0.373)           (1.460)              (0.326)            (1.061)
                                  0.060            -0.049                -0.013             -0.130                0.042            -0.110                0.029             -0.188
     Pj*postt*maleg
                                 (0.084)           (0.184)               (0.092)            (0.294)              (0.082)           (0.238)              (0.106)            (0.240)
                                 -0.150            -0.211*              -0.465**             0.468               -0.019            -0.566               0.419**           -0.511**
     Pj*postt*blackr
                                 (0.221)           (0.108)               (0.215)            (0.617)              (0.115)           (0.726)              (0.204)            (0.191)




38
     Fixed Effects                                                        State-Year , Race-Gender-Year, Race-Gender-State
     Observations               143,554             77,400              178,756             42,198              176,032             44,922              160,335            60,619
     No. Clusters                 49                  49                  49                  49                  25                  24                  49                 49
     Adj R-squared               0.013              0.030                0.014              0.036                0.016              0.017                0.014             0.030

      Notes: OLS estimates of equation (2) assessing heterogeneous effects by income level, education level, black doctor prevalence, and marital status. Specifically, in the
      first two columns we divide the sample by median black male income. In the following two columns we divide the sample by median black male education. In the next
      two columns, we calculate black physicians as a percentage of all physicians using occupational data from the 1970 Census and bifurcate states as above or below median
      on this dimension. In the last two columns, we divide the sample by whether the survey respondent was married. Utilization data are from the harmonized version of the
      National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) available from IPUMS and merged with restricted identifiers for use in the Restricted Data Center (RDC) and cover the period
      1969-1977. Post is an indicator variable equal to 1 in the years following 1972. The unit of observation is the individual, and the sample includes non-veteran black and
      white men and women ages 45-74. The outcome variable across all panels and columns is the number of physician interactions in the last 12 months. In addition to the
      listed fixed effects, individual-level controls in every specification for utilization include indicator variables for educational status, income, age, marital status, telephone
      ownership, and rural/urban status. Regressions are weighted using provided survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.

      ***p<0.01 ,** p<0.05 and *p<0.10, respectively.
                              Table III: Alternative Measures of Proximity, Robustness Checks
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)            (8)
                                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                                   Level Age-
                                               Number Outpatient Visits                     Log Age-Adjusted Chronic Mortality      Adjusted
                                                                                                                                 Child Mortality
                                    Migrant                                                 Migrant
                                                      South Only          Kids (Placebo)                     South Only          Kids (Placebo)
                                   Treatment                                               Treatment
                                                PANEL A---Utilization                                    PANEL B---Mortality
                                                              -1.794*         -0.152                                 0.066**         0.171
     Pj*postt *blackr*maleg
                                                              (1.027)        (0.151)                                 (0.033)        (0.548)
                                                               0.417          0.016                                    0.003        -0.019*
     Pj*postt*maleg
                                                              (0.423)        (0.030)                                  (0.012)       (0.010)




39
                                                              0.794*          0.148                                    -0.040     -0.386***
     Pj*postt*blackr
                                                              (0.434)        (0.112)                                  (0.027)      (0.125)

                                   -10.18***    -8.356**                                   0.220***     0.140**
     Migrantj*postt*blackr*maleg
                                     (3.307)     (3.351)                                    (0.072)     (0.069)

                                     0.838        0.099                                      0.016        0.015
     Migrantj*postt*maleg
                                    (1.306)      (1.715)                                    (0.018)      (0.023)
                                     2.775        3.071                                      -0.090     -0.092*
     Migrantj*postt*blackr
                                    (1.755)      (1.981)                                    (0.069)     (0.048)

     Fixed Effects                   State-Year , Race-Gender-Year, Race-Gender-State        SEA-Year, Race-Gender-Year, Race-Gender-SEA

     Observations                   216,984      65,495       69,465         299,688         17,103       6,973        7,413        18,600
     No. Clusters                     48           16           17              49             451         175          186          465
     Adj R-squared                   0.017       0.016         0.016          0.044           0.799       0.920        0.923        -0.027
     Notes: OLS estimates of equations (2) and (3). Panel (A) presents outcomes for outpatient visits. Utilization data are from the harmonized version of the National Health
     Interview Survey (NHIS) available from IPUMS and merged with restricted identifiers for use in the Restricted Data Center (RDC) and cover the period 1969-1977. Post
     is an indicator variable equal to 1 in the years following 1972. In columns (1) through (4) the outcome is the number of outpatient physician interactions in the past 12
     months. Columns (1) and (2) use an alternative measure of proximity –the fraction of black migrants from Alabama –instead of geographic proximity to Tuskegee. Alabama
     is excluded from these regressions. Column (2) is identical to column (1), but restricts the sample to the South. Columns (3) and (4) both use geographic proximity to
     Tuskegee as an instrument (as in Table I). Column 3 restricts the sample to the South, and column (4) uses the placebo outcome of children’s utilization. Panel (B) presents
     outcomes for mortality. Mortality data are from the compressed mortality files from the CDC and cover the period 1968 to 1987. The unit of observation is a demographic
     group within a state economic area (SEA) and the sample includes black and white men and women ages 45-74 who died in the United States. Rates are constructed
     biennially, and post is an indicator equal to 1 in the years following 1972/1973. In columns (5) and (6) the outcome is log age-adjusted chronic mortality, and fraction of
     black migrants from Alabama is used as the measure of proximity. Column (6) repeats the specification in (5), restricting the sample to the South. Column (7) restricts the
     sample to the South and uses geographic distance to Tuskegee. In column (8), the outcome variable is the level of age-adjusted child mortality. Regressions using NHIS
     data are weighted using provided survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level or SEA level.
     ***p<0.01 ,** p<0.05 and *p<0.10, respectively.




40
 Table IV: Effect of Tuskegee on Beliefs About Medical Care
                                        (1)                     (2)                    (3)
                                     Medical                                        General
         Outcome                                       Deny Treatment
                                     Mistrust                                       Mistrust
                                     0.176**                   0.157                 -0.073
Pj*blackr*maleg
                                      (0.071)                (0.127)                 (0.197)

                                      -0.016                 -0.002                  -0.005
Pj*maleg
                                      (0.030)                (0.039)                 (0.048)
                                      -0.051                 -0.024                  -0.052
Pj*blackr
                                      (0.047)                (0.115)                 (0.055)

Fixed Effects                                      State1998 , Race*Gender
Observations                            801                     801                    801
Adj R-squared                          0.024                   0.054                  0.103
No. Clusters                             36                     36                      36

Notes: OLS estimates of equation (4). The data are from the General Social Survey for the year
1998. The sample contains black and white males and females at least 10 years old in 1972. The
outcome variable for column (1) is whether the respondent disagrees with the statement that doctors
can be trusted. The outcome variable in column (2) is whether the respondent believes they will be
denied needed treatment by the medical profession. The outcome variable in column (3) is general
mistrust (whether people, in general, can be trusted). In addition to the controls listed above, every
specification includes indicator variables for age categories, marital status, state of current
residence fixed effects, and indicators for being black, male, and the interaction. Standard errors
are clustered at the state of residence level.
***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10, respectively.




                                                 41
                 Table V: All Male Sample, Veterans vs. Non-Veterans
                                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)
                                            Number                 Any                                  Number
                                                                                  Any Hospital
             Outcome                       Outpatient          Outpatient                               Nights in
                                                                                   Admission
                                              Visits              Visit                                 Hospital
                                           -1.161***           -0.040***            -0.027***            -0.417
Pj*postt *blackr*nonvetg
                                             (0.347)             (0.009)              (0.007)            (0.312)
                                             0.146**               0.004               0.002               0.051
Pj*postt*nonvetg
                                             (0.072)              (0.005)             (0.003)             (0.056)

                                            -0.592***            -0.024**             -0.012               0.280
Pj*postt*blackr
                                              (0.179)             (0.011)             (0.010)             (0.247)

Fixed Effects                               State-Year , Race-Non-Veteran-Year, Race-Non-Veteran-State

Observations                                 135,635             135,635             135,635             135,635
No. Clusters                                   49                  49                  49                  49
R-squared                                     0.020               0.023               0.016               0.014

Notes: OLS estimates of equation (2) testing differences between “experienced”(veteran) and “less experienced”
(non-veteran) males in response to the disclosure of the Tuskegee study. Utilization data are from the harmonized
version of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) available from IPUMS and merged with restricted
identifiers for use in the Restricted Data Center (RDC) and cover the period 1969-1977. Post is an indicator variable
equal to 1 in the years following 1972. The unit of observation is the individual, and the sample includes non-veteran
and veteran black and white men ages 45-74. The outcome varies across columns and is given by the column
heading. In addition to the listed fixed effects and controls in the table, individual-level controls in every
specification for utilization include indicator variables for educational status, income, age, marital status, telephone
ownership, and rural/urban status. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.

***p<0.01 ,** p<0.05 and *p<0.10, respectively.




                                                       42
                                                                                                   XI.               Figures
             Figure I: Black-White Mortality Di¤erences by Age and Sex
Panel A. Infant Mortality Rate             Panel B. Child Mortality Rate




                                                                                                                                             .8
                    18
 Difference in Infant Mortality Rates




                                                                                                                           Difference in Child Mortality Rates
                                                                                                                                                          .7
                               16




                                                                                                                                                .6
                   14




                                                                                                                                      .5
        12




                                                                                                                            .4
                    10




                                                                                                                                             .3
                                        1968   1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988                                               1968   1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988
                                                                           Year                                                                                                                     Year



Panel C. 55-64 Mortality Rate                                                                                             Panel D. 65-74 Mortality Rate



                                                                                                                                             16
                    12
 Difference in 55-64 Mortality Rates




                                                                                                                           Difference in 65-74 Mortality Rates
                                                                                                                                                         14
                         10




                                                                                                                                           12
         8




                                                                                                                               10
                    6




                                                                                                                                             8




                                        1968   1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988                                               1968   1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988
                                                                           Year                                                                                                                     Year




 Notes: The data are from the CDC compressed mortality files and represent the black-white difference
 in age-specific mortality rates. Each mortality rate is calculated by dividing the number of deaths in
 the relevant population by the at-risk population (in thousands). The solid (blue) line represents the
 difference for males, and the dotted (red) line represents the difference for females. The vertical line
 represents the year “The Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male”was disclosed. For
 additional figures, including plots of all other age-specific mortality rates and South only, see the
 Appendix.




                                                                                                                     43
                                           Figure II: Proximity Measures
     Panel A. Distance to Tuskegee                        Panel B. Fraction Black Migrants from Alabama




      Notes: Figure 2 plots proximity measures. Panel (A) represents distance from Macon County from the centroid of
      each SEA calculated using ArcGIS proximity tools. Panel (B) represents the fraction of black migrants from
      Alabama by SEA calculated using the 1940 census. Darker tones reflect closer proximity to Tuskegee or a higher




44
      fraction of Alabama migrants using 20 natural breaks. The white open circle in Panel (A) demarcates
      approximately 1000 kilometer radius from Macon County. The white closed circle in Panel (A) and black closed
      circle in Panel (B) represent Macon County.
Figure III: Di¤erence-in-Di¤erences Coe¢ cients and Geographic Gradients for Chronic Cause Mortality
        Panel A. - All Male Sample                         Panel B. - All Black Sample
         Average DD Coe¢ cient: 0.053                       Average DD Coe¢ cient: 0.091
             95% CI: [0.034, 0.072]                             95% CI: [0.065, 0.118]




      Panel C.    - All Female Sample                     Panel D.    - All White Sample
            DD Coe¢ cient: -0.092                               DD Coe¢ cient: -0.054
            95% CI: [-0.112, -0.072]                           95% CI: [-0.064,-0.044]




Panel E. - All Male Sample with False Post         Panel F: - All Black Sample with False Post
            DD Coe¢ cient: -0.006                               DD Coe¢ cient: 0.014
             95% CI: [-0.040,0.027]                             95% CI: [-0.036,0.063]




                                             45
Notes: These figures plot β coefficients from equation (1) estimated on various demographic group samples (all-male,
all-black, all-white and all-female) as indicated by the figure headings and further subdivided into distance bins from
Tuskegee. The outcome variable for each regression is the log of age-adjusted chronic mortality. Panels (A) and (B) plot
β coefficients on black*male*post in the all-male and all-black sample, respectively. Panels (C) and (D) plot β
coefficients on white*male*post and black*female*post in the all-white and all-female sample, respectively. Panels (E)
and (F) plot the same coefficients as in Panels (A) and (B), however, the time period of the analysis is restricted to the
pre-1974 period with all observations after 1969 constituting the “post”period. SEAs were grouped into K bins of 150
kilometers of distance from Macon County, Alabama each bin yielding a βk. Bins in the middle of the country with less
than 2,500 black men in 1970 were combined, and confidence intervals that were greater than 0.6 in absolute value were
omitted so that the scale could be the same for all figures. Regressions for a given bin were weighted by the relevant
SEA population (e.g. 45-74 year old males for the all-male sample), and the size of the bubble reflects the total weight
of the respective treated population within each distance bin. Each βk coefficient is indicated by a bubble and the dashed
vertical lines connected to the bubble denote its 95% confidence interval. The thick (blue) line depicts the average β
coefficient across the entire subsample. This average estimate and its 95% confidence interval are provided in the figure
subheading. The line of best fit between the β coefficients and distance from Tuskegee is drawn as a dashed (red) line.
Data are from the CDC compressed mortality files and cover the period 1968 to 1987 unless otherwise indicated. Rates
are constructed biennially, and post is an indicator equal to 1 in the years following 1972/1973 for Panels (A) through
(D). Placebo post is an indicator equal to 1 in the years 1970/1971 and covers the period 1968 to 1973. See main text
and Appendix for further details on the data source and variable construction.




                                                         46
                                                    Figure IV: Event studies
                            Dependent Variable: Utilization (Physician Interactions in Past 12 months)
     Panel A.   1   Coe¢ cient                        Panel B.   2   Coe¢ cient                      Panel C.   3   Coe¢ cient




                                   Dependent Variable: Mortality (Log Age-Adjusted Chronic)
     Panel D.   1   Coe¢ cient                      Panel E. 2 Coe¢ cient                            Panel F.   3   Coe¢ cient




47
     Notes: Event study coefficients from versions of equation (4). Panel (A) plots the β1 coefficients on the interaction of proximity, an indicator for black, an
     indicator for male, and a year indicator. Panel (B) plots β2 coefficients, the interaction of proximity, an indicator for male, and a year indicator. Panel (C)
     plots β3 coefficients, the interaction of proximity, an indicator for black, and a year indicator. The dependent variable for Panels (A) through (C) is the
     number of outpatient visits within the last 12 months. The sample includes non-veteran black and white men and women ages 45-74 and covers the period
     1969-1977. Data are from the harmonized version of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) available from IPUMS and merged with restricted
     identifiers for use in the RDC. Panels (D) –(F) plot the β1, β2, and β3 coefficients for the outcome of (log) age-adjusted chronic mortality constructed
     biennially. Mortality data are from the compressed mortality files from the CDC and cover the period 1968 to 1987. The unit of observation is the state
     economic area (SEA), and the sample includes black and white men and women ages 45-74 who died in the United States. Each estimate is relative to either
     1972 (vertical dashed line in Panels (A) –(C)) or 1972/1973 (vertical dashed line in Panels (D) –(F)). See Table I notes, text and Appendix for further
     details.

     ** p<0.05.




48
                               Figure V: Permutation Test
Panel A. Number Outpatient Visits           Panel B. Log Age-Adjusted Chronic Mortality




 Notes: Frequency of the “false”β1 coefficient estimated using distance from every other state (exclusive of
 Alabama) or SEA (exclusive of the one containing Macon County) in the sample and estimating equation (2)
 in Panel (A) or equation (3) in Panel (B). The vertical line denotes β1 from baseline estimates using the true
 treatment distance (to Macon County, Alabama) as reported in Table I.




                                                      49
