NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF UNDERFUNDED MUNICIPAL PENSION PLANS
Jeffrey Brinkman
Daniele Coen-Pirani
Holger Sieg
Working Paper 22321
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22321

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia or the Federal Reserve System. Thanks to David
Albouy, Dan Bernhardt, Steve Coate, Victor Rios-Rull, and seminar participants at various
institutions and conferences for helpful comments. Sieg acknowledges financial support from the
National Science Foundation (SES-0958705). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jeffrey Brinkman, Daniele Coen-Pirani, and Holger Sieg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Political Economy of Underfunded Municipal Pension Plans
Jeffrey Brinkman, Daniele Coen-Pirani, and Holger Sieg
NBER Working Paper No. 22321
June 2016
JEL No. E6,H3,H7,R5
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the determinants of underfunding of local government's pension funds using
a politico-economic overlapping generations model. We show that a binding downpayment
constraint in the housing market dampens capitalization of future taxes into current land prices.
Thus, a local government's pension funding policy matters for land prices and the utility of young
households. Underfunding arises in equilibrium if the pension funding policy is set by the old
generation. Young households instead favor a policy of full funding. Empirical results based on
cross-city comparisons in the magnitude of unfunded liabilities are consistent with the predictions
of the model.
Jeffrey Brinkman
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
calhoonbrinkman@gmail.com
Daniele Coen-Pirani
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
230 South Bouquet Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
coen@pitt.edu

Holger Sieg
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
holgers@econ.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

A large number of local governments in the U.S. have taken on a signi…cant amount of debt,
primarily by underfunding their public employees’pension plans. Pension plan underfunding
implies that a local government incurs debt, which breaks the link between current taxation
and expenditure policies, allowing it to potentially shift the tax burden across cohorts. Given
that U.S. cities face stringent requirements to balance their operating budgets each year,
underfunding pension plans is one of the few viable options to e¤ectively take on debt that is
not linked to capital expenditures. According to the Pew Charitable Trusts (2013), unfunded
pension and health-care liabilities of a sample of large U.S. cities add up to several hundred
billion dollars.1 When these liabilities come due, a local government will either need to raise
taxes or try to renege on some of its promises. The latter option appears more di¢ cult to
implement than, for example, changing the parameters of the Social Security system because
local pensions are usually protected by state constitutions.2
In this paper, we investigate the politico-economic origins of local pension underfunding
and its implications for the welfare of di¤erent cohorts in the context of an overlapping
generations model with endogenous pension funding policy. We make four contributions.
First, we develop an analytically tractable model that delivers transparent intuitions about
the main forces at play. To the best of our knowledge, only a few papers work out an
analytical solution to Markov perfect equilibria of these types of dynamic political economy
models. One prominent example is the work by Hassler, Mora, Storesletten, and Zilibotti
1

In Table A.1 in the Appendix, we present Pew Charitable Trust data on liabilities and funding levels
of de…ned bene…t plans of public employees for the 20 largest U.S. cities in 2009. The unfunded portion
of pension liabilities for these 20 cities alone totals $85.5 billion, with considerable variation across cities.
This phenomenon is not con…ned to large urban central cities. For example, according to the 2012 Status
Report on Local Government Pension Plans released by the Public Employee Retirement Commission of
Pennsylvania, 630 of 3,161 local pension plans in Pennsylvania were less than 80 percent funded. These
estimates of unfunded liabilities are probably a lower bound as the latter are typically computed using an 8
percent discount rate following government accounting standards.
2
The pensions of public employees of the City of Detroit were a¤ected by this city’s bankruptcy proceeding.
Recent attempts by the State of Illinois of changing the negotiated pensions of public employees were,
however, blocked by the state’s Supreme Court (see “Illinois Supreme Court Rejects Lawmakers’ Pension
Overhaul”, New York Times, May 8, 2015, Monica Davey).

2

(2003).3 Second, we clarify the extent to which land price capitalization e¤ects neutralize the
impact of debt …nancing on agents’utility.4 Third, we show that a binding downpayment
constraint leads to an intergenerational con‡ict over pension funding policies. Last, we
provide empirical evidence based on a cross-section of cities that is consistent with the
model’s key predictions.
In our model, agents live two periods, as young and old. Geographically mobile young
agents live and work in a municipality; purchase land from old agents; and consume land
services, private consumption goods, and a public good. Young agents can save at the same
exogenous interest rate as the local government. Our key point of departure relative to the
previous literature is the assumption that young agents are subject to a downpayment constraint when purchasing land (housing).5 Public goods are produced by municipal workers.
The latter are compensated through a combination of wages and promised future pension
bene…ts. The current period’s policymaker in a locality chooses how much to save to …nance
future pension bene…ts, taking into account the e¤ect of her choices on population ‡ows,
land values, and, potentially, the policies followed by next period’s policymaker. The characterization of a politico-economic equilibrium in our model follows the pioneering work of
Krusell, Quadrini and Ríos-Rull (1997); Krusell and Ríos-Rull (1999); and Klein, Krusell,
and Ríos-Rull (2008).
In overlapping generations (OLG) models without altruism, Ricardian equivalence typically does not hold so that taxation and debt are not equivalent ways to …nance public goods
from the perspective of di¤erent generations. However, a unique and important feature of
local debt is the so-called capitalization e¤ect, according to which land prices re‡ect the mix
of taxes and debt chosen by a local government. Land price capitalization has the potential
3

Other papers that analytically characterize the equilibrium of dynamic political economy models are
Grossman and Helpman (1998) and Battaglini and Coate (2008).
4
The importance of land price capitalization for many issues such as debt, school quality, taxation, etc.
was …rst emphasized by Oates (1969) and has received a considerable amount of attention in the local public
…nance literature. Recent contributions to this literature include Schultz and Sjostrom (2001); Conley and
Rangel (2001); and Conley, Driskill and Wang (2013). The key di¤erence between these papers and ours is
the fact that young agents in our model face a downpayment constraint.
5
See, for example, Lacoviello and Pavan (2013); Campbell and Hercowitz (2005); and Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) for macroeconomic models with housing and downpayment constraints.

3

to neutralize the negative welfare consequences that debt …nancing would otherwise produce
on future generations. Consider, for example, a situation in which the current policymaker
reduces property taxes today, leaving a larger portion of future pensions unfunded. The
reduction in property taxes increases the willingness to pay for land in the locality. However, today’s land buyers anticipate that property taxes in the future will have to go up,
lowering the land’s future resale value. Thus, the anticipation of higher future taxes lowers
the demand for land today. If young agents can freely borrow and lend at the same rate as
the local government, these two e¤ects will exactly o¤set each other, leaving young agents’
willingness to pay for land –its user cost and, ultimately, its price –una¤ected by the shift
of taxes toward the future. Therefore, neither the old generation, who sells the land, nor the
young one, who buys it, are a¤ected by a local government’s pension funding policy.
The distinctive feature of our model is an imperfection in the capital market. Young agents
are subject to a downpayment constraint when purchasing land and can only borrow up to
a fraction of their housing wealth next period. Consider now the same example just given,
in which the current policymaker reduces property taxes today, leaving a larger portion of
future pensions unfunded. As before, the reduction in current taxes increases young agents’
willingness to pay for land on a dollar-for-dollar basis, while the corresponding increase in
future taxes depresses the future price of land. With a binding downpayment constraint,
however, the latter e¤ect produces a smaller negative impact on the willingness to pay for
land in the location than under perfect …nancial markets. The key intuition is that, since
young agents are constrained, they discount changes in future land prices at a rate higher
than the interest rate. As a consequence, underfunding pensions (i.e., shifting taxes to
the future) increases the price young agents are willing to pay for land, bene…tting the old
generation of land owners. In addition, young agents’lifetime welfare is negatively a¤ected by
pension underfunding because lower current property taxes mostly bene…t the old generation
by raising current land values, while higher future taxes depress land prices at the time when
the (then) young agents sell their land. It follows from the opposite preferences of young and
old agents that a policy that would force a local government to increase its pension funding

4

is bound to lead to an intergenerational con‡ict. The initial old generation is hurt, and all
subsequent generations bene…t from such a policy.
We test some of the model’s implications using data on unfunded liabilities across 168
large U.S. cities. We …nd that unfunded liabilities are smaller in cities with a relative high
fraction of households headed by “young” homeowners. If, in these cities, young households have more political clout, this correlation is consistent with the model’s prediction
that young households prefer higher pension funding levels. Moreover, capitalization e¤ects
should depend on housing supply conditions in cities. In the context of our model, if the
price of land was exogenous, old agents would not be concerned with pension funding, and
young agents would favor underfunding. Based on this insight, we further show that the correlation between the share of young homeowners in a city and various pension underfunding
measures is negative in cities with a relatively inelastic housing supply and positive in cities
with a relatively elastic housing supply.
Our paper is related to several lines of literature. One is the growing literature on dynamic
political-economy models in local public …nance. In a related paper, Barseghyan and Coate
(2015) develop a dynamic Tiebout model similar in spirit to ours and use it to study the
e¢ ciency of zoning regulations.6 The paper is also related to the dynamic political-economy
literature on debt, taxes, and government spending. In addition to the prior references, a
nonexhaustive list of recent related papers includes Bassetto and Sargent (2006); Bassetto
(2008); Battaglini and Coate (2008); Yared (2010), Azzimonti (2011); Song, Storesletten and
Zilibotti (2012); and Azzimonti, Battaglini and Coate (2015), among others. A distinctive
feature of our paper is the presence of a land market and the related issue of capitalization of
unfunded liabilities into land prices. As previously argued, land market capitalization can,
in principle, provide an answer to the question asked by Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti
(2012, p. 2785): “What then prevents the current generations from passing the entire bill
for current spending to future generations?”7 Last, our paper is also related, although less
6

See also Glomm and Laguno¤ (1999). The recent literature on local pensions includes Bohn (2011),
Albrecht (2012), Bagchi (2013), and Glaeser and Ponzetto (2014). Earlier contributions to the literature on
pension funding include Inman (1982), Mumy (1978), and Epple and Schipper (1981).
7
In their OLG model Ricardian equivalence does not hold. However, young agents have a disciplining

5

directly, to the macroeconomic literature on asset prices and portfolio choices in OLG models
(see, e.g., Glover et al. (2014)).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model economy
and the de…nition of politico-economic equilibrium. Section 3 shows that pension funding
policy matters for welfare when the downpayment constraint is binding and presents the
results on the intergenerational con‡ict over pension funding. Section 4 discusses some
policy implications of the model. Section 5 presents some empirical evidence consistent with
the basic predictions of the model. Section 6 concludes. The Appendix contains the proofs
of all propositions.

2

A Model of Underfunding and Capitalization

In this section, we …rst introduce our OLG model of pension funding (Section 2.1). We then
consider the determinants and properties of the demand for land in this economy (Section
2.2). The latter is used to de…ne recursively a politico-economic equilibrium for the model
(Section 2.3).

2.1

Framework

The model is an OLG economy of a municipality embedded in a broader economy. Ex-ante
identical agents live for two periods, as young and old. As young, agents choose whether to
reside in the municipality by purchasing land there and consume. As old, agents sell their
land and consume the proceedings. The municipality is characterized by a …xed mass of
land and o¤ers a certain exogenous amount of public goods to its young residents. Public
goods are produced by absentee municipal employees who receive a compensation package
composed of current wages and future pension bene…ts. Municipal services are …nanced
through property taxation. While current wages to municipal employees have to be …nanced
e¤ect on debt because they anticipate that increasing debt today results in lower public good expenditures
when they are old. We view our answer to the question in the text as di¤erent from, and complementary to,
theirs.

6

out of current taxes, promises of future pensions may be …nanced when they come due. The
problem of the policymaker in each municipality is to fund the municipal pension system.
Agents’preferences are represented by the following utility function:
(1)

U (cyt ; lt ; cot+1 ) = u (cyt ; lt ) + v (cot+1 ) ;

where cyt denotes consumption of the numeraire good when young, lt denotes the services
of the land purchased by the agent, and cot+1 denotes consumption when old. We make the
following assumptions concerning utility.
Assumption 1 The functions u (cy ; l) and v (co ) are twice di¤erentiable and such that i)
u1 (cy ; l) > 0; u2 (cy ; l) > 0; v 0 (co ) > 0; ii) u11 (cy ; l)

0; u22 (cy ; l)

least one of these inequalities being strict; and iii) u12 (cy ; l)

0; v 00 (co )

0; with at

0:

The …rst two sets of assumptions are standard. Higher consumption of each good increases
utility, and the marginal utility of consumption of each good is weakly decreasing. Condition
(iii) is su¢ cient to guarantee that the second-order condition of the agent’s optimization
problem under a binding downpayment constraint is satis…ed.
The quantity of the public good consumed is an exogenous constant, and, for simplicity
of notation, we do not include it in the utility function.8 Each agent is endowed with w
units of the consumption good when young and has to decide how much to consume when
young and old and how much land (housing) to purchase when young.9 An agent’s budget
8

Formally, consumption of the public good can be ignored if it enters additively in utility.
We assume that there is no rental market for land. With a frictionless rental market, the downpayment
constraint we consider would have no e¤ect on policies if the owner of the housing stock is unconstrained.
However, many models (see, e.g., Bajari et al. (2013), and Iacoviello and Pavan (2013)) with a tenure choice
assume either directly or indirectly that agents who want to consume larger amounts of housing services
cannot do so by renting and should instead own. In these models, the downpayment constraint a¤ects both
the decision of owning relative to renting – an extensive margin that is absent here – as well as the house
size owners are able to a¤ord. In this paper, we focus on the latter e¤ect.
9

7

constraint is:
w = cyt + (1 +

t ) qt lt

+

bt+1
R

(2)
(3)

cot+1 = qt+1 lt + bt+1 ;

where qt denotes the price of land in the municipality in period t. There are two assets in
this economy. In addition to land, there is also a risk-less bond. The quantity of bonds
purchased (or issued) by the agent is denoted by bt+1 , and R > 1 is the exogenous gross
interest rate paid by a bond.10
The crucial feature of our analysis is a downpayment constraint on land purchases. The
importance of downpayment requirements in constraining households’housing purchases has
been documented by Linneman and Wachter (1989), Zorn (1989), Jones (1989), and Haurin,
Hendershott and Wachter (1996), among others. We assume that borrowing is constrained
to a fraction of the value of land next period:
bt+1
where 0 <

qt+1 lt ;

(4)

1 is a parameter that indexes the size of the loan relative to the future value

of the land.11 An equivalent way to express the constraint (4) is to use equation (2) and
replace bt+1 :
w

cyt

(5)

dt lt ;

where the downpayment per unit of land is de…ned as:
dt

(1 +

t ) qt

10

R

qt+1 :

(6)

The generation that is old in t = 0 is assumed to have no debt or assets, or b0 = 0.
The advantage of the speci…cation in the text is that when = 1 equation (4) coincides with the natural
borrowing limit (i.e. non negativity of consumption when old), which must prevail to prevent default on the
debt. We have experimented with versions of the model in which the downpayment constraint depends on
the current, rather than the future, price of land and obtained analogous results to those presented here.
11

8

According to (5), agents need to self-…nance the downpayment dt ; where the latter is
equal to the gross-of-tax price of land in the current period minus the maximum amount
a young agent is able to borrow per unit of land purchased. Notice that when

= 1, the

natural borrowing limit applies, and the required downpayment coincides with the user cost
of land.12 When

= 0, the agent needs to pay for his land acquisition entirely out of his

own resources.
The supply of land in the municipality is …xed at an exogenous level normalized to one.
If nt young workers live in the municipality in period t, the total demand for land in a
municipality is given by nt lt : Land market equilibrium requires that:
(7)

nt lt = 1:

The government of a municipality …nances the provision of a local public good. The local
government has committed in each period to current wage payments wg and future pension
bene…ts bg . We take the vector (wg ; bg ) as given and focus on the decision to fund promised
bene…ts. The government collects revenue

t qt

by taxing property values and uses it to

pay the wage wg of current public sector workers, to fund some (or none) of their promised
retirement bene…ts bg and to pay for the unfunded portion of the pension bene…ts of last
period’s public sector workers. Thus, in period t, a municipality’s budget constraint is:
g
t qt = w +

ft+1 bg
+ bg (1
R

ft ) ;

(8)

where ft is the fraction of pensions due in period t that is funded.13 We assume that ft is
constrained to be between some lower bound fmin

0 and one, in which case, the munici-

pality fully funds the future pensions of its employees. We interpret the lower bound fmin as
a policy parameter that can, in principle, be manipulated by a higher level of government.14
12

In this case, the fact that the downpayment coincides with the user cost of land is due to the speci…cation
of the borrowing constraint in equation (4). See Kiyotaki and Moore (1997, p. 221) for a discussion of this
point in the context of a model with a downpayment constraint similar to ours.
13
The initial funding level f0 2 [fmin ; 1] is given exogenously.
14
We discuss the role played by fmin in more detail in Section 4.

9

The policy decision in this economy in each period t is the mix ( t ; ft+1 ) of current taxes
and funding of future public sector pensions. We assume that ( t ; ft+1 ) is chosen in each
period by either the current young or the current old generation in the municipality. We
consider each case separately later in the paper. The timing of events within each period is
as follows. Policy is set at the beginning of the period. Then young agents choose whether
or not to locate in the municipality and make consumption and land demand choices. Last,
the land market clears. Thus, the policymaker takes into account the e¤ect of her choices on
population ‡ows and land values within the period. She also understands the e¤ect of these
policies on the policies chosen by future policymakers.
We express the in‡ow of young agents to the municipality as the following function of the
indirect utility it o¤ers, denoted by Vt :
nt = P (Vt ):

(9)

The function P is assumed to be bounded, di¤erentiable, and increasing in Vt . In what
follows, we replace nt in equation (7) using equation (9) and refer to the resulting equation:
P (Vt )lt = 1;

(10)

as the land market clearing condition. The left-hand side of this equation represents the
aggregate demand for land, and the right-hand side represents the unit supply of land.
The model presented in this section makes a number of simplifying assumptions that
allow us to focus on the issue of pension funding without imposing further restrictions on
preferences, other than those in Assumption 1. Speci…cally, we take as given expenditures
on the public good and we abstract from explicitly modeling public sector workers as agents
in the model. We also assume that public good expenditures are independent of population
size in equation (8) and that old agents do not consume housing. We are abstracting from
these features in order to keep the model analytically tractable and to focus on the impact

10

of downpayment constraints on pension funding choices.15

2.2

The Demand for Land Under a Binding Downpayment Constraint

Before casting the model in recursive form, it is useful to consider the problem of a young
agent choosing how much land to purchase. In what follows, we proceed under the assumption that the downpayment constraint (4) is binding. Notice that the downpayment
constraint is always binding if consumption when young is su¢ ciently more important in
utility than consumption when old. For example, this is true in the special case in which
consumption when old is not valued at all, v 0 (co ) = 0.16 Replacing the budget constraints
(2) and (3) into the objective function (1), the solution to the young agent’s optimization
problem can be written compactly as:
L (dt ; qt+1 ) = arg max U (w

dt l; l; qt+1 l (1

(11)

)) :

l2[0;w=dt ]

The function L (dt ; qt+1 ) denotes the quantity of land demanded as a function of the downpayment per unit of land dt and the price of land next period qt+1 : When young, the agent
acquires L (dt ; qt+1 ) units of land at the cost (inclusive of taxes) of (1 +

t ) qt

per unit. Out-

of-pocket expenses are only dt per unit of land because the agent borrows qt+1 =R per unit
of land purchased.
The following proposition summarizes the properties of the land demand function.
Proposition 1 Properties of the demand for land and the indirect utility function.
15

We have experimented with various formulations of the model that allow for endogenous public goods
expenditures and public sector workers and found that the main results were una¤ected. These extensions
are available from the authors upon request.
16
In Example 1 in Section 3.3, we present an example with a speci…c utility function and provide su¢ cient
conditions for the downpayment constraint to always be binding. In Appendix B, we consider another utility
function and provide conditions on the parameters that guarantee that the downpayment constraint is always
binding.

11

(a) There exists a unique land demand function L (dt ; qt+1 ) that solves problem (11).
(b) If u1 (cy ; l) ! +1 as cy ! 0 and u2 (cy ; l) ! +1 as l ! 0; then the demand function
L (dt ; qt+1 ) satis…es the following …rst-order condition for l:
dt u1 (w

dt l; l) + u2 (w

dt l; l) + v 0 (qt+1 (1

) l) qt+1 (1

) = 0:

(12)

(c) Under the assumptions in part (b), the downpayment constraint binds if and only if the
following inequality holds:
u1 (w

dt L (dt ; qt+1 ) ; L (dt ; qt+1 )) > v 0 (qt+1 (1

) L (dt ; qt+1 )) R:

(13)

(d) Under the assumptions in part (b), the land demand function L (dt ; qt+1 ) is strictly decreasing in dt . The e¤ect of qt+1 on the demand for land is ambiguous.17
(e) Under the assumptions in part (b), the indirect utility function V (dt ; qt+1 ) associated
with problem (11) is strictly decreasing in dt and strictly increasing in qt+1 :
A young agent in this economy needs to choose consumption of land as well as consumption
of the numeraire when young and when old. Absent the downpayment constraint, the user
cost of land should equal the marginal rate of substitution between land and consumption
when young (i.e. the third term in equation (12) would be absent), and the interest rate
would equal the marginal rate of substitution between consumption when young and old (i.e.
equation (13) would hold as equality).
In the economy, we consider, instead, the agent cannot freely borrow to …nance her consumption of land. As a consequence, and di¤erent from the unconstrained case, a marginal
increase in the quantity of land demanded has to result in an increase in consumption when
old because a fraction (1

) of the future value of land cannot be collateralized. This

e¤ect is represented by the last term in the …rst-order condition (12). Moreover, the agent’s
17

Speci…cally, it is strictly decreasing in qt+1 if and only if the absolute value of the elasticity of v 0 (co )
with respect to co is strictly larger than one.

12

marginal rate of substitution between consumption when young and old is now larger than
the interest rate (equation (13)) because the agent is constrained.
Parts (d) and (e) of Proposition 1 emphasize a number of properties of the demand for
land and the indirect utility function that will be used in the remainder of the paper. The
e¤ect of the downpayment on the demand for land is a standard price e¤ect on the demand
for a normal good. A higher future price of land, instead, produces opposing e¤ects on
demand. On the one hand, it makes the investment in land more attractive because it o¤ers
a higher return (a substitution e¤ect). On the other, a higher future price of land makes the
agent richer, increasing the demand for consumption when young (a wealth e¤ect). Given
the binding downpayment constraint, the only way for an agent to increase consumption
when young is to reduce his demand for land. The latter e¤ect prevails when an increase in
old age consumption leads to a relatively large decline in its marginal utility. Finally, agents’
lifetime utility increases when the downpayment falls and the future price of land increases.
We conclude this section by pointing out that the key di¤erence between the young agent’s
problem under a binding constraint and the analogous problem when the constraint is not
binding is that in the former the demand for land and indirect utility depend on both dt
and qt+1 ; while in the latter they depend only on the user cost of land.18 Thus, absent a
downpayment constraint, the equilibrium user cost in a locality, denoted by dt ; is uniquely
determined by the land market equilibrium condition (equation (10)):
P (V (dt ))L (dt ) = 1:

(14)

The aggregate demand for land is strictly decreasing in the user cost dt . Notice that since
the equilibrium user cost is independent of the municipal pension funding policy, it must be
the case that both young agents’utility and the equilibrium price of land are independent
of the local government policy (see Proposition 5 later).
18

To see this, solve for bt+1 from equation (3) and replace it into equation (2) to obtain the lifetime budget
constraint of an agent. The latter depends only on the user cost of land, (1 + t ) qt qt+1 =R:

13

2.3

Recursive Formulation and De…nition of Politico-Economic
Equilibrium

In this section, we cast the model in recursive form and then de…ne a recursive equilibrium
without commitment, following Krusell, Quadrini, and Ríos-Rull (1997); Krusell and RíosRull (2000); and Persson and Tabellini (2002).
The state variable for a municipality is the fraction f of pensions that is funded at the
beginning of a period. The latter determines the need for current taxes to pay for the
promises made in the previous period. Let f 0 = F (f ) denote the funding policy of a
municipal government that begins a period with state f: Let Q (f ; F ) denote the price of
land in a municipality that begins a period with state f and whose government follows the
policy rule F: Let D(f 0 ; F ) denote the equilibrium downpayment per unit of land. Notice
that the downpayment depends on f 0 (and not independently on f ) because it satis…es the
land market clearing condition (equation 10):
P (V (D (f 0 ; F ) ; Q (f 0 ; F )))L (D (f 0 ; F ) ; Q (f 0 ; F )) = 1;

(15)

with f 0 = F (f ) : Since the equilibrium downpayment depends on next period’s price of land
Q (f 0 ; F ) and the latter is a function of f 0 ; also D(f 0 ; F ) depends on f 0 : Given Q (f 0 ; F ) ;
equation (15) admits at most one solution for D(f 0 ; F ) because its left-hand side is decreasing
in D. Let T (f ; F ) denote the current period property tax rate in a municipality that follows
the funding rule F: The local government’s budget constraint in equation (8) can then be
rewritten as:
T (f ; F ) Q (f ; F ) = wg +

f 0 bg
+ bg (1
R

f)

(16)

where f 0 = F (f ) : The land pricing function and the downpayment function are related by
the de…nition (6), which can also be written as:
D (f 0 ; F ) = (1 + T (f ; F )) Q (f ; F )

14

Q (f 0 ; F ) =R;

(17)

where f 0 = F (f ) :
In what follows, we …rst de…ne recursively the economic equilibrium under a given policy
rule for pension funding. We then consider a one-period deviation from this rule and de…ne an
economic equilibrium after a deviation. Last, we de…ne an equilibrium without commitment
by imposing that the one-period deviation preferred by the policymaker coincides with the
original policy rule.
De…nition 1 Economic equilibrium under a policy rule F.
Fix the funding rule f 0 = F (f ) : An equilibrium under this policy rule is given by the functions
Q (f ; F ) ; T (f ; F ) ; and D(f 0 ; F ) such that:
1. The market for land clears: equation (15) holds.
2. The local government’s budget constraint, equation (16) holds.
3. The downpayment and land pricing function are related by equation (17).
To endogenize the policy rule F; it is necessary to de…ne an equilibrium after a one-period
deviation from that rule.19 Let fe0 denote the funding level, chosen in the current period,

that deviates from the policy rule F . A current period deviation will be associated with
di¤erent current taxes and land prices. Let taxes and current land prices in state f following
a one-period deviation fe0 from F be denoted by Te f; fe0 ; F

e f; fe0 ; F ; respectively.
and Q

e in the current period, but (correctly) anticipates
Notice that the young agent faces prices Q

that the pricing function will revert back to Q in the following period. Hence, consumption

when old of an agent who is young at the time of the policy deviation depends on the pricing
function Q.
With this notation in hand, we can de…ne an economic equilibrium in the municipality
after a one-period deviation fe0 from the policy rule F :
19

We focus on one-period deviations because each policymaker only controls pension funding and taxes for
the period in which she is in power and takes as given the behavior of future policymakers. Thus, focusing
on one-period deviations implies that all future policymakers are expected to adhere to the policy rule F .

15

De…nition 2 Equilibrium after a one-period deviation fe0 from the policy rule F:

e f; fe0 ; F ; Q (f ; F ) ;
An equilibrium after a one-period deviation fe0 is given by the functions Q

Te f; fe0 ; F ; and D fe0 ; F

such that for all fe0 , the following conditions hold:

1. The market for land clears:

P V D fe0 ; F ; Q fe0 ; F

L D fe0 ; F ; Q fe0 ; F

= 1:

(18)

2. The local government’s budget constraint holds:
e f; fe0 ; F
Te f; fe0 ; F Q

= wg +

fe0 bg
+ bg (1
R

(19)

f) :

3. The downpayment and land pricing functions are related as follows:
D fe0 ; F

= 1 + Te f; fe0 ; F

e f; fe0 ; F
Q

Q fe0 ; F =R:

(20)

Last, we de…ne an equilibrium without commitment for the municipal economy. The
additional requirement we impose here is that the policy deviation that maximizes the utility
of the policymaker, taking as given the behavior of future policymakers, coincides with the
original policy rule F .
De…nition 3 Equilibrium without commitment.
An equilibrium without commitment for the municipality is given by a policy rule F and set
e f; fe0 ; F ; and Te f; fe0 ; F
of functions Q (f ; F ) ; T (f ; F ) ; D (f 0 ; F ) ; Q

such that:

1. The functions Q (f ; F ) ; T (f ; F ) ; and D (F (f ) ; F ) constitute an economic equilibrium
under F according to De…nition 1.
e f; fe0 ; F ; Q (f ; F ) ; Te f; fe0 ; F ; and D fe0 ; F
2. The functions Q

constitute an eco-

nomic equilibrium after a one-period deviation from F according to De…nition 2.

16

3. The policymaker has no incentive to deviate from F in any period and for any state,
taking into account the economic equilibrium after a one-period deviation. Thus, if the
policymaker belongs to the old generation, the consistency requirement is:
e f; fe0 ; F
F (f ) = arg max Q

(21)

F (f ) = arg max V D fe0 ; F ; Q fe0 ; F

(22)

fe0

for all f: Alternatively, if the policymaker belongs to the young generation, the consistency requirement is:

for all f:

3

fe0

Characterization of Equilibrium

In this section, we characterize the equilibrium of the model analytically. We …rst show in
Section 3.1 that the only feasible equilibrium funding rule is a constant. Then, we proceed
in three steps, corresponding to the three types of equilibria de…ned in the previous section.
In Section 3.2, we characterize the model’s equilibrium given an arbitrary (and constant)
funding rule f = F (f ): In Section 3.3, we consider the equilibrium in a locality after a
one-period deviation fe0 from F . Last, we impose consistency and solve for the equilibrium

without commitment of the model in Section 3.4. In Section 3.5, we show that, absent
the downpayment constraint, agents’utility is independent of the location’s funding policy.

Finally, in Section 3.6, we emphasize the importance of the land supply elasticity for our
results.

17

3.1

Constant Funding Rule

In this section, we show that the only feasible equilibrium pension funding rule must be a
constant:
(23)

F (f ) = f

for all f: Consider …rst the case in which the policymaker is a young agent and seeks to
maximize lifetime utility, i.e. solve the problem in equation (22). Since the indirect utility
function being maximized depends only on fe0 and not on f; the solution to this problem

must be independent of f:

The old policymaker seeks to maximize current land prices (i.e., solve the problem in
equation (21)). Di¤erent from the indirect utility function, the land pricing function depends
on f: However, it depends on f in a way that does not interact with fe0 ; so the optimal fe0 is
independent of f: To verify this, use equation (20) to solve for the land pricing function:
e f; fe0 ; F
Q

= D fe0 ; F + Q fe0 ; F =R

e f; fe0 ; F :
Te f; fe0 ; F Q

(24)

Then take into account the government’s budget constraint (19) to replace the last term
of equation (24) and obtain the following expression for the land pricing function:
e f; fe0 ; F
Q

= D fe0 ; F + Q fe0 ; F =R

wg

fe0 bg =R

bg (1

f) :

(25)

Notice that last period’s funding f enters additively into this expression and does not interact with fe0 . It follows that the optimal fe0 is independent of f: The following proposition

summarizes these results.

Proposition 2 Constant funding rule.
The only possible politico-economic equilibrium of this economy is one in which the funding
rule is a constant F (f ) = f for all f .

18

3.2

Equilibrium Given an Arbitrary Constant Funding Rule

We begin by solving for the equilibrium of the economy given an exogenous and constant
funding policy f

= F (f ) for all f (see Proposition 2). An equilibrium in this case is

composed of a land pricing function Q (f ; f ) and a constant downpayment D = D (f ; f )
such that the conditions in De…nition 1 are satis…ed. Notice that when the funding rule is
constant, the future land price Q = Q (f ; f ) is also a constant. It follows from equations
(16) and (17) that the equilibrium land pricing function takes the following form:
Q (f ; f ) = D +

R

Q

wg

f bg
R

bg (1

(26)

f) :

In words, the current price of land equals the downpayment D plus the discounted future
price of land Q minus the current taxes needed to pay public sector wages wg , to fund
retirement plans f bg =R; and to pay for not previously funded pension promises bg (1

f ).

The equilibrium future price of land Q can be obtained by replacing f = f in equation
(26) and solving for Q :
Q =

D
1

1
=R

1

=R

w g + bg

f bg 1

1
R

:

(27)

The equilibrium downpayment D (f ; f ) must be consistent with land market clearing:
P (V (D ; Q ))L (D ; Q ) = 1;

(28)

taking into account the relationship between Q and D implied by (27).
In the following proposition we provide su¢ cient conditions for the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium.
Proposition 3 Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium with exogenous f .
If the size of the local government is small enough (wg ! 0 and bg ! 0) and the assumptions
in part (b) of Proposition 1 hold, then there exists a unique equilibrium of the economy with
exogenous f .
19

The proof of uniqueness relies on the fact that both the demand for land by a young agent
–the intensive margin e¤ect –and the number of young agents who choose to locate in the
municipality –the extensive margin e¤ect –decline as D increases, even taking into account
the dependence of Q on D given by equation (27). Therefore, the aggregate demand for
land – the left hand side of equation (28) – is decreasing in D , giving rise to a unique
intersection with the vertical supply curve. The intuition is as follows. For given Q ; as D
increases, both the demand for land, L (D ; Q ) ; and the utility of locating in the municipality, V (D ; Q ) ; fall (properties (d) and (e) of Proposition 1). The higher downpayment,
however, increases the future land price Q ; with ambiguous e¤ects on L (D ; Q ) and a positive one on V (D ; Q ) (property (e) of Proposition 1). The reason why the indirect e¤ect
of D through Q cannot be large enough to o¤set its direct e¤ect on aggregate demand
for land is twofold. First, a young agent is constrained, so it discounts the higher future
consumption brought about by a higher Q at a rate higher than the interest rate. Second,
the complementarity between land and consumption when young in utility (u12 (cy ; l)

0;

Assumption 1, part iii) dampens the response of an agent’s demand for land L (D ; Q ) to an
increase in Q : The only way to consume more land is to reduce consumption when young.
Thus, uniqueness is implied by the fact that the aggregate demand for land is monotonically
decreasing in D :
The proof of existence of an equilibrium in Proposition 3 relies on the fact that when D is
close to zero, the demand for land is very large, but when D is arbitrarily large, the demand
for land must be very low because of the high marginal utility of consumption when young.
These observations, combined with the fact that equation (28) is a decreasing function of
D ; guarantees the existence of a (unique) solution for D .20
To discuss policymakers’ incentives to fund pensions, we need to consider a one-period
policy deviation from f . The next section discusses the impact of such deviation on equilibrium prices and lifetime utility.
20

The requirement that the size of the local government is small enough guarantees that the price Q
remains non-negative as D approaches zero.

20

3.3

E¤ects of a One-Period Deviation from Equilibrium

Starting from the equilibrium of the model under a constant policy f ; consider a currentperiod deviation fe0 by the locality. Since the equilibrium funding rule is the constant f ; the

current deviation has no impact on future funding. Following a deviation, the equilibrium
current price of land is given by equation (25). The current price of land depends on the
downpayment D fe0 ; f

and on the future price of land Q fe0 ; f

: The latter is given by

equation (26) with state variable fe0 instead of f because next period, the location will have

to …nance the unfunded portion 1

fe0 of pension promises made this period. It follows that

in order to characterize the locality’s equilibrium after a one-period deviation, we only need
e to fe0 : The downpayment is pinned down
to determine the response of the downpayment D
by the land market clearing equation (18):
P V D fe0 ; f

; Q fe0 ; f

L D fe0 ; f

; Q fe0 ; f

= 1:

(29)

The left-hand side of this equation represents the aggregate demand for land after a policy
deviation. It is given by the product of the young population attracted to the location and
the quantity of land demanded by each young agent. Notice that the left-hand side of
equation (29) is strictly decreasing in D because of properties (d) and (e) of Proposition 1.
Therefore, it uniquely pins down D fe0 ; f
function of fe0 :

as a function of fe0 since Q fe0 ; f

is a known

Figure 1 represents the land market equilibrium condition (29) in a standard demand/supply

diagram with the quantity of land on the x-axis and the downpayment D on the y-axis. Each
downward-sloping line corresponds to a given deviation fe0 from f , with the solid line corresponding to the case fe0 = f .

Following a deviation that increases fe0 ; the aggregate demand for land –and, therefore,

the equilibrium downpayment –might either increase or decrease. The dashed line in Figure
1 represents the shift in the demand for land following an increase in fe0 for the case in
which the individual demand for land is increasing in its future price (L2 (D; Q) > 0). In

21

Figure 1: This …gure represents the e¤ect of a policy deviation that increases fe0 on the
equilibrium downpayment. If aggregate demand for land increases with Q fe0 ; f –the case
represented by the dashed line –then the equilibrium downpayment increases, otherwise, if it
goes down –the case represented by the dashed-dotted line –the equilibrium downpayment
falls.
this situation, the aggregate demand for land is also increasing in Q fe0 ; f

because the

measure of young agents ‡owing to the location is always increasing in Q fe0 ; f

:21 As a

result, an increase in fe0 leads to a higher equilibrium downpayment. The dashed-dotted
line in Figure 1 represents the alternative case in which the individual demand for land is
decreasing in Q fe0 ; f

, and this e¤ect is strong enough to make the aggregate demand for

land decrease in Q fe0 ; f

as well. As a result, in this case, an increase in fe0 leads to a

lower equilibrium downpayment.

Despite this ambiguity, it is possible to show that the equilibrium downpayment cannot
increase “too much” in response to a higher fe0 . The following lemma speci…es what this
21

This stems from the fact that the indirect utility function V D fe0 ; f

Q fe0 ; f

; Q fe0 ; f

(property (e) of Proposition 1), and the function P (V ) is increasing in V .

22

is increasing in

means.
Lemma 1 Upper bound on downpayment e¤ ect.
The largest possible increase in the equilibrium downpayment following an increase in fe0 is
given by:

where Q = Q fe0 ; f

@D
@ fe0

v 0 (Q (1
) L)
(1
u1 (w DL; L)

; D = D fe0 ; f

) bg ;

(30)

, and L = L (D; Q) : This inequality is strict if and

only if P 0 (V ) < +1 and at least one of the following strict inequalities hold: u11 (cy ; l) < 0;

u12 (cy ; l) > 0; v 00 (co ) < 0:
The expression on the right-hand side of equation (30) represents an agent’s willingness to
pay for a marginal increase in fe0 : The latter reduces future taxes by bg , increases future land

prices by the same amount, and increases consumption when old by (1

) bg . Notice that

the willingness to pay re‡ects the agent’s marginal rate of substitution between consumption
when young and consumption when old. This is an upper bound for the increase in the
equilibrium downpayment, instead of being exactly equal to it, because there are two margins
of response to a higher future price of land induced by fe0 : First, the utility o¤ered by the

location increases, leading to an in‡ow of young agents. Second, the demand for land per
young agent varies in response to higher future land prices.22 Following these responses,
the downpayment adjusts to restore land market equilibrium. If land demand per young
agent was constant, the downpayment would have to increase by exactly the amount on the
right-hand side of equation (30) to perfectly o¤set the increased in‡ow of population. On
the other hand, if population was constant, the downpayment would have to change by the
amount necessary to keep the per capita demand for land constant in response to a higher
fe0 . The latter e¤ect is always smaller than the former by the concavity of the utility function
and the complementarity between land and consumption when young, u12 (cy ; l)
22

0:23 This

Recall that the demand for land might either increase or decrease in response to an increase in the future
price of land.
23
This is obvious when the demand for land decreases in response to a higher future price (the partial
derivative L2 (D; Q)
0). In this case, the equilibrium downpayment needs to fall to re-establish land
market equilibrium.

23

explains why the expression on the right-hand side of equation (30) is an upper bound.
The result in Lemma 1 allows us to determine the e¤ect of a policy deviation fe0 on the

equilibrium price of land and on the lifetime utility of a young agent.

E¤ect of policy deviation on the current price of land. The land pricing function
e f; fe0 ; f
following a deviation is given by equation (25). To evaluate the e¤ect of fe0 on Q
take the partial derivative of equation (25) with respect to fe0 :
e f; fe0 ; f
@Q
@ fe0

=

bg
R
|{z}

+

current taxes

bg
R
|{z}

borrowing

+

@D fe0 ; f

|

@ fe0
{z

:

;

(31)

}

downpayment

The net e¤ect of a policy deviation fe0 on the current price of land depends on the three

terms on the right-hand side of equation (31). The …rst term represents the e¤ect of the
higher current taxes associated with an increase in fe0 on the price of land. A marginal

increase in fe0 causes current property taxes to increase by bg =R: The latter are capitalized in

(lower) contemporaneous land prices on a one-for-one basis. The second and third terms on
the right-hand side of equation (31) represent the e¤ects of lower taxes next period –induced
by a higher fe0 –on current land prices. Speci…cally, the second term captures the fact that

a young agent can borrow bg =R units of consumption as a response to a reduction in future
taxes by bg ; because the price of land when old increases by bg as well. The third term on the
right-hand side of equation (31) re‡ects the fact that, even if young agents cannot borrow
against the portion (1

) of the increase in future land prices, the latter nevertheless a¤ects

the attractiveness of the location and the incentives to purchase land there.24
The net of these three e¤ects becomes clear after replacing the upper bound for the change
Notice from equation (30) that the increase in future land prices induced by fe0 a¤ects the equilibrium
downpayment proportionately to the fraction (1
) of land’s value that cannot be collateralized.
24

24

in the downpayment from Lemma 1 into equation (31):
e f; fe0 ; f
@Q
@ fe0

2

bg 6
6 1+
R4

+ (1

)

u (w
|1

R
DL; L) =v 0 (Q (1
{z
<1

3

7
7 < 0:
) L) 5
}

The combined e¤ect of the second and third terms on the right-hand side of equation
(31) cannot exceed the direct e¤ect of the …rst one because young agents discount the noncollateralizable portion (1

) of the increase in future land prices using their marginal rate

of substitution for consumption rather than the interest rate R. The former is higher than
the latter because of the binding downpayment constraint (part (c) of Proposition 1). It
follows that the equilibrium land price falls in response to an increase in pension funding fe0 :

E¤ect of policy deviation on the lifetime utility of a young agent. As we have

shown, an increase in current taxes compensated by a reduction in future taxes has a limited e¤ect on the equilibrium downpayment (Lemma 1) while increasing land prices in the
future. As a result, an increase in pension funding bene…ts young agents. More formally, a
young agent’s indirect utility V D fe0 ; f

; Q fe0 ; f

would, by de…nition, remain con-

stant after an increase in fe0 only if the equilibrium downpayment increased exactly by the
noncollateralizable portion (1

) of the increase in future land prices discounted at her

consumption marginal rate of substitution. Since this increase in the downpayment coincides with Lemma 1’s upper bound, a young agent must be (weakly) better o¤ following an
increase in pension funding fe0 :

The following proposition summarizes our …ndings regarding the e¤ect of a policy devia-

tion in land prices and lifetime utility.
Proposition 4 Impact of a policy deviation.
A current-period deviation fe0 that increases funding above f leads to strictly lower current
land prices and a weakly higher lifetime utility of locating in the municipality:

25

e f; fe0 ; f
@Q

@V D fe0 ; f

@ fe0

@ fe0

(32)

<0

; Q fe0 ; f

0:

(33)

The second inequality is strict if the su¢ cient condition for a strict inequality in Lemma 1
is satis…ed.
What role does geographic mobility of young agents play in giving rise to the results of
Proposition 4? Intuitively, geographic mobility should act as a force that dampens the e¤ect
of pension underfunding on young agents’ utility and on the price of land. This intuition
is correct within the context of our model, although geographic mobility does not prevent
pension underfunding from increasing local land prices. In the extreme case in which labor
mobility is perfect – in the sense that a locality would not be able to attract any young
agents if it o¤ered less than some lifetime utility V –young agents’utility is insulated from
any attempt to underfund pensions. In such case, the equilibrium downpayment must unambiguously decline by the amount on the right-hand side of equation (30) to fully compensate
young agents for the decline in future land prices induced by fe0 . Even in this case, however,

the net e¤ect on the locality’s price of land is positive. This is because, as explained above,
the decline in the downpayment re‡ects a constrained agent’s willingness to pay today for a
marginal increase in consumption when old, while the shifting of taxes to the future allows
the locality to reduce current taxes by 1=R dollars for each dollar of future taxes. Since a
young agent is constrained, the former e¤ect is dominated by the latter even with perfect
mobility of labor.
Example 1 In this section, we introduce an example to illustrate some of the points
made. Consider the following utility function:
U = cyt + (lt ) + cot+1 ;
26

(34)

with

0

(l) > 0 and

00

(l) < 0: Assume that R < 1; so that the agent is always constrained. It

is straightforward to derive the demand for land and the indirect utility function as a function
of the current downpayment D = D fe0 ; f
L (D; Q) =

0 1

(D
0

V (D; Q) = w

and the future price of land Q = Q fe0 ; f

(1

) Q) ;

(L (D; Q)) L (D; Q) + (L (D; Q)) :

:
(35)
(36)

Imposing the land market equilibrium equation (10) then pins down the argument of the
land demand function:
D fe0 ; f

) Q fe0 ; f

(1

=z ;

(37)

where z is a policy-independent constant such that:
P w

z

0 1

0 1

(z ) +

0 1

(z )

(z ) = 1:

(38)

The condition (37) allows us to easily compute
@D fe0 ; f

=

@ fe0

(1

) bg :

(39)

Notice that this corresponds to the term on the right-hand side of equation (30) because for
the utility function (34) the marginal rate of substitution of consumption across periods is
simply . Notice also that in this case the upper bound in equation (30) is attained because
the necessary conditions for a strict inequality in Lemma 1 are not satis…ed. Replacing
equation (39) into the expression for the current land price in equation (31) yields:
e f; fe0 ; f
@Q
@ fe0

= (1

bg
) (R
R

1) < 0

(40)

because R < 1: Thus, an increase in funding lowers current land prices. By contrast, there
27

is no e¤ect of fe0 on young agents’utility because the latter depends only on the term on the

left-hand side of equation (37), which is a constant. Notice that the su¢ cient condition in
Proposition 4 for a strictly positive e¤ect of fe0 on young agents’utility is not satis…ed. What
is going on is that, in response to a higher funding level fe0 ; the equilibrium downpayment
o¤sets exactly any utility gain associated with higher future land prices.

3.4

Intergenerational Con‡ict Over Funding Decisions

In this section, we impose the consistency conditions (21) and (22), and solve for the equilibrium funding policy under two alternative assumptions about the identity of the policymaker.
Speci…cally, we consider the case in which the policymaker is an old agent and then the case
in which it is a young one. Considering these two extreme cases serves to highlight the
intergenerational tension over pension funding.
When currently old agents set the funding policy, the objective is simply the maximization
of the price of land. The higher the price at which an old agent is able to sell her land to
the incoming young agents, the higher her current consumption is. A young policymaker,
instead, maximizes her lifetime utility.25
Corollary 1 then directly follows from Proposition 4.
Corollary 1 Equilibrium policies:
(1) If an old agent sets the funding policy, the only politico-economic equilibrium is one in
which pension funding is the minimum allowed, or f = fmin .
(2) If a young agent sets the funding policy and if the condition for a strict inequality in
Lemma 1 is satis…ed, then the only politico-economic equilibrium is one in which pensions
are fully funded, or f = 1.
What would two otherwise identical localities controlled by young versus old agents look
25

Notice that the reason why the equilibrium solution is always a corner is that political power is assumed
to be concentrated in the hand of one group. More generally, we could assume that the policymaker’s
preferences are a weighted average of the utility of the young and old groups. In this case, however, we
would need to include an additional state variable to keep track of the size of the young population in the
economy.

28

like? Given an arbitrary initial state f inherited from the past, a locality subsequently
controlled by old agents would be characterized by higher land prices Q (f ; fmin ) in that
period and lower land prices in subsequent periods Q (fmin ; fmin ) relative to a locality controlled by young agents. The locality controlled by old agents would be characterized in
all periods by a lower lifetime utility for young agents and, therefore, a smaller young population, P (V (D (fmin ; fmin ) ; Q (fmin ; fmin ))). By contrast, absent the downpayment constraint, the funding policy would have no e¤ect on current land prices, in the sense that
Q (f ; fmin ) = Q (f ; 1). It would also have no e¤ect on the size of the location’s young population. However, also in this case, underfunding would be re‡ected in lower land prices
in subsequent periods, or Q (fmin ; fmin ) < Q (1; 1), because starting a period with more
unfunded liabilities inherited from the past necessitates higher property taxes today.

3.5

No Downpayment Constraint

If the downpayment constraint does not bind (or if it is not present), a policymaker cannot
a¤ect either the utility of the old generation or the utility of the young generation by underfunding the pension system. In this case, as already mentioned at the end of Section 2.2,
the demand for land and consumption when young and old depends only on the user cost
of land, which is de…ned as d in equation (6) with the parameter

set equal to 1. Since the

future price of land Q does not play an independent role in a¤ecting agents’choices (given
the user cost of land), a policy deviation fe0 has no e¤ect on the equilibrium user cost of

land, consumption, or population. In such a situation, the derivative @D=@ fe0 is equal to
zero by de…nition. Moreover, with a perfect capital market the increase in current taxes is

perfectly compensated by the decline in the future price of land induced by higher future
taxes. This point can be veri…ed by replacing

= 1 in the second term on the right-hand

side of equation (31) and cancelling it out with the …rst one. The following proposition
summarizes this result.
Proposition 5 Policy deviation if the downpayment constraint does not bind.
Without a downpayment constraint (or when the latter does not bind), both the price of land
29

and the indirect utility o¤ered by a municipality are independent of the one-period deviation
fe0 from f . As a result, both young and old agents are indi¤erent about alternative pension
funding policies.

3.6

The Role Played by the Price Elasticity of Housing Supply

Up to now, we have assumed that the supply of land is perfectly inelastic. The elasticity of
housing supply plays a crucial role in the land price capitalization of local policies. Consider,
for illustration purposes, the extreme opposite case in which the supply of land is perfectly
elastic at the price Q = Q; for some exogenous Q: By de…nition, old agents cannot a¤ect Q
so they are indi¤erent about pension funding. The downpayment is now given by equation
(25):
D fe0 ; f

= Q + wg +

fe0 bg
+ bg (1
R

f)

R

Q:

Notice that the downpayment increases with higher levels of pension funding because of
the higher taxes. It follows that a young agent’s utility
V D fe0 ; f

;Q

is decreasing in funding levels. In summary, without capitalization e¤ects, if the old agents
are in control they are indi¤erent about various funding policies. If the young ones are
in control instead, they prefer not to fund the pension system. This result is independent
of whether the downpayment constraint binds or not. This discussion implies that as we
increase the share of old agents we should expect a smaller degree of underfunding in more
elastic cities. We test this implication of the model in Section 5.

4

Policy Implications

The previous discussion has highlighted a tension between the interests of the old and young
generations with regard to funding pensions. Old agents prefer to underfund the system as
30

much as possible, while young agents prefer to fully fund it. In this section, we consider
this con‡ict from the perspective of a higher level of government that is in charge of setting
the minimum level of pension funding, fmin : In the U.S., state governments have adopted
di¤erent laws and regulations about local pension funding. For example, in 1994 the federal
government’s Governmental Accounting Standards Board introduced the concept of annual
required contribution (ARC) to provide an estimate of the ‡ow contributions needed to
“adequately” fund a de…ned bene…ts pension plan. Brainard and Brown (2015) point out
that pension funds are not required by law to contribute the ARC and write that “laws and
practices governing payment of pension contributions vary widely among states.”26 They
show that states that have encoded the ARC in their statutes and laws have in recent
years made larger contributions to their de…ned bene…ts pension plans than states where
pension contributions are left at the discretion of plan administrators and policymakers.
Consistent with this narrative, we interpret the fmin parameter as a federal or state mandate
to minimally fund their pension promises.
Since young agents choose to fully fund the system, in this circumstance, the minimum
funding policy has no impact on equilibrium utilities. When old agents set the policy instead,
fmin matters. The following proposition summarizes our results.
Proposition 6 State or federal mandate regarding minimum funding level.
Assume that the condition for a strict inequality in Lemma 1 is satis…ed. Then:
(a) If old agents set the funding policy, the utility of the …rst (old) generation is decreasing
in fmin , while the lifetime utility of all other generations is strictly increasing in fmin .
(b) If young agents set the funding policy, fmin has no e¤ect on any agent’s utility.
When the old set the policy, a higher fmin leads to a higher level of f : In turn, a higher f
lowers the current price of land Q (f ; f ) and increases the future price Q (f ; f ). The former
26
Speci…cally, they write that “some states require that the amount recommended by the retirement system
actuary be paid; some states consistently pay the amount recommended by the retirement system actuary,
even if it is not legally required; other states appropriate pension contributions in amounts that are not
linked to an actuarial calculation. Still other states base their contributions on a statutorily …xed rate, such
as a percentage of employee payroll.”

31

e¤ect is damaging to the initial old generation. The latter favors subsequent generations,
starting from the initial young. Notice that, while in response to a higher future land price
Q (f ; f ) ; the equilibrium downpayment D (f ; f ) might increase; this e¤ect and its impact
on lifetime utility is dominated by the direct e¤ect associated with a higher Q (f ; f ) : The
intuition is analogous to the one associated with Proposition 4.
If the assumption of Proposition 6 does not hold, a minimum funding policy can make
the initial old worse o¤ without increasing the utility of the subsequent generations. This is
the case in Example 1.
Example 1 (continued) Minimum funding in Example 1. The equilibrium current
price of land when the old generation sets the funding policy is given by:
Q (f ; fmin ) =

wg

z
1

=R

bg
(1

)

fmin

bg
1+

R 1
(1 R )(1

+ f bg :
)

This is decreasing in fmin because R < 1: It follows that requiring the locality to increase the
minimum funding fmin leads to lower current land prices, hurting the initial old. No other
cohort is a¤ected by this policy.

5

Evidence on the Relationship Between Underfunding and Capitalization

This section presents some empirical support for the key conclusions of our theoretical analysis. There are a number of key challenges encountered in empirical analysis. First, underfunding, capitalization, and the age composition of cities are all endogenous and simultaneously
determined in equilibrium. To our knowledge, there are no natural experiments that would
provide plausible exogenous variation in the extent of underfunding. Second, key variables
such as the elasticity of housing and the political power of young households are di¢ cult to
measure. We, therefore, need to rely on imperfect proxies. As a consequence, the empirical

32

analysis does not provide estimates of causal relationships. Instead, we focus on reporting
some new and interesting correlations in the data that are broadly consistent with our theory.
Our model predicts that, all else equal, localities in which political power is concentrated
in the hands of young agents are more attractive to young individuals and, therefore, are
inhabited by a higher number of young agents. We, therefore, use the share of young households in a locality, an endogenous but observable variable, as a proxy for the political power
held by young individuals there.
We provide evidence that – as predicted by Corollary 1 – municipalities with younger
populations, on average, have lower levels of unfunded liabilities. Furthermore, this relationship strengthens in cities that are relatively more land constrained. In the most sparsely
populated cities, on the other hand, which presumably have more ability to add housing,
a younger population is associated with higher unfunded liabilities (see the discussion in
Section 3.6).
To conduct the analysis, we draw data from several sources. The …rst is a report prepared by Munnell and Aubry (2016) that calculates unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities
(UAAL) for 173 large cities.27 This report also provides data on the ratio of UAAL to ownsource revenues. In addition, we collect data from the U.S. Census to calculate measures of
age distribution, home ownership, home values, income, population density, and population
growth.28
We normalize UAAL by di¤erent economic variables to create several measures of pension
liabilities: UAAL per capita, UAAL divided by aggregate income, UAAL divided by ownsource revenues, and UAAL divided by aggregate housing value. For a measure of the age
distribution, we use the percentage of total households that are headed by owners under 55
27

The authors of the report collected data from the 2012 Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports of 173
selected U.S. cities. The cities were selected to create a sample that included large cities in each state and
provide some variation in institutional arrangements. The authors calculated UAAL using new Governmental
Accounting Standards Board guidelines implemented in 2015, which require more transparent reporting of
pension liabilities by local municipalities.
28
Data was drawn from the 2012 American Community Survey and the 1980 Decennial Census. Because
of di¤erences in municipal de…nitions, a few cities were dropped when merging the data, leaving a sample of
168 cities.

33

years old.29 Finally, we use residential population density as an inverse proxy for land supply
elasticity.30 Table 1 provides summary statistics for the data.
Table 1: Summary of Data
Mean Std. Dev.

Min

Max

UAAL/population ($)

1,446

1,416

-463

8,775

UAAL/annual income (%)

6.21

6.11

-1.22

29.74

UAAL/annual revenue (%)

71.6

66.3

-17.0

359.0

UAAL/house value (%)

3.81

4.18

-0.71

22.63

Owners under 55 (%)

28.4

6.5

12.0

52.5

Population density (per sq. mi.)

3,993

3,481

171

27,092

ln density

8.03

0.72

5.14

10.21

Source: Data on UAAL and revenues are from Munnell and Aubry (2016). Data on population, income,
house values, age, ownership, and density are drawn from the U.S. Census, 2012 Annual Community Survey.

Unfunded liabilities vary greatly among cities. The average unfunded liabilities per capita
are $1; 446 and range from a high of $8; 775 in New York to a low of negative $463 in Seattle,
indicating a surplus. The pattern is similar when liabilities are measured against aggregate
income, own-source revenues, and aggregate house values.31 On average, 28.4 percent of
29

Notice that this speci…cation does not distinguish between renters and homeowners over 55. It may be
argued that renters might have di¤erent preferences for pension funding relative to homeowners. We have
also considered versions of our main regression that distinguish renters from homeowners. The results are
qualitatively similar to those in Table 2.
30
For this investigation, we would not want to use measures of metropolitan area supply elasticities,
such as those estimated by Saiz (2010) and others, given that we are studying municipalities instead of
metropolitan areas. Land and housing constraints faced by municipalities are largely driven by how their
borders are drawn, whether they can annex surrounding property, and whether they are relatively more
urban or suburban in form. Population density is presumably a good proxy for this. Formally, we are
assuming that the marginal costs of supplying additional housing are increasing in population for a given
land area.
31
The rank correlation coe¢ cient across our four measures of unfunded liabilities is always above 0.80.

34

households in cities are headed by homeowners under the age of 55. Finally, density ranges
from a high of 27,092 people per square mile in New York to a low of 171 in Anchorage. The
natural log of density is used in subsequent regressions, so those statistics are also provided.
The …rst notable relationship that arises in the data is that the age distribution of the
population in di¤erent cities is correlated with the level of pension liabilities. Figure 2
plots the homeowners under the age of 55 as a percentage of total households versus UAAL
per capita for each city in the sample. There is a strong negative correlation between the
percentage of young homeowners in a city and the level of unfunded liabilities. The …rst
column in each panel shows the results including only the percentage of young owners. The
results show that as the percentage of young homeowners increases the level of unfunded
liabilities declines.

Figure 2: This …gure plots the percentage of households who own their home and are headed
by someone under 55 years old versus UAAL per capita for 168 large U.S. cities.
To further investigate this correlation we turn to regression analysis. Table 2 shows the

35

results of regressions using the four measures of pension liabilities as dependent variables
with various speci…cations.
The economic interpretation in terms of UAAL per capita is that a single percentage
point increase in the share of young homeowners decreases unfunded liabilities by $90:60
per capita. The negative correlation between the share of young homeowners and unfunded
liabilities could be driven by the fact that economically declining cities are populated by older
households and have larger unfunded liabilities. To partially control for these e¤ects, in the
second column of each panel we include census region dummies, a city’s population growth
between 1980 and 2012, and a number of other variables, including population density.32 The
e¤ect of age distribution is diminished but still signi…cant. In the third column, we include an
interaction term between the age variable and density. For three of four measures of pension
liabilities, the coe¢ cients on the interaction terms are negative and signi…cant. This shows
that the relationship between age distribution and pension funding is more pronounced in
locations where housing supply is more inelastic. More precisely, in denser cities, a larger
proportion of young homeowners is associated with decreased liabilities, whereas, in the
most sparse cities, more young owners are associated with increased liabilities. Finally, in
the fourth column, we use the same speci…cation, but again include a number of controls.
These additional controls have little e¤ect on the estimates. Taken together, these results
are consistent with the predictions of our model.

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we have explored the political and economic determinants of underfunding of
municipal pension plans using a new dynamic politico-economic model. The key insight of
our model is that pension funding policies produce distributional e¤ects across generations
if agents are subject to binding downpayment constraints when purchasing land. In such
a situation, young and old policymakers disagree on the funding policy to pursue, with
32
Other controls include the ratio of median income and median house values, and the natural log of
population.

36

Table 2: Determinants of Underfunding of Municipal Pensions
UAAL/Population
% owners U55

-90.6
(17.5)

ln(density)

-41.4
(13.9)

493.7
(181.1)

346.1
(168.2)

224.8
2423.5
(156.2) (705.8)

1624.3
(674.5)

-68.8
(23.0)

-48.7
(21.7)

% owners U55
ln(density)
controlsa

UAAL/Income

y

y

R2

0.17

0.31

observations

168

165
168
UAAL/Revenues

% owners U55

-2.55
(0.75)

ln(density)

controls

0.30

0.21

165

168

-0.29
(0.06)

0.44
(7.13)

-2.72
(8.14)

16.03
(6.88)

30.32
(25.79)

12.14
(32.02)

-0.23
(0.92)

0.14
(1.06)

y

-0.27
(0.07)

1.72
(0.68)

1.41
(0.71)

1.26
(0.70)

8.99
(2.60)

7.32
(2.95)

-0.25
(0.09)

-0.21
(0.09)

y

0.33

-1.64
(0.86)

% owners U55
ln(density)

-0.43
(0.08)

y

0.34

y
0.31

0.36

165
168
165
UAAL/House values
-0.25
(0.06)

0.82
(0.50)

0.92
(0.52)

0.80
(0.49)

4.41
(1.90)

5.05
(2.14)

-0.13
(0.07)

-0.15
(0.07)

y

y

R2

0.06

0.16

0.12

0.16

0.20

0.36

0.24

0.39

observations

168

165

168

165

168

165

168

165

— p<0.1, — p<0.05
Controls include the percentage population change between 1980 and 2012, dummies for the four census
regions, the ratio of median income and median house values, and the natural log of population.
a

37

the former favoring full funding and the latter favoring underfunding. As a result, statewide policies that mandate binding minimum funding levels hurt the initial old and bene…t
subsequent cohorts. Empirical results based on cross-city comparisons in the magnitude of
unfunded liabilities are consistent with the key prediction of the model.
We conclude with some more general lessons of our analysis and then discuss avenues for
future work. One important lesson is that increasing government debt might make young
constrained households worse o¤. This stands in contrast to a standard result in public
…nance whereby a shift of taxes towards the future alleviates constrained households’borrowing constraints, allowing them to increase current consumption (see, e.g., Yared, 2015).
The reason for this reversal is the adjustment of land prices: Following a shift of taxes toward
the future, young households increase their demand for land, pushing up land prices. The
second lesson is that, in the presence of frictions such as downpayment constraints, land
price capitalization might not be su¢ cient to insulate young generations from the government …nancing choices made by old generations. More generally, our results suggest that
with binding constraints, land price capitalization might not provide su¢ cient incentives for
old generations to invest e¢ ciently in durable public goods (e.g., Conley and Rangel, 2001).
Our analysis can be fruitfully extended in at least two important dimensions. First,
capitalization e¤ects are more likely to operate at the city level, rather than at the state
level, because the supply of land is less constrained in the latter case and states rely on
income and sales taxes, rather than property taxes, to fund their expenditures. Novy-Marx
and Rauh (2009, 2011) have calculated that state governments’unfunded liabilities amount to
$3 trillion, against approximately $1 trillion of their outstanding debt. Studying the welfare
implications of states’unfunded liabilities is therefore an important area for future research.
A second important policy issue is the extent to which localities might, in the future, be
able to change ex-post some of the terms of their pension promises. In our model, localities
are assumed to be able to commit to certain pension bene…ts. Allowing for renegotiation, or
even outright default, is another interesting, although not straightforward, extension of our
analysis.

38

References
Albrecht, K. (2012). “Capitalization of Unfunded Public Pension Liabilities,” Working Paper, Cornell University.
Azzimonti, M. (2011), “Barriers to Investment in Polarized Societies,”American Economics
Review, Vol. 101, No. 5, pp. 2182-2204.
Azzimonti, M., M. Battaglini, and S. Coate (2016). “The Costs and Bene…ts of Balanced
Budget Rules: Lessons from a Political Economy Model of Fiscal Policy,”Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 136, pp. 45–61.
Bagchi, S. (2013). “The E¤ects of Political Competition on the Funding and Generosity of
Public-Sector Pension Plans.”Working Paper.
Bajari, P., P. Chan, D. Krueger, and D. Miller (2013). “A Dynamic Model of Housing Demand: Estimation and Policy Implications,” International Economic Review, Vol. 54, No.
2, pp. 409–442.
Barseghyan L., and S. Coate (2015). “Property Taxation, Zoning, and E¢ ciency in a Dynamic Tiebout Model,”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Bassetto, M. and T. Sargent (2006). “Politics and E¢ ciency of Separating Capital and Ordinary Government Budgets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121, No. 4, pp.
1167-1210.
Bassetto, M. (2008): “Political Economy of Taxation in an Overlapping-Generations Economy,”Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 11, No.1, pp. 18–43.
Battaglini, M., and S. Coate (2008). “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation, and
Debt,”American Economic Review, Vol. 98, No. 1, pp. 201–236.
Bohn, H. (2011). “Should Public Retirement Plans Be Fully Funded?” Journal of Pension
Economics and Finance, Vol. 10, No. 02, pp. 195–219.
Brainard, K., and A. Brown (2015). Spotlight on the Annual Required Contribution Experience of State Retirement Plans, FY 01 to FY 13. National Association of State Retirement
Administrators.
39

Campbell, J., and Z. Hercowitz (2005). “The Role of Collateralized Household Debt in
Macroeconomic Stabilization.”NBER Working Paper 11330.
Conley, J., and A. Rangel (2001). “Intergenerational Fiscal Constitutions: How to Protect
Future Generations Using Land Taxes and Federalism,”NBER Working Paper 8394.
Conley J., R. Driskill, and P. Wang (2013): “Capitalization, Decentralization, and Intergenerational Spillovers in a Tiebout Economy with a Durable Public Good,” Working Paper,
Vanderbilt University.
Epple, D., and K. Schipper (1981). “Municipal Pension Funding: A Theory and Some Evidence.”Public Choice. Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 141–178.
Favilukis, J., S. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008). “Macroeconomic implications
of housing wealth, housing …nance, and limited risk-sharing in general equilibrium.” New
York University Working Paper.
Glaeser, E,. and G. Ponzetto (2014), “Shrouded Costs of Government: The Political Economy of State and Local Public Pensions.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 116, pp. 89–
105.
Glomm, G., and R. Laguno¤ (1999), “A Dynamic Tiebout Theory of Voluntary versus Involuntary Provision of Public Goods,”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 66., pp. 659–677.
Glover A., J. Heathcote, D. Krueger, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2014),“Intergenerational Redistribution in the Great Recession,”Working Paper, University of Minnesota.
Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1998). “Intergenerational Redistribution with Short-Lived
Governments.”Economic Journal, Vol. 108, No. 450, pp. 1299–1329.
Hassler, J., R. Mora, K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2003). “The Survival of the Welfare
State,”American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 1, 87-112.
Haurin, D., P. Hendershott, and S. Wachter (1996). “Borrowing Constraints and the Tenure
Choice of Young Households,”NBER Working Paper 5630.
Iacoviello, M., and M. Pavan (2013), “Housing and Debt over the Life Cycle and over the
Business Cycle,”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 60, No. 2, pp. 221–238.
40

Inman, R. (1982), “Public Employee Pensions and the Local Labor Budget.” Journal of
Public Economics, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 49–71.
Jones L. (1989). “Current Wealth and Tenure Choice,”Real Estate Economics, Vol. 17, No.
1, pp. 7–40.
Kiyotaky, N., and J. Moore (1997). “Credit Cycles,”Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105,
No. 2, pp. 211–248.
Klein, P., P. Krusell, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2008). “Time-Consistent Public Policy,” Review
of Economic Studies, Vol. 75, pp. 789–808.
Krusell, P, V. Quadrini and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (1997). “Are Consumption Taxes Really Better
Than Income Taxes?”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 475–503.
Krusell, P., and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (1999). “On the Size of the U.S. Government: Political
Economy in the Neoclassical Growth Model.” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 5,
pp. 1156–1181.
Linneman, P., and S. Wachter (1989). “The Impacts of Borrowing Constraints on Homeownership,”Real Estate Economics, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 389–402.
Mumy, G.E. (1978). “The Economics of Local Government Pensions and Pension Funding.”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 3, pp. 517-527.
Munnell, A. H., and J.-P. Aubry (2016). “GASB 68: How Will State Unfunded Pension
Liabilities A¤ect Big Cities?”State and Local Pension Plans, No. 47, Center for Retirement
Research at Boston College.
Novy-Marx, R., and J. Rauh (2009). “The Liabilities and Risks of State-Sponsored Pension
Plans,”Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 191–210.
Novy-Marx, R., and J. Rauh (2011). “Public Pension Promises: How Big Are They and
What Are They Worth?”Journal of Finance, Vol. 66, No. 4, pp. 1211–1249.
Oates, W. (1969). “The E¤ects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on Property
Values: An Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and the Tiebout Hypothesis,”Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 77, No. 6, pp. 957–71.
41

Persson, T., and G. Tabellini (2002). Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pew Charitable Trusts (2013). “A Widening Gap in Cities: Shortfalls in Funding for Pensions and Retiree Health Care.”
Saiz, A. (2010). “The geographic determinants of housing supply.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 125, No. 3, pp.1253–1296.
Schultz, C., and T. Sjostrom (2001), “Local Public Goods, Debt and Migration,”Journal of
Public Economics, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 313–337.
Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2012). “Rotten Parents and Disciplined Children:
A Politico-Economic Theory of Public Expenditures and Debt,”Econometrica, Vol. 80, No.
6, pp. 2785–2803.
Yared, P. (2010). “Politicians, Taxes, and Debt,”Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 77, No.
2, pp. 806–840.
Yared, P. (2015). “Optimal Fiscal Policy in an Economy with Private Borrowing Limits,”
Working Paper, Columbia University.
Zorn P. (1989). “Mobility-Tenure Decisions and Financial Credit: Do Mortgage Quali…cation Requirements Constrain Homeownership?” Real Estate Economics, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp
1–16.

42

A

Pension Funding Across U.S. Cities

In this section, we brie‡y document the magnitude of unfunded pension liabilities in large
U.S. cities. Table A.1 shows liabilities and funding levels of de…ned bene…t plans of public
employees for the 20 largest U.S. cities in 2009. The unfunded portion of pension liabilities
for these 20 cities alone totals $85.5 billion. The level of pension funding varies across
cities, from Chicago, which is only 52 percent funded, to San Francisco, at 97 percent. New
York has the highest unfunded liabilities per capita at $5,453, and unfunded liabilities are
signi…cant when compared with annual general revenues, with Chicago topping the list with
a ratio of 1.69. This phenomenon is not con…ned to large urban central cities. For example,
according to the 2012 Status Report on Local Government Pensions Plans released by the
Public Employee Retirement Commission of Pennsylvania, 630 of 3,161 local pension plans in
Pennsylvania were less than 80 percent funded. On net, the $28 billion in accrued liabilities
for local Pennsylvania governments were only 70 percent funded.
Further exacerbating the issue is the fact that most reported liabilities are best-case
scenarios, given that optimistically high discount rates are often used to calculate their
present value. Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011) found that reported state pension liabilities
might be underestimated by up to 30 percent. Recently, the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board, which sets accounting standards for local governments, set new guidelines
for calculating and reporting pension liabilities, which will most likely lead to changes in
reported funding levels, worsening the outlook for municipalities.

B

Utility Function and Binding Downpayment Constraint

In this section, we consider a special utility function for which it is feasible to derive conditions
on parameters such that the downpayment constraint is always binding. We …rst focus on

43

Table A.1: Pension Liabilities and Funding Levels for 20 Largest U.S. Cities, 2009

New York
Los Angeles
Chicago
Philadelphia
San Francisco
Houston
Detroit
Dallas
San Diego
San Jose
Columbus
Phoenix
San Antonio
Jacksonville
Austin
Memphis
Fort Worth
El Paso
Charlotte
Indianapolis
Averages

Total
Liabilities
($ millions)
148,586
35,063
24,971
18,337
17,257
11,030
7,910
7,359
6,282
5,450
5,240
5,115
4,544
4,028
3,729
3,577
2,301
1,841
1,366
1,162

Percent
Funded
70
89
52
62
97
80
93
87
66
79
74
73
87
63
75
84
81
84
94
94
79

Annual
Revenue
($ millions)
80,174
8,854
7,099
6,382
6,043
3,456
2,127
2,497
2,492
1,646
1,209
3,027
1,536
1,993
1,304
1,764
997
638
1,408
2,399

Ratio of Unfunded
Liabilities to
Revenues
0.56
0.44
1.69
1.09
0.09
0.64
0.26
0.38
0.86
0.70
1.13
0.46
0.38
0.75
0.71
0.32
0.44
0.46
0.06
0.03
0.57

Unfunded
Liabilities per
capita ($)
5,453
1,017
4,447
4,566
643
1,051
776
799
1,634
1,210
1,731
955
445
1,814
1,179
885
590
454
112
84
1,492

Data for liabilities and funding come from a report by the Pew Charitable Trusts (2013). The values are
based on reported pension liabilities and assets in 2009 drawn from each municipality’s Comprehensive
Annual Financial Report.
Data on municipal …nances were taken from the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy’s Fiscally Standardized
Cities Database, 2010, available at www.lincolnist.edu. The values represent reported annual general
revenues in 2010 dollars.
Population data are taken from the 2010 U.S. Census.

44

the case in which the utility function takes the logarithmic form:
U = ln cyt +

ln lt + ln cot+1 :

(41)

The fact that v (co ) is logarithmic implies that the demand for land with a binding downpayment constraint is independent of qt+1 and given by:
L(dt ; qt+1 ) =

+
1+

+

w
:
dt

(42)

Su¢ cient conditions for the downpayment constraint to always be binding both in equilibrium and following any deviation are that: (i) the relative size of local government – as
proxied by wg and bg –is su¢ ciently small and (ii) the share of land in utility is su¢ ciently
large:33
>

(R
1

1)

:

(43)

A high land share makes it more likely that the consumer is constrained because it increases
his demand for land. The assumption about the size of government is needed because the
existence of unfunded pension promises pushes taxes to the future, reducing land prices
when an agent is old. As a consequence, agents might want to save rather than borrow.
Assumption (i) limits the importance of this e¤ect.

C

Proofs of Lemmas and Propositions

C.1

Proof of Proposition 1

(a) The function U (w

dt l; l; qt+1 (1

) l) is continuous in l on the interval [0; dt =w] : There-

fore it achieves a maximum in this interval.
(b) The Inada conditions on the derivatives at l = dt =w and l = 0 rule out corner solutions
in which the optimal demand for land is either d=w or zero. Therefore, the solution must be
33

The proof of this statement is available from the authors upon request.

45

interior and satisfy the …rst-order condition (12):
dt u1 (w

dt lt ; lt ) + u2 (w

dt lt ; lt ) + v 0 (qt+1 l (1

)) qt+1 (1

) = 0:

(44)

This equation admits a solution because of the Assumptions in part (b) of Proposition 1.
Notice that the objective function U (w

) l) is strictly concave in lt because

dt l; l; qt+1 (1

its second derivative with respect to lt is negative:
= d2t u11 (w

dt lt ; lt ) 2dt u12 (w

dt lt ; lt )+u22 (w

dt lt ; lt )+v 00 (qt+1 l (1

)) [qt+1 (1

)]2 < 0:

This is true because, by Assumption 1:
u11 (w

dt lt ; lt )

0;

u22 (w

dt lt ; lt )

0;

u12 (w

dt lt ; lt )

0;

v 00 (qt+1 l (1

))

0;

and at least one of the own-second derivatives is strictly negative. Thus, the solution to the
…rst-order condition is unique.
(c) The properties of the demand function can be proved using the implicit function
theorem as applied to equation (44). First:
@L (dt ; qt+1 )
u1 (w
=
@d

dt lt ; lt )

dt lt u11 (w

dt lt ; lt ) + u12 (w

dt lt ; lt ) lt

<0

because the numerator of this expression is positive and the denominator is negative. The
other derivative is:
dL (dt ; qt+1 )
v 0 (qt+1 l (1
=
@q

)) + v 00 (qt+1 l (1

46

)) qt+1 l (1

)

(1

)

which can be expressed as:
@L (dt ; qt+1 )
v 0 (qt+1 l (1
=
@q

)) [1

" (qt+1 l (1

))]

(1

(45)

);

where
" (qt+1 l (1

v 00 (qt+1 l (1
)) qt+1 l (1
0
v (qt+1 l (1
))

))

)

>0

is the (positive) elasticity of v 0 (cot+1 ) with respect to cot+1 : It follows that the derivative (45)
is negative if and only if " (qt+1 l (1

)) > 1: In terms of ; we can write:

@L (dt ; qt+1 ) @dt v 0 (qt+1 l (1
@L (dt ; qt+1 )
=
+
@
@dt
@

)) + v 00 (qt+1 l (1

)) qt+1 l (1

Replacing @L (dt ; qt+1 ) =@dt from above and noticing that @dt =@ =
@L (dt ; qt+1 )
@ 8
qt+1 < u1 (w
=
R(
):

dt lt ; lt )

dt lt u11 (w

dt lt ; lt ) + u12 (w

Rv 00 (qt+1 l (1

qt+1 :

qt+1 =R; leads to

dt lt ; lt ) lt

)) qt+1 l (1

)

0

Rv (qt+1 l (1

)

where (

) > 0: The term in brackets is also positive because the agent is constrained and

so u1 (w

dt lt ; lt ) > Rv 0 (qt+1 l (1

)) :

(d) The indirect utility function is
V (dt ; qt+1 ) = u (w

dt L (dt ; qt+1 ) ; L (dt ; qt+1 )) + v (qt+1 L (dt ; qt+1 ) (1

By the envelope theorem:
@V (dt ; qt+1 )
=
u1 (w dt L (dt ; qt+1 ) ; L (dt ; qt+1 )) L (dt ; qt+1 ) < 0;
@dt
@V (dt ; qt+1 )
= v 0 (qt+1 L (dt ; qt+1 ) (1
)) L (dt ; qt+1 ) (1
) > 0:
@qt+1
Q.E.D.

47

)) :

(46)

9
)) =
;
;

C.2

Proof of Proposition 3

Uniqueness. Let z be de…ned as:
1

z

1

=R

wg +

f bg
+ bg (1
R

(47)

f ) ;

so that equation (27) can be written as:
Q =

D
1

z :

=R

Replace Q into equation (28) to obtain:
P

V

D ;

D
1

=R

z

L D ;

D
1

z

=R

(48)

= 1:

Assume that there exists at least a D that satis…es equation (48). To show uniqueness of
the solution, we proceed in two steps. In the …rst one, we show that the L D ; 1 D =R

z

is a decreasing function of D : In the second step, we show that V D ; 1 D =R

is a

z

decreasing function of D :
Step 1. Consider the …rst step and take the total derivative of L with respect to D :
@L (D ; Q ) @L (D ; Q )
+
@d
@q
1

1
=R

:

This is negative if and only if:
@L (D ; Q ) =@q
>
@L (D ; Q ) =@d

(1

=R) :

(49)

For convenience, de…ne L = L (D ; Q ) : Use the implicit function theorem on equation

48

(12) to replace the derivatives and obtain:
@L (D ; Q ) =@q
@L (D ; Q ) =@d
v 00 (Q (1
=
u1 (w D L ; 1)

) L ) Q L (1
) + v 0 (Q (1
)L )
(1
D L u11 (w D L ; 1) + L u12 (w D L ; 1)

):

Notice that:
v 00 (Q (1
u1 (w D L ; 1)
because u12 (w

) L ) Q L (1
) + v 0 (Q (1
)L )
>
D L u11 (w D L ; 1) + L u12 (w D L ; 1)

v 0 (Q (1
)L )
;
u1 (w D L ; 1)

0: Thus, it follows that:

D L ; 1)

@L (D ; Q ) =@q
>
@L (D ; Q ) =@d

v 0 (Q (1
)L )
(1
u1 (w D L ; 1)

1

)>

>

R

1

R

;

(50)

where the second inequality holds due to the binding downpayment constraint and the third
one holds because R > 1. This proves that equation (49) holds.
Step 2. The second step is to show that V D ; 1 D =R

is a decreasing function of

z

D : Take the total derivative of the indirect utility function:
@V (D ; Q ) @V (D ; Q )
+
@d
@q
1

1
=R

:

This is negative if
@V (D ; Q ) =@q
>
@V (D ; Q ) =@d

(1

=R) :

Apply the implicit function theorem to equation (46) to obtain:
@V (D ; Q ) =@q
=
@V (D ; Q ) =@d

v 0 (Q (1
)L )
(1
u1 (w D L ; 1)

):

The argument is then the same as in Step 1 of the proof; see equation (50). This proves the
claim that V D ; 1 D =R

z

is a decreasing function of D :

Since both L (D ; Q ) and V D ; 1 D =R

z

49

are monotonically decreasing in D ; the

left-hand side of equation (48) is also monotonically decreasing with respect to D ; guaranteeing that the solution is unique, provided it exists.
Existence. To show existence, notice …rst that the left-hand side of equation (48) is a
continuous and monotonically decreasing function of D : Proving existence of equilibrium
requires one to show that there exists a D that solves equation (48) above for a given
f 2 [0; 1] : We consider the case wg = bg = 0; which implies z = 0 in equation (47), and
argue that the results that follow extend to the case wg ; bg > 0 by continuity as long as wg ; bg
are not too large. Taking wg = bg = 0 into account, equation (48) becomes:
P

V

D

D ;

1

L D ;

=R

D
1

The strategy is to show that the function L D ; 1 D =R
lim L D ;

D !0

lim L D ;

D !1

D
1

=R
D

1

=R

=R

= 1:

(51)

has the following properties:

= +1

(52)

= 0:

(53)

If these two conditions hold, the left-hand side of equation (51) would have the same
properties because the function P (V ) is bounded. These two properties are su¢ cient to
guarantee that there exists a D such that the labor market is in equilibrium. Consider
equation (52) and the …rst-order condition (12):
D u1 (w

D L; L) + u2 (w

D L; L) + v 0

D (1
)L
1
=R

D (1
)
= 0:
1
=R

(54)

As D ! 0; the demand for land grows without bound because the marginal cost of land
D u1 (w

D L; L) ! 0;

50

and the marginal bene…t of land is always strictly positive by assumption (1):
D L; L) + v 0

u2 (w

D (1
)L
1
=R

D (1
)
> 0:
1
=R

Consider now equation (53). When D > 0; equation (54) can be rewritten as:
u1 (w

D L; L) +

u2 (w

D (1
)L
1
=R

D L; L)
+ v0
D

1
1

=R

= 0:

As D ! +1; consumption when young goes to zero and the marginal cost of land
becomes arbitrarily large:
u1 (w

D L; L) !

1:

The marginal bene…t of land, instead declines because u21 (w

D L; L)

0 and the func-

tion v 0 (:) is weakly decreasing in its argument. It follows that the demand for land must
converge to zero as D ! +1, and that the demand for land on the left-hand side of (51)
must intersect supply for some D . The same logic can be applied, by continuity, when
wg ; bg > 0 as long as wg ; bg are not too large. Q.E.D.

C.3

Proof of Lemma 1

To determine the derivative of D fe0 ; f

with respect to fe0 ; apply the implicit function

theorem to equation (29), taking into account the fact that
Q fe0 ; f

and therefore:

=

D (f ; f )

[wg + bg ((1
1
=R

@Q fe0 ; f
@ fe0

51

) f + ) =R]

= bg :

bg 1

fe0 ;

(55)

(56)

From the implicit function theorem, we obtain that:
@D fe0 ; f
@ fe0

=

1
L (D; Q) bg +
L2 (D;Q) 2
1
L (D; Q)
L2 (D;Q) 1

P 0 (V ) V2 (D; Q) bg
P 0 (V ) V1 (D; Q)

where D and Q on the right-hand side of this equation stand for D fe0 ; f
We can write the term:

=

and Q fe0 ; f

:

e0
1 @D f ; f
bg
@ fe0
1
L (D; Q) + P 0 (V ) V2 (D; Q)
L2 (D;Q) 2
1
L
L2 (D;Q) 1

(D; Q)

1
L
L2 (D;Q) 2

=
=

;

1
L
L2 (D;Q) 1

(D; Q)

P 0 (V ) V1 (D; Q)

(D; Q)
P 0 (V ) V1 (D; Q)

1
L2 (D;Q)
1
L2 (D;Q)

+

+

P0

P 0 (V ) V2 (D; Q)
1
L (D; Q) P 0 (V ) V1 (D; Q)
L2 (D;Q) 1

+

L2 (D; Q)
L1 (D; Q)

(V ) V1 (D; Q) =L1 (D; Q)

P 0 (V )
1
L (D; Q) =V1 (D; Q) + P 0 (V )
L2 (D;Q) 1

= ! (D; Q)

L2 (D; Q)
L1 (D; Q)

+ (1

! (D; Q))

V2 (D; Q)
V1 (D; Q)
V2 (D; Q)
V1 (D; Q)

;

(57)

where the “weight”! (D; Q) is de…ned as:
! (D; Q)

1+

L2

(D; Q) P 0

1
:
(V ) V1 (D; Q) =L1 (D; Q)

(58)

The term ( V2 (D; Q) =V1 (D; Q)) can be found considering the indirect utility of a young
agent
V (D; Q) = U (w

DL (D; Q) ; L (D; Q) ; Q (1

52

) L (D; Q)));

(59)

and apply the envelope theorem to obtain the partial derivatives:
V1 (D; Q) =

u1 (w

(60)

DL; L)L

V2 (D; Q) = v 0 (Q (1

) L) (1

) L;

(61)

):

(62)

where L denotes L (D; Q) : We therefore obtain that:
V2 (D; Q)
v 0 (Q (1
) L)
=
(1
V1 (D; Q)
u1 (w DL; L)

Moreover, it is straightforward to show using the implicit function theorem on the …rstorder condition for land (equation 12) that:
L2 (D; Q)
v 00 (Q (1
=
L1 (D; Q)
u1 (w DL; L)

) L) Q(1
LDu11 (w

)L + v 0 (Q (1
) L)
(1
D; L) + Lu12 (w DL; L)

):

(63)

Notice that
V2 (D; Q)
V1 (D; Q)

L2 (D; Q)
;
L1 (D; Q)

(64)

because by Assumption 1:
v 00 (Q (1

) L)

0;

(65)

u11 (w

D; L)

0;

(66)

DL; L)

0:

(67)

u12 (w

It follows from equation (64) and the fact that ! (D; Q) 2 [0; 1] that:
e0
1 @D f ; f
bg
@ fe0

V2 (D; Q)
:
V1 (D; Q)

(68)

Replacing equation (62) in equation (68) and rearranging gives the desired result (i.e.,
equation (30)). The inequality in this equation is strict whenever the weight ! (D; Q) is
strictly greater than zero and at least one of the inequalities (65)–(67) is strict. The condition
53

that ! (D; Q) > 0 requires P 0 (V ) < +1 (see equation (58)).
Q.E.D.

C.4

Proof of Proposition 4

(1) E¤ect on the land price today. We want to show that:
e f; fe0 ; f
@Q
@ fe0

=

where the upper bound on @D fe0 ; f
su¢ cient to show that the term

@D fe0 ; f

+

@ fe0

(

1) bg
< 0;
R

(69)

=@ fe0 has been established in Lemma 1. It is then

V2 (D; Q)
+
V1 (D; Q)

1
R

(70)

< 0;

for (69) to hold. This is true because of equation (62) and because the downpayment
constraint is binding:
1
v 0 (Q (1
) L)
< :
u1 (w DL; L)
R
(2) E¤ect on lifetime utility. Notice that:
@V D fe0 ; f

@ fe0

; Q fe0 ; f

= V1 (D; Q)

@D fe0 ; f
2

@ fe0

+ V2 (D; Q) bg

e0
1 @D f ; f
g
4
= b V1 (D; Q) g
b
@ fe0

3

V2 (D; Q) 5
:
V1 (D; Q)

We want to show that the term in squared brackets is nonpositive given that V1 (D; Q) < 0:
This is the case according to the inequality in equation (68). Moreover, if the utility function
satis…es at least one of the inequalities (65)–(67), then the term in square brackets is strictly
negative and so the derivative of V D fe0 ; f
54

; Q fe0 ; f

with respect to fe0 is strictly

positive.
Q.E.D.

C.5

Proof of Proposition 5

As we write in the main text, when the borrowing constraint does not bind, the demand for
land depends only on its user cost. Thus, equation (25) holds with

= 1: In that equation,

D does not depend on fe0 : The derivative of the future land price with respect to fe0 is simply:
@Q fe0 ; f
@ fe0

Thus, we compute:
e f; fe0 ; f
@Q
which equals zero. Q.E.D.

C.6

@ fe0

= bg :

(71)

e0
1 @Q f ; f
=
R
@ fe0

bg
R

(72)

Proof of Proposition 6

If the young set the policy and the assumptions in Corollary 1 hold, the equilibrium funding
rule is f = 1; so fmin is irrelevant.
If the old set the policy, in equilibrium we have:
(73)

f = fmin :

Utility of initial old. The land price in equation (26) represents the utility of the …rst
generation. From that from equation (26), we determine that Q (f ; f ) decreases with f if
and only if:
@D (f ; f )
bg (1
<
@f
R
55

)

:

(74)

Take the total derivative of the labor market clearing condition:

P (V (D ; Q ))L (D ; Q ) = 1;

(75)

with respect to f and D . We obtain:
@D (f ; f ) bg =R bg
V2 (D ; Q ) @f
1
=R
1
=R
@D (f ; f ) bg =R bg
+P (V (D ; Q )) L1 (D ; Q ) @D (f ; f ) + L2 (D ; Q )
L2 (D ; Q ) @f = 0:
1
=R
1
=R
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))L (D ; Q ) V1 (D ; Q ) @D (f ; f ) + V2 (D ; Q )

Solve the latter for derivative the derivative of interest:
@D (f ; f )
1=R 1
= bg
@f
1
=R
0
P (V (D ; Q ))L (D ; Q ) V2 (D ; Q ) + P (V (D ; Q ))L2 (D ; Q )
h
i
h
V2 (D ;Q )
0
P (V (D ; Q ))L (D ; Q ) V1 (D ; Q ) + 1 =R + P (V (D ; Q )) L1 (D ; Q ) +
=

bg (1

1=R)

TERM,

(76)

L2 (D ;Q )
1 =R

i

where
TERM
(1

P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ; Q ) = (L )2
i
:
;Q )
0 (V (D ; Q ))V (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ;Q )
=R) P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V1 (D ; Q ) + L1 (D
+
P
2
(L )2
(L )2
(77)
h

Notice that we have used the fact that P (V (D ; Q )) = 1=L and that
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V1 (D ; Q ) +

L1 (D ; Q )
< 0;
(L )2

because V1 (D ; Q ) < 0 and L1 (D ; Q ) < 0: Condition (74) then reduces to:

(R

1)

TERM < (1

):

(78)

There are two options, corresponding to whether TERM> 0 or TERM< 0. In case

56

TERM> 0; condition (78) is satis…ed because R > 1. Consider then the case in which
TERM< 0: For this to be true, we need:
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ; Q ) = (L )2 > 0;

(79)

otherwise TERM> 0. Divide both numerator and denominator of equation (77) by (79) to
rewrite TERM as:
1

TERM =
(1

P 0 (V (D ;Q ))V1 (D ;Q )+

=R) P 0 (V (D

(80)

:

L1 (D ;Q )
(L )2

;Q ))V2 (D ;Q )+L2 (D ;Q )=(L )2

+1

With TERM< 0, equation (78) becomes:
R
1
>
TERM
1

1

(81)

;

with
1
=
TERM

(1

=R)

P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V1 (D ; Q ) +

L1 (D ;Q )
(L )2

P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ; Q ) = (L )2

1:

(82)

Replace this in (81) and simplify to obtain:
P 0 (V (D ; Q )) [ V1 (D ; Q )] +

[ L1 (D ;Q )]
(L )2

P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ; Q ) = (L )

2

>

R
1

Notice that the left-hand side of this inequality can be written as:
[ V1 (D ; Q )]
+ (1
V2 (D ; Q )

)

[ L1 (D ; Q )]
;
L2 (D ; Q )

where
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q )
:
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ; Q ) = (L )2

57

:

(83)

From equation (64), we know that:
[ V1 (D ; Q )]
V2 (D ; Q )

[ L1 (D ; Q )]
:
L2 (D ; Q )

(84)

Thus, we only need to show that
R
[ V1 (D ; Q )]
>
;
V2 (D ; Q )
1

(85)

for (81) to hold. This is the case because of the binding downpayment constraint as:
[ V1 (D ; Q )]
v 0 (Q (1
) L (D ; Q ))
=
(1
V2 (D ; Q )
u1 (w D L (D ; Q ) ; L (D ; Q ))
Lifetime utility of young.

)<

1
R

:

Consider now the lifetime utility of a young agent,

V (D (f ; f ) ; Q (f ; f )) : We have that
@D (f ; f )
@Q (f ; f )
@V (D (f ; f ) ; Q (f ; f ))
= V1 (D ; Q )
+ V2 (D ; Q )
;
@f
@f
@f
where D stands for D (f ; f ) ; and Q stands for Q (f ; f ) : For this derivative to be
positive we need:
@D (f ; f ) V2 (D ; Q ) @Q (f ; f )
+
< 0:
@f
V1 (D ; Q )
@f

(86)

From equation (27), we know that:
@Q (f ; f )
=
@f
1

1

@D (f ; f ) bg (1
+
=R
@f
1

1=R)
:
=R

Replacing this into equation (86), we need to show that:
@D (f ; f )
+
@f
1

1

V2 (D ; Q ) @D (f ; f )
+ bg (1
=R V1 (D ; Q )
@f

58

1=R) < 0:

(87)

Replace equation (76):
TERM

bg (1

1=R) 1 +

1
1

V2 (D ; Q )
=R V1 (D ; Q )

bg (1
1

+

1=R) V2 (D ; Q )
< 0:
=R V1 (D ; Q )

Simplify:
TERM
If TERM

1

=R

V2 (D ; Q )
[ V1 (D ; Q )]

V2 (D ; Q )
< 0:
[ V1 (D ; Q )]

(88)

0, then (88) is satis…ed because V2 (D ; Q ) =V1 (D ; Q ) < 0 and
1

R

V2 (D ; Q )
1
>
[ V1 (D ; Q )]
R

V2 (D ; Q )
> 0;
[ V1 (D ; Q )]

R

due to equation (85) and R > 1. Assume then that TERM< 0: Rearrange equation (88) to
read:
1
=R
1
> V2 (D ;Q )
TERM

1:

[ V1 (D ;Q )]

Replace equation (82) and simplify:
P 0 (V (D ; Q )) [ V1 (D ; Q )] +

[ L1 (D ;Q )]
(L )2
2

P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ; Q ) = (L )

>

V1 (D ; Q )
:
V2 (D ; Q )

Using the expression for the left-hand side derived above (equation (83)), we obtain:
[ V1 (D ; Q )]
+ (1
V2 (D ; Q )

)

[ L1 (D ; Q )]
>
L2 (D ; Q )

V1 (D ; Q )
:
V2 (D ; Q )

From equation (64), we know that this inequality is always satis…ed weakly and strictly
if the utility function satis…es at least one of the inequalities (65)-(67).
Future price of land. We show that the future price of land Q (f ; f ) is increasing in
f : From equation (27), this is the case if and only if:
@D (f ; f )
+ bg (1
@f
59

1=R) > 0:

(89)

Use equation (76) to replace @D (f ; f ) =@f and rewrite (89) as:
bg (1

TERM + bg (1

1=R)

1=R) > 0:

Simplify this equation to:
TERM < 1:
Use equation (77) to replace TERM:
P 0 (V (D ;Q ))V2 (D ;Q )+L2 (D ;Q )=(L )2
P 0 (V (D ;Q ))V1 (D ;Q )+

1

=R +

L1 (D ;Q )
(L )2
L2 (D
(L
L (D
)+ 1
(L

P 0 (V (D ;Q ))V2 (D ;Q )+
P 0 (V (D ;Q ))V1 (D ;Q

;Q )
)2
;Q )
)2

(90)

< 1:

There are two cases. First, if
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) + L2 (D ; Q ) = (L )2
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V1 (D ; Q ) +

L1 (D ;Q )
(L )2

(91)

> 0;

then equation (90) is veri…ed. Second, if the inequality in (91) is not veri…ed, then (90) is
veri…ed as long as

1

=R +

;Q )
)2
;Q )
)2

> 0:

V2 (D ; Q )
+ (1
[ V1 (D ; Q )]

)

P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) +
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V1 (D ; Q ) +

L2 (D
(L
L1 (D
(L

To show that this is the case, recall that
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V2 (D ; Q ) +
P 0 (V (D ; Q ))V1 (D ; Q ) +
where

L2 (D
(L
L1 (D
(L

;Q )
)2
;Q )
)2

=

2 (0; 1) is de…ned as:
P 0 (V (D ; Q )) [ V1 (D ; Q )]
P 0 (V (D ; Q )) [ V1 (D ; Q )] +

60

[ L1 (D ;Q )]
(L )2

:

L2 (D ; Q )
[ L1 (D ; Q )]

;

Notice then that:
1

R

>

1
R

>

V2 (D ; Q )
[ V1 (D ; Q )]

V2 (D ; Q )
+ (1
[ V1 (D ; Q )]

)

L2 (D ; Q )
;
[ L1 (D ; Q )]

where the …rst inequality follows from R > 1; the second one from equation (70), and the
third one from (64).
Q.E.D.

61

