NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INCIDENTAL FERTILITY EFFECTS OF SCHOOL CONDOM DISTRIBUTION
PROGRAMS
Kasey S. Buckles
Daniel M. Hungerman
Working Paper 22322
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22322

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We thank Guillermo Roque, Connor Voglewede, and Madeleine Organ for excellent research
assistance, and participants at the 2015 ASSA conference, the 2015 SOLE/EALE conference, the
2015 Family Economics Workshop at the University of Montreal-CIREQ, the 2016 Economics of
the Family Conference at the Notre Dame London Global Gateway, and the 2015 NBER
Children’s and Education programs for their comments. During this paper’s composition,
Professor Hungerman received funding from the John Templeton Foundation for an unrelated
project. Email the authors at kbuckles@nd.edu and dhungerm@nd.edu. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kasey S. Buckles and Daniel M. Hungerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Incidental Fertility Effects of School Condom Distribution Programs
Kasey S. Buckles and Daniel M. Hungerman
NBER Working Paper No. 22322
June 2016
JEL No. J13
ABSTRACT
While the fertility effects of improving teenagers’ access to contraception are theoretically
ambiguous, most empirical work has shown that access decreases teen fertility. In this paper, we
consider the fertility effects of access to condoms—a method of contraception not considered in
prior work. We exploit variation across counties and across time in teenagers’ exposure to
condom distribution programs in schools. We find that access to condoms in schools increases
teen fertility by about 10 percent. These effects are driven by communities where condoms are
provided without mandated counseling.

Kasey S. Buckles
University of Notre Dame
Department of Economics
436 Flanner Hall
South Bend, IN 46556
and NBER
kbuckles@nd.edu
Daniel M. Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
439 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu

I. Introduction
The US teen birth rate is far above that of other industrialized countries, and one
controversial approach to addressing the issue has been to improve young people’s access to
contraception. Proponents of this approach argue that improved access will reduce the likelihood of
an unwanted pregnancy among sexually active teenagers (e.g., Boonstra, 2014). However, others
have argued that providing improved access to contraception to teenagers condones or facilitiates
sexual activity and could even increase teen births (Paton, 2002).
The effect of contraceptive access on teen fertility is therefore an empirical question, and a
large body of work in the social sciences has considered it. Much of this work has focused on access
to oral contraception (the Pill) in the 1960s and 1970s, finding that access not only lowered teen
fertility, but also improved long-term economic and family outcomes (Goldin and Katz, 2002;
Bailey, 2006; Pantano, 2007; Guldi, 2008; Ananat and Hungerman, 2012). Recent work has also
examined the effects of access to long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) and to emergency
contraception. Access to LARCs decreases teen childbearing (Lindo and Packham, 2015), while
access to emergency contraception increases sexually-transmitted infections—suggesting a
behavioral response—but has no effect on teen fertility (Girma and Paton, 2011; Durrance, 2013).
In this paper, we consider the effects of condom access on teen fertility—a contraceptive
method that has received much less attention in the literature. Despite the fact that research on
other methods consistently suggests that contraceptive access lowers teen fertility (or in some cases
has no effects), there are reasons to believe that the effects of condom access programs may be
different. First, condoms are a relatively less effective method of birth control—one-year failure
rates for condoms are more than double those of the Pill (Trussell, 2011). Second, condom use
relies more heavily on the male partner, whereas the methods mentioned above rely more heavily on
the female. This may be important given gender differences in the costs of an unintended
pregnancy. Third, condoms are used at the time of intercourse, as opposed to LARCs or the Pill
which can be taken in advance. Fourth, the Pill and LARCS are effective over a longer term,
making the decision to use them a long-term decision rather than a short-term one.
A careful study of the effects of condom distribution has important implications for policy,
as both the American Academy of Pediatrics in the United States and the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence in the UK have recently advocated for condom distribution in schools

1

(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2013; National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2014). 1
School districts in Boston, Buffalo, Chicago, and elsewhere have consequently reconsidered the role
of condoms in their schools (Bidgood, 2013; Chicago Tribune, 2014; Tan, 2014).
To our knowledge there is no research that provides rigorous evidence on how condom
access in schools—or condom access more generally—impacts teen fertility. The goal of this paper
is to provide such evidence. To do so, we consider a massive policy intervention that affected
millions of teenagers during the early 1990s: the introduction of condoms in schools to prevent HIV
transmission. During this period, hundreds of schools across the country provided condoms to
their students. We construct a national dataset documenting the introduction of condom access
programs across the country. We then match these data to national data on birth rates for counties
with a population of at least 100,000, allowing us to observe birth outcomes for women of different
ages in different communities. By using data and policy variation at the national level, we are able to
identify fertility effects that would be missed by using a single school or even a single large school
district.
We find clear evidence that access to condoms in schools leads to an increase in teen fertility.
This increase is observed in both rigorous regression specifications and in a basic visual inspection
of the data. It does not appear to be driven by differential trends or reverse causation and it is
robust to using births to slightly older women as a control. The effects are reasonably large in
magnitude: access to condoms for the entire high-school-aged population in a county would lead to
about 5 extra births per 1,000 teenage women, or a 10 percent increase relative to the mean. Since
the average program covered about one-third of the teenage women in the county, the typical
program led to an additional 2 births per 1,000 teenage women.
There are several mechanisms that could drive our results. School condom distribution
programs could encourage risky sexual behaviors, promote the use of the condom over methods
that better prevent pregnancy, or cause schools to shift resources away from more effective
programs. We explore these mechanisms by
testing the sensitivity of the results to contextual factors. We find that the fertility increase is driven
by communities where condom access was provided without mandated counseling, and that these
fertility effects may have been attenuated, or perhaps even reversed, when counseling was mandated
1

In November of 2013, the AAP released a policy statement arguing that “schools should be considered appropriate
sites for the availability of condoms” and in March of 2014 a NIHCE statement advocated that free condoms should be
“readily accessible” at “schools, colleges, and youth clubs.”

2

as part of condom provision. We also briefly consider the prevalence of sexually transmitted
infections (STIs) and find that gonorrhea rates for women rose following condom provision. These
estimates are limited by the available data but again are driven by communities providing condoms
without counseling. In section 5, we discuss the extent to which these results support the various
potential mechanisms.
Our results suggest that the findings of past work on the impacts of access to the Pill and
LARCs may not necessarily match the impacts of other contraceptive methods, and that the
circumstances of contraception access may matter a great deal. These results also suggest caution
both in assessing recent policy proposals for condom provision in schools and in inferring fertility
outcomes from small-scale prior studies discussing condom access and sexual behavior. Our
findings on the importance of counseling may also help reconcile our results with those of
Lovenheim, Reback, and Wedenoja (2014), who show that school-based health clinics offering
contraceptive services significantly lowered teen fertility. If health clinics can effectively combine
contraception access and counseling, this may lead to very different effects than access alone—a
conclusion similar to the one drawn by Kirby (2002).
II. School Condom Distribution Programs
A. Overview of Condom Programs
In the early 1990s, hundreds of schools across the United States began to make condoms
available on-site to students. 2 Discussions of the introduction of these programs at the time
overwhelmingly point to concerns with AIDS/HIV as the primary driver (e.g., Banks, 1991;
Goldstein and Bates, 1993; Tillman 1992). Adams County School District 14 in Commerce City,
Colorado was the first district to implement a school-based condom program directly on school
grounds in 1989. The largest district in the country, New York City Public Schools, did so in 1991.
The activity in New York began after the appointment of Joseph Fernandez as chancellor following
the unexpected death of chancellor Richard Green, who died of an asthma attack after only 14
months on the job; during Green's brief tenure little work was done to address concerns about
AIDS (Johnson, 1998). The second-largest district, Los Angeles Unified School District, followed
with a condom program in 1992. By the middle of the decade, dozens of school districts had
2

In this section we draw on a wide variety of sources, but particularly noteworthy and extensive discussions can be
found Samuels and Smith (1993), Kirby and Brown (1996), and Johnson (1998).

3

implemented a policy that allowed students to obtain condoms at school.
Typically, condoms were provided by an intermediary, and most schools made condoms
available through multiple sources. 3 The most common method of providing condoms was through
a school nurse (including either nurses employed by the district or nurses in clinics employed by
outside agencies) and teachers. Nearly half of condom programs also made condoms available from
counselors, and about a quarter of programs made condoms available through other employees or
the school principal. A small number of schools (less than 5%) made condoms available from
sources such as vending machines or baskets. Most schools made condoms free to obtain, although
some suggested or charged a small fee such as 25 cents (Brown et al., 1997). The vast majority of
programs were provided in high schools; most programs (about 75%) were located in what Kirby
and Brown call “regular academic schools,” but a relatively high proportion were found in
alternative schools such as schools for students with children or facing incarceration. About a
quarter of all programs were run in conjunction with a school health center that typically provided
other services, such as physicals. 4
Most programs allowed parents to “opt out” on behalf of their children if they wished
(although research, e.g., Kirby and Brown (1996) suggests that very few parents–typically just 2 or 3
percent–did so). Most programs were implemented at the district level, and the great majority of
programs were adopted by school boards (Leitman, Kramer, and Taylor, 1993).
Several sources agree that a key feature distinguishing programs is whether students were
required to receive counseling when requesting a condom. Lewin (1991) writes “even those who
argue most vociferously that teen-agers need better access to contraception concede that condom
programs may not have much effect unless they include counseling and social support;” MartinezDonate (2004) and Taylor (1991) make similar arguments. As described by Kirby and Brown (1996),
“during counseling, students are commonly informed that abstinence is the safest method of
protection against STIs; they are also instructed about the proper methods of storing and using
condoms.” Counseling also emphasized the effectiveness of condoms in preventing STIs.
Fortunately, when collecting information about programs we were able to identify in most cases
3

Most of the numbers for this discussion are taken from a national survey of programs conducted by Kirby and Brown
(1996).
4 There were far fewer clinics in the early 1990s than today (Lovenheim, Reback, and Wedenoja, 2014), and clinics played
a more limited role in providing on-campus access to condoms. For example, according to Johnson (1998, page 89),
only two school clinics provided contraception access in NYC in 1987; the number in LA Unified in 1991 was three
(Banks, 1991) and in San Francisco that year it was zero (Asmiov, 1992a).

4

whether or not counseling was mandated by the district; about two-thirds of the programs we use in
our study are programs with district-mandated counseling accompanying diffusion.
Previous empirical work on the effects of school condom distribution programs has focused
on take-up, condom use, and sexual activity. First, regarding take-up, Kirby and Brown (1996) find
that the median school distributed about one condom per student per year, a reasonably large
number, although there was large variation with about a fourth of schools distributing less than half
a condom per student/year and nearly a sixth of schools distributing more than six condoms per
student/year. Alternative schools and smaller schools had higher numbers of condoms distributed.
Of course, taking condoms and using them are separate issues. As noted in Kirby (2001) 5,
and Kirby et al. (1999), condoms may have been already reasonably available to adolescents during
this time period, so condom distribution at school might merely crowd out condoms obtained from
other locations. Cohen (1999) reviews several studies on the effects of school condom programs on
condom use; many studies find that the programs led to greater condom use among sexually active
students. Kirby and Coyle (1997) present similar survey results. However, several studies produce
inconclusive results; for example Furstenberg et al. (1997) find an insignificant increase in condom
use and Schuster et al. (1998) found no significant change in condom use from females. Kirby et al.
(1999) compare condom use throughout the Seattle school district to a nationally-representative
sample of students in other (non-condom) schools before and after Seattle’s diffusion; they
strikingly find a statistically significant and economically large decrease in condom use following
diffusion. They hypothesize that this decrease might be driven in part by the fact that condoms in
Seattle were provided in vending machines and baskets (i.e., without mandatory counseling), so that
staff in health centers might have responded to this form of condom access by shifting focus to
other behaviors, causing unexpected changes in adolescent contraceptive use.
Opponents of school condom distribution programs argue that the programs condone
sexual activity and may therefore increase it. The majority of the empirical evidence on this question
finds that condom programs did not increase teen sexual activity; examples include Martinez-Donate
et al. (2004), Blake et al. (2003), and even the above Kirby et al. (1999). Wretzel et al. (2011) show
that a condom availability program lowered STI rates in one school district.
However, nearly all of this work exploring the effects of condom distribution in schools has
suffered from a number of methodological challenges. A well-cited survey by Kirby (2002) notes
5

See the summary discussion of condom access programs in chapter 4, page 115.

5

that almost no prior study (1) utilizes both pre- and post-access data, (2) compares students gaining
access to other students, and (3) employs large sample sizes. One noted exception, Kirby et al.
(1999), uses data from 10 high schools, a sample that may be too small to study teen fertility.
Subsequent work (e.g., Martinez-Donate et al., 2004; Blake et al., 2003) has also faced these
challenges.
In this paper, we provide the first investigation on the effects of school condom distribution
on fertility using a rigorous identification strategy and data on condom access programs and teen
births from across the country. We describe these data next.
B. Data on Condom Programs
Using Samuels and Smith (1993), Kirby and Brown (1996), and Johnson (1998) as starting
points, and supplementing these sources with popular-press coverage, we collected information on
condom distribution programs implemented in the 1980s and early 1990s. This gave us a list of
districts with programs making condoms available to schools. We included any district where (a) we
had documentation of a district condom access program (b) there was information about whether
counseling was required by the district (c) there was information about whether the program was
district wide, and, if it was not district wide, which schools participated, and (d) there was clear
information available about when the program began. Several districts which had condom programs
were dropped from our analysis because they lacked some of this information. 6
Table 1 lists the districts we identify as districts implementing a condom access program
during our period of study. The list includes 22 districts in 12 states (including DC) with a total of
484 affected schools (we discuss this number of schools momentarily). The list shows that most
programs were implemented in 1992 or 1993. About two-thirds of the programs feature mandatory
counseling. Appendix Table 1 shows how the programs varied along other dimensions, including
6

Many of the programs we lost were in the state of Massachusetts. In the fall of 1991, the Massachusetts Department
of Education suggested that schools consider making condoms available to students. Many of the schools and districts
in the state did (Nealon, 1993), but in several instances we were unable to locate clear information on the details of a
particular program. Programs where the exact timing of implementation was unclear included the programs in Chelsea
(MA), Dade County (FL), Hatfield (MA), and Jackson Public School District (MS). Places where we had clear
information about the timing of a program but lacked other information included Martha's Vineyard (MA), Palm Beach
(FL), Portsmouth (MA), and Somerville (MA). Places dropped because it was unclear which schools or clinics
participated include Dallas (TX), Little Rock (AR), and Chicago Public Schools (IL). The Gadsden County School
District (FL) could not be matched to the birth certificate dataset as the county's population was too small for inclusion
in the data. These districts were excluded from the analysis, although fortunately this still leaves us with the vast
majority of students and counties in the country.

6

the presence of an opt-in/out policy and whether students were charged for condoms.
Given that we compiled our list well after these programs were introduced, there might be a
concern that we have missed a large number of programs. Fortunately, this does not appear to be
the case. In 1995–just after the explosion of condom access programs–Kirby and Brown undertook
a national survey of school condom-access programs. They identified a total of 421 schools with
programs, a number quite comparable to the number we identify. 7 Our count of the number of
districts that required counseling also matches the numbers in their survey (see Table 2 in their
paper). This gives us confidence that our efforts to collect information have been acceptably
thorough. To the extent that we miss programs and thus misclassify a treatment county as a control
county, our estimates will be biased towards zero.
While Table 1 shows that condom access programs were in both large school districts and
small school districts all over the country, the table also shows that programs were primarily located
in the northeast and the west. Table 2 shows that the districts introducing condom programs
differed in other ways as well—they had slightly higher teen birth rates in 1990 than other districts,
were more populous, had a lower fraction white, and higher per-capita income. The adopting
districts may also have differed in other harder-to-observe ways. One might thus ask why some
districts adopted condom access.
As we have mentioned, these programs were an effort to reduce the spread of AIDS and
other sexually transmitted infections. But, of course, communities with especially strong concerns
about AIDS might have different populations of students than other districts, as Table 2 confirms.
We have several responses to this observation. First, the nature of our identification strategy
involves comparing changes over time in fertility between condom-adopting communities and other
communities so that persistent differences across communities should not confound the analysis.
Next, it is possible that divergent trends in outcomes between communities could lead to changes in
fertility between communities even absent the adoption of condom programs. For example, it could
be that changes in teen birth rates lead to condom programs being introduced, rather than the other
way around. Fortunately, all of the national results below include controls for such trends and our
findings are robust (as we show) to either parsimonious or more aggressive trend controls; and we
present both simple and more sophisticated evidence indicating that reverse causality is not driving
7

We would like to have used their original data for our study. We contacted these authors, and we appreciated their
cooperation with us, but unfortunately (albeit understandably) it appears that the original data they collected cannot be
located.

7

the results.
One might wonder whether communities fighting AIDS through condom programs might
also choose to fight AIDS in a variety of other ways. Examples could include sexuality and HIV
education programs and curricula such as Project IMPACT in NYC (Liebermann, Gray, Wier,
Fiorentino, and Maloney, 2000) or the Reducing the Risk program or the SNAPP programs used in
California (Kirby, Barth, Leland and Fetro, 1991; Kirby, Korpi, Adivi, Weissman, 1997); holistic
after-school programs such as the Children’s Aid Society-Carrera after-school program (Philliber,
Kaye, Herrling, and West, 2002); and community initiatives outside of schools such as the
RESPECT project in Philadelphia (Huges, Furstenberg, and Teitler, 1995) or the service-based Teen
Outreach Program used in various cities (Allen, Philliber, Herrling, Kuperminc, 1997). Kirby (2001)
provides a survey of these and other programs devoted to adolescent sexuality in the 1980s and
1990s. While these programs used various strategies and presented differing content to adolescents,
he finds that the vast amount of evidence suggests that these programs typically lowered or had no
effect on most measures of adolescent sexuality. Several studies specifically consider teen pregnancy
as an outcome, and here again most available evidence suggests that these either lowered teen
pregnancy or had no effect. 8
Such coincidental efforts would thus be expected to work against our conclusion that school
condom distribution programs increased birth rates. Indeed, of the anti-HIV procedures considered
by schools in the early 1990s, condoms were uniquely singled out for their potential to
unintentionally raise fertility rates (Rafferty and Radosh, 2000; Blake et al., 2003). However, we
investigate this concern in two ways. First, we test for changes in the birth rate just before a
community adopts condom access in schools. Clear drops in teen pregnancy in treatment
communities observed a year or two before condom access would be a signal that these
communities may be aggressively fighting AIDS in a variety of ways—for example, with staterecommended or required AIDS education programs. This is a plausible scenario (which, again
would likely work against our finding below) as at least some anti-AIDS programs could have
predated the early-1990s rise of condom use (Kirby and Coyle, 1997). But consistent evidence that
the changes in fertility—and especially increases in fertility—coincide with the years of condom
The majority of these programs promoted abstinence as the best method for avoiding STIs and unplanned
pregnancies. One possibility is that it was the “mixed-message” of both introducing condoms while focusing education
efforts on abstinence that led to the increase in teen pregnancy that we find. Given that sex education in the United
States is still primarily abstinence-based, our results could still be relevant today if this were the case.
8

8

diffusion would be difficult to reconcile with this story.
Additionally, in some specifications we control for the birth rate among women age 20-24.
These women would have been subject to many of the same public health efforts to address the
AIDS epidemic, but should not have been as affected by condom distribution in schools. This
strategy also helps us address concerns that the intensity of the crack epidemic may have been
correlated with condom access programs, as women 20-24 would also have been exposed to the
arrival of crack. We would have liked to have included controls for crack in our main specifications,
but were not able to find annual measures at the county level for our sample. We have replicated
our results for a subset of cities for which we have information on the arrival of crack from Evans,
Garthwaite, and Moore (2012), and our results are robust to the inclusion of these controls.
III. Estimation
In order to identify the effect of school condom access programs on teen fertility, we
employ a framework that exploits within- and across-county variation in teens’ exposure to these
programs. While the condom-program information is available at the school or district level, the
national birth outcome data we will use in our analysis is available at the county level. As we
describe in more detail below, our measure of treatment will be the fraction of high-school-aged
women in each county attending a school with a condom program. 9
We estimate equations of the form:
=
lbrct d Condomct + b X ct + θ c + θ t + Tc + ε ct
where lbrct is the log of the live birth rate for women age 15 to 19 in county c and year of conception t
(discussed in more detail below). The variable Condomct measures the fraction of high-school-age
teens in the county who were in schools with a condom access program; this will exploit variation in
the relative magnitude of diffusion across affected counties as compared to simply using a dummy
variable for whether any student in a county gains condom access. The numerator is the size of the
student population in schools with a program, taken from the 1990 Common Core of Education.
We use the 1990 population to avoid concerns about student migration into or out of a public

9

There were 22 affected districts in 21 counties. New York City Public School District covers five counties, while eight
Massachusetts districts are housed within five counties and three school districts are housed within Los Angeles County.
Our data include a school’s district and county, and so we can identify schools in districts with condoms and also the
county where these schools are located. Thus our measure of diffusion can accommodate both several districts within a
county and districts spanning multiple counties.

9

school district in response to a program's introduction. 10 The denominator is the county population
of 15-18 year olds in 1990, taken from the 1990 Census. For counties with a condom program, this
variable has a mean of 0.37 and a standard deviation of 0.29. The matrix Xct includes controls for
per-capita county income, per-capita Medicaid payments, and per-capita state unemployment
insurance compensation (all from the BEA), total county population in levels and logs, the fraction
of the county population that is Hispanic, the fraction white, the fraction black, the fraction under
18, the fraction poor and under 18, and the fraction over age 65 (from decennial censuses and
linearly interpolated across years). The terms θc and θt represent county and year dummies,
respectively, and Tc represents a set of county-specific time trends.
Annual county-level birth rates are constructed from the National Center for Health
Statistics’ Natality Detail Files, from 1982 to 2000. 11 The data provide records for all births in the 50
U.S. states and the District of Columbia, with the exception of a few states that report 50% of births
prior to 1985. 12 Each record contains detailed information on the mother, father, and baby. Data
used in this study include the mother’s age and county of residence. County of residence is available
for counties with populations greater than 100,000; thus, our group of control counties will be
counties with populations greater than 100,000 that did not see condom diffusion). Only one
district condom program, in Gadsden county (FL), was dropped because it could not be matched to
our birth data. Our estimates include 396 counties in total.
We use these data to construct the numerator for the birth rates, which is the number of
births to women ages 15 to 19 that were conceived in a given county and year. 13 Month of
conception is estimated using birth certificate data on month of birth and gestation. The
denominator for the birth rate is the population of women ages 15 to 19 in each county, taken from

10

Seattle is a noteworthy district where several schools began distributing condoms in 1993 and more followed in 1995.
In this case we adjust the number of students affected over time. Thus, in the year 1995 we increase the estimated
fraction of students in Seattle given condom access using the enrollment information from 1990. There are two other
counties (Middlesex, MA; and Worcester, MA), where we make similar adjustments as the number of districts in the
county with condom access changed over time.
11 We choose this time frame to allow for the identification of pre- and post-trends; in results not shown here we have
reproduced Table 3 for alternative sample periods. When later years of the sample are dropped (1997-2000), the results
unsurprisingly become more sensitive to the choice of functional form for the county-specific time trends—while we
still observe positive effects on fertility, the results are only statistically significant when quadratic trends are used. When
we also drop earlier years (1982-1986), only the linear specification is statistically significant.
12 For 50% sampling states, each observation is doubled.
13
We use the 15 to 19 range because our interest is in how condom programs affect teen births, and also because
women in this range (or their partners) would likely have been affected by school-based programs. Below, we reproduce
our results using one-year age intervals.

10

the 1990 census population count data. 14 The mean birth rate to women 15 to 19 in our sample,
using this method of constructing birth rates, is 54 births per 1000 women. We also construct (a)
the birth rate to women 20 to 24 years old and (b) age-specific birth rates for young women for use
in alternative specifications. The dependent variable for our regressions is the log of the birth rate. 15
The key coefficient in equation (1) is δ, which could be interpreted as showing the
proportional change in the birth rate from a county going from no students having condom access
in schools to all students having condom access in schools. Some specifications will alter (1) to
include births to women ages 20 to 24.
IV. Results
Before presenting estimates of equation (1), we first consider a simplified investigation of
our data. For each of our “treatment” counties implementing a school condom program, we
construct a birth ratio equal to the births for women ages 15-19 conceived in year t over births to
women ages 20-24 conceived in t . Figure 1 shows the average value of this ratio across counties
beginning 5 years before condom access occurs in a county through 5 years after access occurs (year
zero is thus the year a program was implemented). The figure shows a prominent and persistent
break from trend exactly at the time a condom access program is introduced. Going from one
period before a condom program to one period after, the figure indicates a county will on average
see about 5 additional children born to teenagers for every 100 children born to women ages 20 to
24, about a 10 percent increase. The figure shows no evidence of a pre-existing change in relative
fertility between these two groups in the years immediately preceding diffusion.
While simple and striking, Figure 1 fails to account for changes in teen births in other
communities and does not include any controls. Table 3 presents regression estimates of equation
(1) that address these issues. All regressions are weighted by the number of women ages 15 to 19 in
a county in 1990. Standard errors are clustered by county. The year a program is introduced is
dropped from the regression. The table shows estimates of δ, the coefficient for the variable
measuring the fraction of high-school aged teens in a county exposed to a district condom access
Redoing our estimates using annual SEER population counts produces qualitatively similar results.
Our focus is on live births given the important (and earlier-mentioned) policy concerns related to teen childbearing.
But one might wonder if condom access could impact other outcomes, such as abortion. We know of no reliable data
on the universe of abortions to women by age group and county across years. However, if diffusion caused unwanted
pregnancies and this led to a rise not only in the birth rate (as we find) but also in abortions, then the results below
would represent underestimates of the effect of diffusion on unwanted pregnancies.

14

15

11

program. Note that the source of identification that distinguishes treatment group and control
group differs between the regression results and the figure. The figure compares adolescent women
to slightly older women within the treatment counties, before and after diffusion. The regressions
will compare adolescent women in treatment counties to adolescent women in control counties.
However, the results of the regressions are similar to those in the figure. The baseline result
in column 1 indicates that in-school-condom access increases teen births; the coefficient suggests
that if a county went from no access to access for the entire high-school-age population, the birth
rate among women 15 to 19 would increase by about 12 percent (we discuss the magnitude of this
effect more below). The next two columns present results using quadratic (column 2) and cubic
(column 3) county-specific trends, rather than linear. The estimates are robust to these alternatives
and the results do not appear to be driven by pre-existing, or differential, trends. Column 4 presents
another investigation of this possibility by including a variable measuring diffusion two years in the
future. If the inclusion of this variable dramatically weakened the “true” diffusion variable, this
would indicate that communities adopted condom programs following changes in birth rates (rather
than the other way around). But the main result is comparable to before; the future-diffusion
coefficient is small and insignificant, and the regression along with Figure 1 indicates that preceding
increases in birth rates are not driving the estimates.
The last column revisits Figure 1 by including logged births to women 20-24 as a control on
the right hand side; the specification is thus a generalization of a regression using, in the spirit of
Figure 1, a ratio of birth rates for women 15-19 over women 20-24 (where here the specification
allows the coefficient on births to women 20 to 24 to vary, rather than forcing it to be unity). But
despite this generalization, and the different nature of identification here, the implied effect of 0.100
is close to before. The results of Table 3 thus indicate that condom access programs increase teen
births, and that these estimates are not driven by pre-existing trends. 16 The coefficients imply that
full diffusion would lead to 10 to 12 percent more births to women ages 15 to 19, or about 5 or 6
additional births per 1000 women off a mean birth rate of 54 per 1000. Since the average program
covered about one-third of the teenage women in the county, the typical program led to an

16

We also explore estimates using birth rates in levels, rather than logs. Using levels typically gives qualitatively similar
results to those shown here. The baseline estimate in Table 2 in levels yields a coefficient of 0.55 [se = 0.30], implying a
proportional effect of about 10 percent, which is comparable to the effects in Table 2.

12

additional 2 births per 1,000 teenage women. 17
Table 4 presents results where births for older women are now modeled not as a control but
rather as a dependent variable. Each coefficient in columns 2 and 3 comes from a separate
regression. In each regression, the dependent variable is the logged birth rate for women of a
particular age or age group. The first row repeats the results from Table 3; the second row shows
results for women ages 20 to 24. The results indicate that condom access leads to significant
increases in the teen birth rate but is unrelated to changes in the birth rate for slightly older women.
Our data also allow us to consider births for individual years of age. The rest of Table 4
present results by individual age at birth for ages 15 to 21. As before diffusion measures condom
access at the estimated time of conception, while the groups are identified by age at birth, so that the
diffusion coefficient for (e.g.) 19 year olds illustrates how the birth rate for 19-year-old women (who
are generally too old to attend high school) changes depending on whether these women had
school-condom access at the time of conception (which would typically be when these women were
18 years old, and potentially still in school). The results show strong and significant effects for the
middle age groups. 18 Further, the estimates become insignificant as women age out of high school,
providing evidence that the impacts of school diffusion are limited to women of high-school-going
age.
The appendix also shows two additional results. First, Appendix Table 2 gives results
dropping each treatment county one-by-one, showing that the main result is not driven by any
particular county. Next, Appendix Figure 1 provides a robustness test where we take the diffusion
profile for each of our 22 treatment counties, and, without replacement, randomly assign the
treatment profile to another of the 396 counties in the data. We then estimate the diffusion
coefficient generated from this random assignment exercise 1,000 times using the baseline
specification in Table 3, and provide a histogram of the resulting distribution in the figure. As
expected, the distribution is centered around zero and symmetric, and the actual coefficient value
falls in the 99th percentile of the distribution.

17

These estimates assume that there is no “spillover” from condom access in one district to other teens in a county. If
there is spillover, than our measure of diffusion is too small, and the implied effect is too big. In a hypothetical extreme
case of full spillover, where one district in a county offering condoms means all high-school-aged teens in a county have
access (including unenrolled teens), a dummy variable for access would be appropriate. Redoing the baseline estimate
using a dummy variable accordingly produces a smaller coefficient of 0.035 [se = 0.22].
18
Results using birth rates in levels give effects similar to the level effects suggested here, although the estimates are
sometimes less precise when quadratic or cubic trends are used.

13

V. Contextual Factors and Channels
Our finding of an increase in fertility in response to improved access to contraception
contrasts with the great majority of the literature on the effects of other contraceptive methods.
While our results may be surprising given this context, social scientists and policy-makers alike have
long raised this possibility for condoms. One possible story, of course, is that condom provision
condoned or otherwise encouraged risky sexual behavior. 19 While the literature on this topic has
certain flaws noted earlier, we note that there is essentially unanimity in the absence of support for
this explanation. We discuss this possibility more below.
A second possible explanation for our fertility results is that school condom programs may
have increased failure rates by encouraging substitution from other types of contraception, a
possibility raised by Blake et al. (2003). There are two types of women who could be marginal in the
decision between the condom and another method. First, sexually active teens who had been using
a method such as the Pill could switch to the now freely-available condom. Second, young women
who have never used any method (perhaps initiating intercourse for the first time) could choose to
adopt the condom rather than another method. As condoms have high failure rates relative to most
other contraception, this could cause an increase in teen pregnancy and births. Ott et al. (2002)
document that teenage women rarely combine condoms with other methods of contraception, but
instead “trade off between hormonal contraceptives and condoms according to partner type and
perceived risk.” Kearney and Levine (2015) also document that dual-use of contraception was much
lower in the mid 1990s than in the late 2000s.
As a back-of-the envelope take on whether this channel could plausibly account for these
results, suppose that condom use partially crowded out use of oral contraception. Based on a
pregnancy risk for condoms of 18% within the first year of typical use (for all women) versus 9% for
the Pill, and assuming continued use for a year (although the percent of women continuing condom
use is lower than that for the Pill), then about 5 teenage girls out of 100 using the condom instead of
the pill could be sufficient to explain the increase in births we see in Table 2. (The risk rates are
from Trussell, 2011). This calculation is intentionally simple and ignores other potential channels.
But this calculation indicates that even if condom programs had negligible changes on sexual activity

Arcidacono, Khwaja, and Lijing (2012) develop a dynamic discrete-choice model in which access to contraception
decreases fertility in the short run but increases it in the long run through habit persistence. Since we document shortrun impacts here, this is likely a less-relevant channel for our estimates.
19

14

overall, a modest crowd-out effect would be sufficient to produce the findings here. We again
discuss this channel more below.
A third potential explanation for a positive fertility effect is raised by the Kirby et al. (1999)
study. This study, which is noteworthy given its use of (a) a relatively large number of schools in the
treatment group, (b) a nationally-based sample of control schools, (c) data both pre- and postintervention, and (d) data on both condom and other contraceptive use, found that condom use fell
with diffusion. To explain this result, the authors note that condoms in their setting were provided
without mandatory counseling (in baskets), and that this provision without counseling may have
created an unexpected effect wherein counselors or other health-center officials responded to
condom provision by turning their attention away from promoting condom use. This shift in
attention, aside from any substitution effect, may have impacted the quality and quantity of teen
contraceptive use. Programs without mandated counseling thus may have created a moral hazard
problem in that they unintentionally disincentivized school personnel from promoting contraceptive
use or other conduct discouraging conception. 20
The Kirby et al. study thus highlights the potentially critical role of contextual factors such as
mandatory counseling. In addition to the potential for moral hazard, mandatory counseling (or
“counseling” for short) could alter the effects of condoms in other ways. Because counseling
programs commonly promote abstinence and other safe sexual practices, counseling might
discourage risky sexual activity that otherwise would be condoned by the presence of condoms in
schools (or at least educate students on how to use condoms effectively or promote the use of dual
methods). 21 In this case, fertility increases would be driven by schools offering condoms without
counseling. Also, if condom distribution raises fertility by generating substitution away from
effective but relatively costly options like the Pill, we might expect to see less of this substitutionbased fertility increase in districts with mandated counseling if counseling increases the effort cost of
acquiring condoms. This again would lead to higher fertility in non-counseling settings. On the
other hand, if counseling emphasized the effectiveness of condoms in protecting against STIs, we
School condom programs could also generate this type of moral-hazard problem among personnel at neighborhood
clinics or other community agencies.
21 As discussed earlier, the evidence on the effects of sex education programs is mixed, but some programs have been
shown to decrease risky sexual behaviors (Kirby, 2001; Toups and Holmes, 2002; Kirby et al. 2007). We also note that
individual counseling to teenagers who are proactively trying to obtain condoms may work differently from other
curriculum-based interventions. Kirby (2007, chapter 8) reviews several studies on teenage reproductive-health programs
in clinics. He concludes that research is “remarkably” consistent in documenting the potential positive effects of
individualized counseling programs in promoting sexual health.
20

15

could see more substitution towards condoms and therefore more teen pregnancy in districts with
counseling.
In Table 5 we explore the role of mandatory counseling in our results by including (a) a
variable measuring diffusion among counties housing any condom program where counseling was
mandated, and set to zero otherwise (that is, we interact our continuous diffusion variable with a
dummy for whether a county housed any condom program mandating counseling), and (b) a similar
variable measuring diffusion when counseling was not mandated and set to zero otherwise. 22 There
are a number of both types of county. 23 The first column in Table 5 redoes the baseline estimate
from Table 3, but interacts the treatment effect with a pair of dummy variables for (a) whether a
county housed a counseling condom program and (b) whether a county housed a non-counseling
condom program. Column 1 uses linear trends, column 2 adds quadratic trends. The results in the
two columns indicate that the teen birth rate significantly increased when condoms were introduced
without mandated counseling, but decreased when counseling was mandated. The effects are large in
magnitude–indeed, somewhat larger (in absolute value) than the baseline effects shown in Table 3
earlier. The bottom of the table includes F statistics from Wald tests that the two coefficients on
condom access are equal; the hypothesis that the coefficients are equal (that is, the hypothesis that
condom access has the same fertility impact in both counseling and non-counseling communities) is
rejected at the 1 percent level. The results indicate that the increase in fertility observed earlier was
driven by counties where counseling was not mandated.
The next two columns include the 20-to-24 year-old birth rate in each county as a control, so
that the effect of condom programs can be identified from variation between each age group and
each type of program. As before, counties without counseling see an increase in the teen birth rate.
Looking at counties with counseling, however, the effect on the teen birth rate is notably smaller
The method of condom distribution can be “bundled” with the counseling requirement. Distribution is more likely to
be handled by a nurse or other health professional in counseling districts, and less likely to be done with a basket or
vending machine. Given the belief at the time of the potential importance of counseling, the relatively small number of
basket-or-vending-machine-based programs, the different roles counseling could have in understanding mechanisms, the
availability of data on counseling mandates, and the policy relevance of this aspect of diffusion, we focus on counseling
here.
23
See Table 1 for how counties are classified. We code Los Angeles as non-counseling as its two non-counseling
districts (Los Angeles Unified and Santa Monica Unified) are much larger than its counseling district (Culver City
Unified). Also, two other counties housing counseling programs also housed programs without counseling (Middlesex
and Worcester); simply dropping Los Angeles, Middlesex, and Worcester from the sample yields similar results to those
here. We code San Francisco as a counseling county based on the discussion in Asimov (1992b), although the (pre
adoption) comments in Asimov (1991) suggest counseling may have varied. Recoding San Francisco as non-counseling
produces similar results. Results using levels rather than logs are also qualitatively similar.
22

16

than before and is now statistically insignificant. However, despite the lack of precision, the
coefficients continue to suggest an economically significant difference in the effects of condom
access across the two types of counties, and again a Wald test of the hypothesis of equality of the
coefficients is rejected in both column 3 and column 4 at the 5-percent level.
These regressions impose the restriction that the right-hand side controls in the regressions
impact teen fertility in similar ways across counties. But if among counties with condom access
programs there is some other important characteristic which generates variation in birth rates, and
this characteristic differs between counties with access and other counties, then the variation
observed between counseling and non-counseling might be driven not by the presence of
counseling, but rather might reflect variation along this other characteristic. The last two columns
investigate this possibility by redoing the estimates in columns 3 and 4, but here, the right-hand-side
covariates in Xct from equation (1) are interacted with a dummy for whether a county ever houses a
condom-access program. Changes in either coefficient would be evidence that the differential
behavior of a particular type of county could in part stem from differential responses to the other
covariates. In fact, that is not the case. The precision of the estimates (and the Wald statistics) is
somewhat lower, which is unsurprising as the set of covariates now includes additional regressors
that are mechanically correlated with the treatment variables. 24 But this notwithstanding, the
estimates are close to those in columns (3) and (4). 25
Figure 2 presents further evidence on the role of counseling. The figure shows county-bycounty estimates of condom diffusion, grouped by counseling status. Each point in the figure is
from a separate regression. Each regression is based on column 2 in Table 3, except that only a
single treatment county is included. 26 Since the estimated effects are off of a small base and will be
identified by comparing responses in a single county to the control group, we report results from the
16 regressions that use treatment counties with more than 10,000 females ages 15 to 19 in 1990. The
dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.
The picture shows a remarkably consistent pattern where every large treatment county
One might wonder about whether the additional interacted covariates are themselves typically significant. Of the 22
additional covariates in columns 5 and 6 in the Table (11 in each regression), none are significant in both regressions and
in fact only three are statistically significant at the 10 percent level (that is, p < 0.10), and none are significant at the 5
percent level (p < 0.05) or better.
25 One could also apply this robustness test to the baseline regressions earlier that do not disaggregate counties by
counseling. Doing so produces qualitatively similar results; for example adding these interaction terms to the estimate in
column 2 of Table 3 produces a coefficient of 0.088 [se = 0.058]
26 Using column 1 in Table 3 produces similar results.
24

17

lacking counseling sees an increase in fertility following diffusion (although in Bronx and Kings
counties the coefficients are insignificant, with confidence intervals of [-0.06, 0.09] & [-0.004, 0.13],
respectively). Clearly, the results for non-counseling counties are not driven by any one county. Also
following the earlier results, the counseling estimates are suggestive of a decline in fertility on
average but are noisier, with one county (New Haven) even suggesting a large (but imprecisely
estimated) increase. As before the picture shows evidence of increases in birth rates in noncounseling counties, and less-robust evidence of declines for counseling counties.
Table 6 gives a final account of the robustness of this result. The estimates in Table 6
address the concern that there may be heterogeneity within diffusing counties that impacts the
efficacy of condom programs. For example, perhaps wealthy counties gaining condoms responded
differently than poorer counties, and perhaps wealthy counties were more likely to adopt counseling.
In that case, the results of Table 5 might confound the differential effect of counseling with the
differential effect of income. The first column in the table repeats the baseline regression in Table 5.
In the next column of Table 6, a new regressor is added that interacts the diffusion covariate with a
dummy for whether or not a county has above-average per-capita income (where the average is
calculated only among diffusing counties). If the variation found in Table 5 is driven not by
counseling itself, but rather reflects the fact that high income counties respond to condoms
differently, then the inclusion of this new interaction term could substantially alter the estimates.
(Note that a below-average interaction term cannot be included, as it would be collinear with the
other three diffusion variables.) In fact, the new coefficient is small and insignificant and the other
coefficients are unchanged, suggesting that the variation between counseling and non-counseling
counties in the baseline estimates was not an artifact of constraining richer counties gaining
condoms to have similar effects as poorer counties. The rest of the table confirms this result using
interactions with population size and race—the variation in efficacy appears to be driven by
counseling, rather than some other characteristic of counties. As in Table 5, results with quadratic
trends are similar but the significance of counseling estimates can be lower, while in this case the
non-counseling estimates are more robust (results with these additional controls are reported below
the table).
The evidence clearly suggests that counseling matters. However, several of our proposed
mechanisms are consistent with these results. For example, counseling might discourage risky sexual
behavior otherwise encouraged by diffusion; or, even if risky sexual behavior were unchanged,
18

counseling might mitigate the substitution-between-contraception story mentioned earlier (e.g., by
educating students about dual-use). If one had data on teen sexual activity, one could look at this as
an outcome variable to further explore why fertility increased and why it did so differentially by
counseling status. Unfortunately, we were unable to find a data set that measured sexual activity or
contraceptive use in this time period with usable geographic variation. 27 Instead, we consider this
possibility by using STI rates as an outcome variable.
Our data are from the Centers for Disease Control’s Sexually Transmitted Disease
Surveillance Reports from 1989 to 1999. Data are available by gender for cities with populations
over 200,000. The rate of STIs can serve as a proxy for risky sexual behavior. Furthermore, results
on condom diffusion and STIs are of interest independent from questions on teen fertility, given
that the main objective of the programs was to reduce these infections. Because we only have data
for cities over 200,000, more than half of the treatment districts were dropped from this analysis. 28
We also have to map city-level STI data to counties, which we do by using the measure of program
access for the county in which the city is primarily located. In the end, we have 59 cities including
seven cities from treatment counties. 29
STI data are available for syphilis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia, but data on chlamydia are
missing for several cities until the early 1990s and syphilis has a very low incidence (gonorrhea rates
among women were more than ten times higher than rates of syphilis during this period).
Gonorrhea symptoms also typically appear sooner than syphilis symptoms. We therefore focus on
results for gonorrhea; results are presented in Table 7. First, we show that we are able to replicate
our results for teen births using this more restricted sample. Using the same specification as in
column 1 of Table 3, the coefficient on the treatment measure is 0.123 (se=0.038), compared to
0.127 (se=0.047), and we continue to find that the positive fertility effect is driven by counties
without counseling. 30 In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is the log of the gonorrhea rate
27 For example, the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System does not begin until 1991, the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System only surveys women and men age 18 and older, and the National Survey of Family Growth is too
small given our requirements for geographic variation. We considered using birth certificate data on herpes cases among
teen mothers (the only sexually transmitted infection recorded on birth certificates), but unfortunately for our purposes,
the incidence of herpes on the birth certificates was too low to permit this analysis.
28
The smaller sample does allow us to use the Evans, Garthwaite, and Moore (2012) data to include controls for the
arrival of the crack epidemic.
29 The treatment cities with counseling are Philadelphia, Portland, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C. The treatment
cities without counseling are Los Angeles, New York City, and Seattle.
30 Results using quadratic trends are unsurprisingly less precise here given the smaller sample and time frame (this loss in
precision holds for both the fertility estimates and the STI estimates in the Table 7 sample).

19

for women. The coefficient on the treatment indicator is 0.747, which is statistically significant at
the 10% level. Given the incidence of gonorrhea among women, this corresponds to an additional
2.43 cases per 1,000 women. When we consider the effects of counseling and non-counseling
programs separately, we show that the effects are driven by the non-counseling programs. The
coefficient for counseling programs is 0.264 (se=0.495), while the coefficient for non-counseling
programs is 0.923 (se=0.384), and the null hypothesis that the coefficients are the same is rejected at
the 5% level.
These results suggest that risky sexual behavior may have increased in areas without
counseling programs. We do not see this in districts with required counseling, potentially because
counseling effectively discourages these behaviors or promotes effective use or dual-use. The results
also suggest that programs without counseling were unsuccessful in reducing the transmission of at
least one STI. However, we urge caution in interpreting these results. STI rates for cities are not
available by age, so we are unable to isolate the effects for teenagers or include the rates for other
age groups as a control. 31 As can be seen in Tables 3 and 5, the results for teen births were
attenuated when rates for women age 20-24 were included as a control. The results are also
imprecise given our low number of treatment cities, particularly when considering counseling (four
programs) and non-counseling (three programs) separately. Finally, because the STI series by
gender do not begin until 1989, we do not have a long pre-period for some of our treatment cities. 32
Overall, Tables 5 and 6 and Figure 2 show that the increase in teen fertility is driven by
counties where condoms are provided without mandatory counseling and that the fertility response
is significantly different in these counties compared to counties that mandated counseling. In fact,
the results suggest that programs with counseling may have seen no change or perhaps a decline in
teen fertility. Results using STI rates also indicate increases in these rates in places providing
condoms without counseling.
Taken together, what do our results and the existing literature suggest about the contexts
and channels that mediate the effects of condom access? Our simple back-of-the-envelope
calculation suggested that substitution to condoms from other contraception could drive our main
fertility results. We raised the possibility that this type of substitution (and thus the increase in
31 Teenagers do account for a significant portion of all gonorrhea cases. In 1995, the gonorrhea rate for women age 1519 was 839.7 per 100,000 women, which was the highest for any age group and six times higher than the overall rate of
139.6 (CDC 1996).
32 We have focused on rates for women, since our fertility measure is also constructed for women. We find no effects of
condom distribution programs on gonorrhea rates for men.

20

fertility) may have been greater in counseling districts if counseling promoted substitution by, for
example, emphasizing the effectiveness of condoms in preventing STIs. However, that would be
inconsistent with the results in Tables 5 and 6 and Figure 2. Those results are consistent with a story
in which counseling prevented substitution toward condoms by raising the effort cost of obtaining
them, but this story is not consistent with our STI estimates in Table 7 (since we do not see a
relative increase in STI rates in counseling counties) or the findings in the Kirby et al. (1999) paper.
A story in which condom programs encourage substitution toward condoms, but counseling leads
toward more reliable condom use or to the use of dual methods, is consistent with our differential
fertility and STI results, but not with the Kirby et al. (1999) paper. Similarly, an increase in sexual
activity prompted by condom access would fit our differential fertility and STI results if counseling
discouraged risky sexual behavior, but is less compatible with extant research.
Finally, it may be that programs without counseling introduced an unexpected effect wherein
school officials or counselors responded to condom provision by turning their attention away from
issues surrounding teen pregnancy—the possibility raised by Kirby et al. (1999) in considering their
own paradoxical finding of access lowering condom use. This explanation is consistent with (a)
most prior studies on condom diffusion and the constancy of sexual behavior, (b) our fertility
results, (c) the differential effect by counseling that we identify here, (d) the STI results, and (e) the
paradoxical results in the Kirby et al. study; in fact it is the only channel to fit with all these pieces of
evidence.
While this explanation fits with the available evidence, we caution that not all of this
evidence is necessarily sacrosanct. For example, as noted before, prior work on condoms and sexual
activity has faced methodological limitations, and the STI results above should be taken as
suggestive. Further, it is certainly possible that some of these different channels may play a role
simultaneously—they are not mutually exclusive. But clearly the results above indicate that
contextual factors are of first-order importance when providing condoms—a critically important
result both for policy makers and for scholars interested in considering how historic episodes of
contraception diffusion (e.g., the Pill) may extend to different eras and contexts.
VI. Conclusions
In this paper, we show that the introduction of condom access programs in schools is
associated with an increase in teenage fertility. This result is driven by schools that provided
21

condoms without mandating counseling. The effects are reasonably large in magnitude and contrast
with the implications of prior work on access to oral contraception in the 1960s and 1970s and on
more recent work on the effects of LARCs. As Martha Bailey (2006) points out in her paper on the
long-term effects of oral contraception, the Pill was revolutionary because it 1) was used by women,
2) was not used at the time of intercourse, and 3) was much more effective than previous methods.
The LARCs studied by Lindo and Packham (2015) also have these three features, and are in fact
even more effective than the Pill. The condom, on the other hand, has none of these advantages.
In this sense, our estimates help show how the likely effects of contraception access vary across the
full range of available methods.
One shortcoming of our paper is the lack of stronger evidence on mechanisms, due to the
lack of adequate data on sexual behaviors at the county level for these cohorts. However, our
results on fertility are well-identified and robust, and are an important finding even in the absence of
clear evidence on mechanisms. Our results also provide clear evidence against the adequacy of some
explanations, such as a substitution-of-contraception story, to fully explain the increase in fertility
here. Further, evidence that contraception diffusion in this case increased fertility is of clear
importance. If one were to simply consult the prior literature on other methods of contraception to
make policy recommendations about condom distribution programs, one would find little reason to
be concerned about unintended effects on teen pregnancy. Our paper suggests that this could be
very misleading.
We also recognize that we have estimated the effects of condom distribution in schools in a
specific context—primarily large urban districts, in the early 1990s. The time period is especially
relevant. Overall, teenagers today are less likely to engage in sexual activity and are less likely to
become pregnant. Teens also have increased access to a wider range of contraceptives, and are
more likely to use dual methods (Kearney and Levine 2015). Condom distribution programs in
today’s schools may not have the same effects as those shown here. Policy makers should therefore
use caution in generalizing our results to predict the effects of condom distribution programs for
today’s teens. But again, our results suggest they should be equally cautious about generalizing
results from an existing literature that is based on access to other methods of contraception.
Our work also informs the discussion about the causes of the notable decline in teenage
childbearing during the 1990s. Several explanations for this decline have been proposed, including
incarceration (Mechoulan, 2011), welfare reform (Lopoo and DeLeire, 2006), pregnancy prevention
22

messaging campaigns (Martin et al., 2012) or the improving economy (Colen, Geronimus, Phipps,
2006; Arkes, and Klerman, 2009). Some observers, especially Santelli and Melnikas (2010) have
noted that the decline in teen fertility coincides with the rise of condom access, but their observation
goes no further than a discussion of overall trends. Our work shows that, in fact, condom access—
at least through schools—did not play a role in the decline in teen fertility in the 1990s.

23

References
Allen, Joseph, Susan Philliber, Scott Herrling, and Gabriel Kuperminc. 1997. “Preventing Teen
Pregnancy and Academic Failure: Experimental Evaluation of a Developmentally Based Approach,”
Child Development 68(4): 729-742.
American Academy of Pediatrics. 2013. “Condom Use by Adolescents,” Pediatrics 132(5): 973-981.
Ananat, Elizabeth, and Daniel Hungerman. 2012. “The Power of the Pill for the Next Generation:
Oral Contraception’s Effects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal and Child Characteristics.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 94: 37-51.
Arcidiacono, Peter, Ahmed Khwaja and Lijing Ouyang. 2012. “Habit Persistence and Teen Sex:
Could Increased Access to Contraception have Unintended Consequences for Teen Pregnancies?”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 30(2): 312-325.
Arkes, Jeremy, and Jacob Klerman. 2009. “Understanding the Link Between the Economy and
Teenage Sexual Behavior and Fertility Outcomes.” Journal of Population Economics 22: 517-536.
Ashcraft, Adam and Kevin Lang. 2006. “The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing.” NBER
Working Paper 12485.
Asimov, Nanette. 1991. “Free Condoms Distributed to SF Teenagers,” San Francisco Chronicle,
February 15.
Asimov, Nanette. 1992a. “Condom program starts May 4” San Francisco Chronicle, April 8.
Asimov, Nanette. 1992b. “Condoms Promised at All S. F. High Schools,” San Francisco Chronicle,
December 2.
Bailey, Martha J. 2006. ‘‘More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on
Women’s Life Cycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121: 289–320.
Banks, Sandy. 1991. “School Officials back Plan to Make Condoms Available,” Los Angeles Times,
September 27.
Bidgood, Jess. 2013. “Board to Vote on Condoms in Boston Schoos,” The New York Times, June
24

18.
Blake, Susan, Rebecca Ledsky, Carol Goodenow, Richard Sawyer, David Lohrmann, and Richard
Windsor. 2003. “Condom Availability Programs in Massachusetts High Schools: Relationships with
Condom Use and Sexual Behavior.” American Journal of Public Health 93: 955-962.
Boonstra, Heather. 2014. “What is Behind the Declines in Teen Pregnancy Rates?” Guttmacher Policy
Review 17(3): 15-21.
Brown, Nancy, Michelle Pennylegion, Pamela Hillard. 1997. “A Process Evaluation of Condom
Availability in the Seattle, Washington Public Schools.” Journal of School Health 67: 336-340.
Centers for Disease Control. 1996. Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance, 1995. Atlanta:
CDC.
Chicago Tribune. 2014. “CPS to Expand Free Condom Program to 24 Schools.” March 19.
Cohen, Deborah A. 1999. “Condom Availability for HIV/STD Prevention.” AIDS Patient Care
and STDs, 13(12), 731-737.
Colen, Cynthia G. Arline Geronimus, Maureen Phipps. 2006. “Getting a Piece of the Pie? The
Economic Boom of the 1990s and Declining Teen Birth Rates in the United States.” Social Science &
Medicine 63: 1531-1545.
Durrance, Christine. 2013. “The Effects of Increased Access to Emergency Contraception on
Sexually Transmitted Disease and Abortion Rates.” Economic Inquiry 51(3): 1682-1695.
Evans, William, Craig Garthwaite, and Timothy J. Moore. 2012. “The White/Black Educational
Gap, Stalled Progress, and the Long Term Consequences of the Emergence of Crack Cocaine
Markets.” NBER Working Paper 18437.
Furstenberg, Frank. 1976. “The Social Consequences of Teenage Parenthood.” Family Planning
Perspectives 8(4): 148-151, 151-164.
Furstenberg, Frank, Lynne Geitz, Julien Teitler and Christopher Weiss. 1997. “Does Condom
Availability Make a Difference? An Evaluation of Philadelphia’s Health Resource Centers.” Family
Planning Perspectives 29: 123-127.
25

Geronimus, Arline and Sanders Korenman. 1992. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen
Childbearing Reconsidered.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4): 1187-1214.
Girma, Sourafel and David Paton. 2011. “The Impact of Emergency Birth Control on Teen
Pregnancy and STIs.” Journal of Health Economics, 30(2): 373-380.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2002. ‘‘The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,’’ Journal of Political Economy 110: 730–770.
Goldstein, Amy, and Steve Bates. 1993. “Alexandrea to Fight AIDS with Condoms in School;
Grades 9-12 First to be Targeted in VA,” The Washington Post, June 19.
Guldi, Melanie. 2008. ‘‘Fertility Effects of Abortion and Birth Control Pill Access for Minors,’’
Demography 45: 817–827.
Hoffman, Saul D. 1998. “Teenage Childbearing Is Not So Bad After All…Or Is It? A Review of
the New Literature.” Family Planning Perspectives 30(5): 236-239+243.
Hughes, Mary Elizabeth, Frank F. Furstenberg Jr., and Julien O. Teitler. 1995. “The Impact of an
Increase in Family Planning Services on the Teenage Population of Philadelphia,” Family Planning
Perspectives 27(2): 60-65+78.
Johnson, Johan. 1998. A Battle of Values: The Condom Controversy in New York City Public
Schools. PhD Dissertation.
Joyce, Theodore, Robert Kaestner, and Silvie Colman. 2006. “Changes in Abortions and Births and
the Texas Parental Notification Law.” New England Journal of Medicine, 354(10): 1031-1038.
Kahn, Joan, and Kay Anderson. 1992. “Intergenerational Patterns of Teenage Fertility,” Demography
29(1): 39-57.
Kearney, Melissa, and Phillip Levine. 2012. “Why is the Teen Birth Rate in the United States so
High and Why Does it Matter?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(2): 141-166.
Kearney, Melissa, and Phillip Levine. 2015. “Investigating Recent Trends in the U.S. Teen Birth
Rate,” Journal of Health Economics 41: 15-29.
26

Kirby, Douglas. 2001. Emerging Answers: Research Findings on Programs to Reduce Teen
Pregnancy. Washington DC: the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy.
Kirby, Douglas. 2002. “The Impacts of Schools and School Programs Upon Adolescent Sexual
Behavior,” in The Journal of Sex Research 39(1): 27-33.
Kirby, Douglas, 2007. Emerging Answers: Research Findings on Programs to Reduce Teen
Pregnancy and Sexually Transmitted Diseases. Washington DC: The National Campaign to Prevent
Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy.
Kirby, Douglas, Richard P. Barth, Nancy Leland and Joyce V. Fetro. 1991. “Reducing the Risk:
Impact of a New Curriculum on Sexual Risk-Taking,” Family Planning Perspectives 23(6): 253-263.
Kirby, Douglas, Nancy Brener, Nancy Brown, Nancy Peterfreund, Pamela Hillard, and Ron Harrist.
1999. “The Impact of Condom Distribution in Seattle Schools on Sexual Behavior and Condom
Use.” American Journal of Public Health 89: 182-187.
Kirby, Douglas, and Nancy Brown. 1996. “Condom Availability Programs in U.S. Schools.” Family
Planning Perspectives 28: 196-202.
Kirby, Douglas, and Karin Coyle. 1997. “School-Based Programs to Reduce Sexual Risk-Taking
Behavior.” Children and Youth Services Review, 19(5): 415-436.
Kirby, Douglas, Meg Korpi, Carla Adivi, and Jennifer Weissman. 1997. “An Impact Evaluation of
Project SNAPP: An AIDs and Pregnancy Prevention Middle School Program,” AIDS Education and
Prevention 9(1, Suppl): 44-61.
Kirby, D. B., Laris, B.A., Rolleri, L.A. 2007. “Sex and HIV Education Programs: Their Impact on
Sexual behaviors of Young People Throught the World.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 40(3): 2062107.
Leitman, Robert, Erich Kramer, and Humphrey Taylor. 1993. “A Survey of Condom Programs,”
in: Sarah Samuels and Mark Smith (eds.) Condoms in the Schools. Menlo Park CA: Kaiser Family
Foundation.
Lewin, Tamar. 1991. “Studies on Teen-Age Sex Cloud Condom Debate,” The New York Times,
27

February 8.
Lieberman, Lisa, Heather Gray, Megan Wier, Renee Fiorentino, and Patricia Maloney. 2000.
“Long-Term Outcomes of an Abstinence-Based, Small-Group Pregnancy Prevention Program in
Newy York City Schools.” Family Planning Perspectives 32(5): 237-245.
Lindo, Jason, and Analisa Packham. 2015. “How Much Can Expanding Access to Long-Acting
Reversible Contraceptives Reduce Teen Birth Rates?” NBER Working Paper 21275.
Lopoo, Leonard M., and Thomas DeLeire. 2006. “Did Welfare Reform Influence the Fertility of
Young Teens?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 25: 275-298.
Lovenheim, Michael, Randall Reback, and Leigh Wedenoja. 2014. “How Does Access to Health
Care Affect Health and Education? Evidence from School-based Health Center Openings,”
Working paper.
Martin, Joyce A., Brady E. Hamilton, Stephanie J. Ventura, Michelle J. K. Osterman, Elizabeth C.
Wilson, and T. J. Mathews. 2012. “Births: Final Data for 2010.” National Vital Statistics Reports,
61(1). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Martinez-Donate, Melbourne Hovell, Jennifer Zellner, Carol Sipan, Elaine Blumberg, and Claudia
Carrizosa. 2004. “Evaluation of Two School Based HIV Prevention Interventions in the Border
City of Tijuana, Mexico.” The Journal of Sex Research 41: 267-278.
Mechoulan, Stéphane. 2011. “The External Effects of Black Male Incarceration on Black Females.”
Journal of Labor Economics 29: 1-35.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 2014. “ Contraceptive Services with a Focus on
Young People up to the Age of 25,” NICE Public Health Guidance 51, accessed on 12/12/2014 at
guidance.nice.org.uk/ph51 .
Nealon, Patricia. 1993. “Condoms: A Fact of Life in Many Mass. Schools,” Boston Globe, March 5.
Ott, Mary A., Nancy E. Adler, Susan G. Millstein, Jeanne M. Tschann, and Jonathan M. Ellen. 2002.
“The trade-off between hormonal contraceptives and condoms among adolescents.” Perspectives on
sexual and reproductive health, 6-14.
28

Pantano, Juan. 2007. ‘‘Unwanted Fertility, Contraceptive Technology, and Crime: Exploiting a
Natural Experiment in Access to the Pill.’’ California Center for Population Research working paper
no. 028-07
Paton, David. 2002. “The Economics of Family Planning and Underage Conceptions.” Journal of
Health Economics 21(2): 207-225.
Philliber, Susan, Jacqueline Williams Kaye, Scott Herrling and Emily West. 2002. “Preventing
Pregnancy and Improving Health Care Access Among Teenagers: An Evaluation of the Children’s
Aid Society-Carrera Program.” Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 34(5): 224-251.
Rafferty, Yvonne and Alice Radosh. 2000. “AIDS Prevention and Condom Availability in an
Urban School System: Facilitating Factors and Programme Challenges,” Health Education Journal 59:
50-68.
Ramos, P. S. 1996. “The condom controversy in the public schools: Respecting a minor's right of
privacy.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review: 149-192.
Samuels, Sarah and Mark Smith, eds. 1993. Condoms in the Schools. Menlo Park CA: Kaiser
Family Foundation.
Santelli, John and Andrea Melnikas. 2010. “Teen Fertility in Transition: Recent and Historic Trends
in the United States.” Annual Review of Public Health 31: 371-383.
Schuster, Mark, Robert Bell, Sandra Berry, and David Kanouse. 1998. “Impact of a High School
Condom Availability Program on Sexual Attitudes and Behaviors,” Family Planning Perspectives 30(2):
67-88.
Tan, Sandra. 2014. “’Condom Availability’ Weighed for High Schools.” Buffalo News, October 1.
Taylor, Paul. 1991. “High School Clinic: Case Study in Sexual risk; In Rural Florida Town, Impact
of Offering Free Condoms to Teenagers Remains Unclear,” The Washington Post, March 10.
Tillman, Leroy. 1992. “Washington, D.C., to Give Condoms in Schools to Fight AIDS,”
Associated Press Report, May 12.

29

Toups, M. L. and Holmes, W. R. 2002. “Effectiveness of Abstinence-Based Sex Education
Curricula: A Review.” Counseling and Values, 46: 237–240.
Trussell, James. 1976. “Economic Consequences of Teenage Childbearing.” Family Planning
Perspectives, 8(4): 184-190.
Trussell, James. 2011. “Contraceptive Efficacy.” In Hatcher, Trussell, Nelson, Cates, Kowal,
Policar (eds) Contraceptive Technology: Twentieth Revised Edition. New York NY: Ardent Media.
Wretzel, Sharon, Paul Visintainer, and Laura Pinkston Koenigs. 2011. “Condom Availability
Program in an Inner City Public School: Effect on the Rates of Gonorrhea and Chlamydia
Infection,” Journal of Adolescent Health 49: 324-326.

30

Table 1: School Districts with Condom Diffusion Programs
District
County
Students (1990)
Adams County School District 14
Adams, CO
1,196
Baltimore City Public School System
Baltimore City, MD
4,431
Cambridge Public School District
Middlesex, MA
2,078
Bronx, Kings, New York,
New York City Public Schools
250,033
Queens, Richmond, NY
Brookline Public School District
Norfolk, MA
1,793
Culver City Unified School District
Los Angeles, CA
1,325
District of Columbia Public Schools
Washington, D.C.
14,275
Falmouth School District
Barnstable, MA
1,292
LA-Unified School District
Los Angeles, CA
163,435
Lincoln-Sudbury School District
Middlesex, MA
931
Newton Public Schools
Middlesex, MA
2,668
Portland Public Schools
Multnomah, OR
12,776
Portsmouth School District
Rockingham, NH
1,024
Public schools of Northborough and
Worcester, MA
854
Southborough
San Francisco Unified School District
San Francisco, CA
19,589
Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District
Los Angeles, CA
2,779
School District of Philadelphia
Philadelphia, PA
19,443
Alexandria City Public Schools
Alexandria, VA
2,551
Amherst-Pelham Regional Public School District Hampshire, MA
1,004
New Haven Public Schools
New Haven, CT
1,470
Seattle Public School District
King, WA
10,854
Wachusett Regional School District
Worcester, MA
1,530

Year
1989
1990
1990

Counseling
Yes
Yes
Yes

1991

No

1992
1992
1992
1992
1992
1992
1992
1992
1992

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

1992

Yes

1992*
1992
1992‡
1993
1993
1993
1993†
1993

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No

Districts dropped because we could not could not verify program details (often on which schools adopted programs or had access to clinics with condoms): Chelsea (MA), Dade
County (FL), Hatfield (MA), Jackson Public School District (MS), Martha's Vineyard (MA), Palm Beach (FL), Portsmouth (MA), Somerville (MA), Dallas (TX), Little Rock (AR), and
Chicago Public Schools (IL). The last column in the table denotes whether a district mandated counseling when condoms were distributed. ‡There was a pilot program with several
schools in December of 1991. *1991 for Balboa High, 1992 for others. †Condoms were diffused over time to schools in Seattle from 1993 to 1995. The third column gives the
number of high school students in the district in 1990.

31

Table 2: Pre-Treatment Summary Statistics for Treatment and Control Counties
Counties that Adopt a
Condom Program
53.1
[29.2]

Counties that Do Not
Adopt a Condom
Program
52.6
[21.2]

40,954
[62,234]

12,404
[11,833]

Fraction of Population Under 18

0.24
[0.04]

0.28
[0.03]

Fraction of Population Over 65

0.13
[0.03]

0.11
[0.04]

Fraction White

0.73
[0.22]

0.85
[0.12]

Per-capita Income

28,149
[7,570]

23,644
[4,714]

168

3000

Birthrate of Women 15 to 19
(births per 1000 women)
Number of Women 15 to 19

Number of Observations

Table reports simple county-level averages for counties that ever adopt a school condom program
(column 1) and counties that do not adopt a condom program (column 2). Standard deviations are
in brackets. The number of county/year observations is given below the table. The data are for
means for the years 1982 to 1989.

32

Table 3: Condom Diffusion Programs and Teen Fertility
Quadratic
With 20-24
Linear Trends
Trends
Cubic Trends
Lead Effect
Birth rate
(1)
(1)
(1)
(4)
(5)
Diffusion
0.127
0.096
0.122
0.112
0.100
[0.047]
[0.043]
[0.037]
[0.056]
[0.042]
Lead of Diffusion
0.01
[0.031]
RHS Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County FEs
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County Trends
Linear
Quadratic
Cubic
Linear
Linear
Observations
7,498
7,498
7,498
6,706
7,498
R-squared
0.982
0.988
0.991
0.983
0.986
The dependent variable is the log of the birth rate among women ages 15 to19. Diffusion measures the fraction of
high-school students in a county exposed to a district-wide condom access program. The mean of the dependent
variable (in levels) is 5.4. Among counties with a condom program, the mean level of diffusion is 0.37 and the
standard deviation is 0.29. Standard errors are clustered by county. The regressions include 396 counties covering
conceptions from 1982 through 2000. Month of conception is estimated by subtracting the reported gestation
period from the birth month. Right-hand side controls include per-capital income, per capita Medicaid transfers,
state unemployment insurance compensation per capita, total population in levels and logs, the fraction of the
population Hispanic, fraction white, fraction under 18, the fraction poor and under 18, and the fraction over age 65.
Regressions are weighted by the population of women ages 15 to 19 as of 1990. The year that a condom program is
adopted in a county is dropped from the sample. The last column adds the birth rate for women ages 20 to 24, in
logs, as a control variable.

33

Table 4: Results Across Age Groups

Diffusion: 15-to-19 Birth Rate

Mean Birth
Rate (Levels)
(1)
5.41

Linear
Trends
(2)
0.127
[0.047]

Quadratic
Trends
(3)
0.096
[0.043]

Diffusion: 20-to-24 Birth Rate

10.38

0.045
[0.055]

-0.004
[0.052]

Diffusion: 15-Year-old-Birth Rate

1.65

0.078
[0.057]

0.028
[0.074]

Diffusion: 16-Year-old-Birth Rate

3.47

0.045
[0.057]

0.014
[0.064]

Diffusion: 17-Year-old-Birth Rate

5.50

0.092
[0.061]

0.088
[0.052]

Diffusion: 18-Year-old-Birth Rate

7.26

0.151
[0.054]

0.127
[0.053]

Diffusion: 19-Year-old-Birth Rate

8.18

0.146
[0.055]

0.096
[0.047]

Diffusion: 20-Year-old-Birth Rate

9.07

0.132
[0.069]

0.057
[0.057]

Diffusion: 21-Year-old-Birth Rate

10.00

0.103
0.032
[0.084]
[0.081]
Column 1 shows the mean birth rate (in levels) for the relevant age group across the 7,498 countyby-year observations in the sample. Each coefficient in columns 2 and 3 comes from a separate
regression. In each regression, the dependent variable is the logged birth rate for women of a
particular age. All regressions include the right-hand side controls from earlier tables, along with
county fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by county are in brackets.

34

Table 5: Counseling and Non-Counseling Diffusion

Diffusion without Counseling
Diffusion with Counseling

(1)
0.181
[0.034]
-0.193
[0.103]

Baseline

(2)
0.141
[0.034]
-0.145
[0.085]

With 20-24 Birth Rate
(3)
(4)
0.128
0.129
[0.043]
[0.028]
-0.064
-0.074
[0.077]
[0.076]

With 20-24 Birth Rate
& RHS Interactions
(5)
(6)
0.119
0.191
[0.059]
[0.052]
-0.048
-0.034
[0.094]
[0.094]

County Trends
Linear
Quadratic
Linear
Quadratic
Linear
Quadratic
Test of Equality F(1, 395)
12.87
10.57
5.00
6.63
2.61
5.87
Observations
7,498
7,498
7,498
7,498
7,498
7,498
R-squared
0.982
0.988
0.986
0.989
0.986
0.990
The dependent variable is the log of the birth rate among women ages 15 to19; in each column both coefficients are from the
same regression. All regressions include the right-hand side controls described under Table 2, and year and county fixed effects.
Regressions are weighted by the population of women ages 15 to 19 as of 1990. There are 12 counties with districts
implementing counseling programs and there are 9 counties with programs that do not mandate counseling (see text). The Fstatistic is from a Wald test of equality of the diffusion effect for the counties with counseling and the counties without
counseling; the 1-percent critical value of the F(1, 395) distribution is 6.70 and the 10-percent critical value is 2.72. In columns 3
and 4, the logged birth rate for ages 20-24 is included as a control. In the last two columns, a dummy for being a treatment
county is interacted with the right-hand side controls listed in the text under equation (1) and below Table 3.

35

Table 6: Counseling and Non-Counseling with Other Interacted Covariates
Per-Capita
Percent
Percent
Baseline
Income
Population
Hispanic
White
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(6)
Diffusion without Counseling
0.181
0.19
0.163
0.150
0.177
[0.034]
[0.037]
[0.029]
[0.045]
[0.034]
Diffusion with Counseling
Diffusion × Above-Average
Covariate Value

Percent
Black
(5)
0.204
[0.044]

-0.193
[0.103]

-0.159
[0.118]

-0.195
[0.103]

-0.204
[0.107]

-0.208
[0.095]

-0.178
[0.097]

-

-0.041
[0.044]

0.01
[0.025]

0.023
[0.033]

0.069
[0.092]

-0.023
[0.030]

Test of Equality F(1, 395)
12.95
9.16
12.39
15.55
15.72
14.88
Observations
7,498
7,498
7,498
7,498
7,498
7,498
R-squared
0.982
0.982
0.982
0.982
0.982
0.982
The dependent variable is the log of the birth rate among women ages 15 to19; in each column all coefficients are from the same
regression. All regressions include the right-hand side controls described under Table 2, year dummies, county fixed effects, and
linear trends. Regressions are weighted by the population of women ages 15 to 19 as of 1990. The F-statistic is from a Wald test
of equality of the diffusion effect for the counties with counseling and the counties without counseling; the 1-percent critical
value of the F(1, 395) distribution is 6.70 and the 10-percent critical value is 2.72. The first column repeats the estimates from
column (1) in Table 5. The next column adds a variable that interacts a dummy for condom diffusion with a dummy for
whether a county has above-average per-capita income (where the average is calculated among diffusion counties only); each
subsequent column adds in a similar interacted term using a different covariate. Redoing column 2 with quadratic trends yields
non-counseling and counseling coefficients of 0.15 [0.04] and -0.12 [0.10]; for column 3, 0.15 [0.04] and -0.14 [0.09]; for column
4, 0.15 [0.06] and -0.14 [0.10]; for column 5, 0.13 [0.04] and -0.17 [0.07]; and for column 6, 0.25 [0.05] and -0.08 [0.07].

36

Table 7: Condom Diffusion Programs and Gonorrhea Rates for Women
Log Gonorrhea
Rate (Women)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Diffusion
0.123
0.747
[0.386]
[0.038]
0.141
0.923
Diffusion without
Counseling
[0.034]
[0.384]
Diffusion with
0.074
0.264
Counseling
[0.063]
[0.495]
RHS Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
City FEs
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
629
629
629
629
For columns (1)-(3), the dependent variable is the log of the birth rate among
women ages 15 to19. For coumns (4)-(6), the dependent variable is the log of the
gonorrhea rate for women. Standard errors are clustered by county. The sample is
limited to 59 cities with populations over 200,000, with available data from the CDC
on the gonorrhea rates for women between 1989 and 1999. Cities are assigned the
treatment status of the county in which they are primarily located. Right-hand side
controls include a linear city-specific time trend, the number of years that crack
cocaine has been in the city and its square, per-capita income, per capita Medicaid
transfers, state unemployment insurance compensation per capita, total population in
levels and logs, the fraction of the population Hispanic, fraction white, fraction
under 18, the fraction poor and under 18, and the fraction over age 65. Regressions
are weighted by the population of women ages 15 to 19 as of 1990.
Log Birth Rate

37

Figure 1:
Ratio of Teen Fertility to Fertility of Women 20-24,
in Years Before and After School Distribution Program
0.5

0.48

0.46

0.44

0.42

0.4

0.38

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

The figure shows relative teen fertiliy for the counties implementing a school condom program. The ratio is defined as
the total number of births conceived by women ages 15 to 19 in the county and year, divided by the total number of
births conceived by women ages 20 to 24. This ratio is averaged across the counties annually starting 5 years before
diffusion through 5 years after diffusion (year zero is the year a program was implemented).

38

Figure 2:
Results for Treatment Counties by Counseling Status
1.4
1.2

No-Counseling

Counseling

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
-1.2
-1.4

Each point in the above picture is a coefficient from a separate regression. Each regression redoes the estimate in column 2 of Table 2
except that all the treatment counties except for one are dropped from the sample; the diffusion coefficient is then reported. The above
picture shows the results from regressions keeping a treatment county with at least 10,000 females ages 15 to 19 in 1990; several of the
smaller counties are omitted (see text). The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals for each coefficient.
39

Appendix Table 1: Districts with Condom Diffusion Programs
Opt-In/
Basket/
District
Year
Opt-Out? Vending Machine
Adams County School District 14
1989
Yes
Baltimore City Public School System
1990
No
Cambridge Public School District
1990
?
New York City Public Schools
1991
1994+
Brookline Public School District
1992
?
Culver City Unified School District
1992
No
District of Columbia Public Schools
1992
No
Falmouth School District
1992
No
Yes
LA-Unified School District
1992
Yes
Lincoln-Sudbury School District
1992
?
Yes
Newton Public Schools
1992
?
Portland Public Schools
1992
?
Portsmouth School District
1992
Yes
Public Schools of Northborough and
1992
?
Southborough
San Fransisco Unified School District
1992*
Yes
Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District
1992
No
‡
School District of Philadelphia
1992
Yes
Alexandria City Public Schools
1993
?
Amherst-Pelham Regional Public School
1993
?
District
New Haven Public Schools
1993
?
†
Seattle Public School District
1993
No
Yes
Wachusett Regional School District
1993
No
Yes
‡
Philadelphia had a pilot program with several schools in December of 1991.
*1991 for Balboa High, 1992 for others
†
Condoms were diffused over time to schools in Seattle from 1993 to 1995
The last column denotes districts where we have documentation that diffusion was provided via
condoms or vending machines.

40

Appendix Table 2: Dropping Each County
County Excluded:

Trends

All Counties
(baseline)

0.128
[0.045]

Q.
Trends
0.097
[0.041]

County Excluded:

Trends

Worcester

0.127
[0.047]

Q.
Trends
0.095
[0.043]

Los Angeles

0.133
[0.059]
0.137
[0.046]

0.084
[0.048]
0.106
[0.042]

Rockingham

0.126
[0.047]
0.133
[0.050]

0.095
[0.043]
0.102
[0.046]

Adams

0.127
[0.047]

0.096
[0.043]

Kings

0.123
[0.056]

0.101
[0.049]

New Haven

0.126
[0.047]
0.151
[0.037]

0.094
[0.043]
0.115
[0.037]

New York

0.103
[0.054]
0.100
[0.050]

0.076
[0.051]
0.071
[0.046]

Baltimore City

0.130
[0.046]

0.098
[0.043]

Richmond

0.128
[0.048]

0.095
[0.044]

Barnstable

0.128
[0.047]
0.126
[0.047]

0.096
[0.043]
0.094
[0.043]

Multnomah

0.127
[0.048]
0.131
[0.046]

0.094
[0.044]
0.102
[0.042]

0.128
[0.046]

0.096
[0.043]

Alexandria

0.129
[0.047]

0.098
[0.043]

San Francisco

Washington

Hampshire
Middlesex

Bronx

Queens

Philadelphia

Norfolk

King
0.127
0.096
0.129
0.095
[0.047]
[0.043]
[0.047]
[0.043]
Each Coefficient is from a separate regression and shows the diffusion coefficient estimates from
the specification in columns 1 and 2, Table 2, which a particular treatment county omitted from the
sample. The original baseline estimate is given in the first row on the left.

41

Appendix Figure 1: Distributin of Betas from Permutation Test
160

Actual Coefficient

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-0.14

-0.12

-0.1

-0.08

-0.06

-0.04

-0.02

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

The picture shows the frequency distribution of 1,000 "placebo" regressions. In each regression, the diffusion profile from 1982 to 2000
for each treatment county was randomly assigned, without replacement, to another county in the sample, the baseline regression was then
repeated where the real diffusion variable was replaced by this randomly generated variable. The coefficient from the actual diffusion is in
99th percentile of the above distribution.

49

