                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FINANCING DURABLE ASSETS

                                     Adriano A. Rampini

                                     Working Paper 22324
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22324


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2016




The author thanks Andy Abel, Hengjie Ai, Peter DeMarzo, Oliver Hart, Mauricio Larrain, S.
"Vish" Viswanathan, and seminar participants at the 2015 Finance Summit in Revelstoke, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Duke, the 2015 SED Annual Meeting, the Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond, Wisconsin, the 2015 OxFIT Conference, Columbia, MIT, UC Berkeley,
NYU, Northwestern, UCLA, and Georgetown for helpful comments. First draft: June 2015. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Adriano A. Rampini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Financing Durable Assets
Adriano A. Rampini
NBER Working Paper No. 22324
June 2016
JEL No. D24,D91,D92,E22,G32,O16

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effect of durability on the financing of durable assets. We show that more
durable assets require larger down payments of internal funds per unit of capital making them
harder to finance, because durability affects the price of an asset and hence the overall financing
need more than its collateral value. This insight has implications for the choice between new and
used capital, technology adoption, and the rent versus buy decision. Constrained borrowers
purchase used assets which are less durable than new assets and adopt less durable, low quality
assets, that are otherwise dominated technologies. More durable assets are more likely to be
rented given their larger financing need. Legal enforcement affects trade and technology
adoption; weak legal enforcement economies are net importers of used assets and invest a larger
fraction in less durable, low quality assets. There is a critical distinction between the pledgeability
and durability of assets: pledgeability facilitates financing whereas the net effect of durability is
to impede financing.


Adriano A. Rampini
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
rampini@duke.edu
1       Introduction
Durability is an essential feature of capital.1 Durability varies dramatically across types
of assets; the depreciation rates vary from as low as 1% for new residential structures to
as high as 31% for computing equipment.2 How does durability affect financing?
    It is tempting to conjecture that durable assets can serve as collateral facilitating
financing. Indeed, this is one of the conclusion of the influential paper by Hart and
Moore (1994) who write (page 860):
        “Intuitively, as the assets become more durable, they provide the creditor with
        the security to wait longer before being repaid. ... And hence the debtor need
        not set aside as much of his initial borrowing to finance early debt repayments,
        leaving more to finance the initial investment.”
To the contrary, we argue that durable assets are harder to finance. What the argument
above overlooks is that durable assets are also more expensive, exactly because they are
more durable. We show that this effect dominates. On the one hand, durability does
increase the resale value and hence the collateral value which supports more borrowing
consistent with the intuition above. But on the other hand, durability increases the price
of the asset and thus the financing need overall and indeed increases these by more. This
means that the down payment required for more durable assets is larger, making them
harder to finance. This result obtains as long as the resale value of capital cannot be
fully pledged. If the collateral value can be fully pledged, then durability has no effect
on the ease of financing and is hence neutral. We do not assume that durable assets
are illiquid in any way, and in fact assume that there are frictionless markets for all real
assets; that said, we do of course assume that there are financial frictions in terms of
collateral constraints due to limited enforcement as otherwise the question of the ease of
financing would be moot.
    There is a critical distinction between the durability of assets and their pledgeability.
Durability affects both the collateral value and the price of the assets and hence the
    1
     Durable assets include private and government fixed assets and consumer durables. Fixed assets
comprise residential and non-residential structures and durable equipment. Consumer durables include
motor vehicles and parts, furnishings and durable household equipment, recreational goods and vehicles,
and other durable goods. Private and government fixed assets (not including intellectual property) and
consumer durables are $54 trillion and net of government fixed assets are $41 trillion in 2012 according to
the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Report on Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods for 2003-2012 ;
the net worth of households and not for profit organizations is $70 trillion in 2012 according to the Flow
of Funds. Thus, tangible durable assets comprise as much as 72% of the aggregate capital stock. We
focus on durable assets that are tangible although our arguments apply to intangible assets as well.
   2
     See Table 3 in Fraumeni (1997) for the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ depreciation rate estimates.


                                                    1
overall financing need, and the net effect of durability is to impede financing. In contrast,
pledgeability increases the extent to which assets support borrowing and unambiguously
facilitates financing. Hart and Moore’s (1994) results should be interpreted in terms of
the effect of pledgeability, as they consider the effect of the liquidation value of assets, not
in terms of durability. Our model distinguishes between durability and pledgeability and
predicts that durability impedes financing rather than facilitating it as they conclude.
In our view, the prediction of our model is empirically more plausible in terms of its
implications for the choice between new and used assets, technology adoption, and the
rent vs. buy decision.
     We consider an economy with limited enforcement without exclusion in which firms
can default and divert cash flows and a fraction of durable assets and cannot be excluded
from markets following default as in Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013, 2016).3 For
this class of economies, they show that the optimal dynamic contract can be implemented
with one-period ahead complete markets subject to collateral constraints. The collateral
constraints imply that firms’ promised repayments cannot exceed a specific fraction of
the resale value of capital. These collateral constraints are similar to the ones considered
by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), who build on Hart and Moore’s (1994) model of debt
repudiation, but Kiyotaki and Moore do not consider depreciation in their model.4
     We first consider an economy in which assets last for two periods, such that new assets
are durable whereas used assets are non-durable as they have only one period of useful
life left. Since used assets last for only one period their residual value at the end of the
period is zero and thus they cannot serve as collateral; thus, the firm has to pay the
entire price of used assets up front. In contrast, new assets can be sold as used assets at
the end of the period and have hence positive collateral value allowing firms to partially
finance new asset purchases by borrowing. This seems to suggest that new assets are
easier to finance than used assets. This is incorrect, however, as it misses the fact that
the price of new assets must be higher than the price of used assets precisely because new
assets last for two periods whereas used assets for only one. Indeed, the down payment
required to purchase a unit of new assets strictly exceeds the purchase price of a unit of
   3
     Limited enforcement is in a similar spirit to Kehoe and Levine (1993) except that we assume that
firms which default cannot be excluded from markets going forward whereas they assume that default
results in exclusion from intertemporal trade.
   4
     Bolton and Scharfstein (1990) and Hart and Moore (1998) consider the value of the threat of liqui-
dation in models with incomplete contracts; in both models, liquidation implies that borrowers cannot
operate subsequently, that is, are effectively excluded from markets going forward, unlike in our model.
Townsend (1979) and Holmström and Tirole (1997, 1998) model the limited pledgeability of cash flows
based on private information and moral hazard, respectively.



                                                   2
used assets, as long as the resale value cannot be fully pledged. A buyer of new assets has
to pay up front both the cost of using the assets for one period and the fraction of the
resale value that cannot be credibly pledged. This exceeds what a buyer of used assets
has to pay up front which is just the cost of using the assets for one period. Therefore,
constrained firms buy used assets which require fewer internal funds per unit of capital,
whereas unconstrained firms prefer to buy new assets (at least weakly) and sell them
when they are used, consistent with the data. The pricing of used assets in equilibrium
depends on whether the marginal investor in used assets is unconstrained or constrained;
in the latter case used capital trades at a premium and unconstrained firms strictly prefer
buying new assets. When economies differ in terms of legal enforcement, there is trade
in used capital across economies and weak legal enforcement economies are net importers
of used assets.
    We then show that the same basic insight obtains in an economy with standard neo-
classical capital and geometric depreciation. Holding the user cost of capital fixed, the
down payment per unit of capital is increasing in the durability of capital, that is, more
durable capital requires a larger down payment. If one were to hold the price of capital
fixed, one would come to the misleading, and opposite, conclusion that the down payment
for more durable capital is smaller, because the collateral value is higher; but proceeding
this way an increase in durability reduces the user cost making the capital cheaper at the
same time.
    Since durability impedes financing, financially constrained firms may adopt dominated
technologies, by investing in less durable capital that is of “low quality” in the sense that
it would be dominated in the absence of financial constraints. Less durable capital is
attractive to constrained firms because of the lower down payment required. In contrast
financially unconstrained firms invest in more durable capital only. A larger fraction of
investment by firms in economies with weak legal enforcement is in less durable, low
quality capital; that is, there is more adoption of dominated technologies when legal
enforcement is weak. Less durable capital is associated with smaller financing needs.
When different types of capital are imperfect substitutes, constrained firms substitute
away from more durable assets towards less durable assets and, for severely constrained
firms, the composition of investment is determined by the relative down payments.
    Examples of types of capital that differ in durability, with a more durable, more
costly variety and a less durable, less costly one, include brick vs. wood houses, reliable
vs. budget cars, and concrete vs. asphalt roads. In the household durable goods context,
the choice between durable boots and less durable, cheaper boots is vividly described




                                             3
in Pratchett (1993),5 and the choice between buying larger packages of storable goods
at bulk discounts and buying smaller packages more frequently is studied in Orhun and
Palazzolo (2016).6
    More durable assets are more likely to be rented given the larger financing need.
Renting or leasing, which we use as synonyms, means that the financier retains ownership
of the asset affording a repossession advantage as ownership is the exclusion of others from
use. This ease of repossession implies that by renting an asset out the owner can effectively
extend more credit than a secured lender can. The cost of renting is modeled simply as a
cost of monitoring to prevent abuse of the asset. More constrained firms thus rent assets
as Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2013) argue. Here we
show that constrained firms rent more durable assets such as structures first and that only
more severely constrained firms rent less durable assets such as equipment. Moreover,
our theory implies that the increase in durability of cars over the last few decades can
explain the increase in car leasing as well as the fact that it is predominantly new cars,
which are more durable, that are leased rather than used ones.
    Our theory predicts that financial constraints are especially consequential for invest-
ment in more durable assets. To the best of our knowledge, this basic prediction about
the relation between durability and financing has not been directly tested to date. Nor
have the predictions regarding the composition of investment in terms of durability across
economies with different legal enforcement been investigated empirically. That said, the
empirical evidence on investment in new and used capital and trade in used assets dis-
cussed below is consistent with the predictions of our theory.
    As mentioned above, the most closely related paper is Hart and Moore (1994) who
consider the effect of durability on financing, among other things, and conclude that
   5
      On page 32 of his novel, the author describes “Captain Samuel Vimes [the main character’s] ‘Boots’
theory of socioeconomic unfairness:” “The reason that the rich were so rich, Vimes reasoned, was because
they managed to spend less money.
   Take boots, for example. He earned thirty-eight dollars a month plus allowances. A really good pair
of leather boots cost fifty dollars. But an affordable pair of boots, which were sort of OK for a season or
two and then leaked like hell when the cardboard gave out, cost about ten dollars. Those were the kind
of boots Vimes always bought, and wore until the soles were so thin that he could tell where he was in
Ankh-Morpork on a foggy night by the feel of the cobbles.
   But the thing was that good boots lasted for years and years. A man who could afford fifty dollars
had a pair of boots that’d still be keeping his feet dry in ten years’ time, while a poor man who could
only afford cheap boots would have spent a hundred dollars on boots in the same time and would still
have wet feet.”
    6
      These authors find that low income households are less likely to buy toilet paper in bulk and also
buy on sale less often. The difference to high income households is smaller in the first week of the month,
suggesting that liquidity constraints play a key role.


                                                    4
“[i]f the assets become more durable . . . [t]he project is more likely to be undertaken”
(page 860). Their definition of durability is as follows (page 859): “We say that the
assets become longer lived, or more durable, if [the liquidation value] L(t) rises for all
0 ≤ t ≤ T .” By interpreting a higher liquidation value as higher durability, they do
not distinguish between pledgeability and durability. We argue that the liquidation value
should be interpreted as pledgeability, which facilitates financing in our model as well,
rather than as durability, which impedes financing in our view. Durability of assets in
our model is defined in terms of the depreciation rate, which affects the useful life of the
assets and hence both the value in use and the collateral value. In contrast, in Hart and
Moore’s (1994) definition durability only affects the collateral value and not the value in
use, which we think is a more appropriate definition for pledgeability than durability.
     Also closely related is Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007) who study the choice between new
and used capital. They argue that used capital is cheaper up front but requires ex-post
maintenance costs which makes used capital attractive for constrained borrowers in an
economy with collateral constraints. The durability of capital per se does not play a role
in their analysis.7
     A growing literature studies used capital markets empirically. Ramey and Shapiro
(2001) document that used capital sells at substantial discounts in data from aerospace
plant closings. Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007) show that smaller and more constrained
firms purchase substantially more used capital in U.S. census data on new and used
capital expenditures.8
     Several authors consider international trade in used capital. Sen (1962) considers dif-
ferences in the relative price of labor as an explanation for the fact that less developed
economies are net importers of used capital.9 Navaretti, Soloaga, and Takacs (2000)
show empirically that in less developed economies the share of used equipment imported
is higher. LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and the subsequent
literature study the variation in legal enforcement and protection of creditor rights across
countries and its economic consequences. Specifically, Benmelech and Bergman (2011)
   7
      Aghion, Angeletos, Banerjee, and Manova (2010) study a business cycle model with two technologies,
a one-period investment technology and a two-period investment technology. Their analysis focuses on
the implications of the difference in this time-to-build type feature rather than durability.
    8
      Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) show that trade in used capital, which is part of capital reallocation
which they define more broadly, is procyclical and provide a calibrated model with countercyclical real-
location frictions to match this basic fact. Lanteri (2016) shows that the relative price of used capital
is procyclical and proposes a model in which new and used capital are imperfect substitutes consistent
with this property.
    9
      Relatedly, Bond (1983) studies trade in used equipment in a model with heterogeneous firms which
differ in terms of factor prices and utilization rates.


                                                   5
find that weak legal enforcement is associated with both older aircraft and older tech-
nologies.
    Our model abstracts from several features of durable asset markets that have been
considered in the literature including adverse selection,10 illiquidity,11 and heterogeneity
across firms other than that induced by financial constraints.12 This allows us to focus
squarely on the effect of financial constraints in inducing a preference across assets which
differ in terms of their durability.
    Optimal durability is also analyzed in the literature on durable goods. Much of
this literature focuses on a monopolist’s choice of durability and argues that a monop-
olist has incentives to produce less durable goods than a competitive producer would,
a phenomenon at times referred to as planned obsolescence (see Waldman (2003) for a
comprehensive survey).13 In a seminal paper Coase (1972) argues that a durable-goods
monopolist faces a time inconsistency problem resulting in a complete loss of market power
and a competitive outcome.14 Coase (1972), as well as Bulow (1982) and Stokey (1981),
show that leasing or renting the durable goods avoids the time inconsistency problem
and allows the monopolist to retain market power. Bulow (1982, 1986) moreover shows
that, in the absence of rental markets, a monopolist may choose to produce less durable
goods than a competitive producer again in order to avoid Coasian dynamics.15 In these
  10
     Following Akerlof’s (1970) seminal study of the market for used cars, several authors have studied
adverse selection in the market for used durables. Bond (1982) finds no evidence that trucks that were
purchased used require more maintenance. Hendel and Lizzeri (1999a) consider trade in a durable goods
market with adverse selection and heterogenous consumers and show that trade never breaks down.
Hendel and Lizzeri (2002) argue that leasing ameliorates adverse selection in durable goods markets and
attribute the increase in car leasing over the last few decades to the increase in the durability of cars
which they argue aggravates adverse selection.
  11
     Gavazza (2011) shows that aircraft that trade in thinner markets are less liquid and Gavazza (2016)
studies the effect of trading frictions and the role of intermediaries in the market for used aircraft.
  12
     Stolyarov (2002) and Gavazza, Lizzeri, and Roketskiy (2014) study trade in used cars in a model
with transaction costs and consumers with heterogeneous utility from the service flow of durables.
  13
     An early literature making this case (including Martin (1962), Kleiman and Ophir (1966), Levhari
and Srinivasan (1969), and Schmalensee (1970)) is shown by Swan (1970, 1971, 1972) and Sieper and
Swan (1973) to be incorrect as the monopolist has the same incentives to minimize the cost of the
provision a given service flow as a competitive producer. Barro (1972) comes to a similar conclusion
although he also shows that if consumers are less patient than the monopolist, the monopolist may
choose lower durability. Schmalensee (1974) finds that with endogenous maintenance the monopolist
does distort durability and Rust (1986) shows that with endogenous scrappage the monopolist distorts
durability and derives conditions under which the monopolist produces goods of zero durability. Thus,
these authors resuscitate the conventional wisdom to some extent.
  14
     Kahn (1986) shows that with increasing marginal costs the monopolist asymptotically produces the
competitive amount but produces more slowly.
  15
     More recently, Waldman (1996) and Hendel and Lizzeri (1999b) find that monopolists may choose


                                                   6
theories, market power is therefore the raison d’être for durable goods of low durability
and rental markets for durables. In contrast, in our theory assets of low durability and
rental markets are an optimal response to financial constraints in a competitive model.
    Our model is also related to the literature on technology adoption. Chari and Hopen-
hayn (1991) show that new technologies are adopted slowly in an economy with vintage-
specific human capital and that economies continue to invest in older vintages. In our
model firms may choose to invest in less durable capital that would otherwise be dom-
inated since the lower durability makes this type of capital attractive due to financial
constraints even though different types of capital are perfect substitutes in production.
    Section 2 considers the choice between new, durable assets which last for two periods
and used, non-durable assets with only one period of useful life remaining. Trade in
used capital across economies with different legal enforcement is also analyzed. Section 3
studies the effect of durability in a neoclassical investment model in which the depreciation
rate varies across types of assets. Section 4 considers how durability affects the decision
to rent assets instead of buying them. Section 5 concludes. Throughout the paper we
focus on firms’ investment and financing decisions, but the same basic insights apply to
households’ choice of consumer durables, as discussed in Appendix A.


2     A model of durable asset financing
We analyze the effect of the durability of assets on financing in a model with collateral
constraints due to limited enforcement. In this section, we consider the case where new
assets last for two periods, that is, are durable, whereas used assets have only one period
of useful life remaining and are hence non-durable. Thus, firms have a choice between
new, durable assets and used, non-durable assets. We show that the purchases of durable
assets require more internal funds, despite the fact that their collateral value allows firms
to borrow against them, because durable assets are more expensive and hence have a
larger financing need. As a consequence, constrained firms buy non-durable assets, that
is, used assets, whereas well capitalized firms buy new assets which are more durable. We
also consider the pricing of used assets in equilibrium and the effect of legal enforcement
on trade in used capital across countries.
lower durability as a way to price discriminate between consumers in models with consumers with het-
erogeneous preferences for different vintages that are not perfect substitutes.




                                                 7
2.1     Environment
Consider an economy in discrete time with an infinite horizon. There is a continuum of
entrepreneurs, which we at times refer to simply as firms. In each period, measure ρ ∈
(0, 1) of new entrepreneurs are born and are endowed with net worth w0 . Entrepreneurs
survive to the next period with probability 1 − ρ and hence the measure of entrepreneurs
alive in every period is 1. Entrepreneurs are risk neutral and have preferences ∞        t
                                                                                 P
                                                                                    t=0 β dt
where dt is the dividend at time t and dt ≥ 0, that is, dividends are non-negative. We
assume that the entrepreneurs’ time preference discount factor is β̂ and let β ≡ β̂(1−ρ) ∈
(0, 1). There are two types of goods, output goods (or cash flows) and assets used for
production, which are described in more detail below; output goods are the numeraire.
    The economy has limited enforcement. Entrepreneurs can default on promises and
retain all their cash flows and a fraction 1 − θ of the durable assets where θ ∈ [0, 1).
Importantly, entrepreneurs cannot be excluded from borrowing and saving or the market
for durable and non-durable assets. Our model of limited enforcement is in the spirit of
Kehoe and Levine (1993) but we assume limited enforcement without exclusion whereas
they assume that default triggers exclusion from intertemporal markets.16 For our envi-
ronment, Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013, 2016) show that the optimal long-term
dynamic contract can be implemented with one-period ahead complete markets subject
to collateral constraints.17 This equivalent problem with collateral constraints is rather
tractable and the collateral constraints provide a straightforward decentralization of the
optimal contract.18
    New assets are durable and last for two periods. We denote the amount of new,
durable assets an entrepreneur purchases by kd and normalize the cost of producing new
assets to 1. Since assets last for two periods, there are also used assets in the economy
which have only one period of useful life left and are therefore non-durable. Denote the
amount of used, non-durable assets an entrepreneur purchases by knd . The price of used
assets q is determined in equilibrium. We assume that new, durable assets and used, non-
durable assets are perfect substitutes in production and assets of kd and knd this period
generate output Af (kd + knd ) next period where A is the total factor productivity and f
  16
     Chien and Lustig (2010) consider the asset pricing implications of limited enforcement without
exclusion in an endowment economy.
  17
     For simplicity, we consider an economy with deterministic productivity here and hence have markets
for one-period ahead collateralized debt, but our results on the effect of durability can be extended to
an environment with stochastic productivity along the lines of their model.
  18
     Our decentralization is in a similar spirit to the decentralization provided by Alvarez and Jermann
(2000) except that their solvency constraints are history dependent whereas the collateral constraints in
our model do not require history-dependence.


                                                   8
is strictly increasing and strictly concave.19 We study a stationary equilibrium in which
the price of used capital q and the interest rate on one-period loans R are constant. In
equilibrium, well capitalized entrepreneurs provide financing and hence the equilibrium
interest rate on one-period loans is R = β −1 , where R is the gross interest rate and we
define the net interest rate to be r ≡ R − 1.


2.2     Firm’s financing problem
We formulate the firm’s financing problem recursively. Given net worth w, the en-
trepreneur chooses current dividend d, investment in durable assets kd , investment in
used, that is, non-durable assets knd , borrowing b, and net worth next period w0 , to solve

                               v(w) ≡           max                d + βv(w0 )                      (1)
                                        d,kd ,knd ,b,w0 ∈R3+ ×R2


subject to the budget constraints for the current and next period

                                             w + b ≥ d + kd + qknd ,                                (2)
                             Af (kd + knd ) + qkd ≥ Rb + w0 ,                                       (3)

and the collateral constraint
                                              θqkd ≥ Rb.                                            (4)
The endogenous state variable is net worth and is defined as output plus the resale value
of durable assets minus the loan repayments, that is, w0 ≡ Af (kd + knd ) + qkd − Rb. The
budget constraint in the current period ensures that current net worth plus borrowing
covers the current dividend plus the cost of investment in new, durable assets and used,
non-durable assets. The budget constraint next period implies that output plus the resale
value of durable assets purchased this period can be spent on loan repayments or carried
over as net worth for the next period. The collateral constraint states that the firm can
borrow up to fraction θ of the resale value of the durable goods the household purchased.
As argued above, this constraint is induced by limited enforcement, as firms can abscond
with all cash flows and fraction 1 − θ of assets and cannot be excluded from financial or
real asset markets following default.
    We now characterize the firm’s problem. First, observe that the problem in (1) to
(4) defines a well-behaved dynamic program. The return function is (weakly) concave
and the constraint set convex. The operator defined by (1) to (4) satisfies Blackwell’s
  19
    The assumption that new and used units are perfect substitutes and that age or durability per se do
not play a role dates back to Wicksell (1934) (see Section 3.4 for the case with imperfect substitutes).


                                                     9
sufficient conditions, implying that there exists a unique value function v that solves the
firm’s problem. This value function is strictly increasing and (weakly) concave.
    Denote the multipliers on (2) and (3) by µ and βµ0 and on (4) by βλ0 and let ν, νd , and
νnd be the multipliers on the non-negativity constraints for d, kd , and knd , respectively.
The first-order conditions are
                           µ = 1 + ν,                                                                (5)
                           µ = βµ0 [Afk (kd + knd ) + q] + βλ0 θq + νd ,                             (6)
                         µq = βµ0 Afk (kd + knd ) + νnd ,                                            (7)
                           µ = µ0 + λ0 ,                                                             (8)
                          µ0 = vw (w0 ).                                                             (9)
The envelope condition implies that vw (w) = µ.


2.3     Durability, down payment, and financing need
Consider the minimal amount of net worth that the firm needs to purchase a unit of new,
durable assets, which we call the minimum down payment requirement for such assets.
When the collateral constraint binds, b = R−1 θqkd and so the minimal down payment
required per unit of new assets is
                                           ℘ ≡ 1 − R−1 θq.
In equilibrium, the down payment required per unit of new assets exceeds the price of
used capital, that is, ℘ > q, as otherwise new, durable assets would dominate purchasing
used, that is, non-durable assets.20 Why do new, durable assets require a larger down
payment? First, since used, non-durable assets have no resale value at the end of the
period, they do not support any borrowing and the firm has to pay the full price q up
front, that is, for non-durable assets the down payment equals the price. Thus, we can
define the user cost of non-durable assets und ≡ q. In contrast, new, durable assets do
support borrowing as their resale value at the end of the period as used assets is q and
the firm can pledge a fraction θ of that amount. However, and crucially, the price of new,
durable assets is of course higher, as the assets can be used for two periods. Moreover,
only a fraction of the resale value can be pledged and hence
                          ℘ = 1 − R−1 θq = (1 − R−1 q) + R−1 (1 − θ)q,                              (10)
  20
    Essentially, this is an implication of no arbitrage. If the down payment on new assets were less than
the price of used assets, buying a new unit instead of a used one would yield a positive payoff in the
current period and the firm would get an additional positive payoff in the amount of (1 − θ) times the
resale value of the new unit q, that is, (1 − θ)q, in the next period, an arbitrage.


                                                   10
           Table 1: Durability and Requirements of Internal Funds

                  Time                               t        t+1   t+2
                  Used, non-durable capital
                    Value                                      q     0
                    Collateral value                                 0
                    Borrowing                                  0
                    Internal funds required                    q
                  New, durable capital
                    Value                            1         q     0
                    Collateral value                          θq
                    Borrowing                      R−1 θq
                    Internal funds required      1 − R−1 θq



that is, the down payment required for durable assets comprises two components. The
first term on the right hand side can be interpreted as the user cost of durable assets for
an unconstrained firm, that is, ud ≡ 1 − R−1 q, as a unit of durable assets costs 1 to buy
but can be resold for q as used assets next period which an unconstrained firm discounts
at rate R−1 . The second term reflects the fact that the resale value can only partially
be pledged; the down payment includes 1 − θ of the present value of the resale value of
the used capital next period. The down payment for durable assets thus exceeds the user
cost of new, durable assets because the firm also has to finance out of internal funds the
fraction of the resale value it cannot pledge. Table 1 summarizes the financing need of
new, durable and used, non-durable assets. To deploy durable assets the firm has to come
up with not just the one-period user cost but also the fraction of the residual value that
cannot be pledged.
    To reiterate, durable assets require more internal funds (℘ > q) despite the firm’s
ability to borrow R−1 θq > 0 against their collateral value, since durable assets are more
expensive (1 > q) and hence have a larger financing need precisely because they are more
durable. We emphasize that the fact that the collateral value cannot be pledged fully,
that is, θ < 1, is critical for the result as otherwise ℘ = ud and in equilibrium ud = und
and all firms would be indifferent between new, durable and used, non-durable assets.
    If the economy were frictionless, the rental rate of capital, which we refer to as the
frictionless user cost of capital u∗ in the spirit of Jorgenson (1963), would be u∗ = 1+R
                                                                                        R

since the purchase cost of one unit of capital has to equal the discounted value of the


                                            11
rental rate over the useful life of the asset, that is, 1 = u∗ + R−1 u∗ . Notice that we assume
the rental rate is paid at the beginning of the period, which is of course of no consequence
in the frictionless case, but turns out to be appropriate in the economy with limited
enforcement. Moreover, the price of used capital in the frictionless economy would be
q ∗ = u∗ = 1+R
             R
                .
    In equilibrium, the user cost of new, durable assets for an unconstrained firm has to be
less than or equal to the user cost of used, non-durable assets, that is, ud ≤ und . If ud were
strictly larger than und , then durable assets would be strictly dominated for unconstrained
firms and indeed for all firms, as the user cost of durable assets for constrained firms
exceeds the user cost of durable assets for unconstrained firms.21 There would thus be no
new investment which is not an equilibrium. Further, 1 − R−1 q = ud ≤ und = q implies
that the user cost of used, non-durable assets weakly exceeds the frictionless rental rate,
that is, und = q ≥ q ∗ = u∗ .
    To sum up, when θ < 1, that is, the resale value of durable assets is not fully pledgable,
as we assume throughout, the price of used capital satisfies the following condition in
equilibrium
                                        R               R
                                             >q≥           ,                                (11)
                                      θ+R            1+R
where the first inequality follows from the fact that ℘ > q and the second inequality
obtains because ud ≤ und .22 If the price of used assets is the frictionless price q ∗ , then
ud = u∗ = und , and unconstrained entrepreneurs are indifferent between purchasing new,
durable and used, non-durable assets. Importantly, however, sufficiently constrained
entrepreneurs turn out not to be indifferent even in this case, as we show below. If the
price of used assets q > q ∗ instead, then ud < und , that is, the user cost of durable
assets is strictly lower than the user cost of non-durable assets from the vantage point
of unconstrained entrepreneurs as new assets can be resold at a premium when they are
used. We characterize the choice between new, durable and used, non-durable assets
explicitly in the remainder of this section.
    Finally, to be explicit about the sense in which the new assets with a two period life
are more durable, let us define the depreciation rates for new and used assets: new assets
depreciate at rate δd ≡ 1−q  1
                               ≤ 1 − 1+RR       1
                                            = 1+R  < 50% in the first period while in second
period (when they are used) they depreciate at rate δnd ≡ q−0     q
                                                                     = 100%. Clearly, δd < δnd
and new assets are relatively durable whereas used assets are non-durable.
  21
   See Footnote 24 below.
  22
   If θ were 1, that is, if the resale value of capital were fully pledgable, then the limit of equation (11)
above as θ goes to 1 would imply that the price of used capital again equals the frictionless price.




                                                     12
2.4    Dynamics of firm investment
The analysis of the dynamics of firm investment, financing, and dividend policy is facil-
itated by the fact that the firm’s problem is deterministic, conditional on survival. We
start by characterizing the firm’s behavior in the long run, in which the firm is uncon-
strained and pays dividends. The first order condition for borrowing implies that µ ≥ µ0 ,
that is, the marginal value of net worth is non-increasing and hence firm net worth is
non-decreasing. Moreover, once the firm starts to pay dividends, µ = 1, and hence µ0 = 1
and λ0 = 0 from then on. Therefore, the firm reaches a steady state in which it pays
dividends and is unconstrained (again conditional on survival).
    Consider now the composition of investment for an unconstrained firm. Rewriting the
first order conditions for durable and non-durable investment (6) and (7) using the fact
that µ = µ0 = 1 and λ0 = 0, we have

                                ud = βAfk (kd + knd ) + νd ,
                               und = βAfk (kd + knd ) + νnd ,
                                                                           R
that is, unconstrained firms simply compare the user costs. If q > 1+R       , and hence
ud < und , νnd > 0, that is, an unconstrained firm purchases only new, durable assets and
sells assets once they are used, that is, non-durable. Moreover, the capital stock of an
unconstrained firm k̄d solves 1 = β[Afk (kd ) + q] and the firm is unconstrained once net
worth reaches w̄ = ℘k̄d .23
    We turn to the composition of investment for severely constrained firms next. Rewrite
equations (6) and (7) as investment Euler equations as follows:
                               µ0 Afk (kd + knd ) + (1 − θ)q   νd
                         1 = β                               +    ,                         (12)
                               µ              ℘                µ℘
                               µ0 Afk (kd + knd ) νnd
                         1 = β                    +     .                                   (13)
                               µ        q            µq
The budget constraint (2) together with the collateral constraint (4) imply that w ≥
℘kd + qknd . Thus, as the firm’s net worth w goes to zero, so do kd and knd and therefore
kd + knd , implying that fk → +∞. The investment Euler equations in turn imply that
βµ0 /µ goes to zero. Combining the investment Euler equations implies that
                                         µ0            νd νnd
                              ℘−q =β        (1 − θ)q +   −    .
                                         µ             µ   µ
The left-hand side is the incremental investment of purchasing new, durable assets instead
of used, non-durable assets. The first term on the right-hand side is the additional resale
  23          R
    If q = 1+R  , then the above equation implies that νd = νnd = 0 and the unconstrained firm is
indifferent between investing in new, durable and used, non-durable assets.


                                               13
value of the durable assets (net of debt) which is evaluated using the firm’s discount
factor βµ0 /µ. This value goes to zero for severely constrained firms and hence these firms
purchase only used capital as νd > 0. Severely constrained firms simply compare down
payments.24
    The following proposition summarizes our conclusions regarding the composition of
investment:
                              R
Proposition 1. (i) If q > 1+R   , unconstrained firms purchase only new, durable assets
and sell assets once they are used, that is, non-durable. (ii) Severely constrained firms
purchase only used, non-durable assets, that is, as w → 0, νd > 0.
                                                                             R
    Notice that the second part of the proposition does not require q > 1+R     , that is,
severely constrained firms strictly prefer to purchase only used, non-durable assets even
if used assets do not trade at a premium, because the down payment for durable assets
exceeds the price of non-durable assets as long as θ < 1.


2.5     Equilibrium
A stationary equilibrium consists of policy functions x(w) = [d(w), kd (w), knd (w), b(w), w0 (w)],
an interest rate R, a price of used, non-durable assets q, and a stationary distribution p(w)
of net worth, such that (i) the policy functions x(w) solve the entrepreneurs’ problem in
                                                                           P
equations (1) to (4) given R and q; (ii) the credit market clears, that is, w p(w)b(w) = 0;
(iii) the used asset market clears, that is, the supply of used assets equals the demand
                          X                         X
                               p(w)(1 − ρ)kd (w) =     p(w)knd (w);
                               w                            w

and (iv) the stationary net worth distribution p(w) is induced by the entrepreneurs’ policy
functions x(w).
  24
    To see the intuition for the determinants of the choice between durable and non-durable assets in
another way, define the user cost of new, durable assets, which depends on the firm’s discount factor, as
                                               µ0                  λ0
                              ud (w) ≡ ℘ − β      (1 − θ)q = ud + β (1 − θ)q;
                                               µ                   µ
to deploy one unit of new, durable assets the firm has to make the down payment ℘ in the current
period and recovers (1 − θ)q next period, which the firm evaluates using its discount factor, as the first
expression shows. The user cost can also be written as the user cost of durable assets to an unconstrained
firm plus the scaled multiplier on the collateral constraint times the amount recovered next period. An
unconstrained firm therefore simply compares the frictionless user costs as the multiplier on the collateral
constraint is zero. In contrast, a severely constrained firm discounts the amount recovered next period
completely and hence the user cost equals the down payment and such firms evaluate the choice by
comparing the down-payment on new, durable assets to the price of used, non-durable assets.


                                                     14
   We focus here on the determination of the price of used assets. Consider the marginal
investor in used assets who is indifferent between investing in new, durable assets and
used, non-durable assets and hence νd = νnd = 0. The investment Euler equations (12)
and (13) then imply that

                                                         µ0
                                 (1 − R−1 θq) − q = β       (1 − θ)q,
                                                         µ
so the incremental investment required for durable assets equals the discounted resale
value. If the marginal investor is unconstrained, then βµ0 /µ = R−1 and the above equa-
                                                                      R
tion implies that the market clearing price of used assets is q = 1+R   , which equals the
frictionless price. If constrained entrepreneurs are the marginal investors and price used
                 0
assets, then β µµ < R−1 and hence used assets trade at a premium, that is, q > 1+RR
                                                                                     . This
is the more interesting case that we emphasize in much of this section. Moreover, since
    0
β µµ > 0, we conclude that q < θ+R R
                                       or stated differently ℘ > q. Thus, the conditions in
equation (11) are necessarily satisfied in equilibrium.


2.6     Trade in used capital
To analyze the implications of our model for trade in used assets, suppose the world
economy consists of two types of economies, economies with weak legal enforcement and
economies with strong legal enforcement. We model weak vs. strong legal enforcement
simply in terms of the fraction of the resale value of durable assets that can be collateral-
ized, that is, θL < θH . Moreover, assume that the world loan and used asset markets are
                                                                               R
integrated and assume that the world market price for used assets is q > 1+R     . We show
that weak legal enforcement economies are net importers of used assets.25
    To understand this one has to keep in mind that while the world price of used assets q
is the same in both economies, the entrepreneurs’ problems differ due to the difference in
legal enforcement and hence the policy functions and value functions in the two economies
differ. First, consider the problem of an unconstrained firm and recall that the investment
of an unconstrained firm solves 1 = β[Af (k̄d ) + q] and thus the investment of dividend-
paying firms in both economies is identical and independent of legal enforcement. That
said, the net worth threshold at which firms start to pay dividends satisfies w̄ = ℘k̄d
and since ℘L = 1 − R−1 θL q > 1 − R−1 θH q = ℘H this threshold is higher in a weak
  25
     An alternative would be to assume that there are two types of economies, less developed (“poor”)
and more developed (“rich”) economies which distinguish themselves only in terms of the initial net
worth of entrepreneurs, specifically, w0L < w0H , and have the same legal enforcement. The implications
for trade in used assets would be similar: less developed, “poor” economies are net used capital buyers
as a larger fraction of entrepreneurs are highly constrained.


                                                  15
legal enforcement economy than in a strong legal enforcement economy. Second, con-
sider a constrained firm that is indifferent between new and used assets; combining the
investment Euler equations (12) and (13) we obtain

                                   Afk (k) + (1 − θ)q   Afk (k)
                                             −1
                                                      =         ,                                    (14)
                                      1 − R θq            q
which determines the level of investment k at which the firm is indifferent between the
two types of assets at the margin. This level depends on legal enforcement and firms in
economies with weak legal enforcement are indifferent at a higher level of investment, that
is, k L > k H , as the proof in Appendix B shows. The lowest level of net worth at which the
firm is able to invest k is wnd = qk, in which case the firm uses only non-durable assets.
Clearly, this level is higher with weak legal enforcement, that is, wLnd > wH  nd . Similarly,
the highest level of net worth at which the firm invests k is wd = ℘k, in which case
the firm only invests in durable assets. Since ℘L > ℘H and k L > k H , we conclude that
wLd > wH d . Moreover, since weak legal enforcement does not allow firms to lever as much,
the net worth of firms in such economies grows more slowly. Therefore, firms in weak
legal enforcement economies use non-durable, used assets for longer or in other words, a
larger fraction of firms in weak legal enforcement economies invest in non-durable, used
assets.
     The effect of legal enforcement on durable and non-durable investment and trade in
used assets is summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 2. Suppose legal enforcement differs across economies, with θL < θH , and
world loan and used asset markets are integrated with q > R/(1 + R). Then weak legal
enforcement economies are net importers of used assets. Moreover, firms in weak legal
enforcement economies substitute to durable assets at higher levels of net worth, that is,
wLnd > wH            L   H
          nd and w d > w d and start to pay dividends at a higher level of net worth, too,
that is, w̄L > w̄H .

    Some details of the proof are in Appendix B. The predictions of our model for trade
in used assets are consistent with the empirical evidence provided in the literature.26
  26
     We assume that assets provide the same service flow in both periods. If new assets provided a larger
service flow in the first period, then the user cost of new assets for unconstrained firms could be higher
than that of used assets, although it would still be lower on a per service flow unit basis. Moreover,
if new capital were more productive due to technological progress every period, that is, if the economy
had vintage capital, the unconstrained firms would adopt the new, durable vintages which are more
productive, while more constrained firms would operate using the old, non-durable, and less productive,
vintages.



                                                   16
3     Technology adoption
So far we have considered the effect of durability in an economy with capital goods that
last for two periods, such that new assets are durable whereas used assets are non-durable
as they have only one period of useful life left. We now show that we obtain analogous
results in an economy with a standard neoclassical investment technology and geometric
depreciation. With geometric depreciation, there is no distinction between new and used
capital. We hence focus on the depreciation rate as our measure of durability in this
section. We show that more durable assets require larger down payments of internal
funds. Moreover, constrained firms may deploy less durable types of capital that are
dominated from the vantage point of an unconstrained firm. Thus firms may adopt
technologies that would be dominated in a frictionless economy. We also find that the
fraction of investment in such dominated technologies is larger in economies with weak
legal enforcement.


3.1    Effect of durability with neoclassical investment
As a first step, we consider the effect of durability on down payments in an economy as
in Section 2 except that instead of assets that last two periods we now consider standard
neoclassical investment. Suppose that capital depreciates at rate δ ∈ (0, 1) each period
and that capital can be produced at a cost q, so that the law of motion for capital is

                                   k 0 = k(1 − δ) + q −1 i,

where i is investment (measured in terms of consumption goods). Investment is assumed
to be reversible and hence the price of capital equals the cost of producing capital q.
Otherwise, the economy is as before.
   The entrepreneur’s problem with neoclassical investment is to choose {d, k, b, w0 } given
w to solve
                            v(w) ≡     max2      d + βv(w0 )                            (15)
                                     d,k,b,w0 ∈R+ ×R2

subject to the budget constraints and the collateral constraint

                                          w + b ≥ d + qk,                              (16)
                            Af (k) + qk(1 − δ) ≥ Rb + w0 ,                             (17)
                                     θqk(1 − δ) ≥ Rb.                                  (18)

Notice that we have substituted out investment i and define net worth as output plus the
resale value of depreciated capital net of debt repayments, that is, w0 ≡ Af (k) + qk(1 −

                                             17
δ) − Rb.27 Defining the minimum down payment requirement as before we have

                 ℘ = q − R−1 θq(1 − δ) = R−1 q(r + δ) + R−1 q(1 − θ)(1 − δ),

that is, the down payment is the frictionless one period user cost (paid in advance) plus
the present value of the fraction of the resale value that cannot be pledged. Suppose we
assess the effect of durability on the down payment by simply differentiating the above
expression with respect to δ. We would conclude that more durable capital requires a
lower down payment since ∂℘  ∂δ
                                 = R−1 θq > 0. The intuition is that more durable capital
has a higher collateral value supporting more debt finance, as Hart and Moore (1994)
conclude.28 But this argument is misleading or at least incomplete because it keeps the
price of capital q fixed and thus lower δ implicitly reduces the user cost of capital at the
same time. More durable capital should also be more expensive and taking the effect on
the price into account leads to the opposite conclusion: more durable capital requires a
larger down payment.
    To see this, we fix the frictionless user cost of capital u∗ instead (which is paid in
advance and equals the user cost of capital to an unconstrained firm, too). The price of
capital depends on the durability and is the present value of the future rental payments,
so                                     ∞
                                      X   u∗ (1 − δ)t   Ru∗
                               q(δ) =               t
                                                      =       .
                                      t=0
                                           (1 +  r)     r + δ
In turn, the down payment per unit of capital is
                                                                 u∗
                  ℘(δ) = q(δ) − R−1 θq(δ)(1 − δ) = u∗ +             (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
                                                                r+δ

and differentiating with respect to δ we obtain ∂℘(δ)
                                                 ∂δ
                                                      = −q(δ) 1−θ
                                                              r+δ
                                                                  < 0. More durable capi-
tal requires larger down payments. The basic conclusion regarding the effect of durability
on financing is reversed.29
  27
     Denoting values from the previous period with a subscript −, the flow budget constraint requires that
output plus net new borrowing exceed the current dividend plus investment, that is, Af (k− )+(b−Rb− ) ≥
d + i; substituting for investment using the law of motion for capital i = q(k − k− (1 − δ)) and using the
definition of net worth w = Af (k− ) + qk− (1 − δ) − Rb− , we obtain (16).
  28
     The liquidation value (per unit of capital) in Hart and Moore (1994) can be interpreted as Lk ≡
θqk(1 − δ); the collateral constraint (18) can then be written as Lk ≥ Rb. With this interpretation,
L = θq(1 − δ); thus, the liquidation value involves both pledgeability θ and durability 1 − δ, as well as
the price of the asset. Hart and Moore (1994) consider the effect of the liquidation value L on financing;
we argue that the effect they consider should be interpreted as the effect of pledgeability θ rather than
durability 1 − δ.
  29
     Two special cases are of interest as they provide a connection to the results in Section 2: first, if


                                                   18
   The user cost of capital for a constrained firm depends on the firm’s discount factor,
   0
βµ /µ, and is the down payment minus the discounted resale value of the depreciated
capital, so
                                 µ0                             λ0 Ru∗
          u(w)(δ) = ℘(δ) − β        q(δ)(1 − θ)(1 − δ) = u∗ + β        (1 − θ)(1 − δ).              (19)
                                 µ                              µ r+δ
The sensitivity of this user cost to durability depends on how financially constrained
                                                  0
the firm is in the sense that ∂u(w)(δ)
                                  ∂δ
                                        = −q(δ) λµ 1−θ
                                                    r+δ
                                                        < 0. For an unconstrained firm, the
                                         0
multiplier on the collateral constraint λ = 0 and the user cost is independent of durability.
The user cost is also independent of financial conditions for non-durable capital, that is,
when δ = 1 as then u(w)(1) = u∗ independent of w. Finally, when collateral can be
pledged fully, that is, θ = 1, the user cost equals u∗ and is again independent of financial
conditions and durability for that matter. That said, the key insight here is that in
general durability increases down payments and hence the internal funds required per
unit of capital, and that the effect of durability on the user cost is larger the more
constrained firms are.


3.2     Adopting dominated technologies
Suppose firms can choose between two types of neoclassical capital, one that is more
durable and one that is less durable. For ease of reference, we denote these with a
subscript d for durable and nd for non-durable as in Section 2, although that is a slight
abuse of notation here. The economy is as before but there are two types of neoclassical
capital of different durability, that is, depreciation rates δd < δnd and different costs of
production and hence different prices qd > qnd such that, on the one hand, the frictionless
user cost of the more durable capital is lower than that of the less durable capital, that
is, ud < und or qd (r + δd ) < qnd (r + δnd ), and on the other hand the down payments
required are higher for the more durable capital than for the less durable capital, that is,
℘d > ℘nd or qd (1 − R−1 θ(1 − δd )) > qnd (1 − R−1 θ(1 − δnd )).30 The two types of capital are
perfect substitutes in production. We emphasize that we are taking the prices qd and qnd
capital fully depreciates every period, that is, δ = 1, the down payment is ℘(1) = u∗ , which is the down
payment for non-durable capital in the previous section; and second, if the depreciation rate δ = 0, so
capital does not depreciate, then ℘(0) = u∗ + R−1 (1 − θ)q(0), which is the same expression as for the
down payment on durable assets in the previous section (see Equation (10)).
  30
     The case in which qd ≤ qnd is not interesting as durable capital would have a lower user cost and
require a lower down payment and therefore dominate. The case in which ud ≥ und is also not interesting
as durable capital would then also require a larger down payment and thus would be dominated. Thus,
we assume ud < und and ℘d > ℘nd since if durable capital required a lower down payment it would again
dominate.


                                                   19
as equal to the cost of producing the two types of capital, that is, as exogenously given,
for now, but discuss how the relative price of the two types of capital can be endogenized
by introducing a vintage structure at the end of this section.
    The entrepreneur’s problem with two types of capital j ∈ {d, nd} is to choose {d, kj , b, w0 },
given w, to solve
                             v(w) ≡       max3      d + βv(w0 )                          (20)
                                          d,kj ,b,w0 ∈R+ ×R2

subject to the budget constraints and the collateral constraint
                                                            X
                                            w+b ≥ d+            qj kj ,                    (21)
                                                                        j
                          X        X
                     Af          kj +  qj kj (1 − δj ) ≥ Rb + w0 ,                         (22)
                            j             j
                                          X
                                      θ       qj kj (1 − δj ) ≥ Rb.                        (23)
                                          j

The collateral constraint requires that total borrowing including interest does not exceed
fraction θ of the resale value of the depreciated capital of both types.
    To analyze the choice between the two types of capital, recall from equation (19) that
the user cost of type j capital (for a possibly constrained firm) is

                                                  λ0
                                uj (w) = uj + β      qj (1 − θ)(1 − δj ).                  (24)
                                                  µ
Unconstrained firms never use the less durable, “low quality” capital since when λ0 = 0,
uj (w) = uj and ud < und by assumption. Unconstrained firms evaluate the two types of
capital based on their frictionless user costs. The less durable type of capital is clearly
dominated from the perspective of an unconstrained firm.
    Severely constrained firms in contrast adopt the dominated technology, that is, choose
to invest in this less durable type of capital. Using the investment Euler equation as
                                                 0
before, we can show that when w goes to 0, β µµ goes to 0, so

                                         µ0
                          uj (w) = ℘j − β qj (1 − θ)(1 − δj ) → ℘j
                                         µ
and ℘d > ℘nd . As the firm becomes severely constrained, it evaluates the two types of
capital simply based on the required down payments. For a severely constrained firm,
the user cost is the down payment. Since the less durable capital requires a lower down
payment, such firms choose to adopt otherwise dominated technologies. We emphasize
that our model implies that there is new investment in dominated technologies. Finan-
cially constrained firms may invest in less durable plants and buildings, and may buy

                                                   20
less durable types of equipment, despite the fact that these are dominated, because they
involve smaller financing needs in terms of internal funds.
    We summarize our conclusions regarding the composition of investment as follows

Proposition 3. Suppose there are two types of neoclassical capital with δd < δnd and
qd > qnd such that ud < und but ℘d > ℘nd . (i) Unconstrained firms purchase only the
more durable capital. (ii) Severely constrained firms purchase only the less durable capital
despite it being otherwise dominated.

    The model therefore provides a theory of optimal durability based on financial con-
straints. In a frictionless economy and in an economy in which residual value can be fully
pledged, only the more durable type of capital is used. In contrast, in an economy with
financial constraints, the less durable type of capital is also used because it alleviates
financial constraints.31 The optimal durability moreover varies with legal enforcement, as
we show next, and may vary with aggregate conditions, that is, the business cycle, as well,
with the composition of investment shifting to less durable types of capital in downturns
when firms are more constrained and to more durable types of capital in expansions when
firms’ constraints are relaxed.
    In the neoclassical version of the model discussed in this section so far, the price of
the different types of capital is exogenously given by the cost of producing each type of
capital. We can however endogenize the price of non-durable capital, while taking the
price of durable capital as exogenously given by the cost of producing such capital, by
considering a vintage capital model. Suppose new, durable capital is produced at cost qd
and depreciates at a geometric rate δd while at the same time a fraction η of the capital
  31
     So far we consider only two types of capital with fixed durability. We can extend the argument to
a continuum of types of capital of differing durability. Suppose capital with depreciation rate δ can be
produced at cost φ(δ) per unit of capital where φδ (δ) < 0 < φδδ (δ), that is, the cost of producing a
unit of capital is increasing and convex in durability 1 − δ. Assuming the cost is linear in the quantity
of capital produced, the price of capital with durability 1 − δ is q(δ) = φ(δ). In a frictionless economy
and in an economy in which the residual value can be fully pledged (that is, when θ = 1), all firms
evaluate capital by its frictionless user cost. It is therefore optimal to choose the durability to minimize
the frictionless user cost u(δ) = R−1 φ(δ)(r + δ). Assuming u(δ) is convex in δ, there exists a user cost
minimizing depreciation rate δ ∗ ∈ arg maxδ∈[0,1] u(δ) which is interior if uδ (0) < 0 < uδ (1). For example,
φ(δ) = 1 + φ(1 − δ)γφ with φ > 0 and γφ > r−1 (1 + max{φ−1 , R}) satisfies these conditions. In a
frictionless economy (or when θ = 1) only one type of capital with durability 1 − δ ∗ is produced, whereas
in an economy with financial frictions, that is, θ < 1, also less durable types of capital are produced,
possibly a continuum of them. In contrast, it is never optimal to produce capital that is more durable
than 1 − δ ∗ . Thus, the model provides a theory of optimal durability based on financial constraints,
providing a rather different perspective on low durability capital than the theory of durability based on
planned obsolescence in the literature discussed in the introduction.


                                                     21
becomes used, non-durable capital. Used, non-durable capital trades at an equilibrium
price qnd and depreciates at rate δnd > δd .32 This vintage version of the neoclassical model
nests the model with new and used capital in Section 2 by setting δd = 0, δnd = 1, and
η = 1 (with qd = 1 and qnd = q), that is, by assuming that new capital does not depreciate
but turns into used capital the next period and that used capital fully depreciates each
period. If the marginal investor in used capital is an unconstrained entrepreneur, then
                                  ∗
ud = und , which implies that qnd    < qd , that is, the price of used, non-durable capital,
which is endogenous, is strictly less than the price of durable capital, which is determined
by the production cost.33 Further, ℘d > ℘nd , that is, the down payment for durable capital
strictly exceeds the down payment for non-durable capital.34 The amount recovered the
following period per unit of durable capital also exceeds the amount recovered per unit
of non-durable capital. Thus, these endogenous prices and down payments in the vintage
capital version of the model line up exactly as in the economy with two types of exogenous
capital studied above. Since used, non-durable capital requires a lower down payment,
such capital may trade at a premium relative to the price determined above, when the
marginal investor in non-durable capital is a constrained investor. This used capital
premium reflects to convenience yield of such capital for financially constrained firms.
When the premium is strictly positive, unconstrained investors have a strict preference
for new, durable capital, and sell all the capital that transitioned to used capital each
period. The predictions for trade in used capital mirror those in Section 2.


3.3      Adopting dominated technologies and legal enforcement
Suppose, as in the discussion of trade in used capital in Section 2, that the world econ-
omy consists of two types of economies, economies with strong legal enforcement and
economies with weak legal enforcement, that is, θH > θL . We return to the model with
exogenous types of capital, and assume, as before, that there are two types of capital
with δd < δnd and qd > qnd such that ud < und but ℘d > ℘nd . We can show that a larger
  32
      The law of motion for durable capital is kd0 = kd (1 − δd )(1 − η) + qd−1 id , where id is investment in
                                                                       0                                −1
durable capital, and the law of motion for non-durable capital is knd     = knd (1−δnd )+kd (1−δd )η +qnd  ind ,
where ind is purchases or sales of non-durable capital.
   33
      The appropriate definitions of the frictionless user costs in this economy are und = R−1 qnd (r +δnd ) as
before and ud ≡ R−1 qd (r +δd )+R−1 η(qd −qnd )(1−δd ); the user cost of durable capital takes into account
the additional depreciation due to the vintage transition of fraction η of the capital. The frictionless price
                                   ∗      r+δd +η(1−δd )
of non-durable capital satisfies qnd  = r+δ  nd +η(1−δd )
                                                          qd < qd .
   34
      The down payments are ℘nd ≡ qnd − R−1 θqnd (1 − δnd ) as before and ℘d ≡ qd − R−1 θqd (1 − δd ) +
R−1 θη(qd − qnd )(1 − δd ), which accounts for the additional value loss due to the vintage transition of
fraction η of capital. Note that both down payments involve the endogenous price of non-durable capital.



                                                      22
fraction of entrepreneurs adopt the dominated technology in the economy with weak le-
gal enforcement. To derive this result we must keep in mind that the policy and value
functions differ in the two types of economies. However, taking the investment Euler
equations for type j capital, j ∈ {d, nd},
                                   P
                           µ0 Afk ( j kj ) + (1 − θ)qj (1 − δj )    νj
                      1=β                                        +               (25)
                            µ                ℘j                    µ℘j

and combining them for a firm that is indifferent between the two types of capital yields
                P                                    P
           Afk ( j kj ) + (1 − θ)qd (1 − δd )   Afk ( j kj ) + (1 − θ)qnd (1 − δnd )
                                              =                                      ,  (26)
                          ℘d                                    ℘nd
                                                     P
which determines the level of investment k =           j kj at which the firm is indifferent
at the margin. This level depends on legal enforcement and, as shown in the proof in
Appendix B, is higher in an economy with weak legal enforcement.
    The effect of legal enforcement on technology adoption in terms of durable and non-
durable capital is summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 4. Suppose legal enforcement differs across economies, with θH > θL , and
there are two types of neoclassical capital with δd < δnd and qd > qnd such that ud < und
but ℘d > ℘nd . A larger fraction of firms in weak legal enforcement economies invest in
less durable capital, which is otherwise dominated. Firms in such economies substitute to
more durable capital at higher levels of net worth and start to pay dividends at a higher
level of net worth, too.

    The parts of the proof not discussed in the text are in Appendix B. Our theory predicts
that in economies with weak legal enforcement, more firms invest in less durable types of
capital that would otherwise be dominated and invest in such capital for longer, that is,
until they are older and better capitalized. Thus, new investment in dominated technolo-
gies is more extensive in weak legal enforcement economies. The basic mechanism is that
durability raises the requirements for internal funds and weak legal enforcement com-
pounds these effects. Indeed, if the resale value of capital were perfectly collateralizable,
that is, if θ were 1, then dominated technologies would not be adopted at all.


3.4    Effect of durability on composition of investment
When different types of capital are not perfect substitutes, as assumed so far, but instead
imperfect substitutes, then all firms use all types of capital and durability affects the



                                             23
composition of investment. Consider the following aggregator for capital with constant
elasticity of substitution
                                                !1/γ
                                      X       γ
                                k≡        σj kj      ,                            (27)
                                                   j

where kj is type j capital, the substitution coefficient γ satisfies −∞ < γ < 1, the factor
                              P
shares σj > 0, for all j, and j σj = 1. The elasticity of substitution is 1/(1 − γ). For
ease of exposition, we assume that there are two types of capital, j ∈ {d, nd}, as before,
but the results obtain more generally.35 The firm’s problem is to maximize (20) subject
to (21), (23), and
                                    X
                           Af (k) +     qj kj (1 − δj ) ≥ Rb + w0 ,                    (28)
                                             j

where k is as defined in (27). Using the definition of the user cost for a financially
constrained firm (24), the first-order condition for type j capital can be written as
                                                       µ0         ∂k
                                        uj (w) = β        Afk (k)     .
                                                       µ          ∂kj
Dividing the first order condition for less durable capital by the one for more durable
capital we obtain                               1−γ
                                und (w)      kd       σnd
                                        =                 .
                                 ud (w)      knd      σd
Recall that for unconstrained firms, the user cost is uj (w) = uj , that is, equals the
frictionless user cost. Therefore, for such firms, the ratio of more durable to less durable
capital is determined by the ratio of the frictionless user costs (as well as the factor shares).
In contrast, for severely constrained firms, that is, as w goes to 0, the user cost uj (w) →
℘j , implying that the ratio of more durable to less durable capital is determined by the
ratio of the down payments for such firms. The composition of investment of financially
constrained firms is distorted away from more durable toward less durable capital.36
  35
      The case of perfect substitutes considered so far is a special case of this aggregator with γ = 1 and
σd = σnd . Moreover, if γ = 0, we have a Cobb-Douglas aggregator and k = kdσd knd     σnd
                                                                                          . Finally, the limit
as γ goes to −∞ is the Leontief aggregator.
   36
      Throughout we assume that the pledgeability does not vary with the type of capital. This is plausible
when the types of capital are only distinguished by their durability and are otherwise the same capital
asset as perfect substitutability suggests. When different types of capital are imperfect substitutes, as
we assume here, it is possible that pledgeability also varies with the type of capital. As long as the more
durable capital is not too much more collateralizable than the less durable capital, that is, as long as
 1−θd      r+δd 1−δnd
1−θnd ≥ r+δnd 1−δd , our results obtain. If this inequality were not satisfied, the sign of the distortion
would be reversed, but this would be due to the higher pledgeability of the more durable type of capital,
not its durability. So the key insight that durability and pledgeability are distinct and have opposing
effects remains valid.


                                                       24
    We have established the following result:

Proposition 5. Consider a production function with a CES aggregator for more durable
and less durable capital. The ratio of more durable to less durable assets kd /knd is de-
termined by the ratio of the frictionless user costs und /ud for unconstrained firms and is
determined by the ratio of the down payments ℘nd /℘d for severely constrained firms.

    Consider the effect of financial development in terms of an increase in pledgeability θ.
Financial development does not affect the composition of investment of financially un-
constrained firms. In contrast, financial development increases the ratio of more durable
to less durable investment for severely constrained firms, as an increase in pledgeability
increases the ratio of down payments ℘nd /℘d ; an increase in pledgeability reduces the
down payment on more durable assets by more.
    When different types of capital are imperfect substitutes, our theory predicts that
in the cross section of firms, more constrained firms substitute away from more durable
assets towards less durable assets and that the relative down payments determine the
composition of investment for severely constrained firms. Financial development reduces
the distortion away from durable investment for constrained and especially severely con-
strained firms.


4     Renting durable assets
Renting is a significant way in which firms (and households), especially financially con-
strained ones, avail themselves of durable assets. A key aspect of renting is the associ-
ated ease of repossession as argued by Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009) and Rampini and
Viswanathan (2013). Renting (or leasing, which we use synonymously here) allows the
lessee to deploy assets while the lessor retains ownership which facilitates the repossession
of these assets in case of default. In the context of an economy with limited enforcement,
we model rented capital as capital the firm cannot abscond with, that is, rented capital
can be collateralized fully. The cost of renting is that the lessor has to monitor its use
to prevent abuse, for example. But how does durability affect the decision to rent assets
instead of buying them (and borrowing against them)?
    Consider an economy with neoclassical investment as in the previous section. Suppose
there are two types of capital, as before, one which is more durable and one which is less
durable, denoted by subscripts d and nd, respectively. However, to focus on the rent vs.
buy decision, we assume that the two types of assets are required in fixed proportions.
Specifically, there are two types of neoclassical capital which differ in their durability,


                                             25
that is, for j = {d, nd}, type j capital depreciates at rate δj , where δd < δnd , and has
price qj .37 Denote the type j capital the firm owns by kj and the type j capital the firm
rents (or leases) by kjl . Owned and rented capital of a particular type are assumed to
be perfect substitutes. The two types of capital are deployed in fixed proportions, that
                                                                              k +kl k +kl
is, aggregate capital k is determined by a Leontief aggregator k ≡ min dσd d , ndσnd nd
where the factor shares σj > 0 and j σj = 1, which implies that kj + kjl = σj k.
                                       P

    The rental rate for type j capital is ulj ≡ R−1 qj (r + δj + m) where m is the monitoring
cost per unit of capital. Limited enforcement implies that this rental rate has to be
charged up front. If the monitoring cost were zero, the rental rate would equal the
frictionless user cost of capital, albeit payable in advance.
    The entrepreneur’s problem with a rental decision is to choose {d, k, kj , kjl , b, w0 }, given
w, to solve
                             v(w) ≡         max         d + βv(w0 )                            (29)
                                         d,k,kj ,kjl ,b,w0 ∈R6+ ×R2

subject to the budget, collateral, and technological constraints
                                                     X          X
                                     w+b ≥ d+           qj kj +   ulj kjl ,                        (30)
                                                                      j         j
                                 X
                    Af (k) +         qj kj (1 − δj ) ≥ Rb + w0 ,                                   (31)
                                 j
                                 X
                             θ       qj kj (1 − δj ) ≥ Rb,                                         (32)
                                 j

                                         kj + kjl ≥ σj k,                 j ∈ {d, nd}.             (33)

Only assets that the firm owns can serve as collateral. Introducing aggregate capital k
as a choice variable and equation (33) for j ∈ {d, nd} (which hold with equality at an
optimum) are a simple way to impose the Leontief technology.
   The first-order conditions with respect to k, kj , and kjl using the same multipliers as
before and multiplier βµ0 ηj on equation (33) are
                X
                    σj ηj = Afk (k),
                   j

                       µqj = βµ0 ηj + βµ0 qj (1 − δj ) + βλ0 θqj (1 − δj ) + νj ,
                       µulj = βµ0 ηj + νjl .

The investment Euler equation for purchased type j capital is
                                      µ0 ηj + (1 − θ)qj (1 − δj )    νj
                              1=β                                 +     .
                                      µ            ℘j               µ℘j
  37
    No assumptions on prices of the two types of capital are required here as the prices affect the cost
of owning and renting a particular type of capital in the same way.


                                                      26
   Assume that the down payment for purchasing a type of capital exceeds the rental
rate, that is, ℘j > ulj , as otherwise renting would be dominated. As shown in the previous
work, more constrained firms rent capital. To see how durability affects the rent vs. buy
decision, suppose a firm is indifferent between renting and owning type j capital, so
νj = νjl = 0. Combining first-order conditions we obtain

                                        λ0
                                           (1 − θ)(1 − δj ) = m.
                                        µ

The multiplier on the collateral constraint (scaled by the multiplier on the budget con-
           0
straint) λµ at which the firm is indifferent between buying and renting depends on the
depreciation rate. More durable assets are rented by less constrained firms, whereas less
durable assets are rented only if the firm is sufficiently constrained. Suppose the firm needs
both structures, say a plant, and equipment, say machines, for production and structures
are more durable than machines, which is arguably the case. Severely constrained firms
lease both the plant and the machines whereas less constrained firms lease only the plant
and unconstrained firms do not lease either. Similarly, if firms require different types of
equipment, for example, aircraft, which are very durable, and ground support equipment,
which is less durable, our theory predicts that many airlines lease their aircraft, but only
severely constrained airlines lease their ground support equipment.38 Note also that the
model implies that there is no renting of assets which depreciate fully each period, that
is, with δj = 1, and no renting when collateral is fully pledgable.39
    The key insight is that firms are more inclined to rent more durable assets as such
assets are associated with a larger financing need exactly because they are more durable
and hence require more internal funds which makes renting them more beneficial as it
allows additional financing. Less durable assets are rented only by severely constrained
firms, whereas more durable assets are rented even by less constrained firms.


5      Conclusion
Durable assets are harder to finance because they require larger down payments. While
durability does increase the resale value and hence the collateral value allowing more
  38
     Analogously, for households this implies that severely constrained households rent both their house
and their cars whereas less constrained household buy their cars and rent their house, and unconstrained
households own both their cars and their house. This prediction seems empirically quite plausible.
  39
     If capital lasts for two periods, as in Section 2, then used, non-durable assets are never rented while
new, durable assets might be rented, depending on parameters. This may explain why in practice it is
often new assets that are leased, not used ones.


                                                    27
borrowing, it increases the price of assets and thus the financing need overall by more.
Since the effect on the financing need exceeds the increase in collateral value, more durable
assets require larger down payments as long as the resale value cannot be fully pledged
(that is, θ < 1 in the model).
    Financial constraints are therefore especially salient for investment in durable assets.
For firms, these durable assets include residential and non-residential structures, infras-
tructure, equipment including aircraft, ships, and trucks. For households, durable assets
include consumer durables, especially housing, motor vehicles, and household durables.
While we emphasize the effects of durability on the financing of tangible assets, the same
results apply for investment in intangible capital, for example, organization capital, which
can be collateralized only to a very limited extent or not at all (as θ = 0 is a special case
of our model).
    Constrained firms may use less durable assets even if these were otherwise dominated.
Constrained firms also buy used capital, which is less durable, instead of new capital,
consistent with the data, and rent durable assets to reduce the demands on internal
funds. The model thus yields predictions on how the composition of investment, the
vintage of capital purchased, technology adoption, and rental choices vary with financial
constraints.
    Durability exacerbates the effect of legal enforcement on investment. In economies
with weak legal enforcement, investment in infrastructure, buildings, and cars and trucks,
for example, can be distorted toward lower qualities that are less durable. Moreover,
firms and household use less durable qualities and used capital to a greater extent in such
economies. And weak legal enforcement countries are net importers of used real assets,
consistent with international trade flows.
    We emphasize that it is critical to distinguish the durability of assets from their
pledgeability both in empirical work and in theory. Durability, 1 − δ in our model, affects
not only the collateral value but also the cost of the assets and hence the overall financing
need, with the net effect of impeding financing. Pledgeability, θ in our model, affects only
the collateral value and unambiguously facilitates financing. Hart and Moore (1994)
consider the effect of higher liquidation values, effectively pledgeability, in their model,
but interpret their results in terms of durability, concluding that more durable assets
are easier to finance due to their higher liquidation value. By distinguishing between
durability and pledgeability, we come to the opposite and we think empirically more
plausible conclusion.




                                             28
Appendix
Appendix A: Households’ choice of consumer durables
This appendix considers households’ choice between durable and non-durable goods,
which provides a particularly simple version of the main result of the paper. Consider a
discrete-time, infinite horizon economy. There is a continuum of households of measure
one alive at each date; households survive to the next period with probability 1 − ρ and
measure ρ ∈ (0, 1) of new households are born every period with net worth w0 > 0 (to
be defined below). Households are risk averse and we formulate the households’ problem
recursively. Households have preferences u(c) + βv(w0 ) over consumption services c in the
current period and net worth w0 next period, where β ∈ (0, 1) is the effective rate of time
preference (with β̂ the rate of time preference and β ≡ β̂(1−ρ)), v(·) is the value function,
and u(·) is the utility function which is strictly increasing, strictly concave, continuously
differentiable, and satisfies limc→0 uc (c) = +∞.
    Households have access to two types of goods, durable goods and non-durable goods.
Denote the amount of durable goods a household purchases in the current period by kd
and the amount of non-durable goods by knd . Durable and non-durable goods provide
consumption services and are perfect substitutes in terms of their services, that is, c =
kd + knd . The differences between durable goods and non-durable goods are their price
and durability: durable goods cost 1 to produce and last for two periods, that is, provide
consumption services both in the period in which they are purchased and in the next
period; in contrast, non-durable goods cost q where, in equilibrium, 1 > q ≥ 1/(1 + β)
but provide consumption services only in the period in which they are purchased. Non-
durable goods purchased this period are hence worthless next period, whereas a unit of
durable goods purchased this period is worth q next period since it is equivalent to a unit
of non-durable goods next period. Households also have a deterministic income of y > 0
each period. Households can buy any amount of durable and/or non-durable goods and
can resell durable goods after one period, but do not have access to borrowing or lending
otherwise, that is, we set θ = 0 in terms of the model in the main body of the paper.
    We consider a stationary equilibrium of the economy in which all aggregate quantities
and the used capital price q are constant. For simplicity, we focus on the case in which
q > 1/(1 + β) (as the economic intuition in the case with q = 1/(1 + β) is similar).
    Given current net worth w, the household’s problem can be written as

                       v(w) ≡          max              u(kd + knd ) + βv(w0 )
                                {kd ,knd ,w0 }∈R2+ ×R


subject to the budget constraints for the current and the next period

                                        w ≥ kd + qknd ,
                                   y + qkd ≥ w0 .

Notice that consumption services c have been substituted out and that net worth is
defined as income plus the resale value of consumption durables.

                                                  29
    Since the constraint set is convex and the operator defined by the Bellman equation
satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient conditions, there exists a unique value function that solves
the Bellman equation which is strictly increasing and strictly concave. Using the mul-
tipliers µ and βµ0 for the budget constraints in the current and next period, and the
multipliers νd and νnd for the non-negativity constraints, the first-order conditions for
durable and non-durable goods and for net worth next period are

                                  µ = uc (c) + βµ0 q + νd ,
                                 µq = uc (c) + νnd ,
                                 µ0 = vw (w0 ),

and the envelope condition is vw (w) = µ. It is not possible that both νd > 0 and νnd > 0
at the same time, as otherwise the budget constraint in the current period would be slack.
    Over time, an individual household reaches a steady state (conditional on survival)
in which the household’s net worth and purchases of durable and non-durable goods are
constant. In such a steady state, the household only purchases durable goods. To see
this, denote the marginal value of net worth in the steady state by µ̄ and using the
first order conditions we have µ̄(q − (1 − βq)) = νnd − νd . Since the right-hand side is
strictly positive, we conclude that νnd > 0; the household does not buy non-durable
goods. (If q = 1/(1 + β), the right-hand side is 0 and hence νnd = νd = 0 and the
household is indifferent between durable and non-durable goods.) Indeed, using the
budget constraints for the current and next periods, we can compute the steady state
level of net worth w̄ = y/(1 − q), which equals the purchases of durable goods k̄d and
steady state consumption c̄ (while purchases of non-durable goods are k̄nd = 0).
    Severely constrained households, that is, households with sufficiently low net worth,
buy only non-durable goods. To see this notice that the budget constraint implies that
as w goes to 0, c does too, and µ ≥ uc (c) → +∞. Combining the first-order conditions
we have µ(1 − q) = βµ0 q + νd − νnd and, since w0 ≥ y, µ0 is bounded above, implying
that νd > 0 as w goes to 0. Indeed, households do not buy any durable goods on a lower
interval of net worth levels. For suppose, by contradiction that for w− < w, νd > 0 (that
is, kd = 0) at w while kd− > 0 at w− . By strict concavity of the value function, µ− > µ,
whereas µ0− < µ0 since w−  0
                             = y + qkd− > y + qkd = w0 . Using the first-order conditions
                                                                      −               −
at w and w− respectively we get 0 < (µ− − µ) = β(µ0− − µ0 )q − νnd       − νd < −νnd    − νd ,
a contradiction. Moreover, above this interval, durable goods purchases kd are strictly
increasing in w. This is obvious if the household only buys durable goods, so suppose
the household buys both durable and non-durable goods. In that case, µ(1 − q) = βµ0 q,
and by strict concavity µ is strictly decreasing in w and hence so is µ0 = vw (w0 ), implying
that w0 and hence kd are strictly increasing in w.
    Intuitively, durable goods force households to save, making households with low net
worth reluctant to buy durable goods. Such households buy “low quality” non-durable
goods because these are cheaper to them as these goods have a smaller up-front cost,
whereas households with high net worth buy “high quality” durable goods because these
are cheaper to them since they are less constrained which means that the opportunity
cost of the additional funds required to purchase durable goods is lower.

                                             30
Appendix B: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 2. Total differentiation of equation (14) yields

                            dk   (q + R−1 q − 1) q 2
                               =                         < 0.
                            dθ      (℘ − q)2    Afkk (k)

The rest of the proof is in the main text. 2

Proof of Proposition 4. Total differentiation of equation (26) yields

                          dk    (und − ud ) qd qnd (δnd − δd )
                             =                                 < 0.
                          dθ   (℘d − ℘nd )2     Afkk (k)

The critical levels of net worth are wnd = ℘nd k, wd = ℘d k, and w̄ = ℘d k̄ where k̄ solves
Rud = Afk (k̄). Since ℘nd and ℘d are decreasing in θ the ordering is immediate. Moreover,
since lower θ allows firms to lever less, the net worth of firms in weak legal enforcement
economies grows more slowly. The rest of the proof is in the main text. 2




                                             31
References
Aghion, Philippe, George-Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee, and Kalina Manova, 2010,
     Volatility and growth: Credit constraints and the composition of investment, Jour-
     nal of Monetary Economics 57, 246-265.
Akerlof, George A., 1970, The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market
     mechanism, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488-500.
Alvarez, Fernando, and Urban J. Jermann, 2000, Efficiency, equilibrium and asset pricing
     with risk of default, Econometrica 68, 775-797.
Barro, Robert J., 1972, Monopoly and contrived depreciation, Journal of Political Econ-
     omy 80, 598-602.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman, 2011, Vintage capital and creditor rights,
     Journal of Financial Economics 99, 308-332.
Bolton, Patrick, and David S. Scharfstein, 1990, A theory of predation based on agency
     problems in financial contracting, American Economic Review 80, 93-106.
Bond, Eric W., 1982, A direct test of the “lemons” model: The market for used pickup
     trucks, American Economic Review 72, 836-840.
Bond, Eric W., 1983, Trade in used equipment with heterogeneous firms, Journal of
     Political Economy 91, 688-705.
Bulow, Jeremy I., 1982, Durable-goods monopolists, Journal of Political Economy 90,
     314-332.
Bulow, Jeremy I., 1986, An economic theory of planned obsolescence, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 101, 729-750.
Chari, V.V., and Hugo Hopenhayn, 1991, Vintage human capital, growth, and the dif-
     fusion of new technology, Journal of Political Economy 99, 1142-1165.
Chien, YiLi, and Hanno Lustig, 2010, The market price of aggregate risk and the wealth
     distribution, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1596-1650.
Coase, Ronald H., 1972, Durability and monopoly, Journal of Law and Economics 15,
     143-149.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano A. Rampini, 2006, Capital reallocation and liquidity,
     Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 369-399.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano A. Rampini, 2007, New or used? Investment with
     credit constraints, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2656-2681.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano A. Rampini, 2009, Leasing, ability to repossess, and
     debt capacity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1621-1657.
Fraumeni, Barbara M., 1997, The measurement of depreciation in the U.S. National
     Income and Product Accounts, Survey of Current Business July, 7-23.
Gavazza, Alessandro, 2011, The role of trading frictions in real asset markets, American
     Economic Review 101, 1106-1143.
Gavazza, Alessandro, 2016, An empirical equilibrium model of a decentralized asset
     market, Econometrica, forthcoming.


                                          32
Gavazza, Alessandro, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Nikita Roketskiy, 2014, A quantitative
    analysis of the used-car market, American Economic Review 104, 3668-3700.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of
    human capital, Quarterly Journal of Economics 70, 907-928.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of
    debt, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1-41
Hendel, Igal, and Alessandro Lizzeri, 1999a, Adverse selection in durable goods markets,
    American Economic Review 89, 1097-1115.
Hendel, Igal and Alessandro Lizzeri, 1999b, Interfering with secondary markets, Rand
    Journal of Economics 30, 1-21.
Hendel, Igal and Alessandro Lizzeri, 2002, The role of leasing under adverse selection,
    Journal of Political Economy 110, 113-143.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and
    the real sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1998, Private and public supply of liquidity, Journal
    of Political Economy 106, 1-40.
Jorgenson, Dale W., 1963, Capital theory and investment behavior, American Economic
    Review (Papers and Proceedings) 53, 247-259
Kahn, Charles, 1986, The durable goods monopolist and consistency with increasing
    costs, Econometrica 54, 275-294.
Kehoe, Timothy J., and David K. Levine, 1993, Debt-constrained asset markets, Review
    of Economic Studies 60, 865-888.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy
    105, 211-248.
Kleiman, E., and T. Ophir, 1966, The durability of durable goods, Review of Economic
    Studies 33, 165-178.
Lanteri, Andrea, 2016, The market for used capital: Endogenous irreversibility and
    reallocation over the business cycle, Working paper, Duke University.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,
    1998, Law and finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Levhari, David, and T. N. Srinivasan, 1969, Durability of consumption goods: Compe-
    tition versus monopoly, American Economic Review 59, 102-107.
Martin, David D., 1962, Monopoly power and the durability of durable goods, Southern
    Economic Journal 28, 271-277.
Navaretti, Giorgio B., Isidro Soloaga, and Wendy Takacs, 2000, Vintage technologies
    and skill constraints: Evidence from U.S. exports of new and used machines, World
    Bank Economic Review 14, 91-109.
Orhun, A. Yeşim, and Mike Palazzolo, 2016, Frugality is hard to afford, Working paper,
    University of Michigan.
Pratchett, Terry, 1993, Men at Arms, New York, Harper.


                                          33
Ramey, Valerie A., and Matthew D. Shapiro, 2001, Displaced capital, Journal of Political
     Economy 109, 958-992.
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, risk management, and the
     distribution of debt capacity, Journal of Finance 65, 2293-2322.
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2013, Collateral and capital structure, Jour-
     nal of Financial Economics 109, 466-492.
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2016, Household risk management, Working
     paper, Duke University.
Rust, John, 1986, When is it optimal to kill off the market for used durable goods?
     Econometrica 54, 65-86.
Schmalensee, Richard, 1970, Regulation and the durability of goods, Bell Journal of
     Economics and Management Science 1, 54-64.
Schmalensee, Richard, 1974, Market structure, durability, and maintenance effort, Re-
     view of Economic Studies 41, 277-287.
Sen, Amartya K., 1962, On the usefulness of used machines, Review of Economics and
     Statistics 44, 346-48.
Sieper, E., and Peter L. Swan, 1973, Monopoly and competition in the market for durable
     goods, Review of Economic Studies 40, 333-351.
Stokey, Nancy L., 1981, Rational expectations and durable goods pricing, Bell Journal
     of Economics 12, 112-128.
Stolyarov, Dmitriy, 2002, Turnover of used durables in a stationary equilibrium: Are
     older goods traded more? Journal of Political Economy 110, 1390-1413.
Swan, Peter L., 1970, Durability of consumption goods, American Economic Review 60,
     884-894.
Swan, Peter L., 1971, The durability of goods and regulation of monopoly, Bell Journal
     of Economics and Management Science 2, 347-357.
Swan, Peter L., 1972, Optimum durability, second-hand markets, and planned obsoles-
     cence, Journal of Political Economy 80, 575-585.
Townsend, Robert M., 1979, Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly
     state verification, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265-293.
Waldman, Michael, 1996, Durable goods pricing when quality matters, Journal of Busi-
     ness 69, 489-510.
Waldman, Michael, 2003, Durable goods theory for real world markets, Journal of Eco-
     nomic Perspectives 17(1), 131-154.
Wicksell, Knut, 1934, Lectures on Political Economy, Volume 1, London, George Rout-
     ledge and Sons.




                                          34
