                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               LOAN COMMITMENTS
                             AND MONETARY POLICY




                               George Sofianos

                                 Paul Wachtel

                                 Arie Melnik




                           Working Paper No. 2232




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1987




Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the American Economics
Association meetings, New Orleans, December 1986 and at the Symposium on
Monetary Economics in Memory of Michael Hamburger at the New York University
Business School, March 1987. We are grateful to Ben Friedman, Steve King
and Greg Udell for helpful comments. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2232
                                                May 1987




                    Loan Commitments and Monetary Policy




                                  ABSTRACT




     The impact of loan commitment agreements on the way in which changes
in modetary policy affects the economy is examined. In particular, the
empirical relevance of quantity credit rationing in the transmission of
monetary policy is studied with VAR models. We find evidence of a dif-
ferential impact of monetary policy on loans under commitment and not
under commitment. Our conclusion is that credit rationing for bank
loans does occur, although loan commitments effectively protect borrowers
from credit rationing. Thus, loan commitments which insulate borrowers
from the effects of quantity rationing force monetary policy to work ex-
clusively through interest rate channels.




Paul Wachtel                     George Sofianos                Arie Melnik
New York University              New York University            University of Haifa
Graduate School of               Graduate School of             Haifa Israel
  Business Administration           Business Administration
90 Trinity Place                 90 Trinity Place
New York, NY 10006               New York, NY 10006
(212) 285-6142                   (212) 285-6158
 1. INTRODUCTION


     About three-quarters of all bank loans to business in the U.S. are made

 under loan commitment agreements.   Under these agreements, banks promise to

 provide borrowers with funds, up to a ceiling, any time when the need arises,

 during the term of the agreement.    If and when the commitment is used the

 borrower pays an interest rate that is usually related to market rates at the

 time.



     In this paper we examine the impact of these commitments on the way in

which changes in monetary policy affect the economy.        In particular, we

examine the empirical relevance of quantity credit         rationing in the

transmission mechanism of monetary policy. A loan commitment, at least in the

short run, insulates borrowers from the possibility of being quantity

rationed.   So, if indeed such rationing is important we should find that a

tightening of monetary policy has a different effect on loans under commitment

than on other business loans. If this turns out to be the case, the important

Implication is that loan commitments by making quantity rationing largely

irrelevant, force monetary policy to work only through interest rate changes.

To the extent the interest rate channel is less reliable than the quantity

rationing channel, the effectiveness of monetary policy will be reduced.



    So the main hypothesis we will be testing is whether a tightened monetary

policy has a different effect on loans under commitment than on other business

loans.   To test this hypothesis we disaggregate bank loans into loans under

commitment and loans not under commitment and we do causality tests using

vector autoregressions *
                                       2


   We believe our study makes two important contributions.         First, by

disaggregating loans, we devise an empirical test of credit rationing.

Second, we use a data set that to the best of our knowledge has not been

analyzed in the past.      This data set comes from a monthly survey of large

banks, the Federal Reserve has been carrying out since 1973.      The survey

gathers information on the volume of loans under commitment and on total

unused commitments.



    The paper is arranged as follows.      In section 2, the loan commitment

arrangement is briefly described and our data set is presented and discussed.

Section 3 specifies our hypotheses concerning the channels of monetary policy

and relates them to the literature. Causality tests are presented in section

it and the results are summarized in section 5.


2. LOAN COMMITMENTS


2.1.    Institutional Structure

       A loan commitment obligates the lender to make loans up to a maximum

amount but typically it does not fix the interest rate at which the loan will

be made.1 Most often this rate is a premium over the prime rate. Usually,

commitment agreements last about a year and are often routinely rolled over.

In addition, to the interest charge paid when the commitment is used, there is

a fee paid on the unused portion of the commitment. Typically, this fee is




  11t is important to note here that the term loan commitments covers a number
of diverse arrangements.    For example lines of credit, back—up lines of
credit, term loan commitments and revolving credit arrangements all go under
this heading.
                                        3

 about 0.LI% of the unused volume so that maintaining an unused commitment is

 expensive.    In return for the fee, potential borrowers can obtain financing

 without further application or review. However, it is also the case that loan

 commitments often include provisos concerning the borrowers continued credit

 worthiness.


 2.2. Data


    The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve began Its Survey of

Commercial and Industrial Loan Commitments at Selected Large Commercial Banks

in 1973. The monthly survey of approximately 120 banks is the source of our

data on commitments. These data Include both formal contractual and informal

agreements between the lender and borrower. A consistent seasonally adjusted

time series of the data was prepared by David Small of the Board's Banking

Studies Section. Some further adjustments were necessary to make the data

consistent with the survey releases after some recent bank mergers.2 A plot

of data from the loan commitments survey is in Figure 1. It shows the volume

of C&I loans under commitment and also the volume of unused loan commitments

for the period 1973 to 1985.



    Unfortunately, the loan commitments survey does not collect data on the

volume of total C&I loans. The best source of data on the total volume of C&I

loans Is the seasonally adjusted time series prepared by the Federal Reserve

Bank of St. Louis from the Federal Reserve Board's survey of large weekly




  2The original data (not corrected for bank mergers) are published in Board
Statistical Release G.21.
reporting banks.3 These data are sufficiently comparable to the data from the

loan commitments survey to be used together. Figure 2 which shows the volume

of c&r loans and the level of Ml, provides some indication of the importance

of C&I loans. C&I loans outstanding are almost half as large as the money

supply and have grown at a similar rate over the last 15 years.



    The large weekly reporting banks (banks with current assets in excess of

$1.11 billion) own about half of all U.S. commercial bank assets.      Table 1

shows the major asset categories for these banks at the end of 198'L        All

asset categories over 10% of total assets are shown. Since more than two—

thirds of all C&I loans are made under commitment agreements, loans under

commitment are larger than the next largest asset category (real estate

loans). Thus, it is clear that the distinction between C&I loans made under

commitment and not made under commitment is worth exploring. It is well known

that the other major bank asset categories --   investments, real estate loans,
loans to individuals -- behave very differently with respect to monetary and

real changes in the economy. It is our purpose to see whether similarly large

behavioral differences exist for the components of the largest category - C&I

loans.



    Many observers have the impression that the proportion of loans made under




       series has been corrected to account for breaks in the data and the
weekly data were aggregated to form the monthly series used here. There are
now 168 large weekly reporting banks in the sample that provides the total
loan data. There are 119 large banks in the loan commitments survey. Since
there is considerable overlap between the two samples, we feel that the two
series can be used together for time series analysis.
                                      5


commitment has been increasing. However, the data shown in Figures 1 and 2

and summarized in Table 2 do not support this. The proportion of the total

volume of outstanding C&I loans made under commitment does not show any

discernible trend.



    The impression of increasing Importance of loan commitments comes from

another data source which provides information on the terms of new loans: the

quarterly Survey of the Terms of Bank Lending that the Federal Reserve Board

has conducted since 1977.   This survey collects data from 34O banks on the

terms of new loans.   Among the information collected Is the percent of new

loans made under commitment. Table 3 shows the percent of new C&I loans made

under commitment for a subsample of 148 large banks. It indicates that there

has been a rapid increase in the fraction of new loans made under commitment.



    The apparent discrepancy can be understood if we remember that the data in

Figures 1 and 2 and the growth rates In Table 2 are based on stock data while

the data from the Survey of Terms of Bank Lending in Table 3 are flow data, A

larger fraction of new loans are made under commitment and the proportion of

total loans outstanding under commitment is apparently unchanged. These two

observations are consistent because the average term of loans under commitment

has been declining.



    A final interesting aspect of the data in Figure 1 is the rapId rise in

the volume of unused loan commitments. To a large extent this reflects the

fact that many issuers of commercial paper are required to take out credit

lines to reduce risk. Also, some unused commitments may be unuseable if the
                                       6


borrower does not satisfy the performance criteria in the agreement.

Nevertheless,    this enormous stock of unused commitments could have

implications for both the role rationing plays in the transmission of monetary

policy and for the health of the banking system.           For the banking system,

unused commitments represent a potential liability which raises questions of

capital adequacy.     For the macroeconomy, the unused commitments have the

potential of enabling the economy to avoid quantity rationing in periods of

monetary tightness.


    Although the commitments survey data and the data on total C&I loans are

not exactly comparable, it is worth while to investigate the similarities and

differences in the behavior of the two series. We do so by comparing the

growth rates of the two series over different cyclical episodes.           We can

isolate three reference cycle recessions in the available time period.          In

addition we can identify three periods which are commonly called credit

crunches.5      Table 2 shows the annualized growth rates of loans under

commitment and total C&I    loans   in each of these periods.        In periods of

economic and financial distress there is a tendency for loans under commitment

to grow more rapidly than total C&I loans.         This observation confirms our

initial hypothesis that policy may have a differential impact on loans made




  The data from the Survey of the Terms of Bank Lending will not be used
further for two reasons.  First, our interest is in the total bank balance
sheet so that the new loans data is not relevant. Second the data are only
available quarterly for a short period -   since   1977.


  5The reference cycles are the standard NBER-BCD dating. The credit crunches
are based on suggestions made by Eckstein and Sinai (1986).
                                          7


under commitment and those not. Loan commitments are used more intensively in

periods of distress for the simple reason that they are by their very nature a

form of insurance against such situations.


3. LOAN COMMITMENTS AND THE TRANSMISSION OF MONETARY POLICY



3.1. The Availability Doctrine


    The notion that quantity credit rationing is important in the transmission

mechanism of monetary policy, can be traced back to the availability doctrine

developed in the 19508.6         According to this doctrine, monetary policy

influences the real economy, through the availability of bank loans.        A

tightening of monetary policy by creating a reserves shortage raises the cost

of funds to banks.       The higher bank input costs, affect bank loans in two

ways: through loan rates and through quantity rationing.



    As their input costs rise, banks may raise loan rates, causing businesses

to curtail investment and consumers to postpone purchases. We call this the

"interest rate channel".       It suggests a causal relationship from monetary

policy to bank loan rates, to the quantity of bank loans, to real economic

activity.



    The availability doctrine actually emphasized quantity rationing rather

than loan rate changes as the primary cause of a monetary policy induced

economic slowdown. Quantity rationing refers to a reduction in loans over and




 6See   for   example Kareken (1957), Scott (1957) and Tussing (1966).
                                        8



above any interest rate induced reduction.7 As the bank input costs rise,

banks do not raise loan rates sufficiently to clear the market and resort to

credit rationing.8 We call this the "credit rationing channel" and it implies

a direct causal link from changes in monetary policy to changes in bank loans

and hence to real economic activity.9



    Both versions of the availability doctrine are based on two important

assumptions. First it is assumed that a Fed induced change in reserves will

have a significant impact on the cost of funds to the banking industry. But

banks experiencing a reserves shortage, can always purchase funds or liquidate

their government securities portfolio.      So if the supply of funds to the

banking industry is interest elastic, the Fed may fail to significantly raise

the input costs of banks and thus fail to achieve a reduction in bank loans.

A finding of no causality from a monetary policy indicator to bank loans

and/or loan rates will support this view.




  7According to De Leeuw and Gramlich (1969), credit rationing can also
involve changes in loan terms (down payments, compensating balances) which
change the true price of borrowing without being reflected in explicit loan
rates.


  8Scott (1957) suggested that a reason for this is the banks desire to avoid
risk.  Kareken (1957) suggested a "lock-in" effect• because of the banks
unwillingness to sell long term securities at a loss in order to expand
business loans. More recently "equilibrium" credit rationing models have been
developed to explain why banks may not raise rates to clear the market. The
crucial ingredient here are information asymmetries. See for example Keeton
(1979) and Stiglltz and Weiss (1981, 1983).


  9Blinder and Stiglitz (1983) and Blinder (1981), use the "equilibrium"
credit rationing models to emphasize the credit rationing channel.
                                        9


    Second, there is the assumption that bank loans are unique, so that a

reduction in bank loans will inevitably lead to a slowdown in real economic

activity. This need not happen If there are close substitutes to bank loans,

for example commercial paper, corporate bonds and equity.       In such a case

there may be a monetary policy induced fall In bank loans, but no effect on

real economic activity.


3.2. Effect of Commitments


    The fact that most bank loans to business are made under commitment,

changes the picture dramatically. First of all, the great demand for loan

commitments, in Itself, can be viewed as evidence that borrowers fear they may

be quantity rationed in the future.         Loan commitments are essentially an

Insurance policy.        But insurance against what?      Since most of these

commitments do not fix the loan rate in advance, it is not interest rate

uncertainty that borrowers are insuring against.10       Moreover, since these

arrangements, typically can be reviewed if the creditworthiness of the

borrower deteriorates dramatically, they cannot be viewed as an insurance

against such an event.



    One possibility is that loan commitments are a way of reducing transaction

costs and delays in satisfying an unanticipated urgent need for funds.




  10Almost all of the theoretical work on loan commitments and credit lines
assumes that the loan rate is fixed in advance which is not always the case.
See for example Campbell (1978), Thakor, Hong and Greenbaum (1981), Thakor
(1983) and more recently Boot, Thakor and Udell (1986) and Greenbaum and
Berkovitch (1986). In our view, loan commitments emerge as a mechanism that
allows the avoidance of rationing effects on borrowers.
                                      10



Establishing a new banking relationship may involve extensive delays which can

be very costly.    Furthermore, the customer may find that a new banking

relationship is not readily available with as attractive a credit rating.

However, given the high upfront fee expense it is hard to imagine that firms

obtain these commitments just to reduce transaction costs.



    The most plausible explanation, is that loan commitments are a means of

insuring against the possibility of being       rationed:11    through these

commitments, companies make sure they will be able to get credit, at some

price, in the event of a credit crunch. In its absence, the unavailabilty of

funds may sometimes impose serious constraints on the operations of the firm.



    The implications for monetary policy are clear.    Since loan commitments

insulate borrowers from the danger of being quantity rationed in the future,

changes in monetary policy could only affect loans under commitment through

the interest rate channel. Essentially, under a loan commitment, the supply

of funds to the borrower is horizontal at the going market rate, up to the

commitment ceiling.12 If banks raise their lending rates in response to a

scarcity in reserves, we will be moving up the loan demand schedule. If banks

do not raise loan rates sufficiently to clear the market so that they have to




       a few cases loan commitments may have a strategic motivation, e.g. to
indicate seriousness in a take-over bid.


  2For simplicity in our discussion we assume the commitment ceilings do not
bind. Ham and Melnik (1985) find some evidence that for corporate borrowers
these ceilings occasionally bind. On the other hand, Sofianos (1986), finds
that for consumers, ceilings on bank credit cards do not bind.
                                       11



 resort to rationing, it is those without commitment agreements that will be

 rationed.   Thus the brunt of the impact of a tightened monetary policy is

 likely to fall on loans not under commitment.



    Our maintained hypothesis is represented by case 3, in Table .    Monetary
policy affects the cost of inputs to banks and this effect is transmitted to

the market for bank loans through both the interest rate channel and the

credit rationing channel.     Loans are disaggregated into loans not under

commitment (NUC) and loans under commitment (LUC). The interest rate channel

is represented by arrows from monetary policy (MP) to loan rates (LR) to both

types of loans.13 The credit rationing channel is represented by the direct

arrow from monetary policy to loans not under commitment.     Credit rationing

does not affect loans under commitment. We also hypothesise that bank loans

are unique, so that supply side induced changes in bank loans will affect real

economic activity (IP), hence the arrows from both types of loans to IP.



    If only the interest rate channel is operating and there is no credit

rationing, there should be no direct effect from monetary policy to loans

under commitment: Case 2 in Table I.        So the crucial test confirming the

presence of quantity rationing is direct causality from monetary policy to

loans not under commitment.     Unless the two types of loans are examined

separately, any evidence of rationing may be obscured by the fact that the




  3The interest rate effect on the two types of loans need not be the same.
The only evidence on the interest rate elasticity of commitments and loan
demand under commitment can be found in Kim, Plaut and Melnik (1986). They
analyze a sample of loan commitments and conclude that there is considerable
interest elasticity of both loan demand and the demand for commitments.
                                      12



market is dominated by loans under commitment.



    Table 4 also presents a number of other possibilities.       If there are no

interest rate effects (e.g. if loan demand is interest inelastic), and only

the credit rationing channel is operating, monetary policy can affect real

economic activity only through loans not under commitment, Case 1.       If bank

loans are not unique there should be no causation from either type of loan to

real economic activity, Case 4.    Finally, Case 5, represents the situation

when monetary policy has no significant effect on bank inputs.14


3.3. Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy


    A recent paper by King (1986) examines the transmission mechanism of

monetary policy through bank loans.    King finds evidence of a direct link

between a measure of liquidity (demand deposits) and economic activity, rather

than an indirect link through bank loans.15 Changes in bank loans do not

appear to Granger cause economic activity. This finding is confirmed in a

more recent study by Bernanke (1986). King also finds very little evidence

that banks ration loans, although banks themselves appear to be liquidity

constrained, especially in periods of "tight money".    One interpretation of

these findings is that although the interest rate channel seems to be working,




  14 Table 4 we only present policy induced causation patterns. Any reverse
causation from real economic activity to bank loans, loan rates and/or our
monetary policy measures we interprete as caused by changes in the demand for
loans.


  15B    Friedman (1982) reaches a somewhat different conclusion. He finds
that total credit is more closely related to real economic activity than
narrower measures of liquidity.
                                       13



 the relevant interest rate elasticities are not big enough for a rise in

 interest rates to cause a significant economic slowdown.



     Another interpretation is that both the relationship between monetary

policy and the supply of bank loans and the relationship between bank loans

and economic activity, are dominated by the large fraction of loans made under

commitment.    It is necessary to disaggregate in order to see whether the

credit rationing channel is indeed important for loans not under commitment.

If this is the case, the conclusion would be that the increasing popularity of

loan commitments has reduced the impact of monetary policy, by confining the

credit rationing channel to a small subset of loans.            This possible

consequence of loan commitments was first noted by Wojnilower (1980).          He

argues that the growth in commitments was a response to the threat of credit

crunches. He is primarily concerned, however, with their implications for the

adequacy of bank capital rather than on their impact on monetary policy.


1   THE EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE


     In this section the channels of causality discussed in the previous

section are tested.    VAR techniques are used to investigate causality among

monetary policy, interest rates, bank loans and economic activity.         Vector

autoregressions are well suited for this type of investigation which focuses

on issues of causality without specifying a full structural model of all

relevant interrelationships.     It is a valuable technique for testing

directions of causality among a set of variables with a model that does not

impose any structural priors.
    The VAR models are estimated from July 1973 to October 1985.           The

estimation period is short because the loan survey data is only available

since 1973.16 The data are monthly which we believe is a distinct advantage

for examining the channels of monetary Influence.    It is likely that many of

the existing causal patterns would be obscured with quarterly data.



    The data on loans have already been extensively discussed in section 2.

The following terminology is used for the loan variables:      GIL stands for

total C&I loans, LUC represents C&I loans made under commitment and NUG, C&I

loans not under commitment, NUC   CIL - LUC.17   The additional variables which

appear in the models are indicators of monetary policy, interest rates and a

measure of real economic activity.      These variables were taken from the

Citibase data tape. The indicators of monetary policy tested are:




  l6Although the period is short, it does include several full business
cycles.  Making things more difficult for us the sample period includes at
least one important policy regime change. Unfortunately, the number of sample
points is too small to examine differences across regimes.


  171n doing this disaggregation two issues must be considered. First, as
discussed in section 2, the data series for LIJC is not entirely comparable to
the series for CIL because the two series are constructed from two different
survey samples. The two samples are sufficiently similar so that we feel this
is not an important problem. Second, instead of constructing NUC In this way,
we could have estimated regressions with LUC and CIL and then tried to make
inferences about the behavior of NUC. For example, suppose monetary policy
affects CIL but it does not affect LUG. Does this imply that monetary policy
must affect NUC? The answer is no, not necessarily. The correlations of the
errors could be such that the results from an LUG, NUC specification can be
quite different from the results from an LUG, CIL specification.            An
unexplained shock could have opposite effects on LUG and NUC, so that the
dynamic behavior of the aggregate series could be very different from that of
its components. We believe that nothing can be learnt about the behavior of
NUC by examining the behavior of LUC and GIL.
                                      15


    Ml -- Narrowly defined money supply
    DD -- Total bank demand deposits
    NBR -- Nonborrowed reserves
    FF -- Average effective Federal Funds rate.


Some of these can be viewed as truly exogenous (e.g. NBR) while others are

subject to feedback effects from the level of economic activity (e.g. Ml).

The interest rate variables used in our experiments are:

    RCP -- Commercial paper rate
    RP —- Prime rate.


The commercial paper rate is a representative short-term interest rate

which is likely to vary closely with bank loan rates. We view it as a better

proxy for loan rates than the prime rate which is not as sensitive to changes

in financial conditions. Finally, the level of real economic activity Is

measured by the index of industrial production (IP).




    Since the number of degrees of freedom Is limited (there are 160 monthly

observations), the VAR systems estimated restrict the number of lags to 12 for

each variable. All variables are in logs and the data (except interest rates)

are seasonally adjusted. Each VAR system includes trend and trend squared

terms.



   The first set of relationships to be examined concern the transmission of

monetary policy shocks to loan rates and on to bank loans. Table 5 presents

the significance levels of the F statistics for Granger causality tests for

two systems.   The first treats C&I loans as an aggregate and the second

separates them Into two parts depending on whether the loans are made under

commitment or not. The column heads represent the dependent variables. The
                                      16



significance of the determinants of the respective dependent variables is

found by reading down the column. An asterisk indicates significance at the

10% level.



    Table 5(A) shows support for the credit rationing channel; there is a

direct effect from Ml to CIL.    Although Ml strongly causes interest rates,

interest rates do not cause loans, so that the interest rate channel is

inoperative.   However, in Panel (B) where CIL is disaggregated there is

evidence of both the interest rate and credit rationing channels.       The

monetary policy indicator (Ml) has a direct effect on loans not under

commitment and no effect on loans under commitment. In addition, Ml affects

both types of loans indirectly through interest rates.    The interest rate

effect on loans under commitment, however, is weak, significant only at the

15% level.18 The results here support our maintained hypothesis. Notice that

in both models there is feedback from RCP to Ml which reflects the fact that

the money supply Is to some extent endogenous.



    A VAR system can also be used to calculate the proportion of each

variable's forecast error which can be attributed to the Innovations In each

variable In the model. This procedure is called a variance decomposition. It

requires Inverting the estimated autoregressive equations so that each

variable appears as a function of lags in the innovations in itself and the

other variables in the model.          The variance decomposition uses an




  18A joint significance test for the effect of both Ml and RCP on LUC was
carried out. No evidence of joined causality Is found (the F statistic is
1 .2k).
                                      17



orthogonalized version of the errors which depends on the ordering of the

variables.19 In all cases we use the ordering implicit in the discussion in

section 3.   It is the order in which. the variables appear in Table 5.   This

ordering assumes that monetary policy is exogenous and does not react to

economic conditions which might be the case in certain policy regimes.     The

variance decomposition results are important because they provide some

indication of the magnitude of the relationships among the variables.



    The variance decomposition results for the system shown in Panel (B) of

Table 5 are summarized in Table 6. The decomposition is shown for forecast

horizons of 12 and 36 months. Each entry in the table Is the percent of the

variance in the forecast error of the row variable attributable to the

variable at the column head. The results indicate that interest rates have a

small influence on both LUC and NUC (6% in both cases, at 36 months).

Contrary to our priors, Ml has a larger impact on loans made under commitment

than on loans not under commitment (22% and L% respectively, at 36 months).

This finding contradicts the results In Table 5(B).     Forced to choose, we

believe the causality tests are the more reliable, since the variance

decompositions depend on the size of coefficients many of which are

individually insignificant.


    In Table 7 we present causality tests with each of the models in Table 5




  19Cooley and Leroy (1985) express some reservations about VAR modelling in
part because of this subjective element. However, the causality tests which
are our principle interest are not subject to this critique. In addition, the
variance decompositions for our results were largely robust to changes in the
ordering of the variables.
                                     18


extended to include industrial production.     Panel (A) again provides strong

support for our maintained hypothesis.       There is evidence of both direct

effects on C&I loans from monetary policy (rationing channel) and indirect

effects through interest rates. In addition bank loans cause real activity.

As before, there is feedback from RCP to Ml; although there is none from IP or

CIL to RCP.



    The results in Panel (B) are for a five variable VAR system. We should

view these with some caution because the estimation uses up a large number of

degrees of freedom. Nevertheless, some interesting inferences can be drawn.

There Is a very distinct difference between loans under commitment and not

under commitment. C&I loans made under commitment are entirely exogenous. A

joint significance test for Ml, RCP and IP supports this exogenelty finding:

there Is no evidence of joint causality from these three variables to C&I

loans under commitment (the F statistic is 1.3).        Loans not made under

commitment arrangements are affected both by interest rates and directly by

monetary policy (the rationing channel).      The disappointing aspect of this

particular set of results is that contrary to our maintained hypothesis

interest rates do not affect loans under commitment.     Another disappointing

result is the apparent exogeneity of industrial production.      Loans neither

individually nor jointly have any significant effect on IP.2° A possible

explanation for this result is that bank loans are not unique. As mentioned

in section 3, a monetary policy shock which reduces loan volume may not effect




  20The F statistic for the joint significance test Is 1.15.      The critical
value at the 5% significance level is roughly 1.7.
                                       19


real activity if there are available substitutes for bank financing.



    More generally, the exogeneity of industrial production can be interpreted

as supporting the real business cycle view which states that the financial

sector responds passively to exogenous real sector shocks (King and Plosser

(1984)).   However, such an interpretation may be premature for two reasons.

First, although each individual variable in the I? regression is insignificant

there is some evidence that Ml, RCP, LIJC and NUC, jointly have some

explanatory power. The F statistic for this joint significance test is 1.55

which is slightly higher than the critical value at the 5% significance level

(1.52). Moreover, the differences between the results in Panels (A) and (B)

indicate some sensitivity of the causality orderings to specification changes.

As will be shown below this sensitivity does not depend on the choice of

monetary policy indicator or interest rates.     Instead, it only depends on

whether CIL is disaggregated or not.



    Although the causality tests in Panel (B) of Table T indicate that IP is

not significantly caused by loans, the variance decomposition results for the

system show sizeable effects. These results are shown In Table 8. There are

some reasonably large effects of the loan variables on IP when the forecast

horizon is lengthy. With a 36 month horizon, loans not under commitment have

a larger effect (10%) on the variance of forecast errors of IP than do loans

under commitment (6%). This provides some evidence that loans not under

commitment are more important in determining economic fluctuations.       The

impact of interest rates on LUC and NUC are about the same size, while Ml has

a larger impact on NUC. This is consistent with the hypothesis that monetary
                                      20


policy has a larger direct effect on loans not under commitment:         the

commitment arrangements imply that NUC bears the brunt of any rationing

effect. Again, like in Table 6, the direct effect of Ml is larger on LUC than

on NIJC which is contrary to our expectations.



    The VAR models shown in Tables 5 and 7 are for the most part robust with

respect to changes in the specification of the interest rate and monetary

policy variables.   Causality tests with alternative variable specifications

are shown in Table 9. The prime rate was tried as an alternative measure of

the loan rate. The results in Table 9(A) can be compared to those in Table

5(B) which use the commercial paper rate. As before the interest rate and Ml

channels are stronger on NUC than on LUC.



    The next three panels of the table use alternative indicators of monetary

policy.   The model in Panel B uses demand deposits as the monetary policy

variable like in King (1986). The results shown here suggest that loans under

commitment are exogenous. Similar results are found with the Federal Funds

rate (Panel C), but not with nonborrowed reserves (Panel D).    In this last

system, the results are the opposite of what we expect.



    King finds that Ml dominates C&I loans in causing economic activity.

However, his measure of economic activity is "nominal industrial production,"

the index of industrial production multiplied by the Consumer Price Index.

With that measure, his results are replicated with our data. Causality from

loans to nominal IP is weak (significant at the 10% level only) and causality

from Ml to the real sector is significant at the 5% level. There is however a
                                      21



readily available and more sensible monthly measure of aggregate nominal

economic activity: personal income.   However, with personal income, both Ml

and C&I loans are exogenous. Generally, both ours and King's results indicate

some sensitivity to the specification of the real sector variable.


5. CONCLUDING COMMENTS


    Using vector autoregressions and a unique data set, we find some evidence

of a differential impact of monetary policy on loans under commitment and not

under commitment.   Both types of loans respond to fluctuations in interest

rates, but loans not under commitment are also directly affected by monetary

policy. This result can be interpreted as evidence of quantity rationing of

loans not under commitment. Thus, the eagerness of borrowers to obtain, at

considerable expense, loan commitments can be understood as a desire to insure

against any such rationing.



    Our conclusion is that credit rationing does occur in the market for bank

loans. However, loan commitments effectively protect borrowers from quantity

rationing. The implication is that loan commitments by insulating borrowers

from the effects of quantity rationing force monetary policy to work

exclusively through interest rate changes.     The interest rate channel is

likely to be more slow and less reliable than the rationing channel, so that

the effectiveness of monetary policy will be reduced.    This implication and

the observation that the volume of unused commitments has increased rapidly,

leads us to expect that monetary policy is likely to become even less

effective in the future.
                                     22


    We consider our results in many respects preliminary. First, we only look

at business loans.   Credit crunches may also have a differential impact on

household borrowing. Second, our data set on loan commitments only covers a

relatively short period. Third, tests based on structural models like that

specified by King (1986) and on mixed VAR-structural models as suggested by

Bernanke (1986) can throw more light on the whole issue. Finally, there is

another possible explanation for our finding that rationing has no effect on

loans under commitment.   This may be so not because commitments effectively

protect borrowers from rationing but because the borrowers that get these

commitments are those that would not have been rationed anyway. Commitments

are useful for these borrowers as a signalling device. If this is the true

explanation then commitments have no implications for the transmission

mechanism of monetary policy.   It is very difficult to distinguish between

these two alternative explanations, but clearly some attempt should be made.
                                      Figure 1

C & I Loans Under Commitment and Unused Commitments




      400
                                                                              x
                                                                         1,
                                                                          p.-,

                                                                    .1
                                                               I
                                                              —I
                                                         ——


      300'
CI)




0                                              -.
                                           1'
0 200-
CI)


0


      100-

                                                                                       Legend
                                                                                      zLUC
                                                                                      >K ULUC
        0-             I       I
            72   74   76      78          80        82             54            56
                                   Time
                                       Figure 2

Total C&I Loans and Ml




       700—



       600 H




 c o00
 0
 0
C4-4
       400-
 U)

 0
       300-

                                                 1
       200—                                  /                            Legend
                                                                         ' Ml

       100
             72   74   76
                            _r__r rf
                            78    80       82        84
                                                          -r
                                                               86   38
                                                                         > OILCAN


                                 Time
                                   Table 1

       All Large Weekly Reporting Banks —    %   Of Total Assets, 1984
                  Investments                12%
                  Loans                      61
                        C&I                  24
                        Real Estate          15
                        Individuals          11


                                   Table 2

                 Annualized Growth Rates of C&I Loans

                            Loans Under                  Total C&I
                            Commitment                   Loans


Overall   sample period:
73—8 to   85—10             7.7                          7.5
73—8 to   81—1              8.6                          7.0
81—1 to   85—10             6.4                          8.3
Recessions:
73—il to 75—3               20.9                         13.7
80—1 to 80—7                —1.2                          1.4
81—1 to 82—11                7.4                         10.3
Credit crunches:
73—8 to 74—8                24.7                         18.0
78—1 to 80—3                49.8                         36.1
81—i to 82—1                14.4                         13.5


                                  Table 3
          Proportion on New C&I Loans Made Under Commitment

1977     56.6%
1978     55.6
1979     54.2
1980     54.7
1981     53.0
1982     62.8
1983     67.0
1984     72.5
1985     74.4

Source: Survey of Terms of Bank Lending
                     Table 4:        Possible Causation Patterns

1. Monetary Policy affects bank inputs, banks are unique, only credit
     rationing channel.

               MP                           )NTJC
                           LR                             -
                                             LUC —   -        IP
2.   Monetary Policy affects bank inputs, banks are unique, only interest
     rates channel.




3. Monetary Policy affects bank inputs, banks are unique, credit
   rationing and interest rates channels.

               MP                             NUC




1L Monetary Policy affects bank inputs, banks are not unique.

                                              NUC
              Asinl,2or3
                                              LUC

5. Monetary Policy does not affect bank inputs.

                                        )
               MP
                           LR
                                1/            NUC)
                                                     )    •IP
                                                         ____
                                                           /
                                              LUCJ
Notation

     NP:   monetary policy
     LR:   loan rates
     LUC: loans under commitment
     NUC: loans not under commitment
     IP:   real economic activity
                                             Table 5


                       Significance Levels for Causality Tests


 (A)                     Ml          RCP           CIL
            Ml.        0.00*        0.00*         0.05*
            RCP        0.01*        0.00*         0.54
            CIL        0.41         0.44          0.00*

(B)                     Ml          RCP          LUC         NUC
            Ml        0.00*         0.00*        0.83        0.10*
            RCP       0.00*         0.00*        0.15        0.01*
            LUC       0.03*         0.59         0.00*       0.10*
            NUC       0.15          0.18         0.19        0.00*




                                             Table 6

                  Variance Decomposition of VAR          System   in Table 5(B)


                               Ml      RCP         LUC       NUC
Dependent   Variable:
Ml
       12 months               39         20       28        13
       36 months               23           13     27        36
RcP
       12 months               46         37       14         2
       36 months               30         23       35        11
LUC
       12 months               14         12       44        29
       36 months               22           6      45        27
NUC
       12 months                4           4      16        76
       36 months                4           6      18        72
                                          Table 7

      Significance Levels for Causality Test With Industrial Production


(A)                   Ml          RCP         CIL         IP
           Ml       0.00*        0.00*        0.00*      0.16
           RCP      0.00*        0.00*        0.02*      0.23
           CIL      0.71         0.60         0.00*      0.05*
           IP       0.09*        0.32         0.02*      0.00*



(B)                    Ml         RCP          LUC        NUC          IP
           Ml       0.00*        0.00*        0.49       0.07*     0.31
           RCP      0.02*        0.00*        0.15       0.03*     0.58
           LUC      0.19         0.45         0.00*      0.15      0.51
           NUC      0.05*        0.19         0.43       0.00*     0.24
           IP       0.10*        0.18         0.30       0.].].    0.00*




                                          Table 8

                Variance Decomposition of VR System in Table 7(B)

                            Ml          RCP     LUC       NUC     IP
Dependent Variable:
Ml
     12 months              28           18      16       23      15
     36 months              18           21      12       2].     28

RCP
      12 months             29           36          8      4     23
      36 months             14           26      15       17      28

LUC
      12 months             25           10     47        11       6
      36 months             13            7      37       21      23

NUC
      12 months              3           15      18       40      23
      36 months              5           22      19       29      26

'P
      l2months              7             7         4       3     78
      36 months             8            19         6     10      57
                               Table 9


      Significance Levels With Alternative VAR Specifications



(A)             Ml       RP       LUC     NUC
      Ml     0.00*     0.00*     0.44     0.20
      RP     0.03*     0.00*     0.13     0.08*
      LUC    0.29      0.11      0.00*    0.21
      NIJC   0.20      0.03*     0.13     0.00*

(B)            DD       RCP       LUC     NUC
      DD     0.00*     0.01*     0.53     0.19
      RCP    0.00*     0.00*     0.30     0.09*
      LUC    0.20      0.70      0.00*    0.35
      NUC    0.27      0.85      0.14     0.00*

(C)            FF      RCP        LUC     NUC
      FF     0.03*     0.21      0.45     0.23
      RCP    0.60      0.04*     0.28     0.02*
      LUC    0.38      0.52      0.00*    0.02*
      NUC    0.86      0.54      0.09*    0.00*

(D)          RES        RCP       LUC     NUC
      RES    0.00*     0.40      0.02*    0.29
      RCP    0.45      0.00*     0.00*    0.12
      LUC    0.43      0.06*     0.00*    0.27
      NUC    0.53      0.07*     0.18     0.00*
                                 REFERENCES

BERNANKE, B.   (1986), "Alternative Explanations of the Money -          Income
               Correlation," NBER Working Paper, No. 18142

BLINDER, A. AND J. STIGLITZ, (1983), "Money, Credit Constraints, and Economic
               Activity," American Economic Review, 73, May, pp. 297—302.

BLINDER, A. (19814), "Credit, Working Capital, and Effective Supply Failures,"
                manuscript, Princeton University.

BOOT A., A. THAKOR AND G. UDELL, (1986), "Competition, Risk Neutrality and
               Loan Commitments," mlmeo, New York University, October.

CAMPBELL, T. (1978), "A Model of the Market for Lines of Credit," Journal of
               Finance, 33, pp. 231_1114.


COOLEY, T. AND S. LEROY, (1985), "Atheoretical Macroeconometrics: A Critique,"
                Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, pp. 283-308.

DELEEUW, F. AND E. GRAMLICH, (1969), "The Channels of Monetary Policy,"
               Federal Reserve Bulletin, 55, June, pp. 1472-91.

ECKSTEIN, 0. AND A. SINAI, (1986), "The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in
               the Postwar Era," in R. J. Gordon, ed. The American Business
               Cycle: Continuity and Change, University of Chicago Press for
                the NBER.


FRIEDMAN, B. (1982), "Using a Credit Aggregate Target to Implement Monetary
               Policy in the Financial Environment of the Future," Monetary
               Policy Issues in the 1980's, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas.

GREENBAUM S. AND E. BERKOVITCH, (1986), "The Loan Commitment as an Optimal
               Financing Contract," BRC WP 11130, Northwestern University,
               May.

HAM, J. AND A. MELNIK, (1985), "Loan Demand: An Empirical Analysis Using Micro
               Data," manuscript, Haifa University.

KAREKEN, J.    (1957),   "Lenders Preferences, Credit Rationing and the
               Effectiveness of Monetary Policy," Review of Economics and
               Statistics, Vol. 39, August, pp. 292-302.

KIM, M., S. PLAUT AND A. MELNIK (1985), "Loan Demand: An Empirical Analysis
               Using Micro Data," manuscript.
KEETON, W. (1979), Equilibrium Credit Rationing, Garland Press.


KING, R. AND C. PLOSSER, (1984), "Money, Credit and Prices in a Real Business
                Cycle," American Economic Review, 74, pp. 363-80.

KING, S. (1986), "Monetary Transmission: Through Bank Loans or Bank
                Liabilities?", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 28,
                August, pp. 290—303.

SCOTT, I. (1957), "The Availability Doctrine: Theoretical Underpinnings,"
                Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 25, October, pp. 421-48.

SOFIANOS, G. (1986), "Credit Cards and Liquidity Demand," New York University,
                mimeo

STIGLITZ, J. AND A. WEISS,   (1981),   "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
                Information," American Economic Review, 71, June, pp. 393-410.

STIGLITZ, J. AND A. WEISS, (1983), "Incentive Effects of Terminations,"
                American Economic Review, 73, December, pp. 912—927.

THAKOR, A. (1982), "Towards a Theory of Bank Loan Commitments," Journal of
                Banking and Finance, 6, pp. 55-84.

THAKOR, A., H. HONG AND S. GREENBAUM, (1981), "Bank Loan Commitments and
                Interest Rate Volatility," Journal of Banking and Finance, 5,
                pp. 497—510.


TUSSING, D. (1966), "Can Monetary Policy Influence the Availability of
               Credit," Journal of Finance, Vol. 21, March, pp. 1-13.

WOJNILOWER, A. (1980), "The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent
               Financial History," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No.
               2, pp. 277-326.
