                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ECONOMETRIC MODELING AS
                             INFORMATION AGGREGATION




                                   Ray C. Fair

                                Robert J. Shiller




                             Working Paper No. 2233




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2233
                                                May 1987




              Econometric Modeling as Information Aggregation




                                 ABSTRACT



     A forecast produced by an econometric model is a weighted aggregate of
predetermined variables in the model. In many models the number of
predetermined variables used is very large, often exceeding the number of
observations. A method is proposed in this paper for testing an econometric
model as an aggregator of the information in these predetermined variables
relative to a specified subset of them. The test, called the "information
aggregation" (IA) test, tests whether the model makes effective use of the
information in the predetermined variables or whether a smaller information
set carries as much information.   The method can also be used to test one
model against another.

      The method is used to test the Fair model as an information
aggregator. The Fair model is also tested against two relatively non
theoretical models: a VAR model and an "autoregressive components" (AC)
model. The AC model, which is new in this paper, estimates an
autoregressive equation for each component of real Off?, with real GNP being
identically determined as the sum of the components. The results show that
the AC model dominates the VAR model, although both models are dominated by
the Fair model. The results also show that the Fair model seems to be a
good information aggregator.




Ray C. Fair                                          Robert J. Shiller
Cowles Foundation                                    Cowles Foundation
Box 2125, Yale Station                               Box 2125, Yale Station
New Haven, CT 06520                                  New Haven, CT 06520
                ECONOMETRIC MODELING AS INFORMATION AGGREGATION

                                     by

                      Ray C. Fair and Robert J. Shiller



 I. Introduction

      Structural econometric models often make use of large information sets

 in forecasting a given variable. The information sets used in large-scale

 macroeconometric models are typically so large that the number of

 predetermined variables exceeds the number of observations available for

 estimating the model. Estimation can proceed
                                                  effectively only because of
 the large number of a-priori restrictions imposed on the model, restrictions

 that do not work out to be simple exclusion
                                                restrictions on the reduced form
 equation for the variable forecasted. The
                                               a-priori restrictions make the
model an aggregator of information, an aggregator that could not have been

produced without the restrictions.

     Are these restrictions basically
                                          right in producing derived reduced
forms that depend on so much information?
                                              Is the large amount of

information being applied usefully, for the purpose of forecasting, or is

most of it extraneous? With enough
                                     observations, it is possible to test all
the overidentifying restrictions of a model. One need only compare the

unrestricted estimate of the reduced form against the restricted reduced

form. The problem with this approach in practice is that with large-scale

econometric models there are not enough observations to estimate the

unrestricted reduced form, even if this can in principle be done.1 Also,



     11n practice most structural macroeconometric models
                                                          are nonlinear,
which means that analytic expressions for the reduced form equations are
generally not available.
                                     3

for present purposes we are not interested in testing models against such

general alternatives. We would like to test models against much simpler

alternatives. We cannot, of course, compare a structural model against all

possible simpler alternatives, but parsimony and a sense of relative

importance of predetermined variables may lead to a specification of an

information set that would be in most simple models.

     What variables should one include in a simple model to test a more

complicated model against? Advocates of autoregressive forecasting models

are one possible source of such an information set. Nelson (1972) and

Cooper and Nelson (1975) argued that a simple univariate autoregression

would be a good forecaster of real GNP, in which case the information set

consists only of lagged values of real CNP. Vector autoregressive

techniques restrict the elements of the vector of explanatory variables by

excluding all but the most "important" variables. Importance is apparently

judged intuitively. Thus, for example, Sims (1980) confines the elements in

his vector to real CNP, the GNP deflator, the unemployment rate, the nominal

wage, the import price deflator, and the money stock (all these variables

except the unemployment rate are in logs). Litterman (serial) before August

1984 confined the elements of his vector to real GNP, the GNP deflator, the

unemployment rate, real nonresidential fixed investment, the money stock,

and the three-month Treasury bill rate. In August 1984 Litterman (1984)

added the value of the trade weighted U.S. dollar and the Standard and

Poor's 500 stock price index. This is the VAR model that is now being used

by Sims (serial) for periodic forecasts. In these and other cases the list

of variables included sounds like the list of variables in a simple textbook

macroeconomic model.
                                       4

      The model-free forecasting methods are motivated by a great mistrust of

 the overidentifying restrictions imposed by macroeconometric modelers - -      see
 for example Liu (1960), Sims (1980), (1986). No case, however, has ever

 been made that the overidentifying restrictions
                                                     are so inaccurate that one
 is better off restricting the forecasting equations as done in the vector

 autoregressive methodology. We examine this issue below.

      In Section II we describe our methodology for testing models. The

 models that are tested are discussed in Section III. In this section we

 introduce an "autoregressive components" (AC) model, which is a

nontheoretical simple model that is based on the idea that there may be

 important information in the components of GNP. The results of the tests

are presented in Section IV.



II. Tests of Models as Information Agregators

      Consider an econometric model forecast       made with information through
period t-1. Let Z denote a small information vector of dimension k (small

relative to the number of predetermined variables
                                                         in the model), where the
variables in Z are known as of the end of period t-1. Consider the

regression equation:


(l)                        + ZS + u , t        =         ..., T
                                                   T1,

where EYu and EZu equal zero and where -y is a scalar and S is a k x

vector of coefficients.2 We will estimate such
                                                   regression equations below.

     2We refer to equation (1) as a regression 'equation' rather than
                                                                      as a
regression 'model' to avoid confusion with the econometric model that gave

rise to Y. The equation may be considered as just the projection or
                                         5

There are four possible outcomes when this equation is estimated: 1) neither

the estimate of -y nor the estimate of S is statistically significant, 2)

both estimates are significant, 3) the estimate of -y but not of 5 is

significant, and 4) the estimate of S but not of -y is significant. We first

explore the meaning of each of these outcomes.

      Consider first the extreme case in which the true model is simply Y =

                                  Z5. If the model under consideration uses
Z6   + u, so that E(YtIYt, Zt)
only information in Z or in a subset of Z and if Y is simply a linear

combination of some or all of the variables in Z, then        and Z will be

perfectly correlated and the coefficients in equation (1) cannot be defined

uniquely. If       is (incorrectly) based on variables not in Z, then the

perfect collinearity is broken, and       (the true   in the theoretical

regression (1)) will be zero. Therefore, if the true model is very simple -

- remember that Z is meant to be a small subset of the predetermined

variables in a typical macroeconometric model - - -y will either be zero or

not capable of being determined. This implies that rejecting the null

hypothesis H01 that -y = 0 can be construed as showing that the true model

contains variables other than those in Z and that the model under

consideration captures at least some of these additional variables.

      Now relax the assumption that the true model is simple. Consider the

case where Y E(YlI), where             is a vector of information variables that

includes as elements the elements of Z and other variables. In this case

     is not perfectly collinear with Z, and in the theoretical regression -y


                                   A
theoretical regression of Y onto     and Z . That is, the coefficients -y
and S in the theoretical regression are dehned as coefficients that

minimize Eu.
                                        6

 is one and 6 is zero. This implies that
                                             rejecting the null hypothesis H02
 that S = 0 can be construed as showing that the model under
                                                             consideration is
 missing some information included in
                                        Z.
      Although the hypotheses     and H02 are fairly straightforward to test,

 they are extreme in that they disregard estimation error in the model that

 produced Y.3 We now turn to the realistic case in which the forecast         is

 based only on estimates of the coefficients of the model, not the true

 values themselves.

      Since we do not want to take account of the estimation method used to

produce the model that gave rise to Y, it is essential that the model be

estimated with information only through period t-l.4 In order for the

forecast     to be based only on information through period t-l, the model

generating the forecast must not be estimated beyond period t-l.    One
possibility, which we will call "full sample rolling regression," is to use

the maximum available number of observations for each period to estimate the

model each period: for the forecast for period T1 the model is estimated


        classical statistics, the forecast Y from a model is not
regarded as the conditional expectation E(YjI), but rather as an estimate

of this conditional expectation. In Bayesian statistics, the forecast
may indeed be regarded as E(YII ), but in this case the expectation
operator E is construed as operating over parameter values as well as values
of the noise term u. Thus, the parameters -y and 6 have their hypothesized

values under H02 only if the Eu is minimized over the prior distribution
as well. In real world data, we observe only one drawing from the prior
distribution.

     4For example, suppose the sample period used to estimate the model
extends through the sample used to estimate (1). Suppose the estimation
method for the model uses up all degrees of freedom and obtains a perfect
fit in its forecasts. Our estimates of (1) would show a spurious domination
of the model over the information set
                                      Z. As long as we regard the
estimation method for the model as a black box, there is no way to take
account of the degrees of freedom used up in estimation of the model.
                                        7

using data from T0 through T1-l, for the forecast for period T1+l the model

is estimated using data from T0 through T1, and so on. (Given the data set,

T0 is meant to be the first observation that can be used in the estimation,

after accounting for lags.) This is the procedure followed for the

empirical results in Section IV. Another possibility is a "fixed sample

size rolling regression," where the starting observation is increased by one

each time the ending observation is. A third possibility is simply to

estimate the model once through period T1-l and use this version for all the

future forecasts. We have chosen the full sample rolling regression because

it makes maximum use of the available data. Unless otherwise noted,

"rolling regression" in what follows will refer to full sample rolling

regression.

     Having a forecast be based only on information through the previous

period may lead to a situation in which, paradoxically, a model seems to be

dominated by its own information set. Assume again that the true model is

simply        Z& +   u and that the model under consideration is specified
correctly. Assume that Y Z81, where 8t-l is estimated by rolling
regressions. Even though the structural model makes use of the same

information as in Z, we will not observe perfect collinearity between

and Z, as we would if there were no estimation error, since the parameter

     used to define       is stochastic. In this case -y in the theoretical

regression will be zero. Thus, the rolling regression forecast j. dominated

by its own information set in the sense that there is a linear combination

of the information variables that does a better job forecasting than does

the rolling regression. When data are used to estimate -y and 8, Z has an

advantage over       because the regression can choose the coefficients of Z
                                             8

  to fit the current observations, while
                                                 the rolling-regression coefficients
  that determine
                     are determined by past observations.
        Let us again relax the assumption that the true model is simple. We

 saw above that when       =
                               E(YtII   ), where I includes         and other variables,
 then y = 1 and 8
                      0 in equation (1). What can we say in the presence of
 estimation error? In this case -y tends to be less than one even though the

 model uses more information than that
                                             contained in Z. To see this, it is
 useful to regard Y as equal to E(YjI) +
                                                         where      is the "estimation
 error." Assume that the estimation
                                           error is uncorrelated with current
 information I and with the current residual u in (1). This assumption

 seems likely to be a good approximation. In the case where the econometric

 model is a linear regression model of
                                            Y onto a vector I with i.i.d. errors
 independent of all past, present, and future values of I, we can prove the

assumption. In this case          =
                                           -fi), where (fl. -) is a linear function
of lagged error terms in the regression over the entire estimation period

for        It follows that        is uncorrelated with I and u. With this

assumption, we can use standard errors-in-variables
                                                               results (as applied to
theoretical regressions rather than regression estimates) to assess the

impact of estimation error on equation (1).

       So long as I includes relevant information not in
                                                         Z (so that a
regression of      on E(YtJIt) and Z would produce        -y     1 and 8   0), then we
would expect to see a positive coefficient on
                                                            In fact, the coefficient
  of     will equal 1 -
                          2xll/(l+v2x11)         where    is the variance of
                                                                               , x11
is the upper-left corner element of
                                          E(Xxt)1, and             [E(YtII) ZJ.
Thus, the coefficient of
                             Y must lie between zero and one. Moreover, if one
then expands Z to include another element also in
                                                  It' -y can never increase
                                               9

                             5           .
                                     We will see this happening in the tables below,
and will generally fall.

by comparing rows with different numbers of Z variables.6 As one continues

to add other variables to Z that are in                the coefficient -y will tend to

fall until, when all are included, y will equal zero as long as                   is not

zero. We test the hypothesis -y             0 and not y = 1, because only the former

hypothesis tells us something important even in the presence of estimation

error.

     If i.'2   is   small, then, other things being equal, -y will be close to one.

We may thus interpret a coefficient of              close to one as consistent with

the notion that the model has small estimation error. If            i.'2   is   large,

will be close to zero.7

     Under the above assumptions, S equals -i2/(l+i/2X11)X21, where x21 is


     5Adding another. variable to a random vector can never decrease the
diagonal elements, corresponding to the original variables, of the inverse
of the covariance matrix. If we begin with an hxh positive definite
symmetric matrix A and add another row and column to produce an expanded
positive definite symmetric matrix B whose first h rows are [A cJ and whose

last row is [c' e], (e a scalar) then the upper-left hxh submatrix C of                  B1
is (A-ce 1c')1. Using the rule for inverting the sum of two matrices, C
                                                .      -1
A-l + A -lc(e-c'A-lc)c'A-l               .
                           By Schwartz's inequality c'A c e, so the
                                 .


second term in the expression for C has nonnegative diagonal elements.

     60f course, the results for the theoretical regression do not imply
that estimated must fall in all samples as variables are added.

     7mis result is an application of the simple errors in variables
results for multiple regressions. Recall that if there is an error in a
single variable in a multiple regression, the coefficient of that variable
is biased towards zero. This result is not normally useful in a multiple
regression context, since usually errors in variables are not confined to a
single variable. If there are errors in more than one variable, then the
direction of bias for any variable cannot be predicted. In our application,
we need only assume that the we observe the variables in the information set
   without error, not that they measure correctly what they purport to
measure.
                                           10

 the k x 1 vector consisting of the
                                         second through k÷lth element of the first
 column of (E(X'x))* This coefficient is small if
                                                               is small, and it
 approaches            as
                               is increased.8 Thus, the larger is the variance
 of the estimation error in        the more likely it is that Z will be
 significant in our tests of
                               H02 even when Z is used properly in the model.
      We thus see that if the true model contains more variables than those

 in Z and if the model under consideration
                                                captures at least some of these
 additional variables, then the estimate of -y is likely to be significant

 with a big enough sample. We will refer to the test of the hypothesis
                                                                                      H01
 that y equals zero as the "information
                                            aggregation" (IA) test. If the
hypothesis is rejected, i.e. the estimate of -y is significant, this is

evidence that the model is a useful information
                                                     aggregator. The IA test is
more important than a test of
                                 H02 because only H01 is not affected by
estimation error: if -y     0 with the true model, then   -y    0 with the
estimated model. The estimate of 6 may also, of course, be significant,

since even if the model uses
                               correctly the information in Z, the forecast
has the disadvantage of not being based on the model estimated through

period T. If the estimate of 6 is not
                                           significant, this may mean that the
variables in Z affect Y nonlinearly and that the model adequately captures

this nonlinearity. It may also mean that the variables in
                                                           Z simply do not
affect    after the model has accounted for all the variables in its



     8Note the                       -
                 identity x21x11         M221M21 where M =     E(XXt)    is

partitioned conformably to E(XI'X)1. Thus, as          is increased, S
approaches the vector of projection of
                                           E(YII) onto Z.               is    as we
                                                               A
would expect from Theil's specification error theorem if
                                                            were omitted
from the regression. Indeed, putting a measurement error onto E(YtIIt) with
a very large variance is equivalent to dropping it from the regression.
                                        11

information set.

    We can summarize the implications of this discussion for estimation of

equation (1) as follows. If both the estimates of -y and 6 are

insignificant, then either there is a collinearity problem among Y and Z

or neither the variables in the model nor those in Z seem to affect          If

the estimate of & but not of -y is significant, the model may still be

correctly specified if the truth is simply         Z16 +   u and the model
correctly captures this. On the other hand, this result does suggest that

the truth is not very complicated and that a simple model is all that is

needed. If both the estimates of -' and 6 are significant, this is evidence

in favor of the proposition that the model incorporates relevant information

not in Z. This conclusion is also true if the estimate of -y but not of 6

is significant. The only difference if the estimate of 6 is insignificant

is that the variables in     do not seem to affect Y in a linear way and may

in fact not affect Y at all.



Estimation Methods

     For the estimation of (1),       and Z are assumed to be uncorrelated

with u. In the empirical work below we have been careful to make sure that

   is based only on information through period t-1 and thus not to be based

on variables that may be correlated with u. We are also assuming that

is serially uncorrelated. We shall include in Z a constant term and lagged

values of Y as well as current and lagged values of other variables. If

there are enough lags included in Z, then under H lagged values of Ut may

be regarded as in Z, so that since u is uncorrelated with Z, u is

uncorrelated with its own   lagged   values as well. Presumably the structural
                                           12

 model is good enough that the forecast errors         -    are not themselves
 serially correlated, so that under
                                         H02 the residuals u are serially
 uncorrelated.

           Lack of serial correlation of u and lack of correlation between
                                                                                 and
         and between Z and u does not, however, imply that u is independent of

     t        t
 Y and Z or even that u is uncorrelated with future values Y . and
                              t                                    Z
                                                                   t+J        t+J.,
 j   >   0.   Thus, the traditional assumptions of the regression model, which

 would assure that ordinary least squares gives unbiased estimates of the

 coefficients -y and 5, are not assured here.     Moreover, there is no

 implication of these assumptions that the error term u should be

homoskedastjc.1° To take account of possible heteroskedasticity, our

hypothesis tests will be Wald tests of the restrictions using an estimate of

 the asymptotic variance of X'u/Jn, along the lines described in White

 (1982), where X is the k-i-i x T-T1-l matrix whose tth row is
                                                                         Zt), u is
the (T-T1-l)-element vector whose tth element is u, and T-T1-l is the

number of observations. We are assuming that Euu' is diagonal, and so the

estimate of the variance of X'u/Jn is


     9Granger and Newbold (1986, p. 281) have warned that serial
uncorrelation of u is not valid for many real world models. Uncritical
application of our method to models with serially correlated errors could
thus lead to a spurious rejection of
                                          H02.
      101n fact, it seems likely that the error term will be heteroskedastic.
If, for example, in equation (1) -y — 1 and S   0, then the error term is
simply the forecast error from the model, and in general forecast errors are
heteroskedastic    For the case in which the model is the classical linear
regression model, the nature of the heteroskedasticity can be inferred from
the X matrix. Ramsey's (1969) RESET specification test deals with
heteroskedasticity by regressing Theil's (1965) BLUS residuals on
information variables (in his case, variables related to powers of the
fitted values). We cannot use such a procedure here because we are
regarding the model as a black box for which BLUS residuals cannot be
calculated. In addition, we are using rolling regressions, which does not
fit into the procedure.
                                          13




                      V = n inXeeX
                      A
(2)
                                t=l




where e          -
                     X     [8   (X'X)X'Y)] is the residual in an ordinary least

squares regression of Y on X. The Wald test statistic for a hypothesis that

RU = 0     (where R is a q x k+l matrix) is:



(3)                  W =   n'R'(R(X'X/n)1V(X'X/n)1R')1R

Other assumptions are also needed for the asymptotic distribution theory for

the Wald test to imply that W is asymptotically x. Such assumptions (see,

for example, White [1984], p. 125) do not seem unreasonable in the present

context, except in special cases) The assumptions required concern such

things as the asymptotic independence of [X u) from [Xt u] (so that,
for example, the relation of u to future             dies out appropriately with

n), the convergence of EX'X/n to a positive definite matrix (so that, for

example, all of our observations of independent variables do not become zero

after a certain time period), and the finiteness of certain moments. The

assumptions rule out Unit roots for the time-series representations of the

processes. We assume for the most part that all processes are stationary

around a trend, although results will also be reported below for differenced

information sets Z.

      Note that the use of the asymptotic distribution theory in connection


                                                     A
      11
           In
          the special case noted above in which   is generated by a full-
sample rolling regression on Z, the X'X/n matrix will not have a
nonsingular probability limit.
                                          14

 with (1) is straightforward in connection with the fixed sample length

 rolling regression case, but not the full-sample rolling regression case

 that we actually use. In the former, we might assume that the variables

 discussed above in connection with the theoretical
                                                       regression equation (1)
 are jointly stationary. On the other hand, the case we actually apply, that

of full-sample rolling regression, would generally imply if the true model

is unchanging that ii   declines   with time and that Y is getting better and

better through time as a forecast. Ultimately, the estimation error

disappears completely, so that asymptotic distribution theory would predict

that if    makes use of some information not in Z, then plim =       1.0.   Some

Monte Carlo experiments where the true model generating Y is a simple

linear regression model do confirm that nonetheless in finite samples the

coefficient -y does tend to lie between 0 and 1 when       includes some but not
all the variables used in a rolling regression to determine          The

experiments also show that i tends to fall as more variables are added, in

accordance with our theoretical results above. The only anomaly that was

found was that the estimated -y showed a tendency to become negative when Z

included all variables used to determine            We suspect that this


     '2One experiment, with 10,000 replications, was a follows. In each
replication a new 20x2 matrix Z was generated, where the elements of the
first column are i.i.d. standard normal variables and the elements of the
second column are all 1.0. An independent 20-element column vector u of
i.i.d. standard normal variables was created. Y was defined as Z[l 0]' + u.
Rolling regressions of Y on Z were run with samples l,...,j, j = 10,...,
                                                                             19,
                                                                                A
and the estimated coefficient vector was denoted .. A 10-element vector Y
was generated whose ith element is Z            Whei the bottom 10-element
                                     l0+i.39+i
                                             ..
                                    A
subvector of Y was regressed on Y together with the bottom lO-element
                                                              A
submatrix of Z, the average value of the coefficient of Y was -3.3 and of
                                                          A
the random variable in Z was +4.3. The coefficient of Y was negative in 91%
                                       15

anomalous result is analogous to the small sample bias that tends to produce

a negative coefficient when white noise is regressed on its own lagged

value.



Comparisons of Different Forecasts

     Nothing that we have said so far precludes Z being replaced by a

forecast from a second model. If the coefficient estimate for one forecast

is significant and the coefficient estimate for the other forecast is not,

one forecast can be said to "dominate" the other. Under the hypothesis that

the coefficient of one forecast is one and the coefficient of the other

forecast is zero, the one forecast is said to "encompass" the other in the
                                                    13
terminology of Chong and 1-lendry (1986, p. 677).        When equation (1)

consists of two forecasts, our procedure of comparing models is similar to

that of Nelson's (1972) and Cooper and Nelson (1975). These studies,

however, allowed the sample period used to estimate the model to overlap

with the sample period used to estimate equation (1). The forecasts they

used for period t were not based only on information through period t-l. In

the comparisons below we use rolling regressions for all models, and the

forecasts from all models are based only on information through the previous

period. The studies also did not account for the likely heteroskedasticity



of the replications, although a conventional t-statistic on the
               A
coefficient of Y was significant at the 5% level in only 17% of the
replications.

     13Testing whether a model encompasses another is not the same as
comparing the size of the forecast errors. Hendry and Richard (1982, p. 19)
emphasize that an encompassing model will variance dominate but a variance
dominating model need not encompass.
                                          16

  of the error term in equation (1), which we do here.14



 III. The Models

      In order to carry out the above tests, we need forecasts from models

 that are based only on information
                                       through the period prior to the forecast
 period (through period t-l for a forecast for period t). There are four

 ways in which future information can creep into a current forecast. The

 first is if actual values of the
                                     exogenous variables for period t are used
 in the forecast. The second is if the coefficients of the model have been

 estimated over a sample period that includes observations beyond t-1. The

 third is if information beyond t-l has been used in the specification of the

 model even though for purposes of the tests the model is only estimated

 through period t-l. The fourth is if information
                                                       beyond period t-l has been
 used in the revisions of the data for
                                         periods t-l and back, such as revised
 seasonal factors and revised benchmark
                                          figures.
     The way we have handled the
                                    exogenous-variable problem is to add
autoregressive equations for the exogenous variables to the model. For each

exogenous variable in the model an eighth-order
                                                     autoregressive equation
(with a constant term and time trend included) has been postulated. When

these equations are added to the model, the model effectively has no

exogenous variables in it. This method of
                                               dealing with exogenous variables
in structural models was advocated
                                     by Cooper and Nelson (1975) and McNees
(1981). McNees, however, noted that the method handicaps the model: "It is


     14Cooper and Nelson (1975) emphasized that their forecasts
structural models were "ex ante"                                using
                                 predictions. By this, however, they meant
only that exogenous variables were forecast
that actual future values of the            using autoregressions and thus
                                 exogenous variables were not used. Their
forecasts were not ex ante in the estimation error.
                                          17

easy to think of exogenous variables (policy variables) whose future values

can be anticipated or controlled with complete certainty even if the

historical values can be represented by covariance stationary processes; to

do so introduces superfluous errors into the model solution." (McNees 1981,

p. 404). The Fair model is thus to some extent handicapped in the following

tests.

     For the coefficient-estimate problem, we use rolling regressions. For

the forecast for period t, we estimate the model through period t-l; for the

forecast for period t+l, we estimate the model through period t; and so on.

By "model" in this case we mean the model inclusive of the exogenous-

variable equations. The beginning observation is not changed for the

regressions, and so in the terminology of the previous section we are doing

"full sample rolling regressions."

     The third problem - -   the   possibility of using information beyond period

t-l in the specification of the model -        - is   more difficult to handle.

Models are typically changed through time, and model builders seldom go back

to or are interested in "old" versions. We have, however, attempted to

account for this problem in this paper regarding the Fair model. We

consider two versions of the Fair model, the current version and the version

that existed as of the second quarter of 1976. By comparing the results for

the two versions, we can see in some sense how important the specification

changes that have been made since 1976 are.

     We have done nothing about the data-revision problem in this paper.

The data that have been used are the latest revised data. It would be

extremely difficult to try to purge these data of the possible use of future

 information, and we have not tried. Note that it is not enough simply to
                                           18

 use data that existed at any point in time
                                                   (say period t-l) because data on
 the one-period-ahead value (period t) are needed to estimate equation
                                                                       (1).
 We would have to try to construct data
                                        for period t that are consistent with
 the old data for period t-.1.

      We now discuss the various models used for the tests in this
                                                                   paper.
 The models consist of the two versions of the Fair model, an
                                                              "autoregressive
 components" model, and three versions of a VAR model.



 Th Fair Model - -   Current   Version (FAIR-CUR)

      The Fair model as it existed in 1984 is described in Fair (1984). A

 few changes have been made to the model over time as it has been
                                                                  updated and
 reestimated. The version used here is based on data through 1986 II. The

model consists of 30 stochastic
                                    structural equations and 98 identities. For
purposes of this paper two stochastic equations had to be changed. The

interest rate reaction function,
                                     an equation explaining the behavior of the
Federal Reserve, has a dummy variable in
                                                it to pick up a possible change in
Fed behavior between 1979 IV and 1982
                                      III. This dummy variable was dropped
because it contained future information
                                        for any sample period that ended
prior to at least 1983 I.
                               Likewise, the equation explaining capital
consumption has a number of dummy variables in the
                                                         l980's to try to pick up
the changing effects of depreciation laws. These dummy variables
                                                                 were also
dropped.

     Dropping the above-mentioned dummy variables left the model with 97

exogenous variables. For each of these variables an eighth order

autoregessive equation was postulated with a constant term and time trend
                                          19

included.15 When these equations are added to the model, there are 127

stochastic equations, and this is the version that was used.

     For the results below the model was estimated 57 times. For each of

the estimation periods the beginning observation was always 1954 I. The

first estimation period ended in 1972 I, the second in 1972 II, and so on

through the 57th in 1986 i.16 (The estimation techniques are two stage

least squares for the 30 structural equations and ordinary least squares for

the exogenous-variable equations.) This allowed 57 one-quarter-ahead

forecasts to be made, starting in 1972 II, each forecast based only on

estimates through the end of the previous quarter.



The Fair Model - -   Old   Version (FAIR-OLD)

     The first version of the Fair model was presented in Fair (1976). This

version was based on data through 1975 I. One important addition that was

made to the model from this version was the inclusion of the interest rate

reaction function in the model. This work is described in Fair (1978),

which is based on data through 1976 II. Some changes have been made to the


     15Simpler equations were estimated for four exogenous variables. For
three of the variables the equations merely consisted of a constant term,
and for the fourth variable the equation was a fourth-order rather than an
eighth-order autoregressive equation. This was done because of collinearity
problems. For the early sample periods there were not enough non-zero
observations to allow eighth-order equations to be estimated. The four
variables are a dummy variable for 1971 IV, a dummy variable for 1972 I,
wage accurals less disbursements of the state and local government sector,
and housing investment of the financial sector. The latter variable is the
one for which a fourth-order equation was estimated.

     16The import equation contains a number of dummy variables to pick up
the effects of dock strikes. The last dummy variable is for 1972 I, and
this is the main reason the first estimation period was chosen to end in
1972 I. The last estimation period ended in 1986 I because the overall
sample period ended in 1986 II.
                                       20

 model since 1976 II, and it is of interest to know how important these

 changes have been. Fortunately, we can work with this early version of the

 model to examine this question.

      The version of the model in Fair (1976) consists of 26 structural

 stochastic equations. With the addition of the interest rate reaction

 function, there are 27 stochastic equations)-7    There are 106 exogenous
 variables, and for each of these variables an eighth order autoregressive

 equation with a constant and time trend was added to the model. This gave a

 model of 133 equations, and this is the version that was used.

      The first estimation period ended in 1976 II, which is the quarter in

 which the model could definitely be said to exist. This allowed the model

 to be estimated 40 times (through 1986 I).

      To conclude, the forecasts front FAIR-OLD can be said to be forecasts

that are truly based only on information
                                            through the previous period (except
for the data revision problem))-8
                                    This may be the first time that a model
this old has been tested.




            compares to 30 structural stochastic equations for the current
version of the model. In other words, three more variables are endogenous
in FAIR-CUR than are endogenous in FAIR-OLD.

      18Thjs statement needs to be qualified slightly.
                                                        Although the
structural stochastic equations used for FAIR-OLD here are exactly as in
Fair (1976) and (1978) - - same left hand side and right hand side
- - the                                                            variables
        data revisions in the National Income Accounts since 1976 have
required slight modifications to some of the identities in the model. Also,
the identities in Fair (1976) for the government sector are for the total
government sector, whereas in FAIR-OLD here there
                                                   are separate identities
for the federal government sector and the state and local government sector.
This disaggregation of the government sector does not affect anything
that it means that there are                                           except
                              more exogenous variables (and thus more
exogenous-variable equations) in FAIR-OLD than there were in Fair (1976).
                                        21

The Autoregressive Components Model (AC)

     Time series models like VAR models typically ignore the components of

GNP. For example, the current VAR model used by Sims (serial) includes only

nonresidential fixed investment among the various components. Including

many components in a VAR model rapidly uses up degrees of freedom, and this

is undoubtedly one of the main reasons the components are seldom used. A

possible alternative to the VAR approach, but one that also does not use

much economic theory, is to model each of the components of real GNP by a

simple autoregressive equation and then determine GNP as the sum of the

components.

     For present purposes we have used a slightly more sophisticated version

of what we will call the "Autoregressive Components" (AC) model. Each

equation for a component is an eighth order autoregressive equation with a

constant and time trend added and with the first four lagged values of real

CNP added. The components are three consumption categories, eight

investment categories, imports, exports, and four government spending

categories. All the 17 components are in real terms.   (No logs were taken

for the AC model.) Real GNP is determined by the GNP identity. Each

stochastic equation of the AC model has only 14 coefficients to estimate,

and so there is no serious degrees of freedom problem. The reduced form

equation for CNP has 136 lagged components in it, but this equation is never

estimated and so there is no problem.

     The AC model was estimated 57 times using the same sample periods as

were used for FAIR-CUR. The model was then used to make 57 forecasts of

real GNP.

     The AC model is of interest in two respects. First, if the Fair model
                                        22

 turns out to dominate the VAR models (which it does), it is of interest to

 know if this is due simply to the fact that the Fair model is dealing with

 the components of GNP. If this is the case, then the AC model should do

 better than the Fair model, and this can be tested. The AC model carries

 the components idea even further by including eight lags of the components,

 which the Fair model does not. Second, the AC model is to some extent a

 competitor of the VAR model within the class of non theoretical models, at

 least regarding the predictions of GNP. Both models are based on very

 little economic theory. It is thus of interest to see if one model

dominates the other.



The VAR Models (VAR4. VAR2. and VAR1)

     We consider three VAR models in this paper. The first, VAR4, is the

same as the model used in Sims (1980) except that we have added the three-

month Treasury bill rate to the model. There are seven variables in the

model: real GNP, the GNP deflator, the unemployment rate, the nominal wage

rate, the price of imports, the money supply, and the bill rate. All but

the unemployment rate and the bill rate are in logs. Each equation consists

of each variable lagged one through four times, a constant, and a time

trend, for a total of 30 coefficients to estimate.

     The second VAR model, VAR2, uses only the first two lags of each

variable, for a total of 16 coefficients in each equation. The third model,

VAR1, uses only each variable lagged once, for a total of 9 coefficients.

Litterman (1984) points out that large VAR models seem to suffer from

overparameterization, and this is the reason we have tried VAR1 and VAR2 in
                                         23

addition to VAR4.19

      The same sample periods and procedures were used for the VAR models as

were used for the AC and FAIR-CUR models.



The Information Set: the Variables in Z

      We have chosen to use the 28 variables in the VAR4 model as potential

variables in the information set, i.e., as potential variables in Z. One

of the main questions we are interested in is whether the forecasts from the

Fair model contain useful information not in these variables.



IV. The Results

      We first consider the results for FAIR-CUR, which are presented in

Table 1. All the regressions in Table 1 are for the 1972 II - 1986 II

period, for a total of 57 observations. The dependent variable is the log

of real GNP. All the equations in the table were estimated by ordinary

least squares with the White correction for heteroskedastity. The W-

statistic is the Wald statistic for the test of the hypothesis that all the

coefficients except the coefficient of the forecast are zero. In other

words, the test is a test of the hypothesis that 6 in equation (1) is zero.

S is taken to include the constant term.

      The first equation includes the log of the forecast, whose coefficient

is   denoted   -y, and the constant term. The estimate of -y is .984 with a t-

statistic   of 123.73. The estimate of the constant term is not quite


     19Another possibility is to use Bayesian priors for VAR4 to lessen the
overparamaterization problem, which is what Litterman (1984) does. Our
preference is to exclude lags rather than use priors, but priors could
easily be used within the present procedure. This is clearly of interest to
try in future work.
                                                           TABlE 1

                           Estimates   of Equation (1) arxi Tests of
                                                                                       H01 ani 1102•

                           Results for FAIR-CUR. Depenient Variable is log Y.
                            Sanple period 1972 II - 1986 II, 57 observations.
                      A
 Equation         log Y      const.          Other Variables                              WALD          SE        R       LA
     1              .984       .124                                                       3.78         .00835 .99284 2.00
                (123.73)      (1.94)
     2              .808       .636      T, logY—1' ••• log
                  (5.92)     (1.66)
                                                                                 Y 10.09               .00789 .99361      2.18
    3               .966
                (18.65)
                              .266
                             (0.80)
                                         T, log P—                 .   .., log   P        9.26         .00802   .99340    2.12
    4              .788
                  (9.99)
                             1.578
                             (2.70)
                                         T, U ,
                                            —l             ..., U                        17.73*k       .00709   .99485    2.28
    5               .963      .258       T, log B4—         1' •              log EM 11.69             .00804 .99338      2.07
                (22.49)      (0.84)
    6               .975 —.020
                (19.88)      (0.07)
                                         T, log W—
                                                           , ..., log W                6.64            .00817 .99315      1.99
    7              .990       .357       T, log Ml—                           log Ml

                                                                   r
                                                                       ...,               8.49     .00817       .99315   1.96
                (20.56)      (0.94)
    8              .839      1.181       T, r—              •
                                              1'                                         37.24** .00724         .99483   2.15
                (19.59)      (3.75)
    9              .902      2.494       T, all—
                                                   1                                     13.81     .00755       .99415   2.04
                  (4.01)     (1.26)
   10               .761     6.503       T, all—
                                                   1       2                            62.l5** .00596          .99636   2.00
                 (5.55)      (2.09)
   11              .607     10.747       T, all—
                                                   1 —2 3                               llo.58** .00557         .99682   1.93
                 (3.20)      (3.20)
   12              .590      9.199       T, all    1
                                                       '       '                        20l.59** .00503         .99740   1.92
                 (302)       (209)
            A
            Y = forecast       of real   QP frai FAIR-CUR.
Notes:      The test statistic (IA 'est) for H1                          is the t-statjstjc      for
            the    coefficient of log Y.
            The    test statistic for H02 is the WALD test statistic.
            *      significant at 5 percent level.
                    significant at 1 percent level.
            t-statistics      in absolute    value in parentheses.
           Y real (NP.
           T — tine trer1, 1952 I = 1.
           P QP deflator.
           U urploynnt rate -
          IM      inport price irex.
           W=     ixininal   wage rate -
          ML      nry supply.
           r three-north Treasury bill rate.
         all. =   log Y,   log P, U, log }M, log W, log Ml, r.

         Estimation       technique      Ordinary least squares with Wulte correlation for
         heteroskedasticity.
                                     24

significant at the 5 percent confidence level.20 The equation shows no

signs of serial correlation of the error terms.

    For the second equation in Table 1 the time trend and the first four

lagged values of the log of real GNP have been added. The estimate of -y is

.808 and is significant. The additional six variables are not significant

as a group as revealed by the W-statistic. In other words, the lagged

values of GNP do not contribute significantly to the explanation of GNP once

the FAIR-CUR forecast is included in the equation.

     Equations 3 through 8 in Table 1 have added to them the time trend and

the first four lagged values of one of the variables in the information set.

The GNP deflator, the price of imports, and nominal wage, and the money

supply are not significant. The unemployment rate and the bill rate are

significant at the 1 percent level. In all cases the coefficient estimate

of the FAIR-CUR forecast is significant. In equation 9 the time trend and

all seven variables lagged once are included. They are not as a group

significant. In equation 10 the time trend and all seven variables lagged

once and twice are included. Equation 11 adds one more lag of each

variable, and equation 12 adds yet one more. In all three of these cases

the variables as a group are significant and the FAIR-CUR forecast is

significant. In going from equation (9) to (12) the estimate of -y falls, as

is expected from the theoretical results in Section II.

     The overall results in Table 1 are quite supportive of FAIR-CUR being a

useful aggregator of information. The coefficient estimate of -y is always

significant. The IA test has strongly rejected the hypothesis that -y is


     20By "significant" in what follows is meant significant at the 5
percent confidence level unless stated otherwise. A variable is said to be
significant if its coefficient estimate is significant.
                                         25

 zero.

         We next want to compare FAIR-CUR with
                                                 FAIR-OLD to see if the good
 results for FAIR-CUR are due to information used after 1976 in the

 specification of the model. The results in Table 2 are for FAIR-CUR over

 the shorter sample period beginning in 1976 III. Table 2 is the same
                                                                      as
 Table 1 except that the regressions are over 40 observations rather than 57.

 The results in Table 2 are similar to those in Table 1 except for the last

 three equations, where the estimates of      are not significantly different
 from zero. These last three
                                equations have only 23, 16, and 9 degrees of
 freedom, respectively, and so it is not clear that much confidence should be

 put on the results for these three equations.21
                                                      We discussed above that in
 small samples the estimate of -y will tend to be much less than one or even

 negative even when the theoretical model used to produce
                                                                 is absolutely
 correct. It is difficult to generalize from the
                                                      few specific Monte-Carlo
experiments we ran, but it seenis likely that when degrees of freedom are

very small, there may be a tendency for a small or negative value of       .



     Table 3 is the same as Table 2
                                    except that the results are for FAIR-
OLD rather than FAIR-CUR. The results
                                         for FAIR-OLD are quite similar to
those for FAIR-CUR. If anything,
                                     FAIR-OLD does slightly better. The
changes that have been made to the model since 1976 thus do not seem to be

very important, at least regarding the forecasting
                                                       accuracy of the model.
     The results in Table 4 are for the AC
                                              model. The sample period in
Table 4 is the same as in Table 1,
                                     namely the longer period of 57



          give an example of how fickle the results are when the number of
degrees of freedom is small, when equation 10 is reestimated with the wage
rate and the price of import variables
an insignificant - .447 to a significant dropped,
                                          .504.
                                                  the estimate of goes from
                                       TABLE 2
                  Estimates of     &juation (1) and        Tests of H   and H02.

   Results       for FAIR-CUR for Shorter Sanle Period. Deper1ent Variable is log Y.
                   Saile period 1976 III - 1986 II, 40 observations.
                     A                                                                          2
                 log Y    const.           Other Variables                  WATJ)     SE       R        LW
&uation
   1               .969    .247                                             44*      .00886   .98216    2.00

             (63.96)      (2.01)
                                                                                                        2.34
   2               .862    .734       T, log Y1, ...,          logY    9.57          .00836   .98413

                 (3.82)   (1.72)
   3               .867    .778       T, log P1, ...,          log P 8.30            .00831   .98430    2.11
                 (6.72)   (1.08)
   4               .574   3.203       T, U —1'                             37.94**   .00626   .99110    2.50

                 (3.56)   (2.65)
   5              1.014 —.084         T, log }M.1, ...,        log   FM 7.54         .00809   .98513    2.30

             (14.63)      (0.17)
   6            .879      —.092       T,   log w—         ..., log W    7.18         .00818   .98479    1.92
             (10.48)      (0.28)
   7            .975       .471       T, log Ml —1'            log Ml 5.03           .00874   .98265    1.97

             (17.35)      (0.90)
   8               .821 1.327
             (17.14)      (3.73)
                                      T, r —1'            r                47•33** .00742     .98750    2.31

                                                                                                        1.94
   9              1.358 3.507         T, all—1                             15.42     .00763   .98680

                 (3.22)   (1.68)
   10             —.447   7.113       T, all—                             l67.50** .0(Yi-78   .99480    2.45
                                                 1    2
                 (0.95)    (2.4.6)
   11             —.133 14.548        T, all—                             263.6l** .00400     .99637    2.18
                                                 1' 2 3
                 (0.34)    (3.63)
   12              .225 26.608        T, all—                             l318.8l* .00266      .99840   2.47
                                                 1'        3
                 (087)     (546)
             A
Notes:    Y =    forecast of real Q1P from FAIR-Qfl.
             See Notes, Table 1.
                                                    TABLE 3
                          Estimates   of Equation (1) ard Tests of
                                                                           01       H02.
                          Results for FAIR-OLD. Deperxlent Variable is log Y.
                           Sanple period = 1976 III - 1986 II, 40 observations.
                     A
 Equation        log Y      const.         Other Variables                   WALD          SE     R
     1             .978       .177                                           2.44      .00870    .98281   2.06
                (70.25)      (1.56)

                                              —l, ..., log Y              10.82
     2             .879       .560     T, log Y                                        .00820   .98472    2.43
                 (4.66)     (1.49)
     3             .928
                 (6.75)
                             .480
                            (0.63)
                                       T, log P1, ...,          log   P 4.90           .00849   .98363    2.13
    4              .629     2.793      T, U ,       . .., U
                                          —l                                43.84**    .00623   .99119    2.47
                 (4.14)     (2.45)
    5             1.011 —.051
                (13.24)     (0.10)
                                       T, log R4—
                                                     , ..., log RI 4.45               .00841    .98395    2.14
    6              .928
                (11.38)
                             .040
                            (0.12)
                                       T, log W1, ...,          log   W      3.63     .00839    .98403    1.91
    7              .969      .328      T, log Ml—1'        •• log M1      4.15        .00855    .98342    2.00
                (15.45)     (0.69)
    8              .834
                (18.75)
                            1.226
                            (3.72)
                                       T, r—
                                            ,       ..., r                  49.79**   .00737    .98766    2.33
    9            1.111 2.202           T, all
                                               —l                            6.56     .00813    .98498    1.87
                (2.69)      (1.01)
   10            —.042      7.144      T, all—1      2                     226.21** .00485      .99466    2.45
                (0.14)      (2.28)
   11             .348 15.747
                                      T, all_1      —2 3                   3l1.57** .00395      .99645    2.23
                (1.04)      (3.60)
   12             .391 28.198         T, all    , ,        _,             1328.21**   .00260     .99847 2.42
                (1 68)      (5 55)
            A
Notes:      Y forecast of real CP frQn FAIR-OLD.
            See Notes, Table 1.
                                                 TABLE 4

                       Estimates of   Equation       (1) ar Tests of H01    ai H02.

                          Results for AC. Deper]ent Variable is log Y.
                         Saiqle period 1972 II - 1986 II, 57 observatiors.
                   A                                                                             2
Equation       log Y      const.          Other Variables                 TJ)          SE       R       IYJ


   1         1.000 —.002                                                  0.00      .00942     .99090   2.18
           (93.95) (0.02)
   2             .563       .760    T, logY1, ...,              logY    4.57        .00908     .99154 2.09
               (2.10)      (1.64)
   3              .922      .423    T, log P1, ...,             log P 7.20          .00906     .99158   2.12
               (16.86)     (1.19)
   4              .751     1.849    T, Ti —       ...,                   15.47*     .00837     .99282   2.15
                (7.38)     (2.44)
   5              .932      .455    T, log           —   ...,   log Ht 21.22** .00883          .99201   2.16
               (21.52)     (1.47)
   6              .933 —.234        T,   log W—1'               log W 8.77            .00894   .99181   2.04
               (22.11)     (0.71)
    7             .922      .228      T, log Ml—         ...,   log M1   9.38         .00913   .99147   2.14
               (21.75)     (0.59)
    8             .840
               (14.98)
                           1.166
                           (2.82)
                                      T, r —1'           r                20.08** .00839       .99279   2.14


    9             .585     3.400      T, all—1                            15.75       .00824   .99304   2.12
                (1.86)     (1.43)
   10             .065     5.967      T, all—                             59.60** .00680       .99526   1.97
                                                 1
                (0.21)     (1.93)
   11             .153     9.830                                         156.ll** .00596       .99635   2.05
                                      T, —1 —2 3
                (0.58)     (2.55)
   12             .248     7.515      T, all1' , .                       235.78**     .00536    .99706 2.02
                (0 89)     (1 50)
           A
Notes:     Y forecast of real (P fran AC mDdel.
           See Notes, Table 1.
                                          26

 observations. Comparing equation 1 in Tables 1 and 4, it can be seen that
 the AC model is not as accurate as FAIR-CUR. The estimated standard error

 is .00942 for AC and .00835 for FAIR-CUR.
                                                  Also, the estimates of -y are

 insignificant in equations 9-12 for AC, which is not the case for FAIR-CUR.

 It is interesting, however, that the estimates of -y for the first 8

 equations in Table 4 are significant, which means that the AC model does

 carry information not in the Z vector and suggests that part of the success

of the Fair model in forecasting might come from this disaggregation.

      The best of the VAR models was VAR2, and so the results for VAR2 will

be emphasized here. The results for VAR2 are presented in Table 5, which is

the same as Tables 1 and 4 except for a different model. The results for

VAR2 are not as good as those for AC (and thus a fortiori for FAIR-CUR).

For example, the estimate of    is not significant in equation 2, where the
lagged values of GNP are added. Also, the standard error of equation 1 is

greater for VAR2 than it is for AC. Equations 11 and 12 are not presented

for VAR2 because for these equations the number of variables in the

information set exceed the number of variables in the VAR2 model. The model

is quite likely to be dominated in these cases (which it was). In equation

10 the variables in the information
                                      set and the variables in the model are
the same. We know in this case that the forecast is likely to be dominated

by the information variables, and our
                                         monte-carlo experiments suggest that
the coefficient of the forecast is
                                     likely to be negative. This is what we
indeed observe in Table 5, equation 10.        The estimate of -y is - .487, with a
t-statistjc of 1.16 in absolute value.
                                                       TABLE 5

                       Estliriates of   Equation       (1) arxl Tests of H ard H02.
                          Results for VAR2. Deper1ent Variable is log Y.
                         Sanpie period — 1972 II - 1986 II, 57 observations.

                   A                                                                            2
               log Y const.                 Other Variables                  WAIJ)     SE      R       LJ
Equation
   1             .954       .377                                             24.65** .00963   .99049   1.66
           (101.18)        (4.96)
   2           .417         .703    T, log Y1, ...,                 log Y 35. 68** .00922     .99129   2.00

               (1.49)      (1.44)
   3             .952       .295    T, log P—1,                 ..., log P 30.20k*   .00939   .99095   1.71
            (14.63)        (0.74)
   4           .845
               (6.39)
                           1.180
                           (1.21)
                                        T, U—      ...,
                                                                U            32.62** .00924   .99124   1.75

    5           1.016 —.047             T, log IM —1'               log FM 38.06* .00943      .99089   1.83
            (16.72)        (0.11)
    6          .969        —.017        T, log W—1,             ..., log W 32.05** .00918     .99136   1.82
            (19.43)        (0.05)
    7          .995         .422        T, log Ni—l         ,   ..., log N1 32.43* .0094      .99083   1.67

            (16.13)        (1.05)
    8          .830
               (11.99)
                           1.278
                           (2.52)
                                        T, r —1'                r            48.65* .00870    .99223   1.73


    9             .435     2.195        T, all—                              55.32* .00849    .99262   2.06
                                                   1
                (1.52)     (1.03)
   10           —.487      5.416        T, all—                             105.53** .00673   .99536   1.93
                                                   1    2
                (1.16)     (1.84)
           A
Notes:     Y—  forecast of real QP frcn VAR2 nxxel.
           See Notes, Table 1.
                                         27

 piTiparisons of the Forecasts

      The results in Table 6 compare the forecasts from the various models.

 For each equation the log of real CNP is regressed on a constant term and

 the logs of two or more forecasts.
                                       (These equations are also estimated
 using the White correction for heteroskedasticity.)
                                                        One forecast is said to
 dominate another if its coefficient estimate
                                                is significant and the other's
 is not. Equations 1 through 8 in Table 6 are for the longer sample period

 of 57 observations, and equations 9 through 14 are for the shorter period of

 40 observations. Remember that all the forecasts are based on rolling

 regressions, and so all of them use only information
                                                        through the previous
 period for the forecast of the current period.

      Equations 1 through 4 show that FAIR-CUR dominates
                                                           the AC, VAR1, VAR2,
and VAR4 models.22 Equations 5 and 7 show that AC dominates VAR1 and VAR4.

In equation 6 both the AC and VAR2 forecasts
                                                are significant, although the
AC forecasts has a larger coefficient
                                         estimate and a higher t-statistic. In
equation 8 FAIR-CuR dominates both AC and VAR2.    It is interesting to note
in this case that even though AC is
                                      better than VAR2 in equation 6, VAR2 has
a larger coefficient estimate in equation 8 than does AC (although both

estimates are insignificant). This is an indication that the AC forecast is

correlated more with the FAIR-CUR forecast than is the VAR2 forecast. This

is as expected since both FAIR-CUR and
                                         AC estimate equations for the
components of GNP.

     Equations 9 through 13 show that FAIR-OLD dominates
                                                           AC, VAR1, VAR2, and


     22Cooper and Nelson (1975) also found coefficients near one for
                                                                     a
structural forecast of real GNP from the FMP model in analogous regressions
were the autoregressive forecasts were univariate
GNP.                                              autoregressions for real
                                      T&E 6
Regression of the log of actual (N' on the log of the forecasts fran t or nre nodels.
               Results for All Models. Deperent Variable is log Y
                                                    A

Fpa-                                             log Y
tion const.       FAIR-CUR FAIR—OLD      AC        VAR1     VAR2     VAR4      SE      I) Sample
 1      .093        .779                .209                                  .00827 2.10 722-862
       (1.26)      (4.43)              (1.16)

  2     .154        .836                            .144                      .00828 2.06 722-862
       (1.98)      (4.48)                          (0.80)

  3     .189        .697                                     .279             .00807 2.05 722-862
       (2.44)      (4.43)                                   (1.85)

  4     .179        .775                                              .202    .00815   1.99   722-862

       (2.15)      (5.32)                                            (1.46)


  5     .097                            .704        .284                      .00922 2.12     722-862

       (0.80)                          (3.15)      (1.34)

  6     .161                             .546                .434             .00894 2.02     722-862

       (1.43)                          (3.09)               (2.62)

  7     .125                             .678                         .306    .00905 2.05     722-862
       (1.04)                           (3.87)                       (1.87)


  8     .186        .690                 .013                .274             .00807   2.06 722-862
       (1.84)      (3.92)               (0.07)              (1.57)


  9     .103                  .726       .261                                 .00861 2.16 763-862
       (0.59)                (2.44)     (0.83)
 10     .178                  .973                  .004                      .00870   2.06 763-862
       (1.37)                (3.96)                (0.02)


 11     .276                  .703                           .263             .00851   2.03   763-862
       (2.30)                (3.60)                         (1.39)

 12     .253                  .744                                    .225    .00850   1.91   763-862
       (2.03)                (4.11)                                  (1.30)


 13     .230                  .633       .113                .225             .00850   2.08   763-862
       (1.00)                (2.20)     (0.30)              (0.96)


 14      .197        .330     .645                                            .00864 2.06 763-862
       (1.85)       (0.57)   (1.10)
                                         28

 VAR4. The conclusion regarding FAIR-OLD is thus the same as the conclusion

 regarding FAIR-CUR. In equation 14 both the FAIR-CUR and FAIR-OLD forecasts

 are included. Neither coefficient estimate
                                                    is significant, but FAIR-OLD has
 a coefficient estimate that is about twice the size of the FAIR-CUR

 coefficient estimate. FAIR-OLD is thus slightly better than FAIR-CUR in

 this sense. This is encouraging in that it shows that the changes in

 structure of the Fair model made between 1976-li and 1986-li did not

 contribute to the success it has in forecasting over this period.



 First Differenced Results

      Note that the regressions in Table 6 do not include a time trend. If

 the forecasts must be differenced
                                     to induce stationarity, then the
 regressions are in the form of "cointegrating
                                                     regressions" (Engle and
Granger [1987]), for which the usual
                                       asymptotic distribution theory does not
apply (Phillips and Durlauf [1986]). We reestimated the equations using

differenced data, and the results are presented in Table 7. Table 7 is the

same as Table 6 except that the dependent variable is log Y -
                                                                       log Y1 and
the forecast variables log
                             Y are replaced by log '        - log Y-1 The
results in Table 7 are very similar to those in Table 6. The main

difference is that in Table 7 the VAR models do not do quite as well
                                                                     against
the others as they do in Table 6.

     As a final test for FAIR-CUR,
                                     we estimated equation (1) in first
differenced form. We regressed log Y -
                                              log       on log    -
                                                                      log      a
constant, and the first differences of the various variables. The results

are presented in Table 8. Table 8 is the same as Table 1 except for the

different functional forms. The results in Table 8 are similar to those in
                                               TABLE 7
 Regression              of actual log (P changes on forecasted changes fran two or nore models.
                         Results for All Fkxlels. Deperent Variable is log Y.
                                                   A

Equa-                                          log Y - log Y1
tion    const.             EAIR—U]R FAIR-OLD      AC      VARI     VAR2     VAR4      SE      IM Sample

  1     -   .0027            .736                .284                                .00835 2.12     722-862

        (1.46)              (4.93)              (1.54)


  2     -   .0018            .889                          .030                      .00847   1.95   722-862

        (1.14)              (5.31)                        (0.17)


  3     - .0014              .804                                   .174             .00837 1.96 722-862
        (0.93)              (5.24)                                 (1.22)


  4 - .0018                  .834                                            .109    .00841   1.92   722-862

        (1.17)              (5.22)                                          (1.00)


  5     -       .0004.                            .755     .183                      .00927 2.11 722-862
        (0.19)                                   (4.09)   (1.08)

  6             .0001                             .669              .292             .00908   2.06   722-862

        (0.07)                                   (3.95)            (2.29)


  7     - .0006                                   .711                       .214    .00913 2.04.    722-862
        (0.30)                                   (3.88)                     (1.84)


  8     -       .0022         .679                .242              .142             .00828   2.12   722-862

        (1.27)               (4.19)              (1.43)            (1.07)


  9     -       .0044                  .751       .427                               .00860   2.31   763-862

        (1.44)                        (2.91)     (1.57)


 10     -       .0032                 1.047               - .097                     .00880 2.02     763-862

            (1.20)                    (4.70)              (0.40)


 11         -   .0027                  .880                         .137             .00877 2.02 763-862
            (0.99)                    (3.60)                       (0.71)


 12         -   .0030                  .856                                  .144    .00874 1.92     763-862
            (1.06)                    (3.68)                                (0.92)


  13        -   .0040                  .683       .405              .101             .00856   2.28   763-862
            (1.43)                    (2.39)     (1.53)            (0.56)


  14        -   .0035         .257     .769                                          .00879   2.05    763-862
            (1.28)           (0.41)   (1.24)
                                                       TABLE 8

                            Estimates of     Equation       (1) arxl Tests of
                                                                                            H2.
                              Results for FAIR-CUR. DeperJent Variable is &og Y.
                               Sanple period = 1972 II - 1984 II, 57 observations.

 Equation log Y — log Y1 const.                             Other Variables         WALL)           SE         R2
        1             .904              —.0029                                        1.34        .00847 .40840 1.93
                     (6.85)             (1.16)
     2                .873
                     (8.05)
                                        —.0033 &og Y1,            ..., Laog Y 8.00                 .00819 .44708 2.16
                                        (2.10)
     3                .880               .0037   Alog P1,         .   .., AIog   P 6.47            .00819   .44626 2.03
                     (6.59)             (1.09)
     4                .746              —.0003 LiJ—
                                                       1'                            9.40          .00766 .51558    2.31
                     (5.68)             (0.18)
     5                .809              —.0001   &og    EM1, ...,         Llog EM   10.91          .00825   .43897 1.96
                     (4.83)             (0.03)
     6                .912               .0025 AIog W1,        ..., AIog         W 6.61            .00804 .46667    1.92
                     (6.99)             (0.64)
     7                .919              —.0009   AIog Ni1, ..., &og Ni2 6.39                       .00833   .42739 1.87
                     (6.28)
    8                 .786
                     (5.25)
                                        (0.33)
                                    —.0008
                                        (0.52)
                                                 Ar—
                                                    , ..., Ar4                      22.l4**       .00804    .46667 1.93
    9                 .933          —.0003       all
                                                   —1                               23.09** .00749          .53736 1.85
                     (8.03)             (0.11)
   10                 .709          —.0012 all—
                                                       1 ,—2                        64. 97** .00704         .59098 2.07
                    (4.87)              (0.35)
   11                .725           —.0025 all—
                                                       1 ,—2,—3                     88.   88** .00651. .65069 1.95
                    (4.52)          (0.37)
   12                .903           —.0012 all—
                    (5.54)          (0.14)
                                                       1' 2 3                      244. 25*k .00602 .70113 2.10

Notes:      Y = forecast of real QJP fran FAIR-aiR.
            See Notes, Table 1.
            all =   Alog Y,    Alog P, AU, Alog EM, Alog W, Alog MI, Ar.
                                       29

Table 1. The coefficient estimate of the forecast variable is always

significant. First differencing thus makes little difference.



IV. Conclusion

     A general method has been proposed in this paper for examining models

as information aggregators (the IA test) and for comparing alternative

models. The IA test results show that the Fair model is a useful aggregator

of information. The overall results also show that the Fair model dominates

the nontheoretical AC and VAR models and that the AC model tends to dominate

the VAR models. Since the AC model resembles the Fair model in its use of

lagged values of the components of GNP, this suggests that some but not all

of the information that the Fair model uses to dominate the VAR models is in

the lagged values of the components.
                                        30

                                   References

  Chong, Yock Y., and David F. Hendry,
                                       "Econometric Evaluation of Linear
       Macro-Economic Models,"    iew of Economic Studies, 53:
       671-90, August 1986.

 Cooper, J. Phillip, and Charles R. Nelson, "The Ex-Ante Prediction
      Performance of the St. Louis and
                                       FRB-MIT-Penn Econometric Models
      and Some Results on Composite
                                    Predictions," 1purna1 of Money,
      Credit, and Bankjpg, 7: 1-32, February 1975.

 Engle, Robert F., and C.W,J. Granger,
                                       "Cointegration and Error Correction:
      Representation, Estimation and Testing," Econometrica 55: 251-76,
      March 1987.

 Fair, Ray C., Aj1ode1 of Macroeconomic Activity. Vol. 2. The Empirical
      Model, Ballinger Publishing Co., 1976.

 Fair, Ray C., "The Sensitivity of Fiscal
                                          Policy Effects to Assumptions
      About the Behavior of the Federal
                                        Reserve," Econometrica 46:
      1165-79, 1978.

 Fair, Ray C., £ecifjcation Estimation, and Analysis of Macroeconomejc
      Models, Harvard University Press, 1984.

 Granger, C.W.J., and Paul Newbold,
      2nd ed. , Academic Press, 1986.
                                      Forecasting Economic Time Series,

Hendry, David F., and Jean-Francois Richard, "On the Formulation of
     Empirical Models in Dynamic Economics," Journal of Econometrics,
     20: 3-33, October 1982.

Litternian, Robert B., itForecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions. -
     Four Years of Experience," Federal Reserve Bank of
     Minneapolis Working Paper 259, August 1984.

Litterman, Robert B., "Economic Forecasts From a Vector Autoregression,"
      xeroxed, serial.

Liu, T. C., "Underidentification
                                  Structural Estimation, and Forecasting,"
      cpnometrica, 28: 855-65, 1960.

McNees, Stephen K., "The Methodology of Macroeconometric Model
     Comparisons," in J. Kmenta and J.B.
                                         Ramsey, eds., j.çale
     Mc.-Econometric Models, North-Holland, 1981, 397-422.
Nelson, Charles R., "The Prediction
                                    Performance of the FRB-MIT-Penn Model of
      the U. S. Economy," American
      1972.                        Economic Review, 62: 902-17, December
                                     31

Phillips, P.C.B., and S.N. Derlauf, "Multiple Time Series Regressions with
     Integrated Processes," Review of Economic Studies, 53: 473-95,
     August 1986.

Ramsey, J.B., "Tests for Specification Errors in Classical Least-
     Squares Linear Regression Analysis," Journal of the Royal
     Statistical Society, Series B, 31: 350-71, 1969.

Sims, Christopher A., "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica, 48:
      1-48, January 1980.

Sims, Christopher A., "Book Review," (of Fair [1984]) Journal of Money.
      Credit and Banking, 18: 121-6, February 1986.

Sims, Christopher A., "Economic Forecasts From a Vector Autoregression,"
      xeroxed, serial.

Theil, Henri, "The Analysis of Disturbances in Regression Analysis,"
     Journal of the American Statistical Association, 60: 1067-79,
     December 1965.

Theil, Henri, Principles of Econometrics, John Wiley, New York, 1971.

White, Halbert, Asynrntotic Distribution Theory for Econometricians, Academic
     Press, Orlando Florida, 1984.
