NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMERGENCE OF ASIA:
REFORMS, CORPORATE SAVINGS, AND GLOBAL IMBALANCES
Jingting Fan
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Working Paper 22334
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22334

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

This paper was prepared for the IMF Economic Review-Bank of Korea Conference 2013. We
thank the editor Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, two anonymous referees, our discussant Markus
Bruckner, and the conference participants for their comments. We also thank Alberto Martin for
helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jingting Fan and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Emergence of Asia: Reforms, Corporate Savings, and Global Imbalances
Jingting Fan and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
NBER Working Paper No. 22334
June 2016
JEL No. E0,F0
ABSTRACT
One of the explanations for global imbalances is the self-financing behavior of credit-constrained
firms in rapidly growing emerging markets. We use an extensive firm-level data set from several
Asian countries during 2002–2011, and test the micro foundation of this theory by estimating the
effect of an exogenous change in credit constraints, resulting from financial reforms, on firms’
saving behavior. As predicted, after financial reforms, firms who were credit-constrained
previously decreased their savings more (or increased their savings less) relative to unconstrained
firms. However, this firm-level effect did not lead to a decrease in aggregate corporate savings as
conjectured by the theory. Our sector level regressions show that corporate savings increased
after financial reforms, and more so for sectors more dependent on external finance. The current
account surpluses also did not register a significant deterioration after financial reforms,
consistent with our findings on sectoral and aggregate corporate savings

Jingting Fan
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
fan@econ.umd.edu
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Tydings Hall 4118D
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and CEPR
and also NBER
kalemli@econ.umd.edu

Emergence of Asia: Reforms, Corporate Savings, and
Global Imbalances
Jingting Fan and Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan
University of Maryland and University of Maryland, CEPR, and NBER

Abstract
One of the explanations for global imbalances is the self-financing b ehavior of
credit-constrained firms i n r apidly g rowing e merging m arkets. We u se a n extensive
firm-level d ata s et f rom s everal A sian c ountries d uring 2 002–2011, a nd t est t he micro foundation of this theory by estimating the effect of an exogenous change in credit
constraints, resulting from financial reforms, on firms’ saving be havior. As predicted,
after financial reforms, firms who were credit-constrained previously decreased their
savings more (or increased their savings less) relative to unconstrained firms. However, this firm-level effect did not lead to a decrease in aggregate corporate savings as
conjectured by the theory. Our sector level regressions show that corporate savings
increased after financial reforms, and more so for sectors more dependent on external
finance. The current account surpluses also did not register a significant deterioration
after financial reforms, consistent with our findings on sectoral and aggregate corporate savings.
JEL Classification: E22, F41, D24, O16, O47

1

Introduction

Before the global financial crisis, many have argued that one of the key reasons behind
the global imbalances was the high saving rates in Asian countries. The reasons behind
these high savings rates are not well understood given the lack of empirical evidence on the
issue.
While several theoretical papers argue that financial constraints are responsible for the
increase in private savings and capital outflows (see, for example, Buera and Shin, 2009;

Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti, 2011), there are also other explanations. Some papers
emphasize the importance of public savings, due to limited commitment of governments
to pay their debt, combined with expropriation risk, in explaining the observed patterns
in capital outflows from Asia (see, for example, Aguiar and Amador, 2011; Benigno and
Fornaro, 2012). Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rı́os-Rull (2009), on the other hand, argues that
the high savings might be due to precautionary reasons and they find their way into the
developed world since savers in emerging economies seek insurance in safe U.S. bonds
given the limited supply of safe assets elsewhere. A similar argument is in Caballero, Farhi,
and Gourinchas (2008), according to which there are not enough investment opportunities in saver countries, causing capital to flow out.1 Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber
(2007) proposes an alternative theory where governments in the emerging countries of Asia influence international financial transactions, targeting current account so as to foster
employment and export-led growth.
Empirical evidence so far is inconclusive. First, most of the evidence that is put forth
in favor of a given model is mainly based on trends in macro data disregarding micro-level
heterogeneity. Ignoring micro-level heterogeneity in the data is in sharp contrast to what
these models aim to do since firm- or sector-level heterogeneity is a key micro foundation in many. Second, the few papers that do take micro-level heterogeneity seriously and
undertake systematic empirical exercise with firm- or industry-level data, do so in a static
environment. This means that these papers identify purely from long run average relationships between firms and/or sectors, not from dynamic firm- and/or sector-level changes in
the data. This methodology contradicts with the dynamic models set up to explain global
imbalances. Finally, almost all of the empirical papers exclusively focus on China, whereas
during the global imbalances period of 2000s, Korea, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Singapore and Hong Kong all have similar growth experiences and net total capital outflows.2
This paper contributes to this literature by bringing sector- and firm-level evidence together to shed light on the micro foundations of different theories of global imbalances.
Using firm-level data, we specifically test one key micro foundation in aggregate models of
global imbalances with financial constraints such as Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011)
and Buera and Shin (2009). These models aim at explaining the large current account surpluses in Asia based on either too high a corporate saving rate or too low a corporate invest1

Relatedly, Sandri (2014) shows that the precautionary motive of entrepreneurs can explain capital outflow during the growth acceleration period; Bacchetta and Benhima (forthcoming) shows that, in a model with
liquidity constraint, the demand for liquid foreign bond is complement to domestic investment, and this complementarity could explain capital outflows from fast-growing emerging economies.
2
See Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013) and Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2014).

2

ment rate (or both). Their key building blocks are firm-level heterogeneity in productivity
and financial constraints.
In Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011), private firms with high productivity are financially constrained and must rely on their own savings to finance investment, while stateowned enterprises (SOEs) with low productivity have access to external finance. In transition, entrepreneurs accumulate savings and increase their investment and employment, with
investment constrained by savings; SOEs, on the other hand, reduce their investment and
employment. This slow reallocation leads to a rise in aggregate savings—as entrepreneurs
in private firms have a higher saving rate, and a decrease in aggregate investment—as SOEs
are downsizing. The model therefore predicts a rising current account surplus during the
transition. If a financial reform occurs in such a model, private firms will experience a decrease in savings relative to SOEs following the reform, leading to a decrease in aggregate
savings.
In Buera and Shin (2009), after the removal of economic-wide distortions, the savings
of high-productivity firms increase, as the low level of financial development hinders these
firms’ access to external finance. Meanwhile, low-productivity firms exit, causing a decline
in investment. As a result, aggregate savings is higher than aggregate investment, leading
to capital outflows. This paper implies that with successful broad financial reforms, productive firms now can enter and finance increasing investment with foreign savings. The
self-financing saving motive would weaken and we should observe the current account surplus going down, together with a decline in savings. As a result, both models predict that
financial reforms lead to capital inflows on net through a decline in savings, even though
the original outflows might be driven by high savings or low investments.
To test the micro prediction of these theories, we use an extensive firm-level data set
from several Asian countries during 2002–2011 from ORBIS, a commercial database provided by Bureau Van Dijk, which contains administrative data from business registries on
millions of firms worldwide. The financial and ownership information in ORBIS is initially
collected by local Chambers of Commerce and in turn, relayed to Bureau Van Dijk through
some 40 different information providers. The database goes back in time for other countries
but for our countries the data starts in 2002. ORBIS dataset is crucially different from the
other data sets that are commonly used in the literature such as Compustat for the United States, Compustat Global, and Worldscope databases, in that 99 percents of the data in
ORBIS covers private companies, whereas the former popular data sets are for large listed
companies. A fundamental advantage of the data is to have type-specific ownership. We
know not only the foreign and domestic owners of each company, but also whether a owner

3

is government, business, or other types of entities, such as individual, private shareholder,
foundation, or research institution.3
Given the fact that listed firms only amount to approximately 30 percent of the GDP in
emerging economies on average (Bayoumi, Tong, and Wei, 2012), it is utmost essential to
investigate the behavior of all firms. The reason to use Asian firms as our sample is that
in order to test the key assumptions of the above theories we need to use emerging countries that went through financial reforms, with current account surpluses and productivity
growth during the global imbalances period. For Asian economies we can also identify the
ownership structure as SOEs versus private firms, which serves as proxy for firms’ access
to finance.4
We focus on reforms undertaken during the 2000s that are documented in the database
of financial reform introduced in Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010), which is one of
the most comprehensive cross-country data on financial liberalizations.5 There are two reasons for such a focus: first, during our sample period of the 2000s, which is also the key
period for global imbalances, there was a push for financial liberalization and hence several of our countries undertook such reforms, though not all, providing us with control and
treatment groups of firms from different Asian countries. Second, such reforms constitute
a perfect laboratory to test the main assumption of the theories we describe above, that is
financial frictions is the key factor driving capital outflow in these countries during the period of fast growth. If financial frictions led private firms to save more than SOEs originally
then financial reforms that reduced such frictions should undo this behavior, as predicted
by those models. Financial reforms might make SOEs less likely to obtain cheap bank
loans, while at the same time make private entrepreneurs more likely to obtain bank loans,
reducing their need for self-finance. This implication can in principle be tested with financial reforms that are undertaken at any time, however, by using this period we can also test
the aggregate implications of firm-level heterogeneity in financial frictions for aggregate
savings and hence for global imbalances.
We explicitly test whether savings at firm level differs by heterogeneity in credit constraints, conditional on firm-level productivity. We use a differences in differences strategy
and investigate the effect of a removal of credit constraint on private firms’ savings relative
3

See Kalemli-Ozcan and others (2015) for details on the data including coverage and representation.
The other set of countries where we can do a similar decomposition in the ownership structure is Latin
America, but most of the financial reforms are much earlier than 2000s and hence we cannot measure the
change in credit constraints during our sample period for firm-level data in a comparable way to the Asian
countries.
5
The data is originally constructed by Abiad and Mody (2005) and extended by Abiad, Detragiache, and
Tressel (2010) to cover more countries and longer periods.
4

4

to that of SOEs’. This approach will mimic the dynamic variation in firm-specific credit
constraint, as implied by the models. The variation in the changes in credit constraint is
driven by country-level financial reforms, exogenous to the selection of firms into SOE and
non-SOE. Hence a private firm that was previously credit-constrained will face less severe
a constraint after financial reforms. Provided that there was a similar prior trend before
the reform in the saving decisions of state- and privately-owned firms (albeit their different
average savings prior to the reform), we can deduce the differential effect of reforms on
their savings. With rich panel data, we are able to control for firm and country-sector-year
fixed effects, absorbing any firm-level trends that are different for SOEs and private firms,
any country-year or sector-year policy changes or other country-sector-year shocks, and all
long-run differences between SOEs and private firms, and identify only from within firm
changes. We will also use both an unbalanced sample of firms and a continuing-firm sample
to gauge the effects of entry and exit.
We find that financial reforms increased SOEs’ savings relative to that of private firms’; alternatively, private firms decreased their savings relative to that of SOEs’. This result holds both for listed firms and for the full sample that includes non-listed firms. Our
baseline point estimate suggests that a typical one-point increase in financial reform index resulted in a 0.8-percentage-point increase in the relative saving rate of SOEs’. This
is a sizeable effect, a rise of about 25 percents over the mean saving rate. The finding is
supportive of the micro foundations of the theories based on financial frictions.
The ratio of private credit to GDP increased by 5 percentage points on average in our
countries after the financial reform period of 2005, based on the World Development Indicator. Hence it seems like reforms were successful on easing credit constraints to a certain extent. Our firm-level evidence shows that previously credit-constrained firms decreased their
savings (or did not increase their savings as much) compared to previously unconstrained
firms. The predictions of the aforementioned models are such that this micro channel will
lead to a decline in aggregate corporate saving which will lead to a decline in aggregate
saving and current account surplus. These aggregate predictions are not borne out in the
data.
Figure 1 and Table 1 show that after the reform period of 2002–2005 (see Table 2 for
dates of each reform),6 only 2 countries out of the 6 countries that undertook reforms relax6

All our countries undertook several financial reforms during 2002-2005, the specific years are as follows:
China, 2002 and 2004; India, 2004; Indonesia, 2003; Malaysia, 2003, 2004; Philippines, 2005; Taiwan, 2002,
2003; Thailand, 2003. Measures are direct measures to reduce financial frictions such as removal of interest
rate control and security market reform.

5

ing credit constraints—India and Indonesia—had a deteriorating current account balance.7
All others have experienced increasing current account surpluses. Notice that if we end the
period after reforms in 2008, the surpluses will be even higher given the current account
reversals after the global financial crisis. Table 1 also reveals that India and Indonesia had
experienced deteriorating current accounts due to a large increase in aggregate investment, despite the fact that aggregate savings had also increased. In fact, as shown, in all our
countries aggregate savings increased after the financial reform.
Table 3 shows sectoral saving and investment data for countries for which we have flowof-funds data. Again, similar to aggregate savings in Table 1, here we show that corporate
savings increased in nearly all our countries after the financial reform. This result is not
surprising since corporate savings is usually the biggest component of national saving in
emerging markets (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014).
We further confirm these patterns in the data by aggregating our firm-level savings to
2-digit sector level and regressing sectoral corporate savings on financial reform. We show
that corporate savings increased after financial reform in our countries, especially in sectors
highly dependent on external finance. These findings cast doubt on the implications of
the theory in terms of linking the key micro foundation based on firm heterogeneity in
financial constraints to patterns in aggregate savings, where once credit-constrained firms
start decreasing their savings, this effect should lead to a change in aggregate savings.
A possible explanation for our findings is that credit-constrained firms did not decrease
their savings enough after reforms while unconstrained firms increased savings too much,
leading to an increase in aggregate corporate savings. Across sectors, although compared
to firms from sectors less dependent on external finance, previously constrained firms in
sectors more dependent on external finance might have decreased their savings by more,
previously unconstrained firms might also have increased their savings by more, possibly
due to the increase in competition in credit and product markets resulting from reforms, or
other factors, offsetting or even overturning the decrease in sectoral savings.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 summarizes the literature.
Section 3 describes the methodology. Section 4 reviews the data. Section 5 presents the
results and various robustness analysis. Section 6 concludes.
7

Thailand’s reform is a reversal, so it caused an increase in credit constraints; Taiwan reversed its private
ownership reform in 2002 one year later.

6

2

Related Literature

The empirical literature on global imbalances mostly focuses on the Chinese saving
puzzle. Kuijs (2006) argues that the rise in corporate and government savings contributed
more to the increase in national savins than the rise in household savings in China. Yang
(2012) shows that from 2000 onwards the aggregate saving rate increased, moving above
investment rate in China and once decomposed, all sectors—corporate, government, and
household—contributed to the increase in saving. Focusing on the household sector, a large
literature has identified different causes, such as income uncertainty, life-cycle saving motive, changing demographics, and sex ratio, for the high household saving rate in emerging
economies (the last two explanations are more focused on China).8
In our analysis, we highlight the distinction between SOEs and private firms. This focus is motivated by the previous findings that SOEs are systematically different from private
firms in terms of permanent differences. More specifically, empirical evidence suggests that
compared to private firms, SOEs tend to be less productive, but have easier access to bank
loans.9 In light of these findings, it is reasonable to expect that SOEs and private firms
would make different saving decisions, and respond to the same financial reforms in different ways.10 In addition to financial reforms, emerging economies have also gone through
several waves of structural reforms, and previous studies have examined the impacts of
these reforms on the governance and performance of SOEs.11 However, we are unaware of
studies that have used cross-country, over-time, firm-level data, to systematically examine
the saving decision of SOEs and private firms, and study the differential impacts of financial
reforms on this decision.
Bayoumi, Tong, and Wei (2012) investigates whether or not corporate savings can explain the increase in aggregate savings in China. They point out that all evidence that sug8
See, for example, Chamon, Liu, and Prasad (2010), Chamon and Prasad (2010), Wei and Zhang (2011),
Du and Wei (2013), Song and Yang (2010), Choukhmane, Coeurdacier, and Jin (2013) and Yang, Zhang, and
Zhou (2011).
9
Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011), using data from China National Bureau of Statistics Flow of
Funds, shows that profits, return to capital, and employment are higher and rising in private firms compared
to SOEs since 1998. Dollar and Wei (2007), using detailed survey data on 12,400 firms, though for a single
year of 2005, also shows average return to capital to be twice as high in private firms as in fully state-owned
enterprises. SOEs have also been documented to have easier access to bank loans, even many years after the
market-oriented reforms (see, for example, Cull and Xu (2003), Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011), and
Dollar and Wei (2007), among many others).
10
In this paper, we do not attempt to look into what are the distortions that help SOEs sustain their low
productivity or better access to external finance, but rather provide empirically sound estimates of an exogenous
removal of certain distortions, i.e., credit constraints, on the differences between savings of firms that were
credit-constrained and savings of firms that were not before the reform.
11
See, for example, Li (1997) and reference thereto.

7

gests corporate savings is the driving force of the high national savings in China is based
on the flow-of-funds data from the National Bureau of Statistics of China. This data cannot
be verified by a third party and is subject to frequent revisions that could change a number
by as much as 20%. They undertake a study using more than 1500 Chinese listed firms and
more than 30000 global listed firms. They find that listed corporate firms in China are not
different from listed firms elsewhere, and that the recent rise in corporate savings is part of a
global trend, as also documented by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). Comparing SOEs
and private firms in China they also find no significant difference in the saving decisions of
these two groups.
Different from Bayoumi, Tong, and Wei (2012), we use a comprehensive database, in
which listed companies account for only 20% of the final sample, and we are not interested
in the Chinese corporate saving rate per se, but rather interested in how financial reforms
affect SOEs and non-SOEs differently given our guidance by the theory. Through the use
of country-sector-year effects, we fully control for rising trends in corporate savings, let it
be global, country-specific, or country-sector-specific. This is an additional advantage of
using firm-level panel data from multiple Asian countries. In fact, we can control for any
smooth trend difference between SOEs and non-SOEs since our identification comes from
discrete sudden changes in credit constraint, rather than the long run trend difference in the
saving behaviors of SOEs and non-SOEs. We use firm fixed effects, allowing us to identify
solely from overtime changes within a firm, as opposed to from cross-sectional long-run
averages, as most existing literature does.

3

Methodology

We will employ a differences-in-differences methodology and estimate the following
regression equation:
Si,c,j,t =

βSOEi × Reformc,t + ωXi,c,j,t

(1)

+ ϕc,j,t + αi + ξi,c,j,t

where i, c, j, t stand for firm, country, sector, and time respectively. Si,c,j,t denotes firmlevel savings, which is a flow variable normalized by the stock of total assets or tangible
fixed assets (capital). SOEi is a dummy variable that indicates whether or not a firm is
owned by the state. This dummy does not change overtime. Reform denotes financial

8

reforms, which varies at country-time level. This variable is an index (score) for each country’s current state of financial liberalization and it only changes (jumps discretely) in a given year if a reform is undertaken. ϕc,j,t denotes country-sector-year fixed effects, in which
sectors are at 2-digit-SIC level. These effects are important controls for any sector-level
policies—such as subsidies and taxes—and also country-level policies—such as exchange
rate valuations—that might affect results. αi denotes firm fixed effects which means we identify from changes following reforms, rather than from permanent differences in savings
rates between state- and privately-owned firms. We also control for time-varying firm-level
variables in Xi,c,j,t such as profitability/productivity, firm size, cash flow, and investment.
Finally ξi,c,j,t denotes the error term.
We control for the possibility that SOEs and non-SOEs were on different trends in terms
of their savings before the reforms (or afterwards). This is important since the threat to our
identification is not that SOE and non-SOE had permanent differences on many dimensions but rather they had different trends prior to reforms, or firms chose to become SOE or
non-SOE as a result of financial liberalization. We rule out the later by construction as we
keep the SOE ownership dummy fixed for each firm. To address the former concern, there
are several ways. One can run a placebo exercise, control for the term SOEi ∗ Trend, or
use a control group of countries who did not go through any financial reforms. We adopt
the latter approach here for space considerations, but in the previous version of this paper
we show our results survive all these approaches. Specifically, we control for smooth trend
differences between SOEs and non-SOEs through the use of the control group countries
with no financial reforms during the period. If there were different trends for the saving decisions of SOEs and non-SOEs, to the extent that the trends were common to all countries
in the sample regardless whether or not a country went through a reform or not, incorporating non-reform countries could help isolate the impacts of reforms from the trend. We
also run our regressions without the control group countries and show that our results do
not change. This further confirms that, without financial reforms, the differences between
SOEs and non-SOEs are time invarying in nature and will be captured by firm fixed effects.

4

Data and Sample

In our analysis we will use firm-level data which includes information on firms’ financial and ownership status. We will also use data on country-level financial reforms
and industry-level measure for external finance dependence. This section introduces data
sources and presents descriptive statistics.

9

4.1

Firm-Level Data

We use the ORBIS database for firm-level analysis. The ORBIS database is compiled
by BvD, and covers firms from many countries. The database includes companies’ financial
information in a standardized and internationally comparable format and their ownership information. The ownership information allows us to identify owners of a company and these
owners’ types, such as whether a owner is a public administration, an industrial company,
or a financial institution. We use this ownership information to classify a firm as either a
SOE or a non-SOE.
4.1.1

Financial Information

We use information from firms’ financial statements to construct measures for firm
savings and firm-level control variables that aim at capturing firm size, profitability, and
cash flows. The ideal measure for firms’ gross savings is “Retained Earnings” from the
balance sheet, which is the historical stock of earnings that is not distributed, reported
mostly by listed companies. Given our focus on non-listed companies, and given that the
majority of our sample are private companies, however, we will use another balance sheet
item—“Other Shareholders’ Fund” (hereafter OSHF) as a proxy for firms’ gross savings.
In balance-sheet accounting, Shareholders’ Fund = Capital + Other Shareholders’ Fund.
OSHF thus includes not only retained earnings, but also treasury reserves, net depreciation,
profit/loss for the fiscal year, voluntary provisions, and minority interests. All these items
broadly capture how much a firm saves out of its profit.
Balance sheet items are stock variables. For ease of interpretation, in all regressions, we convert stock savings into a flow measure by first differencing. We then normalize
the change in firms’ stock savings, ∆OSHF, by total assets to obtain a flow measure of
firms’ savings. The ratio of the change in OSHF over total assets is the benchmark measure, Savings1 . In robustness analysis, we will also use a measure of firms’ savings that is
normalized differently using total tangible fixed assets (Savings2 ), or is based on retained
earnings (Savings3 ), although in the later case our sample size will be much smaller.
4.1.2

Ownership and Industry Information

Our primary goal in this paper is to investigate the differential saving responses of SOEs
and non-SOEs to financial reforms. It is thus crucial for us to obtain correct classifications
for state ownership. ORBIS’s unique ownership database allows us to classify firms based
on both direct and indirect ultimate ownership information. To the best of our knowledge,
10

this is the only data set available to us with such information that comprehends both listed
and unlisted firms over time. In constructing firms’ ownership status, we take into account
that governments could indirectly hold the stock shares of a company through a state-owned
enterprise, such as the China National Petroleum Corporation, or a sovereign wealth fund,
such as the Temasek of Singapore. The data appendix describes this procedure in detail.
4.1.3

Sample Coverage and Descriptive Statistics

As discussed in the introduction, to focus on a region with important implications for
global imbalances, we use the Asian segment of the ORBIS database. After excluding
countries with poor coverage, we are left with a sample of eleven countries, namely Hong
Kong, China, Taiwan, Singapore, Japan, Korea, India, Indonesia, Thailand, Philippines,
and Malaysia. Among these, Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan, and Korea did not experience
any reforms in our sample period, and they will naturally serve as the comparison group;
the remaining countries will be the focus on our analysis. The initial sample covers close
to one million firm-year observations since 2000. Our analysis requires ownership information and non-missing value for total assets and firms’ savings, among other financial
information. This restricts our analysis to a subset of this database. Even so, our sample
covers a substantial share of the economy.
Table 4 reports several measures of our sample coverage for reform countries. Column
1 reports the share of listed companies. In all but two (India and Indonesia) of our sample
countries, listed companies constitute less than half of the sample observations. In Thailand,
Philippines, and Malaysia, listed companies accounts for 10% or less of our sample. Given
our focus on the differential responses between SOEs and private companies in their saving
decisions, it is important that we have a fair share of SOEs in all reform countries. Column 2
suggests this is indeed the case. There is substantial variation across countries in the shares
of SOEs (for example, China has about a quarter SOEs in the sample, whereas Thailand
has only about 2%), but on average a country has 6-7 percents of observations that are state
owned.
Columns 3 reports the fraction of the aggregate savings of our sample firms in GDP,
where the aggregate firm-level savings is computed as the long run average of the yearto-year change in aggregate “Other Shareholders’ Fund”. Column 4 reports the aggregate
corporative savings in national accounts, from the data set compiled by Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2014), as a share of GDP. Column 5 reports our own collection of corporate savings from various sources of national flows-of-funds table.12 A comparison between Col12

The differences between Columns 4 and Column 5 might be due to statistical discrepancies or small dif-

11

umn 3, and Columns 4 and 5 suggests that our data is broadly representative in terms of
corporate saving rate, given that the numbers are in the same order of magnitude. Again,
there is heterogeneity in coverage across countries—China, for example, has worse coverage than other countries.
Column 6 reports the wage bill in our data relative to that in the official data. To focus
on the role of financial frictions for firms’ saving decisions, we exclude public administration, finance, and other services from our sample, as we will also do in subsequent empirical
analysis. The remaining companies are mainly manufacturers. We use this sample of firms to construct aggregate wage bill, and for a consistent comparison, use only aggregate
manufacturing labor value added as the denominator. As Column 6 suggests, for countries
like Taiwan, Malaysia, and India, our sample covers close to half of the manufacturing
labor value added. For China and Indonesia, the coverage is not as good. But note that
we construct the denominator (since official wage bill is not available) by multiplying the
labor shares in the corporate sector estimated in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) and
the manufacturing value added from the World Development Indicator. To the extent that
manufacturing industries are less labor intensive than the corporate sector in general, our
approach will overestimate the denominator, and understate our data coverage. In any event,
in our robustness section we will do our regressions only for good coverage countries. This
is important in terms of relating our micro results to macro dynamic patterns.13
Table 5 provides descriptive statistics for main variables used in the empirical analysis,
both separately for SOE and private companies, and pooling both types. For each ratio,
before statistics are generated, we trim the sample at 2% from both left and right to exclude outliers. The bottom panel of Table 5 tests whether the SOE sample is systematically
different from the non-SOE sample.
The variables we focus on are firm size, profitability, investment rate, cash flow intensity, and three measures of firm saving rate. Firm size is measured in ln(total assets). Firms’
t−1
, where K is total tangible fixed
investment rate is defined in a conventional way as KtK−K
t−1
asset. Cash flow and profitability are normalized by total assets as the literature commonly
Earnings
∆OSHF
∆OSHF
does. The three measures of firms’ saving rate are: Total
, and ∆Retained
.
Assets ,
K
Total Assets
The first two measures are available for a substantial subset of our sample, while the third
measure is available mainly for listed companies. We will use the first measure in our benchmark analysis, because the second measure might not be appropriate for many companies
for whom non-tangible fixed assets constitute an important component of the balance sheet,
ferences in time horizon.
13
See Kalemli-Ozcan and others (2015) on how to get good coverage and representation out of the ORBIS
data in general.

12

and the third measure has limited coverage. Indeed, as the top panel of Table 5 suggests,
the second measure has a higher mean (which is not surprising, as tangible fixed assets are
only a component of total assets), a higher dispersion, and a higher skewness.
The bottom panel of Table 5 reveals that SOE and private companies differ systematically in their size and cash flow intensity. In particular, SOEs are larger, have more cash,
but do not necessarily invest more. The systematic difference in these dimensions calls for
a fixed effect framework to remove these average differences between the two groups.

4.2

Country-Level Financial Reforms

Our measures for financial reforms are drawn from “A New Database of Financial Reforms” introduced by Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010). This database covers 91
countries over the period of 1973–2005. The database reports a composite index for financial liberalization, which is the sum of scores of seven sub-components, including credit
controls and reserve requirements, interest rate controls, entry barriers, state/private ownership in baking sectors, security market policies, banking supervision and regulations, and
restrictions on the capital account. Each dimension is graded on the scale of 0–3 based on
whether the financial market is fully depressed (0), partially depressed (1), partially liberalized (2), fully liberalized (3). The aggregate index therefore takes a value of 0–21. The
aggregate index increases when there is a financial reform along one or more of the seven
sub-components; a downward movement in the sub-component and aggregate score instead
reflects a reversal. We use the aggregate index for benchmark regressions, and use the
changes in the sub-components to examine the effects of different types of reforms.
Table 2 provides information on which country passed which reform and when.14 As
we can see, during this period, most countries experience at least one point increase in
the aggregate score; countries like Malaysia, China, experienced 3 points increase in this
score, where, ideal for a differences-in-differences estimation, each change corresponds
to a discrete jump in a given year. Even though the reforms are not frequent, the timing
of reforms are different, from which we can identify their differential impacts. There can
also be reversals: for example, in our sample, Thailand experienced a reversal in 2003
(restricting capital account).
To make sense of a one-point increase in the score for financial reforms, in the full
sample (91 countries over the period of 32 years), the mean for overall score is 10.3 out
of 21, and the standard deviation is 6.33. So a one-point increase in the overall score is
14

During this period, Japan, Hong Kong, Korea and Singapore, all of which are in our sample, experienced
no financial reforms, and they will act as control groups in the diff-in-diff estimation.

13

only 1/6 of the standard deviation. For our reform countries for the period 2002–2005, the
sample mean is 13.7, with a standard deviation of 2.36, so a one-point increase in overall
score corresponds to less than a half of the standard deviation.

4.3

Sectoral-Level External Finance Dependence

In examining the role of financial frictions, we will also exploit industry dependence on
external finance. Our measure of industry-level dependence on external finance is defined
as the share of capital expenditures that is not financed by cash flow from operations.15
Originally from Rajan and Zingales (1998), this measure has been extensively used in studying the effects of financial development. A higher value for this measure means an
industry relies more heavily on funding not directly from operations for investment, so this
industry is more dependent on external finance.
The underlying assumption behind this approach is that industries differ in their dependence on external finance due to technological reasons. For example, industries could
have different patterns in generating stable cash flows, hold assets that could be used as
collateral in borrowing to varying degrees, or suffer from different types of contractual frictions, either between lenders and firms, or between the manager and owner of a firm. Given
these industry-level characteristics, an economy-wide financial reform will affect these industries differently. This differential impact is thus informative about the role of financial
development on both industry and aggregate outcomes.
To implement this approach, the key is to make sure the industry-level external finance
dependence is not driven by the supply of finance, but instead determined by exogenous
industry characteristics. Rajan and Zingales (1998) proposes to use U.S. listed companies to
construct such a measure. As the U.S. is financially developed and also at the technological
frontier, the decisions of U.S. listed companies are more likely due to exogenous industry
technological characteristics, rather than reflecting the supply of finance.
Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we construct a measure using the U.S. listed
companies. Since our sample period are after 2000, we use the 1990-1999 data from the
Compustat North America. One caveat of using the U.S. data to construct this measure,
however, is that there might be cross-country differences in industry characteristics—the
same product might be produced in dramatically different ways in our sample of Asian
countries, it is thus not clear that the industry-level dependence measure constructed using
the U.S. data is relevant for firms in the sample. To alleviate this concern, we also use our
sample to construct this measure. More details in the construction of these two measures
15

Formally, Dependence =

Capital Expenditures-Cash Flow From Operations
Capital Expenditures

14

are provided in the appendix.

5

Empirical Analysis

Table 6 shows our benchmark results. The saving rate used as dependent variable is
measured as flow and normalized by assets. We adopt our preferred measure based on
“Other Shareholders’ Funding” here; later we test the results under alternative measures.
In all regressions (and the regressions to be discussed below), we drop the observations
with dependent variables falling in the top or bottom 2% of the distribution, to prevent
outliers from affecting our results. Although not reported here, for robustness, we also try
winsorization, or trimming at alternative percentiles, our results remain robust.
In the first column, we find a positive and statistically significant coefficient for the interaction between SOE dummy and financial reform, which means SOEs increased their
savings more than non-SOEs following financial reforms. Or alternatively, non-SOEs decreased their savings more than SOEs. In Column 2 through 5, we control for other determinants of savings such as size, cash flow, productivity, and investment rate. To avoid
simultaneity, we use lagged control variables, except for investment rate. The reason for using contemporaneous investment rate is that using lagged investment eliminates early years
from the regression (given that we need 2-year-lagged capital stock to compute the lagged
investment rate) and hence the identification would rely solely on the reforms from 2004
onwards.16
The signs of these control variables are as expected. Growing firms decreased their
saving over time as captured by size; firms who increased their cash flow over time also
decreased their savings over time, conditional on productivity improvements, proxied by
profitability, an imperfect but commonly used measure in the finance literature.17 Finally,
column 5 adds investment, measured in flow as the growth of capital stock. Again our main
result does not change.
All regressions have firm fixed effects and country-sector-year fixed effects. In spite of
the fact that fixed effects soak up a lot of variation, we have reasonable and precise point
estimates. Our results are economically significant. The estimated coefficient of 0.8 implies
that with a one-point increase in financial reform (which is the typical increase in the index
when a single reform takes place), there is a 0.8-percentage-point increase in savings. This
represents a 25-percent increase over pre-reform mean saving rate.
16
17

However, we verify when including lagged investment rate as control, the result is qualitatively similar.
Using sales growth, another imperfect but commonly used measure, gives us identical results.

15

Table 7 undertakes robustness analysis. Column 1 excludes China to see how influential this country is for our estimation. Column 2 uses only countries with good coverage
for which we have about half of the real economy, so China, Thailand and Philippines are
not used in this column. Column 4 uses only continuing firms, meaning we do not allow
entry and exit. Column 5 uses firms only from countries that went through financial reform,
omitting control group countries. All estimates are significant and similar in magnitude.
Column 6 restricts to only listed companies to see if listed and unlisted companies differ
systematically. The coefficient is only slightly smaller, but still statistically significant. In
the final two columns, we use two alternative measures of savings. In Column 7 we use
Savings2 as dependent variable, in which we use total tangible fixed assets—rather than
total assets as in the benchmark regressions–for normalization. The coefficient is positive
and significant with a point estimate three times larger than the benchmark results. However, notice from Table 5 that the median value of Savings2 is also about three times larger
than the mean value of Savings1 (the mean value of Savings2 is much larger as this variable
is skewed), so percentage wise, the results are almost the same. Finally, Column 8 uses
Savings3 —the measure based on changes in retained earnings—as dependent variable. The
coefficient is about half of that from the benchmark specification. But again, given that the
mean value of Savings3 is also much smaller than that of Savings1 , the percentage effect is
similar to that implied by the benchmark specification.
In summary, all robustness tests yield the consistent result that SOEs, compared to nonSOEs, increased their relative savings after the reforms, meaning SOEs either increased
savings more, or decreased savings less. Moreover, across specifications, the quantitative
magnitudes of the estimates are also similar.

5.1

The Impacts of Specific Reforms

So far we have focused on the impacts of an increase in the aggregate financial reform
index. In this section, we further explore the impacts of specific reforms using information
on the source of each increase in the aggregate score. To be able to include all lagged
control variables, we focus on reforms after 2003. Table 8 reports the results. Column 1
replicates the benchmark specification; each column in Column 2–5 estimates the impact
of one type of reforms. We obtain similar results as before that non-SOE firms decreased
their savings more than SOE after the reforms. The point estimates, of course, differs
across columns, which could be due to either the different natures of these reforms, or the
heterogenous effects of financial reforms across countries. When we use all the reforms
together in Column 6, it seems like interest rate control reform is most robust. This makes
16

intuitive sense as interest rate control reform refers to relaxations in interest rate controls,
defined based on whether the interest rates are set by administrations, through direct interest
rate control, or through the use of interest floors, ceilings or bands. Of course, given the
high correlation between reforms, and the fact they have been undertaken within 2-3 years’
time in different countries, it is hard to pin down the direct effect of each. Our preferred
measure is therefore the aggregate financial reform index.

5.2

The Role of External Finance Dependence

In this section we introduce the measure of external finance dependence from Rajan
and Zingales (1998) into our regressions. Our aim is twofold. First, this will provide
another measure of financial constraints, albeit at sector level, instead of our firm-level
SOE/non-SOE split. We expect sectors that are more externally financial dependent to
be more financially constrained before the reform, and to experience a larger change in
financial constraints as the reform took place. Second, if what we have found in the previous
section is truly due to financial reforms, we should expect that for industries that are more
dependent on external finance, financial reforms should have a bigger effect. Therefore for
firms that were more financial constrained (private companies), financial reforms should
reduce savings even more in these externally dependent sectors.
Table 9 reports the results. Columns 1 and 2 use the Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure, constructed from the US listed firms data. As discussed before, given the large
cross-country difference in production technology and management practise, the U.S. measure might fail to capture the true financial dependence in our sample countries, hence in
Columns 3 and 4 we use the same measure constructed from our firm-level data. In Columns
1 and 3 we want to look at the direct impacts of reforms on industries with different external dependence, so we control for only country-year fixed effects and firm fixed effects; in
Columns 2 and 4 we absorb this variation using country-sector-year fixed effects, and focus
solely on the terms involving state ownership dummy.
In all four regressions, consistent with our earlier findings, the interaction between financial reforms and state ownership dummies has a positive and significant impacts on firm
savings. The triple interaction terms among financial reform, external finance dependence,
and state ownership dummy are also generally positive and significant, although the p-value
is above the conventional cutoff in the first Column. These results imply that the relative
savings of SOEs increased after financial reforms, and the relative increase was larger for
SOEs operating in the financially dependent sectors. Alternatively, non-SOEs, especially
those in the external-finance-dependent sectors, decreased their savings more relative to
17

SOEs. Again, these results deliver the same message and strengthen our previous findings
further.
So far we still cannot tell the source of the relative change in saving behaviors between
SOEs and non-SOEs. The coefficients for the interaction term between financial reforms
and industry financial dependence could shed some light on this. Note that this term in
Columns 1 and 3 amounts to comparing over time two non-SOEs in two industries with
different levels of external finance dependence. If the source of the differential impacts of
financial reforms are through larger decreases in savings by private companies, we should
expect such decreases to be more pronounced in industries where previous financial constraint was more severe—industries with higher external finance dependence. The fact that
the interaction term between reform and dependence is not significant in either column suggests that it is unlikely that the changes in the saving behavior of non-SOEs are responsible
for the results. Hence the results might be largely due to the increase in the savings of
SOEs. This evidence is only suggestive, however, given that external finance dependence is
measured with error, resulting in potential attenuation bias.

5.3

Sector-Level Regressions

In this section, we run regressions at sector level, instead of at firm level, to offer further
evidence so that we could link our firm-level results to aggregate patterns shown in Tables
1 and 3 through the lens of the models we discuss earlier.
Specifically, in Tables 1 and 3, we report aggregate savings and aggregate corporate
savings at the country-level and show that both increased after financial reforms for most
countries. As shown in Table 4, where we aggregate our corporate savings to country-level
and compare to data from national accounts, our data is representative. Hence here we
aggregate our firm-level savings for each country-sector-year cell, where sector is at twodigit level, and regress that on financial reforms, which varies at the country-year level, to
see if the sectoral aggregate savings increased after reforms.18 We also interact the financial
reform index with two measures of external finance dependence, as we do in the previous
section, to sort out whether the relative change in savings in our firm-level regressions after
the reform is due to non-SOEs decreasing their savings or SOEs increasing their savings.
The reason why we do not run this regression at country level is that, in that case we will
not be able to control for the different sectoral specializations of countries through country18

Specifically, we aggregate total assets and “Other Shareholders’ Fund” over firms in each each 2-digit
industry, and then construct a measure of saving rate analogous to Savings1 . In this aggregation, to keep the
composition of sector fixed we focus on the sample of continuing firms. We winsorize the sample at top and
bottom 2% to rule out the influence of outliers; the results are robust to trimming and winsorization choices.

18

sector fixed effects. And of course we also will not be able to explore the differential
effects of reforms on sectors with different external finance dependence. Still, one caveat in
interpreting these sectoral regressions is that, while country-specific and industry-specific
reforms would be captured by our fixed effects, we will not be able to rule out potential
sectoral-level structural reforms implemented together with financial reforms.
Table 10 shows that after financial reform, sectoral savings went up at two-digit level in
our countries on average. Columns 2 and 3 interact reforms with sector-level external dependence measures, one based on the U.S. and the other based on our own data. Columns
4 and 5 further add country-year fixed effects to absorb time-varying country shocks, including financial reforms, and focus on the interaction term. Both Column 2 and Column
3 show that savings increased after financial reforms. Column 2 and 4 also suggest that
the increase was larger, if a sector is more dependent on external finance. One explanation consistent with this pattern, and all our previous results, is that, after financial reforms,
previously unconstrained SOEs increased their saving, perhaps due to the reduced privilege
in access to finance, or an increase in product market competition, resulting from financial
reforms. This increase more than offset the decrease in the savings of private firms—in fact,
the later effects might not be too strong to begin with, according to the results discussed in
Section 5.2. Although SOEs do not constitute the majority of the firms in these sectors, if
they increased their savings by a large factor, they can still account for bulk of the increase
in savings in such sectors. In fact, Figure 2 shows the aggregate savings by SOEs and
non-SOEs in our data and there was clearly a trend break after the reform period where in
aggregate SOEs increased their savings faster than non-SOE.19 In micro data there is more
heterogeneity and the firm-level results can still be both SOEs increasing their savings more
or non-SOEs decreasing their savings more, but in the aggregate it seems like the increase
in SOEs’ savings dominated the dynamic patterns.
The interaction term between reform and finance dependence is not significant when we
use the U.S. based measure (Columns 3 and 5). This might be due to the US based measure
being more noisy in terms of capturing the need for external finance for our sample of
firms,20 and suffer from more severe attenuation bias. However, at the very minimum, our
results at the country, sector, and firm level, collectively suggest that, the aggregate financial
reforms did not trigger a decline in corporate savings, as predicted by theories that build on
19

Figure 2 simply plots the aggregate OSHF for all firms classified as SOE and non-SOEs, with their values
for the first year normalized to 1. To rule out composition change we focus on the sample of continuing firms,
but the same pattern exists for the full sample.
20
The correlation between the two measures is 0.45. The standard deviation for the two measures are 1.28
(U.S.-based measure) and 0.51 (our sample).

19

the mechanism that credit-constrained firms decrease their savings relative to unconstrained
firms after reforms (or increase relatively less), which holds in the firm-level data.

6

Concluding Remarks

Using an extensive firm-level data set that covers a substantial fraction of the economy from several Asian countries, we test whether the self-financing behavior of creditconstrained firms in rapidly growing emerging markets are responsible for the global imbalances. We estimate the effect of an exogenous change in credit constraints on firms’
savings. As predicted by the theoretical models, after financial reforms, firms who were
credit-constrained prior to the financial reforms that removed the constraint decreased their
savings more, relative to firms that were not previously constrained. However, this firmlevel effect did not lead to a decrease in sectoral or aggregate corporate savings, nor a
deterioration in aggregate current account surplus, as conjectured by the theory.
A possible explanation for our findings is that, while previously credit-constrained firms have decreased their savings after the removal of financial constraints, non-constrained
firms have increased their savings more for other reasons, leading to an aggregate increase
in corporate savings. Since we measure being “non-constrained” by government ownership
(SOE), such firms might increase their savings after financial reform more than the decline
in the savings of previously constrained firms due to the simple fact that financial reform
will hinder their preferential access to credit. Or alternatively, previously constrained firms
did not decrease their savings too much. Results from our sector-level regressions, which
show that sectoral savings increased after reforms, are consistent with both interpretations.
Further research that investigates the possible reasons behind the difference in savings between firms with different access to external finance, as a response to financial reforms, is
needed.

References
Abiad, Abdul and Ashoka Mody, 2005, “Financial Reform: What Shakes It? What Shapes
It?,” American Economic Review, 95 (1), pp 66–88.
Abiad, Abdul G, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel, 2010, “A New Database of Financial Reforms,” IMF Staff Papers, 57 (2), pp 281–302.

20

Aguiar, Mark and Manuel Amador, 2011, “Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (2), pp 651–697.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych, 2014, “Sovereigns, Upstream Capital Flows, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of European Economic Association, 12 (5), pp 1240–1284.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Kenza Benhima, forthcoming, “The Demand for Liquid Assets,
Corporate Savings, and International Capital Flow,” Journal of the European Economic
Association.
Bayoumi, Tamim, Hui Tong, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2012, “The Chinese Corporate Savings
Puzzle: A Firm-level Cross-country Perspective,” in “Capitalizing China,” University of
Chicago Press, pp. 283–308.
Benigno, Gianluca and Luca Fornaro, 2012, “Reserve Accumulation, Growth and Financial
Crises,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9224.
Buera, Francisco J. and Yongseok Shin, 2009, “Productivity Growth and Capital Flows:
The Dynamics of Reforms,” NBER Working Paper No. 15268.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008, “An Equilibrium Model of “Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic
Review, 98 (1), pp 358–93.
Chamon, Marcos D. and Eswar S. Prasad, 2010, “Why Are Saving Rates of Urban Households in China Rising?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2 (1), pp 93–
130.
Chamon, Marcos, Kai Liu, and Eswar S Prasad, 2010, “Income Uncertainty and Household
Savings in China,” NBER Working Paper No. 16565.
Choukhmane, Taha, Nicolas Coeurdacier, and Keyu Jin, 2013, “The One-Child Policy and
Household Savings in China,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9688.
Cull, Robert and Lixin Colin Xu, 2003, “Who Gets Credit? The Behavior of Bureaucrats
and State Banks in Allocating Credit to Chinese State-owned Enterprises,” Journal of
Development Economics, 71 (2), pp 533–559.
Dollar, David and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007, “Das (Wasted) Kapital: Firm Ownership and Investment Efficiency in China,” NBER Working Paper No. 13103.
21

Dooley, Michael P, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, 2007, “Direct Investment,
Rising Real Wages and the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery,” in “G7 Current account imbalances: sustainability and adjustment,” University of Chicago Press,
pp. 103–132.
Du, Qingyuan and Shang-Jin Wei, 2013, “A Theory of the Competitive Saving Motive,”
Journal of International Economics, 91 (2), pp 275 – 289.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, 2013, “Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation Puzzle,” The Review of Economic Studies, 80 (4), pp 1484–1515.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, Vadym Volosovych,
and Sevcan Yesiltas, 2015, “How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm Level Data
from the ORBIS Global Database,” NBER Working Paper No. 21558.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, 2014, “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (1), pp 61–103.
Kuijs, Louis, 2006, “How will China’s Saving-Investment Balance Evolve?,” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper No. 3958.
Li, Wei, 1997, “The Impact of Economic Reform on the Performance of Chinese State
Enterprises, 1980-1989,” Journal of Political Economy, 105 (5), pp 1080–1106.
Mendoza, Enrique G, Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, 2009, “Financial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy,
117 (3), pp 371–416.
Rajan, Raghuram G and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” The
American Economic Review, 88 (3), pp 559–586.
Sandri, Damiano, 2014, “Growth and Capital Flows with Risky Entrepreneurship,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6 (3), pp 102–123.
Song, Zheng and Dennis Tao Yang, 2010, “Life Cycle Earnings and Saving in a Fastgrowing Economy,” Unpublished, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2011, “Growing Like China,” The American
Economic Review, 101 (1), pp 196–233.

22

Wei, Shang-Jin and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011, “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from
Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,” Journal of Political Economy, 119 (3),
pp 511–564.
Yang, Dennis Tao, 2012, “Aggregate Savings and External Imbalances in China,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26 (4), pp 125–146.
, Junsen Zhang, and Shaojie Zhou, 2011, “Why Are Saving Rates so High in China?,” in
“Capitalizing China,” University of Chicago Press, pp. 249–278.

23

Figure 1: Current Account/GDP

24

Figure 2: Aggregate Savings of SOEs and non-SOEs

Table 1: Saving, Investment, and Current Account Surplus
(% GDP)

Saving

Investment

Current Account

2000-2005 2006-2012 2000-2005 2006-2012 2000-2005 2006-2012
China 42.22
51.69
39.30
45.66
2.92
6.03
India 27.23
33.40
27.06
35.97
0.17
-2.57
Indonesia 26.69
30.59
23.49
29.95
3.20
0.64
Malaysia 34.56
35.74
24.04
22.51
10.52
13.22
Philippines 21.63
22.88
21.85
18.99
-0.23
3.90
Taiwan 28.31
30.22
21.86
21.13
6.44
9.09
Thailand 28.40
29.95
25.66
26.79
2.74
3.16
Notes: This table presents average saving, investment, and current account surplus as percentage points of GDP for reform countries in our sample. We split the sample into two
periods—during and after the period of financial reforms. Data source: World Economic
Outlook Database, IMF.

25

Table 2: The Dates of Financial Reforms

Financial Reforms-Overall
Interest Controls
Supervision in Banking Sector
Private Ownership in Banking Sector
Capital Account Restrictions
Entry Barriers
Securities Market Policies

China

India

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Taiwan

Thailand

2002
2004
2002 2004
2004

2004

2003

2005

2003
-

2005
-

-

-

2003

-

2002
2003
2003
2002, 2003(R)
2003
2003

2003

2004

2003
2004
2004
-

2003(R)
-

26

Notes: This table presents the dates and types of financial reforms that took place during our sample period. The date of a reform (reversal) is defined as the year
when a country experiences increase (decrease) in its aggregate financial reform index in the database for financial reform constructed by Abiad, Detragiache, and
Tressel (2010). The aggregate financial reform index is a simple sum of seven variables, each measuring the openness of a country’s financial market along one
dimension. The seven dimensions are: credit controls, interest rate controls, entry barriers into the banking sector, private ownership in banking sector, banking
prudential and supervision policies, capital account restrictions, and security market policies. (During the sample period no reforms in credit control took place,
so it is omitted from the table.) Each dimension is rated on the scale of 0-3 based on whether the financial market is fully depressed (0), partially depressed (1),
partially liberalized (2), fully liberalized (3). Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan, and Korea experienced no reforms during our sample period, hence are not included
in this table. Reversals are indicated as “R”.

Table 3: Savings and Investment by Sector
Household
2000-2005
(% of GDP)

S

I

Corporate

2006-2009
S

I

2000-2005
S

I

Public

2006-2009
S

I

2000-2005
S

I

2006-2009
S

I

27

China
20.96 9.48
23.55 9.22
20.05 25.93 22.12 30.12 0.93
3.89 5.24 4.91
India
24.78 13.31 25.34 13.25 5.35
8.37
8.88
14.87 0.51
7.74 2.62 9.60
Malaysia
0.52
4.25
0.75
3.43
26.17 12.64 32.80 12.17 2.65
6.24 3.01 4.31
Philippines
7.90
4.74
7.08
5.13
9.34
9.40
9.05
6.45
-1.05 2.28 2.17 2.74
Taiwan
10.91 N.A.
10.03 N.A.
16.74 17.94 17.19 17.80 0.66
3.93 2.55 3.42
Thailand
4.84
1.56
5.36
1.52
17.49 19.41 19.85 20.83 5.23
3.50 3.90 3.90
Notes: This table reports sectoral saving and investment as percentage points of GDP for reform countries in our sample.
The data in this table is compiled from various statistical yearbooks and flows of funds accounts. We split the sample into
two periods—during and after financial reforms. For China, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, and Thailand, corporate sector
includes both public and private enterprises, and public sector includes only government; for India, corporate sector includes
only private enterprises, and public sector includes both government and public enterprise. For Taiwan, household sector
do not form new capital. We do not have sectoral saving and investment information for Indonesia. Since the data sources
used here are different from that in Table 1, there are small discrepancies between Table 1 and this table.

Table 4: Data Coverage
Country

Taiwan
Thailand
Philippines
Malaysia
China
India
Indonesia

Corporate savings (ORBIS)
GDP

Corporate Saving (KN)
GDP

Corporate Saving (FoF)
GDP

Wage bill (ORBIS)
Wage Bill (National Accounts)

(1)

SOE Share
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.43
0.01
0.02
0.10
0.40
0.63
0.76

0.09
0.02
0.03
0.12
0.22
0.06
0.06

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.20
0.04
0.05
0.003

0.13
...
0.15
...
0.19
...
...

0.17
0.16
0.10
0.26
0.21
0.08
...

0.58
0.10
0.11
0.63
0.05
0.45
0.04

Listed Share

28

Notes: This table presents information on data coverage for reform countries. All values reported in this table are long-run average over the sample period.
Columns 1-2 report the fraction of firms that are listed companies, and the fraction of firms with known ownership information that are state-owned, respectively.
Column 3 reports the the aggregate savings of firms in our sample as a fraction of GDP, where the aggregate firm savings is computed as ∆OSHF (Other
Shareholders’ Fund). Column 4 reports the aggregate corporate-sector savings from the national accounts as a fraction of GDP, from the dataset compiled by
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), for countries with data available for our sample period. Column 5 reports the same ratio, computed using the flows of funds
data collected by the authors of this paper. The discrepancies between Columns 4 and 5 might be due to different data sources, or small differences in time
horizon. Column 6 excludes public adminstration, finance, and other service companies, and computes the fraction of the aggregate wage bill of firms in the
sample in aggregate manufacturing labor value added from national accounts.

Table 5: Descriptive Statistics
#obs

mean

median

std

All

Size
Savings1
Savings2
Savings3
Profitability
Investment
Cash Flow

246702
207004
199495
60155
242940
201456
178892

9.90
2.98
46.05
1.73
4.15
17.92
6.94

9.73
3.46
12.15
2.01
3.72
3.71
6.15

2.18
10.10
161.30
7.17
8.78
61.42
7.70

SOE

Size
Savings1
Savings2
Savings3
Profitability
Investment
Cash Flow

11900
10145
10273
9530
11802
10237
11107

12.94
3.05
23.27
2.31
4.15
17.54
7.44

12.95
3.02
9.87
2.21
3.67
8.15
6.79

1.65
8.61
96.08
5.98
7.10
42.35
6.43

Non-SOE

Size
Savings1
Savings2
Savings3
Profitability
Investment
Cash Flow

234802
196859
189222
50625
231138
191219
167785

9.75
2.98
47.28
1.62
4.15
17.94
6.91

9.60
3.49
12.30
1.96
3.72
3.46
6.09

2.09
10.17
164.01
7.37
8.85
62.28
7.77

Size
Savings1
Savings2
Savings3
Profitability
Investment
Cash Flow

diff.
3.20
0.08
-24.01
0.69
0.00
-0.40
0.54

t stat
160
0.73
-14.70
8.67
0.02
-0.64
7.10

Mean Test

Notes: This table presents descriptive statistics. Size is defined as ln(Total Assets).
OSHFt −OSHFt−1
Savings1 is defined as
(%), where OSHF refers to Other ShareholderTotal Assetst
s’ Funds in financial statements; Savings2 is defined as
Retearnt −Retearnt−1
(%),
Total Assetst

OSHFt −OSHFt−1
(%);
Tangible Fixed Assetst

Savings3

is defined as
where Retearn refers to firms’ Retained Earnings
in the balance sheet. Profitability is defined as TotalProfit
(%); Investment Rate is deAssets
K −K
fined as tKt−1t−1 (%), where K is total tangible fixed assets; Cash Flow is defined as
Cash Flow
(%). For each variable except total assets, the sample is trimmed at two perTotal Assets
cents from both the top and the bottom to exclude outliers. The bottom panel of the
table reports the mean difference between SOE and non-SOEs and the corresponding t
statistics.

29

Table 6: The Impacts of Overall Financial Reforms on Firms’ Savings
Dependent Variable:
FinancialReform*SOE

(1)

(2)

0.731∗∗∗
(0.186)

0.848∗∗∗
(0.205)
-0.019∗∗∗
(0.003)

207004
0.361
yes
yes

207001
0.366
yes
yes

Sizet−1
Cash Flowt−1

Savings1
(3)

(4)

(5)

0.817∗∗∗
(0.223)
-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.002∗∗
(0.001)

0.830∗∗∗
(0.226)
-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.635∗
(0.340)
0.017∗
(0.009)

157629
0.374
yes
yes

157627
0.375
yes
yes

0.822∗∗∗
(0.222)
-0.023∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.724∗
(0.432)
0.019∗
(0.011)
0.000∗∗∗
(0.000)
157276
0.376
yes
yes

Profitabilityt−1
Investmentt
Observations
R2
Firm FE
Country-sector-year FE

Notes: This table reports the effects of financial reforms on SOEs’ saving decisions relative to that of nonSOEs’. The dependent variable is the year-to-year change in other shareholders’ funds (OSHF), divided by
current-period total assets, multiplied by 100. The dependent variable is trimmed at 2% from both the top
and the bottom to exclude outliers. Size is defined as ln(total assets); Cash Flow, Profitability are normalized
K −K
by total assets and multiplied by 100. Investment is defined as tKt−1t−1 (%). All regressions control for
country-sector-year fixed effects, where sector classifications are at 2-digit level according to SIC.
Standard errors (clustered at the country-year level) in parentheses.
∗
p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

30

Table 7: Robustness: Alternative Measures of Savings and Different Samples
Dependent Variable:

FinancialReform*SOE
Sizet−1
Cash Flowt−1
Profitabilityt−1
31

Observations
R2
Firm FE
Country-sector-year FE

Savings1
(1)
No China
1.689∗∗
(0.668)
-0.021∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.557∗
(0.331)
0.016∗
(0.009)
146292
0.376
yes
yes

(2)
Coverage
1.827∗∗∗
(0.650)
-0.022∗∗∗
(0.004)
-1.11∗∗∗
(0.35)
0.035∗∗∗
(0.011)
141063
0.374
yes
yes

(3)
Crisis
1.077∗∗∗
(0.218)
-0.017∗∗∗
(0.005)
-0.270
(0.193)
0.007
(0.005)
103301
0.430
yes
yes

(4)
Continuing
0.894∗∗∗
(0.265)
-0.022∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.626∗
(0.366)
0.016∗
(0.010)
118876
0.336
yes
yes

(5)
Reform
0.707∗∗∗
(0.166)
-0.032∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.125
(0.171)
0.003
(0.004)
41516
0.428
yes
yes

(6)
Listed
0.619∗∗
(0.295)
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.861∗∗
(0.350)
0.023∗∗
(0.009)
47916
0.418
yes
yes

Savings2

Savings3

(7)
Benchmark
3.69*
(2.05)
-0.285∗∗∗
(0.030)
-0.037
(0.027)
0.043
(0.031)
151464
0.469
yes
yes

(8)
Benchmark
0.343*
(0.197)
-0.018∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.114
(0.113)
0.003
(0.003)
58549
0.427
yes
yes

OSHFt −OSHFt−1
(%), where OSHF refers to Other Shareholders’
Total Assetst
Retearnt −Retearnt−1
as
(%). Dependent variables are trimmed at 2%
Total Assetst

Notes: This table reports robustness tests of results reported in Table 6. Savings1 is defined as
OSHFt −OSHFt−1
(%);
Tangible Fixed Assetst

Savings3 is defined
Funds in financial statements; Savings2 is defined as
from both the top and the bottom to exclude outliers. Size is defined as ln(total assets); Cash Flow, Profitability are normalized by total assets and multiplied by
100.
Columns 1–6 report the estimates using the benchmark measure of firm saving, and the estimates should be compared to Column 4 of Table 6. Column 1 excludes
China from the regression; Column 2 excludes all reform countries whose coverage are relatively low, i.e., China, Thailand, Philippines, and Indonesia; Column
3 restricts the regression to before 2008, hence excluding the recent financial crisis; Column 4 restricts the regression to a continuing sample of firms that are
present in the data for at least 9 years out of the 10-year sample period; Column 5 restricts the regression to the sample of reform countries in Table 2; Column
6 restricts the regression to listed companies. Columns 7–8 report the estimates using Savings2 and Savings3 , respectively. Column (8) has substantial fewer
observations than the benchmark specification because retained earnings are reported mostly for listed companies.
All regressions control for country-sector-year fixed effects, where sector classifications are at 2-digit level according to SIC.
Standard errors (clustered at the country-year level) in parentheses.
∗
p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 8: Effects of Different Types of Financial Reforms
Dependent Variable:

Financial Reform *SOE

(1)
Overall
0.830∗∗∗
(0.226)

(2)
Interest Control

(3)
Privatization

Savings1
(4)
Capital Account

2.581∗∗
(1.010)

Capital Accounts*SOE
Security Market *SOE
32

Profitabilityt−1
Observations
R2
Firm FE
Country-sector-year FE

1.224∗∗∗
(0.354)
-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.634∗
(0.340)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes

1.459∗∗∗
(0.512)
13.864∗
(7.239)
2.582∗∗
(1.010)
-0.217
(0.579)
-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.635∗
(0.341)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes

13.861∗
(7.238)

Private Banking*SOE

Cash Flowt−1

(6)
All

1.287∗∗∗
(0.300)

Interest Control *SOE

Sizet−1

(5)
Security Market

-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.635∗
(0.340)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes

-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.635∗
(0.341)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes

-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.634∗
(0.340)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes

-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.634∗
(0.340)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes

Notes: This table reports the estimates for the differential effects of a financial reform on SOE and private companies using different sub-dimensions of reform.
The first column replicates Column 4 in Table 6. Columns 2–5 use interest control reform, banking-sector privatization reform, capital account restriction reform,
and security market reform, respectively. Column (6) includes all reforms. The dependent variable in the regressions reported in this table is the year-to-year
change in other shareholders’ funding (OSHF), divided by current-period total assets, multiplied by 100. The dependent variable is trimmed at 2% from both the
top and the bottom to exclude outliers. Size is defined as ln(total assets); Cash Flow, Profitability are normalized by total assets and then multiplied by 100.
All regressions control for country-sector-year fixed effects, where sector classifications are at 2-digit level according to SIC.
Standard errors (clustered at the country-year level) in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 9: Financial Reform, Sectoral Dependence, and Savings
Dependent Variable:

Savings1
U.S.-based measure

FinancialReform*SOE
Reform*Dependence1
Reform*Dependence1 *SOE

(1)
0.646∗∗∗
(0.227)
0.001
(0.090)
0.186
(0.119)

(2)
0.671∗∗∗
(0.221)

Reform*Dependence2 *SOE

Cash Flowt−1
Profitabilityt−1
Observations
R2
Firm FE
Country-sector-year FE
Country-year FE

-0.021∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.645∗
(0.341)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.360
yes
yes

(3)
0.987∗∗∗
(0.238)

(4)
1.125∗∗∗
(0.265)

-0.767
(0.725)
2.044∗
(1.157)
-0.021∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.645∗
(0.341)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.360
yes
yes

2.517∗∗
(1.249)
-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.635∗
(0.341)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes
-

0.268∗∗
(0.103)

Reform*Dependence2

Sizet−1

Sample-based measure

-0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.635∗
(0.340)
0.017∗
(0.009)
157627
0.375
yes
yes
-

Notes: This table estimates the differential impacts of financial reforms on the saving decisions of
SOE and private companies in sectors with different external finance dependence. The measure
for external finance dependence is based on Rajan and Zingales (1998), defined as the fraction of
capital expenditures not financed by cash flows from operation. The measure used in Columns
1–2 (Dependence1 ) is constructed using the U.S. listed companies, over the period of the 1990s.
The measure used in Column 3 and Column 4 (Dependence2 ) is constructed using the a balanced
sub-sample of listed companies (restricted to before-crisis period) from our sample. The dependent
variable is trimmed at 2% from both the top and the bottom to exclude outliers. Size is defined as
ln(total assets); Cash Flow and Profitability are normalized by total assets and multiplied by 100.
Column 1 and Column 3 control for country-year fixed effects; Column 2 and Column 4 control for
country-sector-year fixed effects, where sector classifications are at 2-digit level according to SIC.
Standard errors (clustered at the country-year level) in parentheses.
∗
p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

33

Table 10: Reforms and Industry-level Savings
Dependent Variable

Country-Industry Savings1

Estimator
Financial Reform

S*C+S*T
(1)
1.495∗∗
(0.691)

Reform*Dependence2

(2)
1.854∗∗
(0.786)
2.571∗∗
(1.230)

Reform*Dependence1
Observations
R2

2014
0.39

2014
0.39

S*C+S*T+C*T
(3)
1.507∗∗
(0.697)

(4)

(5)

2.806∗∗
(1.216)
0.519
(0.590)
2014
0.39

2014
0.47

0.574
(0.586)
2014
0.47

Notes: The dependent variable is corporate savings computed at the country-industry-year level. In
aggregation we include only a continuing sample of firms to rule out the role of entry into and exit
from the database. We aggregate firm-level OSHF (Other Shareholders’ Funds) and Total Assets by
country-industry-year, and then use this to compute industry-level saving rate analogous to Savings1 .
The dependent variable is then winsorized at 2% from both ends to drop outliers. Column 1 includes
only Financial Reform as dependent variable; Columns 2–3 include in addition the interaction term
between financial reform and sectoral-level external finance dependence; Columns 4–5 further add
country-year fixed effects. The definitions of Dependence1 and Dependence2 are described in the
footnote of Table 9.
Estimator indicates the set of fixed effects that are used in these regressions: S indicates sector fixed
effects; C indicates country fixed effects; T indicates time fixed effects.
Standard errors (clustered at the country-year level) in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01

34

A
A.1
A.1.1

Data Appendix
Firm-Level Data
Data Preparations

Our firm-level financial information is obtained in the “Global Detailed Form” (for listed companies), and the “Global Standard Form” (for private companies), from the ORBIS
database. For listed companies, the financial information include all detailed items on the
balance sheet and the profit/loss accounts. For private companies, the information is coarser.
For the majority of companies in our sample, the financial information is from December of each year. Some companies, however, report their financial information in other
months. For the companies whose financial information are from months before June, we
change the year of information to the year before the time of report. For example, if a company reports a profit of 1 million in May, 2013, we count this as its profit for the year of
2012.
There is enormous heterogeneity in the firm-level variables. To prevent outliers from
affecting our analysis, in all our firm-level regression analysis, we trim our dependent variables at 2% from both the top and the bottom. A 2% trimming makes the distributions
of dependent variables look approximately normal. Although not reported here, for robustness, we also try winsorizing the outliers, and the results are robust. The descriptive
statistics in Table 5 is based on the sample after trimming and dropping the observations
for which we do not have ownership information. We also further exclude public administrations, finance, and other service industries in both computing descriptive statistics and
performing regression analysis.
A.1.2

Constructing the State Ownership Status

We proceed as follows to classify the ownership status of the firms in our sample.
First, we find companies whose global ultimate owner is recorded in the BvD Ownership Database. In extracting the information, we require a minimum of 25% shares along
each link. We generate SOE1 based on the type of this ultimate owner: if a company’s
ultimate owner is recorded as “public authority, government,” we assign a value of 1 to this
variable, otherwise we assign a value of 0 to it. In the case where a company’s ultimate
owner is missing, or the type of the ultimate owner is unclear, we leave SOE1 with missing
value.
Second, we use the information from step 1 to update the type of each companies’

35

shareholders. So if company B—a shareholder of company A—has an ultimate owner being “Public Authority,” we change the type of company B to “Public Authority” as well,
even though B itself might be an “Industry Company” or “Financial Company.” This procedure serves to capture to the maximum extent the possibility that government authorities
may hold companies indirectly through either industry company, financial companies or
other type of entities. In this case, the ownership goes as Government–B–A, and B is the
intermediary through which the government control A, so we update B’s type to “Public
Authority.”
Third, we also create SOE2 , and set this variable to 1, if firm’s biggest direct shareholder
in a given year is recorded as “Public Authority,”. The difference here is that this dummy
is based on direct shareholder, while the previous SOE1 is based on ultimate ownership.
The shareholder data is in principle by firm-year, but there is limited over-time variation
in ownership status. We use shareholder information from the last year of the sample and
fix the ownership status for each firm for the entire sample period. This also prevents
endogenous change in ownership as a response to financial reforms.
Finally, we determine firms’ type based on SOE1 and SOE2 . As we are more confident in SOE1 , when the two dummies differ, we use SOE1 . In a robustness check we run
regression with SOE2 only, and our results do not change.

A.2

Measure for External Finance Dependence

We construct the Rajan-Zingales measure for industries-level external finance dependence using two different samples.
The first measure is generated using a sample of U.S. listed companies. We focus on
Compustat North America database, and extract all observations between 1990 and 1999.
We aggregate firm-level capital expenditures and cash flows from operations over the ten
years to flush out yearly fluctuations, and use that to generate firm-level dependence on
external finance, following the formula:
Dependence = (Capital Expenditures- Cash Flows from Operations)/Capital Expenditures.
We take the median of this value for each industry, dropping industries with only one firm,
and use this median value as our first measure of industry external finance dependence.
The second measure is generated using our own sample of firms. To capture the technological frontier in our sample of countries, we focus on the listed companies, as those are
with best access to finance in any given industry. To rule out sectoral difference in represen-

36

tativeness from firms’ entry into and exit from the database, which not necessarily reflect
firms’ entry and exit decisions, and the influence of the global financial crisis, we restrict
to the sample of continuing firms for the before-crisis period. We then use the resulting
sample to first aggregate over time for each firm to construct firm-level dependence, and
then take median value for each industry to arrive at the industry-level measure for external
finance dependence. An industry is defined as an SIC two-digit sector in constructing both
measures, consistent with industry classifications in our regression analysis.

A.3

National Accounts Data

Our aggregate data on national accounts (Figure 1 and Table 1) is extracted from the
World Economic Outlook Database from the IMF. The saving and investment data by sectoral (Table 3) is collected from flows-of-funds table of the sample countries. A detailed
description is provided in the supplementary material.

37

