NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF TRADING RELATIONSHIPS IN TURBULENT TIMES
Marco Di Maggio
Amir Kermani
Zhaogang Song
Working Paper 22332
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22332

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Viral Acharya, John Campbell, Nicolae Gârleanu, Larry Glosten,
Jeff Harris, Terry Hendershott, Dwight Jaffee, Charles Jones, Christian Julliard, Pete Kyle, Ben
Lester, Christopher Palmer, Chester Spatt, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Hongjun Yan, and Kathy
Yuan, as well as seminar participants at the 2015 NYU/NYFRB Financial Intermediation
Conference, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 2015 LSE conference on Economic
Networks and Finance, and the Third Annual Conference on Financial Market Regulation for
helpful comments. We also thank Calvin Zhang, Jeff Jacobs, Katrina Evtimova and especially
Jason Lee for outstanding research assistance. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Zhaogang Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Trading Relationships in Turbulent Times
Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Zhaogang Song
NBER Working Paper No. 22332
June 2016
JEL No. G01,G12,G14,G2
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the ways in which the network of relationships between dealers shapes
their trading behavior in the corporate bond market. They charge lower spreads to dealers with
whom they have the strongest ties, and this effect is all the more pronounced at times of market
turmoil. Moreover, highly connected and systemically important dealers exploit their connections
at the expense of peripheral dealers as well as clients, charging higher markups than to other core
dealers, especially during periods of uncertainty. We show that following the collapse of a
flagship dealer in 2008, trading chains lengthened by almost 20 percent and that the increase was
even greater for the institutions that had the closest ties with the defaulted dealer. Finally, we find
evidence that dealers drastically reduced their inventory during the financial crisis. These results
can help inform the debate on the risks posed by the interconnectedness of the financial system,
showing how this could be a source of market fragility and illiquidity.
Marco Di Maggio
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, uris Hall 819
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mdimaggio@columbia.edu

Zhaogang Song
The Johns Hopkins Carey
Business School
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
zsong8@jhu.edu

Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22332

1

Introduction

The global …nancial crisis of 2008 highlighted the key role of the intertwined nature of …nancial
markets in shaping the transmission of risk and the buildup of fragility throughout the system.
At the same time, the growing importance of o¤-exchange trading, with many securities traded in
opaque OTC markets (corporate bonds, mortgage-backed securities, credit default swaps, etc.), has
been blamed for the persistent illiquidity of these markets. Even the new regulatory frameworks
adopted in the aftermath of the crisis, from the proposal that clearing houses serve as central
counterparties to the de…nition of systemically important …nancial institutions, have incorporated
these views. Yet exactly what role is played by …nancial system interconnectedness and the ways
in which large …nancial institutions may a¤ect OTC market liquidity remain at best imperfectly
understood.
This paper investigates dealers’ trading behavior and pricing strategy in the corporate bond
market to shed new light on the role of the network of existing relationships among dealers in
shaping the transmission of risk and in‡uencing market liquidity. The corporate bond market is
one of the world’s largest and most important sources of capital for …rms, with outstanding debt
now of about $8 trillion.1 Daily trading volume in the U.S. averages $20 billion, virtually all
between broker-dealers and large institutions in a decentralized OTC market.2 Hence, this market
is ideal for studying how the network of dealer relationships shapes trading behavior and liquidity
provision, and investigating how dealers responded during the crisis.3
We start by showing that the inter-dealer corporate bond market has a de…nite, persistent coreperiphery network structure. In other words, there are only a few highly interconnected dealers,
the core dealers, which intermediate most of the transactions with other dealers and with clients
1

Based on data from SIFMA. See http://sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx.
In the last few years, investors have been attracted to …xed income securities, and bond issuers have taken
advantage of the low interest rate environment. For instance, FINRA reports that in 2012 issuers borrowed a record
$1.54 trillion, up 29% from 2011, owing chie‡y to a shift in retail portfolio composition from equities to …xed-income
instruments.
3
As we make clear in the next section, our empirical …ndings are informed and guided by the burgeoning theoretical
literature on networks and o¤-exchange markets. Following the seminal articles of Allen and Gale (2000) and Freixas
et al. (2000), a growing body of work has considered …nancial networks as a possible mechanism for shock propagation
and ampli…cation. For instance, Acemoglu et al. (2015) characterize the extent of contagion when …nancial institutions
are linked via unsecured debt contracts, and Elliott et al. (2015) study cascading failures in a model of equity crossholdings. In a similar vein, Stanton et al. (2014) develops a network model in which heterogeneous …nancial norms and
systemic vulnerabilities are endogenous and tests its implications with data on …nancial intermediaries’securitization
network.
2

1

(retail investors, insurance companies, mutual and hedge funds, etc.) and many sparsely connected
ones transacting less frequently, i.e. the peripheral dealers.4 Given this structure, we analyze
how dealers’markups and trading behavior di¤er according to their counterparties’position in the
network, and how their previous relationships with counterparties a¤ect trading outcomes.5 The
…rst result is that when dealers trade with clients rather than other dealers, they pro…t signi…cantly
more. On average, similar bonds in the same industry traded by the same dealer go at a signi…cantly
higher price to non-dealer clients, an extra markup of about 50 basis points. We also show that more
central dealers pay lower spreads while charging signi…cantly higher spreads to their counterparties.6
Importantly, we also …nd signi…cantly lower spreads between dealers with stronger prior relationships, as proxied by the fraction of bonds exchanged between two counterparties in the previous
quarter. Here the results do not depend on di¤erences in the type, volume or quality of the transactions of more or less connected dealers, because these characteristics are controlled for. The
magnitude of the e¤ects, moreover, is economically signi…cant: the di¤erence in the terms of trade
between the bottom and the top decile of relationship strength comes to about 20 basis points.
And the results hold even in the most conservative speci…cation, where we control for seller- and
buyer-month …xed e¤ects, to o¤set time-varying shocks at dealer level that could a¤ect trading
behavior. Overall, our …ndings constitute evidence that existing trading relationships, which most
of the theoretical literature abstracts from, are crucial in determining trading behavior, at least on
a par with network centrality.
Now we can answer the main questions we want to pose. Does the importance of these prior
relationships vary over time? And do dealers tend to provide liquidity to their counterparties
in times of market turmoil? We capture periods of …nancial market stress in two ways. One
is a simple volatility index (VIX or MOVE). The second splits the full sample into three subperiods, January 2005-December 2006, January 2007-August 2008, and September 2008-July 2009.
4

This network structure has been the subject of recent theoretical studies on the risks created by highly interconnected institutions (see for instance Babus (2016), Farboodi (2014) and Atkeson et al. (2015)).
5
Our main dependent variable is the di¤erence between the price at which a dealer sells a bond and his previous
buying price. We call this the spread, pro…t margin or markup. We provide results for two di¤erent measures. The
more conservative approach considers only trades in which the dealer buys a bond and then sells it within an hour.
However, we also provide consistent evidence in which the benchmark buy price is the average at which other dealers
buy the same bond during the same week.
6
Given these results, our paper is related to empirical studies on OTC market transaction costs and price discovery,
such as Bessembinder et al. (2006), Schultz (2001) Edwards et al. (2007), Green et al. (2007b), and Green et al.
(2010). In other related works, Biais (1993) and ?) consider the comparative advantages of bilateral and electronic
trading. Our own focus is on how relationships shape dealers’liquidity provision during periods of uncertainty.

2

The …rst period represents normal times, the second corresponds to the run-up to crisis, and the
third is the peak of the crisis following the default of Lehman Brothers. We …nd that having
stronger relationships and being a more central dealer are all the more important during periods
of high uncertainty. Speci…cally, during periods of stress dealers provide less liquidity to clients
and peripheral dealers (than to other core dealers), charging them signi…cantly higher markups.
In other words, at times of market turmoil dealers tend to rely even more heavily on their central
position in the network, as more connected institutions can impose higher spreads and purchase at
signi…cantly lower prices. The results are further con…rmed when we split the sample over time:
markups charged are signi…cantly larger for the more central dealers during the run-up and even
more so at the peak of the crisis. In contrast, dealers did provide liquidity to the other institutions
with which they had the strongest relationships, in fact, existing trading relationships drive a
signi…cant portion of the variation in spreads during the peak of the crisis. This implies that in
turmoil dealers rely more heavily on their closest counterparties, as is suggested by Glode and Opp
(2016). Our results carry important implications for the theoretical models of trading in OTC
markets. Essentially, the common random-matching framework, which ignores bilateral trading
relationships, de facto, by assuming that traders interact only in anonymous spot transactions,
misses an important feature of o¤-exchange markets.
Also, we examine how dealers’trading behavior reacted to the collapse of a ‡agship dealer that
defaulted in September 2008. We code this dealer as Dealer D.7 First of all, after the failure of Dealer
D the intermediation chains between buyers and sellers lengthened signi…cantly. Since longer chains
are associated with higher spreads, they also have adverse e¤ects on the clients who are seeking
liquidity. Second, we test whether dealers tend to lean against the wind, i.e. accumulating bond
inventories during periods of turmoil. We compute dealers’ inventories in the weeks before and
after Dealer D’s collapse, excluding new issuance and maturing bonds, and …nd that they shrank
signi…cantly more for the bonds that clients were selling more vigorously. In fact, dealers decreased
their holdings of the bonds that other market participants were selling most intensely by at least
20%. This is strongly suggestive that one of the main factors in the increase in intermediation costs
and market illiquidity was dealers’ inability (or unwillingness) to expand inventories. As further
evidence of this channel, we also show that inventories shrank most for the bonds in whose regard
7

Under an agreement with the FINRA, we are not allowed to disclose dealer identities.

3

the intermediation chain lengthened the most. These results can inform the debate on dealers’role
during the crisis and how signi…cantly they aggravated the market disruption.
Finally, if these existing trading relationships are readily replaceable among dealers, then the
failure of Dealer D should not impact on its counterparties. Instead, we …nd that the dealers most
closely connected with Dealer D reduced their markups signi…cantly after September 2008. One
possible explanatory factor could be a di¤erence in the composition of the bonds traded after the
collapse. Alternatively, the results might also be driven by endogenous matching between more
fragile counterparties. In reality, however, we show that these results persist over time and are
not driven by these factors, by comparing the same bond traded by the same counterparties in
the same week, the only di¤erence being sellers’relative exposure to Dealer D. This suggests that
having lost their main counterparty, dealers had to form new trading relationships, but that these
were signi…cantly less pro…table.
Overall, our …ndings contribute to improving our understanding of the role of …nancial system
interconnectedness, which has become a theme of policy debate. In the words of Donald Kohn,
the former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board: “Supervisors need to enhance their understanding of the direct and indirect relationships among markets and market participants, and the
associated impact on the system. Supervisors must also be even more keenly aware of the manner in
which those relationships [...] can change over time and how those relationships behave in times of
stress.”8 These results shed new light on the way in which these prior relationships may sometimes
act as a bu¤er in periods of distress, but they also show that they accentuate systemic fragility, as
connections with vulnerable dealers might a¤ect trading outcomes even for sound dealers.
For the most part the literature on the role of the network is theoretical, but there are exceptions,
such as Li and Schürho¤ (2014), Holli…eld et al. (2012), Choi and Shachar (2013), Afonso et al.
(2013) and Hendershott et al. (2016).9 Li and Schürho¤ (2014) show that the municipal bond
market has a persistent core-periphery structure, with a trade-o¤ between execution costs (lower
in the periphery) and speed (faster in the core). A similar network structure is uncovered by
Holli…eld et al. (2012) in the securitization market. Choi and Shachar (2013) inquire into the
misalignment between corporate bond and CDS spreads during the …nancial crisis. Afonso et al.
8
9

Senate testimony, June 5, 2008.
See the presidential address by Green (2007) and the references therein as additional studies related to ours.

4

(2013), study the overnight interbank market, …nding that borrowers that have more concentrated
lenders may pay higher rates and that banks get lower interest rates from their most important
lenders.10 Finally, Hendershott et al. (2016) use data on insurers’transactions with corporate bond
dealers to document a trade-o¤ between order ‡ow concentration and dealer competition for best
execution. We complement these existing studies by highlighting the time-varying importance of
the relationships between dealers and the role played by the network in the propagation of shocks
such as Dealer D’s collapse.11
Further, cooperation and reputation have been shown to a¤ect liquidity costs in exchange
markets by Battalio et al. (2007), who document an increase in liquidity costs in the trading days
surrounding a stock’s relocation to the ‡oor of the exchange, while Pagano and Röell (1992) and
Benveniste et al. (1992) demonstrate that reputation attenuate the repercussions of information
asymmetries in trading and liquidity provision.12 We complement this strand of the literature with
our evidence that existing relationships are at least as important as bargaining power in explaining
dealers’behavior.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the data sources and
summary statistics and Section 3 develops, in relation to the theoretical literature, the empirical
hypotheses that we test and outlines our empirical strategy. Section 4 demonstrates the clear
core-periphery structure of the corporate bond market, which shapes trading behavior. Section
5 describes the main results on the importance of the trading relationships at times of market
turmoil and presents evidence on how the failure of Dealer D a¤ected its trading partners and how
the shock was propagated. Section 6 examines the changes in dealers’ inventories to test if they
provided liquidity during bad times. Section 7 concludes and the online appendix presents further
robustness checks.
10

Another related work is Ang et al. (2013), which compares the characteristics of OTC and listed stocks, showing
that the former exhibit an illiquidity premium several times higher, and even more for stocks held predominantly by
retail investors and investors that do not disclose …nancial information.
11
A related work is Gabrieli and Georg (2014), which studies liquidity reallocation in the European interbank
market and documents a signi…cant change in the network structure around the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers.
12
Also related are Henderson and Tookes (2012) on repeated interactions between placement agents (investment
banks) and investors in the initial pricing of convertible bonds and Cocco et al. (2009), with evidence from the
interbank market that banks provide liquidity to one another at times of …nancial stress.

5

2

Data and Summary Statistics

We collect information on corporate bonds and transactions in them from an enhanced version of
the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE). For each trade the dealer reports: the
date, the terms and the counterparty identi…er. The enhanced TRACE data provided by FINRA
(not publicly available) has several advantages. First, we can observe whether the trade is between
two dealers or with a customer. And we can distinguish buyers and sellers. Thus we can trace the
chains of intermediation; that is, we can see whether a dealer who has gotten a buy order from a
client has then gone to another dealer or another client to acquire the bond demanded. For our
analysis, the most important feature of this proprietary dataset is that we can observe the identity
of the dealers, which allows us not only to construct a panel of dealer-speci…c variables but also
to measure the existing trading relationships between various dealers and Dealer D and study how
Dealer D’s collapse a¤ected trading in the network.
Table 1 presents the summary statistics. Panel A refers to the bonds and the trades we observe.
Columns (1) and (2) are for the entire dataset, Columns (3) and (4) for our most restrictive sample,
i.e. trades concluded within an hour of their initiation. Finally, Columns (5) and (6) report the
statistics for a less restrictive sample, for which we compute the markup as the di¤erence between
the ask price and the average price at which other dealers have bought the same bond during
the week. We use this broader sample in the appendix to perform robustness checks. Our data
runs from 2005 to 2011, covering more than 56,000 bonds traded and 52 million transactions. Due
to computing limitations, our main analysis and the samples in Columns (3)-(6) relate to a 10%
random sample of the entire TRACE database, reducing the sample from 52 million to about 5
million trades.13 Our principal measure of the spread, which refers to buy and sell transactions
that occur within one hour of each other, further restricts the sample to some 700,000 trades.
Most of these bonds, about 85 percent of all the bonds, are investment-grade, while 15 percent
are high-yield or unrated. The average issue volume is $21 million (85 percent of the issues are
smaller than $100 million), maturity 10 years and rating BBB+. There is no signi…cant di¤erence
in the distribution of bond characteristics between the full sample and our main sample.
Panel B reports the statistics on the main variables. These include dealers’ spread, i.e. the
13

The random sample consists of trades whose last CUSIP digit is 0. As Table 1 shows, the sample so reduced
looks very similar to the full sample.

6

di¤erence between the price at which they buy a bond (from another dealer or a client) and
their resale price. The spread averages between 40 and 60 basis points. Our main measure of
network centrality is the eigenvector centrality. This takes account of all direct and indirect trading
partners and is computed by assigning scores to all dealers in the network; connections to moreconnected dealers increase the score more than similar connections to less-connected dealers. In
other words, what counts is not only the number of connections, but with whom they are connected.
However, our qualitative results are robust to alternative measures of centrality, such as the degree
of centrality, between-ness and closeness. We also report statistics on the number of transactions
between core dealers (about 30% of total trades), between peripheral dealers (25%), and between
a core and a peripheral dealer, which account for the remaining 45%.

3

The Empirical Framework

Our paper is informed by recent theoretical work on trading in OTC markets, starting with the
seminal work of Du¢ e et al. (2005) and Du¢ e et al. (2007) on the asset pricing implications of
OTC trading. Our empirical investigation of the dealers’ trading strategy in the OTC corporate
bond market could prove valuable to this literature by showing what types of strategic interaction
are the result of the relationships formed among dealers, and how these relationships a¤ect not
only asset prices but also dealers’response to shocks.
We develop and test four main hypotheses inspired by recent developments in this strand of the
literature.
Hypothesis I: Bilateral inter-dealer existing relationships signi…cantly a¤ect markups.
Formally, we estimate the following speci…cation

Spreadi;j;k;t =

1 F raction

+ Xi;j;k +

Selling to Counterpartyi;j +
t

+

k

+

i

2 F raction

Buying f rom Counterpartyi;j

+ "i;j;k;t ;

where Spreadi;j;k;t is the di¤erence between the price at which dealer i sold bond k to counterparty j
at time t and the price at which he had bought it.14 The main independent variables considered are
14

We compute the spread in two di¤erent ways. First, we refer only to trades concluded within an hour of their

7

the fraction sold by dealer i to dealer j and the fraction of bonds purchased by dealer i from dealer j
in the previous quarter. To make sure we are comparing similar transactions, the vector X includes
as controls the log of trade size, the bond’s rating and the fraction of bond k held in inventory by
seller i, normalized by the volume outstanding, which proxies for the seller’s market share of this
market segment. We also control for week ( t ), CUSIP (

k)

and seller ( i ) …xed e¤ects. To capture

possible industry-level shocks, in the most conservative speci…cation, we also include industrymonth …xed e¤ects. This ensures that our results are not driven by purchases of bonds in some
particular industry, say energy, that is hit by a common shock, say oil price changes. Throughout,
in computing standard errors we take the most conservative approach, double-clustering them at
both CUSIP and week level. This procedure allows for arbitrary correlation across time and across
bonds.15
If

1

and

2

are negative, this suggests that counterparties bene…t from repeated transactions,

as their stronger ties tend to predict lower markups. This possibility is of special interest in that to
date the theoretical literature has generally adopted a random-matching framework, which ignores
bilateral trading relationships, de facto, by assuming that traders interact only in anonymous spot
transactions. Our results might well motivate new theoretical work to accommodate this important
feature of the data.
We can also test if the price discrimination proposed in Hypothesis I becomes even more pronounced at times of market turmoil.
Hypothesis II: Dealers exploit their position in the network more forcefully in times of market
turmoil.
Formally, we test whether during spike periods of the CBOE Volatility Index, dealers take
greater advantage of their position in the network to trade at better terms than in normal times.16
initiation, meaning that we observe both the purchase and the sale by the same dealer i in the same hour. This
narrows the …eld to transactions in which the spread precisely measures the dealer markup. However, the bonds in
these transactions could have special characteristics, such as a particularly high degree of liquidity. To address this
concern, in robustness checks (in the appendix) we also consider transactions in which the dealer sells directly from
his inventory, where we do not necessarily observe the previous purchase price. We overcome this limitation by using
the average price of the bond bought by other dealers in the same week, as a proxy of its actual value. The two
measures yield similar results.
15
Single clustering on either of these two dimensions produces smaller standard errors (results available from the
authors).
16
We also …nd very similar results using the MOVE index.

8

If con…rmed, this hypothesis would relate to Carlin et al. (2007), who describes an equilibrium in
which traders cooperate most of the time through repeated interactions, providing liquidity to one
another. However, cooperation breaks down when the stakes are high, leading to predatory trading
and episodic illiquidity.
We can also test whether dealers actually performed their expected role of liquidity providers
during the crisis. Theoretically, Weill (2007) has examined the conditions under which dealers might
provide liquidity by "leaning against the wind", i.e. accumulating bond inventories in bad times. It
is still being debated whether dealers coped successfully with the increased selling pressure at the
height of the crisis, because as Mitchell and Pulvino (2012) documents, the deleveraging of other
institutions, such as highly leveraged hedge funds, after the Lehman Brothers default signi…cantly
increased the demand for liquidity in the corporate bond market. And adverse shocks may well
induce dealers too to unload their bond positions in periods of distress. This suggests the following
hypothesis:
Hypothesis III: During …nancial disruptions, market-makers provide liquidity by absorbing external selling pressure.
To test this hypothesis, we use transaction data to construct a measure that captures dealers’
inventory, sorting bonds into three bins depending on the intensity of clients’ selling pressure,
de…ned as the amount sold by clients to dealers normalized by the amount outstanding; we then
estimate the following speci…cation:

Inventoryi;t =

1 T op

T ercile

P ost +

2 M id

T op T ercile + M id T ercile +

i

T ercile
+

t

P ost + P ost +

+ "i;t

where we have three observations for dealer i’s inventory in each week, one for each tercile. We
interact our main independent variable with P ost, a dummy equal to 1 after the collapse of Dealer
D, and the omitted category is the identi…er for the bonds in the lowest tercile of selling pressure
(de…ned as the amount sold by clients to dealers normalized by the amount outstanding). To be
sure that the inventory variations captured are due to the intensi…ed demand for liquidity and not
to some general trend, we estimate this speci…cation in a narrow window around Dealer D’s default
9

and only for investment-grade bonds. If

1

and

2

are negative, this strongly suggests that dealers

ran down their inventories especially for the bonds that their clients were selling most intensely, by
reselling them immediately. In other words, dealers’unwinding of corporate bond positions might
have exerted heavy selling pressure precisely during the period when many market participants
were selling and demanding liquidity.17
Finally, the data also allows us to trace the trades that involve several layers of intermediation.
Glode and Opp (2016) argue that given asymmetric information, trading an asset through several
heterogeneously informed intermediaries can reduce adverse selection between counterparties and
so preserve the trade e¢ ciency.18 This result suggests the following testable hypothesis:
Hypothesis IV: The length of the trading chain increases with adverse selection in the market.
We can test this hypothesis by examining the length of the trading chain during periods of
market turmoil, when adverse selection should be more pronounced, for instance, by comparing
lengths before and after the collapse of Dealer D.

4

The Trading Network of in the Corporate Bond Market

Before testing our main hypotheses, let us analyze the type of network that came into being in the
corporate bond market and its persistency. Figure 1 shows the cumulative distribution of all trades
as a function of the seller’s centrality measure. The top 50 dealers account for some 80 percent of
all transactions, suggesting a de…nite core-periphery structure in the interdealer market. This is
con…rmed by Figure 2, which plots the intermediation network using transaction data: each red
circle represents a dealer, the center of the network is occupied by clients, and the links connecting
participants are more intense as the volume of the transactions increases. The network consists of
a few top dealers at the core, carrying out a high volume of trades among themselves and with
clients, and a larger number of peripheral dealers making fewer trades.19
17

If dealers do not lean against the wind but instead sell during periods of market turmoil, bond prices will drop
signi…cantly. This is one possible reason for the large negative basis of non-AAA bonds during the …nancial crisis.
18
The recent literature has also suggested a few other reasons for the emergence of intermediation chains: Afonso
and Lagos (2015) focuses on heterogeneity of banks’reserves, Atkeson et al. (2015) considers the banks’exposure to
aggregate default risk, and Hugonnier et al. (2014) and Shen et al. (2015) show how search costs and heterogeneous
asset valuations might lead traders with intermediate valuation to act as intermediaries.
19
In unreported results, we …nd that this structure is also highly persistent, with the probability of switching from
the core to the periphery, or viceversa, being negligible.

10

Accordingly, we begin by di¤erentiating three types of market participants: core dealers, peripheral dealers and clients. The …rst question is whether core dealers are able to charge other
participants higher prices for the assets they sell.20 Columns (1)-(5) of Table 2 (Panel A) consider
the entire sample of transactions, where the relevant coe¢ cient is that of the indicator variable
"Client Buyer". Column (1), controlling only for week …xed e¤ects in order to absorb changes in
the average cost of intermediation, shows that on average dealers charge clients 50 basis points
more than they charge other dealers. In Columns (2) and (3) we control for transaction volume,
rating, dealer’s market share and the bond …xed e¤ect (CUSIP); the results are similar. In Column
(4) we also include seller …xed e¤ects, and the results remain una¤ected. Finally, in Column (5)
we saturate the model with industry-month …xed e¤ects, so that we exploit variation only for the
bonds in the same industry traded in the same month; again, the results are una¤ected. In Column
(6) we restrict the sample to investment-grade bonds and in column (7) to non-investment-grade.
The data show that dealers charge similar prices for the two grades. Columns (8) and (9), instead,
show that both core and peripheral dealers charge their clients about 50 basis points more than
they do other dealers, even controlling for week and bond …xed e¤ects. That is, clients’transaction
costs appear to be about the same regardless of whether their counterparty is a core or a peripheral
dealer. Panel B shows the same regression estimates, but now the markup is related to transaction
size; we …nd that markups decline with the size of the trade, suggesting that for small trades the
client does not search for the best deal, while for larger transactions there is more competition
among dealers, resulting in reductions in the spread of as much as 60 basis points.
So far we have compared transactions among dealers with those between dealers and clients.
However, Figures 3 and 4 show that even among interdealer transactions there is signi…cant heterogeneity. The trades with the lowest spreads are those between core dealers and peripheral-to-core
dealer transactions; core-peripheral dealer and core-client transactions show signi…cantly higher
spreads, and these increase signi…cantly during the crisis that began in the …rst quarter of 2008. So
we explore these …ndings further by analyzing interdealer transactions in Table 3. The comparison
group is inter-core-dealer transactions, i.e. trades in which both seller and buyer have a network
20
Theoretical support for this hypothesis is provided by Babus and Kondor (2013), and Farboodi (2014). Babus
and Kondor (2013) shows that more central dealers can learn faster from the prices of the transactions they execute,
increasing their trading gains. Similarly, in the context of an endogenous network formation model, Farboodi (2014)
shows that core dealers charge higher average prices to the peripheral dealers than to other core ones.

11

centrality measure in the top 30.21 Column (1) shows a clear ranking among di¤erent types of trades
as far as the spread is concerned. Speci…cally, core-core transactions are the cheapest, peripherycore trades are slightly more costly, periphery-periphery are about 20 basis points more expensive
than core-core, and core-periphery transactions are the most expensive by almost 30 bp. Columns
(2)-(4) show that these results remain both statistically and economically signi…cant even when we
include controls. Columns (5) and (6) show that core dealers charge the peripheral dealers about
10 basis points more for non-investment-grade than for investment grade bond trades. However,
there is no signi…cant di¤erence by bond rating when peripheral sellers are dealing with core buyers.
It would thus appear that the core dealers can indeed pro…t more from riskier investments when
they transact with marginal dealers than with other core dealers. Transactions between peripheral
dealers show a similar pattern, with non-investment-grade bond trades exhibiting higher margins.
These results are consistent with the …ndings of Green et al. (2007a), Green (2007), and Li and
Schürho¤ (2014) for other o¤-exchange markets.
In short, these results establish a very signi…cant relationship between a dealer’s position in the
network and the pro…ts captured in trades with clients or other dealers. Of course, our measure of
network centrality could be proxying for the dealer’s bargaining power, one of the main parameters
common to the theoretical literature on OTC trading. However, we can now show that the prior
bilateral relationships among dealers, which are usually left unmodelled, are at least as important
as bargaining power in predicting spreads.

5

The Main Results

Let us start by analyzing how existing bilateral trading relationships among dealers a¤ect spreads,
especially in times of market turmoil. We then investigate how the network reacts when a core
dealer defaults.

5.1

Trading Relationships

To this point we have considered only position in the network, core versus periphery, as a factor potentially a¤ecting pro…t margins. We now turn to a more in-depth analysis of the role of
21

The results are qualitatively the same if the sample is narrowed to the top 20 or broadened to the top 40 dealers.

12

prior bilateral relationships in the OTC corporate bond market. We compute the fraction of sales
that seller s had with buyer b in the previous quarter, normalized by the s’s total sales (Fraction
Saless;b /Total Saless ), which we label "Fraction Selling to Counterparty". We also compute the
fraction of trades in which buyer b bought bonds from seller s, normalized by b’s total purchases in
the previous quarter (Fraction Purchasess;b /Total Purchasesb ), designated "Fraction Buying from
Counterparty".
Table 4 reports the estimation results from our formal test of Hypothesis I. Column (1) shows the
e¤ect of “Fraction Selling to Counterparty” and “Fraction buying from Counterparty” on seller’s
spread controlling for week …xed e¤ects, the volume of the trade, market share and the bond’s
rating. On average a higher fraction of past sales to the buyer predicts signi…cantly lower pro…t
margins. Similarly, a higher fraction of purchases by the buyer from the same seller, compared
to his total purchases, predicts signi…cantly lower pro…t margins. The data also con…rms that in
general higher transaction volume corresponds to lower pro…t margins and lower-rated bonds are
associated with higher pro…t margins.
Column (2) con…rms these results by controlling for the bond …xed e¤ects. The coe¢ cient is
quite similar and both economically and statistically signi…cant. In other words, comparing the
same bond traded between two di¤erent pairs of counterparties in the same week, those with the
stronger past tie have lower spreads. Column (3) adds industry-month …xed e¤ects, to make sure
that the result is not driven by unobserved heterogeneity in the type of bonds traded by some
counterparties and not others. The results are economically signi…cant. There is a di¤erence
in the markup of about 20 basis points between the bottom and the top decile of relationship
strength. The results hold even in our most conservative speci…cation, where we control for sellerand buyer-month …xed e¤ects, which neutralize any time-varying shocks at dealer level that could
a¤ect trading behavior.
Thus the results show the importance of the existing relationships between counterparties. Now
Column (4) focuses on the positions of the seller and buyer in the network, controlling for week and
bond …xed e¤ects. In this way we test whether or not the importance of bilateral relationships is
subsumed by relative centrality in the network. We …nd in fact that a more central buyer can get a
lower price from his counterparties than a more peripheral one, while the results for the seller are
weaker, both statistically and economically. Let us emphasize that although this shows that dealer
13

centrality is important in explaining markups (central sellers buy at lower prices), it also shows
that network centrality does not explain the importance of prior bilateral relationships away.
Finally, Columns (5) and (6) demonstrate that the importance of existing bilateral relationships
remains even including seller- and buyer-month …xed e¤ects, thus controlling for time-varying
heterogeneity at dealer level. Overall, there is evidence that existing trading relationships play a
major role in shaping trading behavior, at least as important as the dealer’s degree of network
centrality.

5.2

Dealer Network and Trading Relationships in Times of Market Turmoil

Now we are in a position to address one of our main questions: When are these prior relationships
most valuable? And do dealers demand higher spreads during periods of high uncertainty, especially
from the counterparties that are most dependent on them? In answering we exploit the time series
dimension of our data to test Hypothesis II. Speci…cally, our dataset covers the …nancial crisis, so
we can investigate dealers’trading behavior as a function of their existing relationships during the
crisis.
Table 5 shows the results. We take two di¤erent approaches. First we interact our measures
of prior trading relationships and of network centrality with the volatility index (VIX). Second,
we split the sample into three periods to capture the di¤erent phases of the crisis. We begin, in
Columns (1)-(2), by interacting the intensity of the relationship between seller and buyer with the
volatility index controlling for week and bond …xed e¤ects. Interestingly, if the two parties have a
strong tie the incidence of the trading relationship on the spreads becomes even more pronounced
in periods of intense uncertainty. It is particularly important to hold the bond constant, because
changes in the spreads could be due to a change in the composition of the bonds traded at the peak
of the crisis, as dealers might well be reducing inventories by getting rid of their riskier holdings.
Speci…cally, comparing the same bond, traded in the same week among di¤erent counterparties, we
…nd that dealers who had previously done a signi…cant fraction of their corporate bond business
with the same counterparties were able to strike a better deal, and that pro…t margins were lower in
correspondence with spikes in market uncertainty. In terms of magnitude, a one-standard-deviation
increase in the VIX reduces margins by 35 basis points. At the worst of the crisis, the VIX increased
by about three standard deviations, which makes these results economically signi…cant indeed. The
14

results are very similar when we control for industry-month …xed e¤ects. That is, in times of market
distress dealers tended to be liquidity providers for their closest counterparties.
Did dealers also serve as liquidity providers for market participants in general? Columns (4)(6) address this issue by testing whether the degree of network centrality becomes more important
during periods of market turmoil. Interacting our centrality measure for buyer and seller with the
volatility index, we …nd that more central sellers pro…t even more from their position during periods
of stress, and central buyers too have greater bargaining power, concluding transactions at lower
prices. This means that a core dealer can capture even higher rents by trading with peripheral
dealers in bad times, but peripheral dealers cannot do the same when selling to a core dealer. Thus
the gap between core and peripheral dealers is accentuated in crisis periods, as only the former
can take advantage of their position. This supports the thesis that in bad times dealers provide
liquidity selectively to their closest counterparties only, while exploiting their centrality with other
market participants.
As a complementary strategy, in Panel B of Table 5 we split the sample into three sub-periods,
January 2005-December 2006, January 2007-August 2008, and September 2008-July 2009. The
…rst period represents normal times, the second the run-up to the …nancial crisis, and the third the
crisis peak after the failure of Lehman Brothers. Comparing the results in the three columns, we
see that relative to other traders central sellers and buyers capture a signi…cantly larger fraction
of the trading pro…ts during the crisis than in normal times, even controlling for week and bond
…xed e¤ects. The di¤erence is signi…cant statistically as well as economically: sellers charge six
times more during the crisis than during the run-up, and buyers get discounts four times larger.
Speci…cally, buyers in the top decile of centrality purchase at spreads 50 basis points narrower than
those charged to buyers in the bottom decile, while the markups of the most central sellers are 40
bp higher.
The comparison further con…rms that the role of existing relationships was even more important
than in normal times. At the height of the crisis, the presence of a repeated seller or buyer relationship with a given counterparty led to lower margins than in normal times. Unlike the centrality
measure, whose coe¢ cient increases monotonically as the market turmoil intensi…es, the bilateral
relationships have the same impact on spread in Columns (1) and (2): their importance only increases signi…cantly at the peak of the crisis (Column 3). The economic e¤ect too is important:
15

the gap between the markups of dealers in the top and in the bottom decile of our measure of
relationship is about 40 bp between the pre-crisis and crisis period. Thus, this analysis con…rms
the time-varying role of bilateral relationships in turbulent times and their importance, on a par
with the network centrality.
Figure 3 suggests that all spreads increase signi…cantly around the Lehman Brothers’collapse,
but with considerable heterogeneity across transactions among the di¤erent types of market participant. This heterogeneity could be due to a variety of factors, such as a change in the pool
of bonds traded by di¤erent counterparties, or shocks to speci…c dealers. We address this issue
formally in Table 6, splitting the transactions between dealer types as in Table 3 and interacting
the main indicator variables with the VIX (Columns (1)-(4)). We also split the sample into our
three periods (Columns (5)-(7)). Interestingly, core dealers are able to extract even higher rents
from peripheral dealers in periods of high volatility, but peripheral dealers are not able to do the
same when selling to core dealers; and transactions at the periphery tend to exhibit higher pro…t
margins in turbulent times. Comparing Column (3) with Column (4), we can see that core dealers
pro…t even more at times of greater uncertainty in trading with peripheral dealers when the bond
is non-investment-grade. The results are robust to controls for trade characteristics interacted with
the VIX, as well as week-, bond- and industry-month …xed e¤ects. When transactions are compared
over time (Columns (5)-(7)) the results are very similar, with core dealers pro…ting about three
times more from peripheral dealers at the peak of the crisis.
These results highlight the main …nding of this section: existing relationships are good predictors
of pro…t margins, and they become even more important under market turmoil. This contrasts with
the theoretical literature on OTC markets, which generally – with the exceptions of Seppi (1990)
and Glode and Opp (2016) –posits that interactions between buyers and sellers are anonymous and
price dispersion is not a¤ected by the parties’transaction history.22 A further original feature of
our study is the discovery that the importance of existing relationships is time-varying. In addition,
relationship-based trading behavior bene…ts core at the expense of peripheral dealers.
22

The models proposed by Seppi (1990) and Glode and Opp (2016) highlight how the identity of the counterparty
might signi…cantly shape the trading process.

16

5.3

Default of a Core Dealer

Having established that prior trading relationships and network centrality shape dealers’rent shares
and liquidity provision, and that their importance is heightened in crisis, we now investigate the
impact on a dealer’s behavior of losing a major trading partner. The question, that is, is whether
these relationships are easily substitutable. If there are no frictions – i.e. if dealers can readily
locate new counterparties and new relationships can be easily formed –losing a tie with a speci…c
dealer should not a¤ect pro…tability or transaction costs. We test this hypothesis formally using
the information on dealer identities contained in our regulatory data. In particular, we want to see
how the network reacts to the shock of Dealer D’s default and how this a¤ected the dealers who
had prior relationships with Dealer D.
Table 7 reports the regressions that relate the strength of the relationship with Dealer D with
other dealers’ pro…t margins after the collapse. For each dealer we compute the fraction of all
bonds sold to Dealer D as the average for the year 2007. This is to make sure we capture a stable
relationship with Dealer D, rather than deleveraging on the eve of the bankruptcy. We consider the
fractions of securities both bought from and sold to Dealer D, but in fact the two are very closely
correlated. Formally, we estimate the following regressions:

Spreadi;j;k;t =

1 F raction

of P urchase T ransactionsi;D

2 F raction

of P urchase T ransactionsi;D +

Xi;j;k +

+ "i;j;k;t

t

P ost +

where i and j denote the two counterparties, k indexes the bond and t the week. "Fraction of Purchase Transactionsi;D " proxies the intensity of the relationship between dealer i and
Dealer D in the pre-period. "P ost" is a dummy equal to 1 in the period after the default. We
include several controls in the vector Xi;j;k to capture heterogeneity across dealers and bonds, and
all speci…cations include week …xed e¤ects. The relevant coe¢ cient is

1

on the interaction between

the intensity of the pre-default trading relationship with Dealer D and the indicator for the postdefault period. Column (1), controlling for week and CUSIP …xed e¤ects, shows that the dealers
that were buying the most from Dealer D su¤ered a signi…cant decline in pro…t margins. The e¤ect

17

is both statistically and economically signi…cant: a one-standard-deviation increase in the fraction
of assets bought from Dealer D narrows the spread by an average of 14 basis points.
This result is robust to the inclusion of trade characteristics (volume and bond rating) and
of our measure of the strength of the relationship (Column 2). Columns (3) and (4) further test
the sensitivity of the result by including in turn the seller and the buyer …xed e¤ects to control
for possible unobserved heterogeneity across dealers more or less closely connected to Dealer D.
Column (5) is our most restrictive speci…cation, controlling also for seller- and buyer-month …xed
e¤ects. This means that comparing transactions in the same period, in the same bond, and by
similar dealers, the dealers who were relying more heavily on Dealer D su¤ered the most with its
collapse.
Columns (6)-(10) complement these results by studying how the dealers who were selling more
of their assets to Dealer D responded. As before, the main coe¢ cient is the interaction between
the dummy Post (equal to 1 after the default), and the average fraction of assets sold to Dealer
D in 2007. As above, we …nd that dealers more exposed to Dealer D experienced a signi…cant
reduction in pro…t margins after the default. However, statistical signi…cance is reduced: it is
signi…cant at the 10% level only when seller- and buyer-month …xed e¤ects are included, in Column
(10). Presumably this is because the fractions of sale and purchase transactions are very closely
correlated.

6

Dealers’Inventories in Bad Times

As is discussed in section 3, theoretical work considers whether and how dealers may be able to "lean
against the wind" by expanding inventories at times of distress (see, for instance, Weill (2007)).
We test Hypothesis III by addressing the following question: Were the dealers able to absorb the
selling pressure of other market participants? We can employ transaction data to compute dealers’
inventory around the collapse of Dealer D.23 One problem with calculating inventories from trade
data is that we do not observe the primary market, so our measure necessarily excludes newly issued
bonds. To avoid bias in our computation, we use a very narrow time window around the failure
and exclude both new issues and those maturing within that time. Moreover, the primary market
23

To make sure our results are not driven by smaller broker-dealers, we focus on the top 100 by transaction volume.
We also ran the same analysis with the top 30 only, with highly similar results.

18

was signi…cantly less active during our period than ordinarily, so our measure can be considered a
good proxy for the dealers’actual inventory in this brief period.
We start by plotting, in Figure 5, the dealers’inventory of bonds characterized by di¤erential
selling pressure, de…ned as the volume sold by clients to dealers normalized by the amount outstanding. The idea is that if the dealers are providing liquidity by ful…lling sell orders without
immediately unloading the bonds in order to avoid further price declines, then we should observe
an expansion of inventories of the bonds subject to the most intense selling pressure. Instead, we
…nd that around the peak of the crisis dealers reduced their inventories most sharply precisely for
these bonds.
Table 8 formally tests and quanti…es this hypothesis, dividing bonds into terciles of selling
pressure. The regressions are normalized by dividing the inventory for each dealer for each tercile
by the standard deviation of inventory for that dealer and tercile. Columns (1) and (2) are for a
three-month window around the failure of Dealer D, while Column (3) restricts the sample to a
four-week window. The …rst two columns show that dealers reduced their inventory of bonds in the
top two terciles of selling pressure signi…cantly, by 25%-30% of 1 standard deviation. The result
holds also for the shorter window in Column (3), which shows a reduction of 20% of 1 standard
deviation for the bonds in the top tercile. These results strongly suggest that in the midst of the
market turmoil dealers did not readily provide liquidity to clients. We can now seek to determine
whether their behavior also increased transaction costs. One possible source of such an increase is
a lengthening of the intermediation chain owing to dealers’inability to increase their inventories.
The prevalence of transactions among intermediaries along intermediation chains has been recently highlighted by Li and Schürho¤ (2014) for the municipal bond market, Holli…eld et al. (2012)
for securitized products and Weller (2014) for metals futures. However, there is no study of the
way in which these intermediation chains respond to shocks. Speci…cally, one possible reason why
spreads might have widened following the default of Dealer D could be the lengthening of the
chains, as in Hypothesis IV. To test this hypothesis, Figure 6 plots the estimated week …xed e¤ects
for a regression whose dependent variable is trading chain length. After the failure of Dealer D,
intermediation chains between seller and buyer lengthened signi…cantly. This suggests that with
the disappearance of a major counterparty, dealers had to form new trading relationships, and as
Table 7 has shown these were signi…cantly less pro…table than their predecessors. We can also
19

con…rm this result in Table 9 by estimating a regression of chain length over the Post indicator
(equal to 1 after the bankruptcy). Even controlling for bond- and industry-month …xed e¤ects and
other trade characteristics, we …nd that on average the intermediation chain becomes signi…cantly
longer, and the e¤ect appears to be more pronounced when the seller is core rather than peripheral.
This increase in the intermediation length matters because it might increase the overall intermediation cost. Table 10 shows how the spread is allocated among intermediaries along the chain;
we …nd that being closer to the client yields higher pro…ts. Moreover, since the average spread is
about 60 bps, and the intermediaries other than the one closest to the client charge about 20-30
bps less than the average spread, we have that intermediation costs increases with the length of
the chain.
Is there a relationship between the change in length documented in Table 9 and the change
in dealers’ inventory? On this question, Figure 7 plots our measure of inventory for bonds that
underwent changes in average intermediation chain length above and below the median. By this
measure, inventory shrinks most markedly for the bonds whose chains lengthened, suggesting that
dealers were not providing liquidity, because they were diminishing their inventories, making it
harder to accommodate clients’order requests and thus requiring a longer intermediation chain.
Formally, Table 11 reports the results of the following regression:

Inventoryi;j;t =

1 Above
i

+

t

M ediani;D

P ost +

2 Above

M ediani;D + P ost +

+ "i;j;t

where i is the dealer, j is the bond and t is the week. Above M ediani;D equals one for the
bonds whose intermediation chain lengthened by more than the median. P ost equals one after the
Dealer D’s default. We control for dealers’( i ) and time …xed e¤ects ( t ). Since we cannot observe
the issuance of new bonds, our measure of inventory excludes them. Given the especially turbulent
period covered, however, we are convinced that this does not signi…cantly a¤ect our estimates.
However, to alleviate such concerns, in Columns (1) and (2) we take a three-month window around
the default and in Column (3) a more restrictive four-week window. To simplify interpretation, we
normalize our measure of inventory by dividing the inventory for each dealer above and below the
median by the standard deviation in that dealer’s inventory. In the most restrictive speci…cation,
20

we …nd a reduction of 20% of inventory for the bonds whose intermediation chain lengthened. This
result does not appear to be driven by di¤erences across dealers or by common shocks to the bond
market, as we control for dealer and time …xed e¤ects. The evidence is that intermediation costs
increased because dealers were deleveraging and holding smaller inventories at the peak of the crisis.
Overall, our results o¤er new insights into dealers’ behavior during one of the most severe
episodes of …nancial market turmoil in recent times. Rather than provide price support by absorbing
the excess supply from other market participants, dealers tried to unload these bonds immediately.
And by reducing inventories they also made the market more illiquid, as the average length of the
intermediation chain increased signi…cantly, which means higher transaction costs for clients.

7

Concluding Remarks

The recent crisis has spotlighted the issue of how governments should handle complex …nancial
institutions that are "too connected to fail". Theoretical contributions have shown how connections between …nancial institutions, stemming both from correlation in asset holdings and from an
intricate system of cross-liabilities, could potentially trigger a cascade of bank failures. However,
there is little if any evidence on the role played by existing bilateral relationships among …nancial
institutions.
This paper focuses on a crucial over-the-counter market, that in corporate bonds, inquiring
into the way in which the network of relationships between dealers shapes trading behavior and
liquidity provision both in normal times and in periods of turmoil. We start by showing the clear
core-periphery structure of the market, in which a few highly interconnected dealers intermediate
most of the trades with other dealers and with clients and many sparsely connected ones trade
less frequently. This structure is highly stable over time. Next we show that the dealers’bilateral
relationships and their degree of network centrality are quite reliable predictors of their transaction
costs, the more central dealers taking advantage of their connections to get better deals. More
important, during periods of distress dealers tend to provide liquidity to the counterparties with
whom they have the strongest ties. But core dealers exploit their connections at the expense of
peripheral dealers and of clients, increasing the spreads they charge to them. In the same vein, the
value of being highly connected and systemically important increases when uncertainty is high.

21

In contrast to most of the empirical studies of the corporate bond market, we are able to learn
the identity of each dealer, and so to see how the network responded to a large shock such as the
failure of Dealer D. We …nd that Dealer D’s main counterparties had to narrow their spreads after
September 2008, by comparison with other, similar dealers trading the same bonds in the same
period.
To conclude, our results shed new light on the way in which prior bilateral relationships between
…nancial institutions sometimes serve as a bu¤er in times of stress, but also reveal that they
heighten the fragility of the system, insofar as connection to more fragile dealers may worsen
trading outcomes even for healthy dealers.

22

References
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). Systemic risk and stability in …nancial
networks. American Economic Review .
Afonso, G., A. Kovner, and A. Schoar (2013). Trading partners in the interbank lending market.
FRBNY Sta¤ Reports.
Afonso, G. and R. Lagos (2015). Trade dynamics in the market for federal funds. Econometrica 83 (1), 263–313.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000). Financial Contagion. Journal of Political Economy 108, 1–33.
Ang, A., A. A. Shtauber, and P. C. Tetlock (2013). Asset Pricing in the Dark: The Cross-Section
of OTC Stocks. Review of Financial Studies 26 (12), 2985–3028.
Atkeson, A. G., A. L. Eisfeldt, and P.-O. Weill (2015). Entry and exit in otc derivatives markets.
Econometrica 83 (6), 2231–2292.
Babus, A. (2016). The formation of …nancial networks. The RAND Journal of Economics 47 (2),
239–272.
Babus, A. and P. Kondor (2013). Trading and information di¤usion in over-the-counter markets.
Technical report.
Battalio, R., A. Ellul, and R. Jennings (2007). Reputation e¤ects in trading on the New York
Stock Exchange. The Journal of Finance 62 (3), 1243–1271.
Benveniste, L. M., A. J. Marcus, and W. J. Wilhelm (1992). What’s special about the specialist?
Journal of Financial Economics 32 (1), 61–86.
Bessembinder, H., W. Maxwell, and K. Venkataraman (2006). Market transparency, liquidity
externalities, and institutional trading costs in corporate bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 82 (2), 251–288.
Biais, B. (1993). Price formation and equilibrium liquidity in fragmented and centralized markets.
The Journal of Finance 48 (1), 157–185.
Carlin, B., M. Lobo, and S. Viswanathan (2007). Episodic liquidity crises: Cooperative and
predatory trading. The Journal of Finance 62 (5), 2235–2274.
23

Choi, J. and O. Shachar (2013). Did liquidity providers become liquidity seekers? Technical
report, Sta¤ Report, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Cocco, J. F., F. J. Gomes, and N. C. Martins (2009). Lending relationships in the interbank
market. Journal of Financial Intermediation 18 (1), 24–48.
Du¢ e, D., N. Garleanu, and L. Pedersen (2005). Over-the-Counter Markets. Econometrica 73 (6),
1815–1847.
Du¢ e, D., N. Garleanu, and L. Pedersen (2007). Valuation in over-the-counter markets. Review
of Financial Studies 20 (6), 1865–1900.
Edwards, A., L. Harris, and M. Piwowar (2007). Corporate bond market transaction costs and
transparency. The Journal of Finance 62 (3), 1421–1451.
Elliott, M., B. Golub, and M. O. Jackson (2015). Financial Networks and Contagion. American
Economic Review .
Farboodi, M. (2014). Intermediation and voluntary exposure to counterparty risk. Technical
report, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Freixas, X., B. M. Parigi, and J.-C. Rochet (2000). Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations, and
Liquidity Provision by the Central Bank. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32 (3), 611–
638.
Gabrieli, S. and C.-P. Georg (2014). A network view on interbank market freezes.
Glode, V. and C. C. Opp (2016). Adverse Selection and Intermediation Chains. American Economic Review.
Green, R. C. (2007). Presidential address: Issuers, underwriter syndicates, and aftermarket transparency. The Journal of Finance 62 (4), 1529–1550.
Green, R. C., B. Holli…eld, and N. Schürho¤ (2007a). Dealer intermediation and price behavior
in the aftermarket for new bond issues. Journal of Financial Economics 86 (3), 643–682.
Green, R. C., B. Holli…eld, and N. Schürho¤ (2007b). Financial intermediation and the costs of
trading in an opaque market. Review of Financial Studies 20 (2), 275–314.

24

Green, R. C., D. Li, and N. Schürho¤ (2010). Price discovery in illiquid markets: Do …nancial
asset prices rise faster than they fall? The Journal of Finance 65 (5), 1669–1702.
Hendershott, T., D. Li, D. Livdan, and N. Schürho¤ (2016). Relationship Trading in OTC
Markets.
Henderson, B. J. and H. Tookes (2012). Do investment banks’relationships with investors impact
pricing? The case of convertible bond issues. Management Science 58 (12), 2272–2291.
Holli…eld, B., A. Neklyudov, and C. S. Spatt (2012). Bid-ask spreads and the pricing of securitizations: 144a vs. registered securitizations.
Hugonnier, J., B. Lester, and P.-O. Weill (2014). Heterogeneity in Decentralized Asset Markets.
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Li, D. and N. Schürho¤ (2014). Dealer networks. Available at SSRN 2023201 .
Mitchell, M. and T. Pulvino (2012). Arbitrage crashes and the speed of capital. Journal of
Financial Economics 104 (3), 469–490.
Pagano, M. and A. Röell (1992). Auction and dealership markets: what is the di¤erence? European Economic Review 36 (2), 613–623.
Schultz, P. (2001). Corporate bond trading costs: A peek behind the curtain. The Journal of
Finance 56 (2), 677–698.
Seppi, D. J. (1990). Equilibrium block trading and asymmetric information. the Journal of Finance 45 (1), 73–94.
Shen, J., B. Wei, and H. Yan (2015). Financial Intermediation Chains in an OTC Market.
Stanton, R., J. Walden, and N. Wallace (2014). Securitization Networks and Endogenous Financial Norms in US Mortgage Markets.
Weill, P. (2007). Leaning against the wind. The Review of Economic Studies 74 (4), 1329–1354.
Weller, B. (2014). Intermediation chains. Working paper.

25

Figure 1
This figure plots the cumulative distribution of seller’s network centrality for all transactions, both
among dealers and with clients.

Client

Figure 2
This figure plots the core-periphery network structure where each link is a transaction, and at the
center there are the transactions with clients. Darker lines indicate a higher number of transactions
between the two nodes.

Figure 3
This figure plots the profit margins over time, for transactions among different types of
counterparties.

Figure 4
This figure plots the cumulative distribution of the profit margins for the different types of
counterparties.

Figure 5
This figure plots the dealers’ inventory for bonds that experienced different selling pressure from the
clients, which is defined as the amount sold by clients to dealers normalized by the amount
outstanding.

Figure 6
This figure plots the average trading chain length over time normalized to the first week in 2005..
The vertical line indicates the default of Dealer D.

Figure 7
This figure plots the dealers’ inventory, normalized to July 2008, i.e. three months before Dealer D’s
default. The blue solid (red dashed) line shows the inventory for bonds that experienced a change in
the length of the intermediation chain above (below) median, as computed by comparing the length
of the chain before and after the Dealer D’s default.

Table 1
Summary Statistics
The table reports descriptive statistics for the main variables employed in our analysis. In the Panel A, we present the main bond characteristics: the number of bonds and the number of trade,
the bonds' credit quality, issue size and maturity, as provided by a confidential version of TRACE for the period 2005-2011. The first two columns report the statistics for the full data sample.
Due to computing limitations, we focus on a random 10% sample (the draw is based on the last digit of the CUSIP being equal to zero). The remaining columns report the summary statistics for
the main estimation sample which restricts attention to buy and sell transactions observed within an hour from each other, and for the sample used in the robustness checks in the appendix.
Panel B provides summary statistics for these characteristics and for the transactions, such as the bilateral relationships, the profit margins and the seller's centrality measure for the main results.

Number of Bonds and Trades

Full Sample
Bonds
Trades
56,707
52,151,496

Credit Quality Distribution (%)
Superior (AA and UP)
Other Investment Grade (BBB-A)
High-Yield (below BBB)
Not Rated

10.0%
68.6%
5.3%
16.2%

9.5%
79.7%
7.3%
3.5%

10.24%
74.82%
5.62%
9.32%

8.90%
79.18%
8.29%
3.63%

10.42%
73.47%
5.65%
10.46%

8.95%
81.24%
6.97%
2.84%

Issue Size Distribution (%)
Small (< $100 Million)
Medium ($100 - $500 Million)
Large ( > $500 Million)
Missing Offering Data

85.9%
3.8%
0.0%
10.3%

61.4%
24.4%
0.14%
14.1%

86.04%
3.94%
0.02%
10.00%

68.23%
17.77%
0.14%
13.86%

86.48%
3.77%
0.02%
9.73%

64.70%
21.54%
0.17%
13.59%

Maturity Distribution (%)
Under 2 years
2-5 years
5-20 years
20+ years
Missing Maturity Data

7.0%
20.8%
59.9%
12.0%
0.3%

0.3%
6.8%
76.4%
15.8%
0.6%

6.34%
19.60%
60.00%
13.74%
0.31%

0.68%
6.73%
76.84%
15.01%
0.74%

7.25%
20.00%
59.10%
13.33%
0.32%

0.41%
6.54%
79.91%
12.53%
0.61%

(1)
N

(2)
Mean

(3)
St. Dev.

(4)
p1

(5)
p10

(6)
p50

(7)
p90

(8)
p99

Average Spread
Counterparty Buyer
Network Centrality
Log(Transaction Volume)
Market Share
Rating
Investment Grade

773,200
773,200
730,225
722,914
773,200
773,200
773,200

0.621
0.422
52.16
8.397
0.00553
8.555
0.730

1.427
0.494
94.28
2.015
0.0329
4.918
0.444

-1.152
0
1
4.630
1.33e-06
0
0

0
0
2
6.225
1.00e-05
3
0

0.239
0
25
7.832
0.000233
8
1

1.976
1
107
11.58
0.00708
16
1

4.455
1
554
13.30
0.102
22
1

Statistics for Tables 4-7
Average Spread
Fraction Selling to Counterparty
Fraction Buying from Counterparty
Network Centrality Seller
Network Centrality Buyer
Core-Periphery
Periphery-Core
Periphery-Periphery
Log(Transaction Volume)
Market Share
Rating

446,854
417,640
417,639
421,221
420,139
446,854
446,854
446,854
424,872
446,854
446,854

0.393
0.112
0.135
0.102
0.101
0.185
0.244
0.256
8.466
0.00358
8.984

1.515
0.161
0.203
0.0397
0.0463
0.388
0.430
0.437
2.051
0.0229
5.074

-1.832
7.79e-05
8.64e-05
0.00231
0.00104
0
0
0
4.626
1.14e-06
0

0
0.00184
0.00233
0.0483
0.0235
0
0
0
6.223
1.00e-05
3

0.102
0.0426
0.0523
0.102
0.113
0
0
0
7.869
0.000233
8

1.132
0.319
0.386
0.151
0.152
1
1
1
11.63
0.00541
17

4.999
0.727
1
0.170
0.172
1
1
1
13.21
0.0554
22

Statistics for Table 8
Average Spread
Fraction of Sale Transactions with Dealer D
Fraction of Purchase Transactions with Dealer D
Fraction Selling to Counterparty
Fraction Buying from Counterparty
Log(Transaction Volume)
Market Share
Rating

30,687
30,687
30,687
29,582
29,582
29,394
446,854
30,687

0.596
0.0174
0.0219
0.0936
0.134
8.105
0.00358
8.096

2.549
0.0269
0.0279
0.129
0.218
1.891
0.0229
5.366

-7.514
0
0
6.58e-05
0.000133
4.508
1.14e-06
1

0
0.000368
0.000535
0.00194
0.00255
6.109
1.00e-05
2

0.183
0.00337
0.00995
0.0378
0.0522
7.749
0.000233
6

2.064
0.0678
0.0740
0.256
0.242
11.16
0.00541
16

9.482
0.0929
0.104
0.611
1
12.73
0.0554
22

Panel A

Estimation Sample
Bonds
Trades
4,540
773,200

Appendix Estimation Sample
Bonds
Trades
4,636
5,296,107

Panel B
Statistics for Table 3

Table 2
Spreads: Clients vs Dealers
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spread (difference between sell and buy price) with the type of counterparty. The sample includes bond transactions for the period 2005-2011 as reported in
an enhanced version of TRACE. "Client Buyer" is a dummy equal to one if the buyer is a client. "Log(Transaction Volume)" is the size of the transaction. "Rating" captures the numerical equivalent of the bond
rating, with higher number capturing riskier bonds. "Market Share" is the fraction of bond i held in inventory by seller s in the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding. Columns (6) and (7) divide
the sample between investment grade and non-investment grade bonds, whereas Columns (8) and (9) differentiate between sellers in the core or in the periphery. Column (5) shows the most conservative
specification in which we control for week, bond, seller and industry×month fixed effects. Panel B reports the results for different samples based on the size of the transaction. Robust standard errors double
clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All Bonds

Client Buyer

0.524***
(0.0309)

(8)

(9)

Investment
Grade Bonds

Non-Investment
Grade Bonds

Core Dealers

Periphery
Dealers

0.529***
(0.0237)

0.563***
(0.0217)

0.564***
(0.0218)

0.549***
(0.0305)

0.464***
(0.0242)

0.500***
(0.0319)

0.536***
(0.0221)

-0.113***
(0.00533)

-0.0768***
(0.00408)
0.0108**
(0.00538)
0.718**
(0.277)

-0.0843***
(0.00445)
0.0102*
(0.00523)
0.738**
(0.285)

-0.0838***
(0.00442)
0.0117**
(0.00524)
0.719**
(0.282)

-0.0683***
(0.00373)
0.00156
(0.00880)
0.572**
(0.262)

-0.0978***
(0.00882)
0.00831
(0.00781)
3.182*
(1.826)

-0.0602***
(0.00515)
0.0215***
(0.00637)
0.391
(0.446)

-0.0919***
(0.00446)
0.00375
(0.00677)
0.825***
(0.174)

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

773,200
0.044

722,914
0.077

722,609
0.158

722,466
0.202

722,466
0.203

523,613
0.242

198,952
0.078

370,727
0.159

351,478
0.181

Rating
Market Share

Observations
R-squared

(7)

0.585***
(0.0287)

Log(Transaction Volume)

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Seller Fixed Effects
Industry × Month Fixed Effects

(6)

Panel B
(1)

(2)

(3)

Transaction Size Below Transaction Size between Transaction Size between
Median
50th and 75th
75th and 90th
Client Buyer

Log(Transaction Volume)
Rating
Market Share

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

(4)
Transaction Size Above
90th

0.658***
(0.0317)

0.558***
(0.0267)

0.202***
(0.0135)

0.0850***
(0.0147)

-0.0515***
(0.00844)
0.00710
(0.00668)
0.854***
(0.290)

-0.0874***
(0.00765)
0.0200**
(0.00842)
0.681*
(0.398)

-0.0801***
(0.00922)
0.0337***
(0.00818)
0.0679
(0.468)

-0.0146
(0.0177)
0.0269***
(0.00554)
1.135
(1.720)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

361,106
0.216

180,390
0.149

107,992
0.069

72,039
0.056

Table 3
Spreads and Network Structure
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spreads with the type of counterparty. The sample includes bond transactions for the period 20052011 as reported in an enhanced version of TRACE. "Core-Periphery" is a dummy equal to one if the seller is a core dealer and the buyer is a peripheral
dealer, while "Periphery-Periphery" identifies transactions between dealers in the periphery, and "Periphery-Core" is a dummy equal to one for transactions
where the seller is in the periphery and the buyer is in the core. The comparison group are interdealer transactions between core dealers. "Log(Transaction
Volume)" is the size of the transaction. "Rating" captures the numerical equivalent of the bond rating, with higher number capturing riskier bonds. "Market
Share" is the fraction of bond i held in inventory by seller s in the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding. Column (4) shows the most
conservative specification in which we control for week, bond, and industry×month fixed effects. Columns (5) and (6) divide the sample between investment
grade and non-investment grade bonds. Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All Bonds
Core-Periphery
Periphery-Periphery
Periphery-Core

0.298***
(0.0174)
0.231***
(0.0159)
0.141***
(0.0159)
-0.0746***
(0.00456)
0.0160***
(0.00207)
1.123***
(0.312)

0.260***
(0.0160)
0.145***
(0.0137)
0.0905***
(0.0143)
-0.0502***
(0.00407)
0.0220***
(0.00612)
0.876**
(0.342)

0.261***
(0.0162)
0.148***
(0.0137)
0.0898***
(0.0143)
-0.0499***
(0.00410)
0.0227***
(0.00635)
0.871**
(0.342)

0.243***
(0.0169)
0.115***
(0.0148)
0.0811***
(0.0180)
-0.0426***
(0.00323)
0.0129*
(0.00678)
0.445***
(0.157)

0.317***
(0.0332)
0.207***
(0.0293)
0.118***
(0.0230)
-0.0753***
(0.0113)
0.0165*
(0.00890)
8.942
(5.454)

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

446,854
0.016

424,872
0.026

424,561
0.062

424,561
0.063

295,843
0.077

128,662
0.065

Rating
Market Share

Observations
R-squared

(6)

Non-Investment
Grade Bonds

0.281***
(0.0174)
0.196***
(0.0169)
0.0602***
(0.0138)

Log(Transaction Volume)

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Industry × Month Fixed Effects

(5)

Investment Grade
Bonds

Table 4
Spreads and Bilateral Relationships
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spreads with the existing of bilateral relationships between seller and buyer and to their network centrality. The
sample includes bond transactions for the period 2005-2011 as reported in an enhanced version of TRACE. "Fraction Selling to Counterparty" is the fraction of sales
of this seller to this buyer computed in the previous quarter. Similarly for the "Fraction Buying from Counterparty". "Log(Transaction Volume)" is the size of the
transaction. "Rating" captures the numerical equivalent of the bond rating, with higher number capturing riskier bonds. "Market Share" is the fraction of bond i held
in inventory by seller s in the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding. The centrality measures are computed using the eigenvector centrality measure in
the previous quarter. Column (6) shows the most conservative specification which includes seller×month, buyer×month and industry×month fixed effects in addition
to week and bond fixed effects. Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote
significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Fraction Selling to Counterparty
Fraction Buying from Counterparty

Log(Transaction Volume)
Rating
Market Share

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.697***
(0.0424)
-0.472***
(0.0277)

-0.727***
(0.0389)
-0.447***
(0.0234)

-0.725***
(0.0390)
-0.442***
(0.0231)

-0.514***
(0.0310)
-0.713***
(0.0333)

-0.332***
(0.0746)
-0.658***
(0.0883)

-0.333***
(0.0748)
-0.654***
(0.0967)

-0.0812***
(0.00509)
0.0153***
(0.00210)
1.543***
(0.278)

-0.0581***
(0.00449)
0.0180***
(0.00571)
0.910**
(0.354)

-0.0578***
(0.00452)
0.0185***
(0.00598)
0.903**
(0.353)

-0.0601***
(0.00445)
0.0204***
(0.00597)
0.958**
(0.375)
0.272
(0.196)
-2.031***
(0.167)

-0.0534***
(0.00514)
0.0258***
(0.00433)
0.630
(0.391)

-0.0532***
(0.00542)
0.0261***
(0.00477)
0.622
(0.408)

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

366,748
0.285

366,748
0.286

Seller Network Centrality
Buyer Network Centrality

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Industry × Month FE
Seller × Month FE
Buyer × Month FE
Observations
R-squared

397,419
0.033

397,102
0.069

397,102
0.070

375,889
0.072

Table 5
Spreads in Turbulent Times
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spread with the existing of bilateral relationships between seller and buyer and to their network centrality.
The sample includes bond transactions for the period 2005-2011 as reported in an enhanced version of TRACE. "Fraction Selling to Counterparty" is the fraction
of sales of this seller to this buyer computed in the previous quarter. Similarly for the "Fraction Buying from Counterparty". VIX is the volatility index as provided
by CBOE. We also control for the bond rating, the market share and the log of the transaction size interacted with the VIX. The centrality measures are computed
using the eigenvector centrality measure in the previous quarter. Panel B reports the coefficient estimates relating the spread with the existing of bilateral
relationships between seller and buyer and to their network centrality for three time periods: January 2005-December 2006 (Column 1), January 2007-August 2008
(Column 2) and September 2008-July 2009 (Column 3). Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in
parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A
Fraction Selling to Counterparty × VIX
Fraction Buying from Counterparty × VIX

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.435***
(0.0402)
-0.0542**
(0.0230)

-0.431***
(0.0392)
-0.0406*
(0.0226)

-0.442***
(0.0399)
-0.0376*
(0.0222)

-0.237***
(0.0386)
-0.210***
(0.0330)

-0.219***
(0.0390)
-0.216***
(0.0326)

-0.228***
(0.0391)
-0.215***
(0.0324)

1.078***
(0.212)
-1.085***
(0.183)

1.262***
(0.211)
-1.222***
(0.176)

1.253***
(0.214)
-1.250***
(0.181)

Seller Network Centrality × VIX
Buyer Network Centrality × VIX

Fraction Selling to Counterparty
Fraction Buying from Counterparty

-0.743***
(0.0380)
-0.466***
(0.0263)

-0.763***
(0.0344)
-0.442***
(0.0220)

-0.761***
(0.0347)
-0.439***
(0.0217)

-0.513***
(0.0359)
-0.762***
(0.0328)
-0.248
(0.180)
-2.435***
(0.164)

-0.555***
(0.0313)
-0.692***
(0.0294)
0.267
(0.169)
-1.981***
(0.136)

-0.551***
(0.0312)
-0.690***
(0.0291)
0.279*
(0.168)
-1.993***
(0.136)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

397,389
0.035

397,072
0.071

397,072
0.072

376,171
0.041

375,859
0.075

375,859
0.077

Seller Network Centrality
Buyer Network Centrality

Week Fixed Effects
Controls×VIX
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Industry × Month FE
Observations
R-squared

Panel B
(1)

(2)

Jan 2005-Dec2006 Jan 2007- Aug2008
Fraction Selling to Counterparty
Fraction Buying from Counterparty
Seller Network Centrality
Buyer Network Centrality

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Controls
Observations
R-squared

(3)

Sep 2008July2009

-0.428***
(0.0572)
-0.397***
(0.0302)
0.411
(0.259)
-0.953***
(0.179)

-0.387***
(0.0434)
-0.517***
(0.0388)
0.588**
(0.255)
-1.407***
(0.192)

-1.211***
(0.112)
-1.176***
(0.0897)
3.383***
(0.648)
-4.138***
(0.505)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

75,898
0.083

59,522
0.090

70,347
0.132

Table 6
Network Structure and Turbulent Times
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spreads with the type of counterparty. The sample in Columns (1)-(4) includes bond transactions for the period 2005-2011 as reported
in an enhanced version of TRACE. "Core-Periphery" is a dummy equal to one if the seller is a core dealer and the buyer is a peripheral dealer, while "Periphery-Periphery" identifies
transactions between dealers in the periphery, and "Periphery-Core" is a dummy equal to one for transactions where the seller is in the periphery and the buyer is in the core. The
comparison group are interdealer transactions between core dealers. VIX is the volatility index as provided by CBOE. We also control for the the log of the transaction size, the bond rating
and the market share interacted with the VIX. Columns (5)-(7) reports the coefficient estimates relating the spread with the type of counterparty for three distinct time periods: January 2005December 2006 (Column 5), January 2007-August 2008 (Column 6) and September 2008-July 2009 (Column 7). Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week
level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Core-Periphery × VIX
Periphery-Core × VIX
Periphery-Periphery × VIX

Core-Periphery
Periphery-Periphery
Periphery-Core

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Controls×VIX
Industry × Month FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

All Bonds

All Bonds

Investment Grade
Bonds

Non-Investment
Grade Bonds

Jan 2005Dec2006

Jan 2007Aug2008

Sep 2008July2009

0.145***
(0.0193)
-0.0281
(0.0179)
0.0373**
(0.0173)

0.146***
(0.0201)
-0.0305*
(0.0180)
0.0373**
(0.0174)

0.143***
(0.0204)
-0.0581***
(0.0218)
0.0406**
(0.0196)

0.203***
(0.0427)
0.0439
(0.0311)
0.0591*
(0.0348)

0.247***
(0.0140)
0.0802***
(0.0152)
0.143***
(0.0143)

0.248***
(0.0142)
0.0793***
(0.0152)
0.146***
(0.0143)

0.211***
(0.0125)
0.0729***
(0.0179)
0.109***
(0.0144)

0.373***
(0.0368)
0.129***
(0.0272)
0.228***
(0.0346)

0.0710***
(0.0174)
-0.00613
(0.0226)
0.0633***
(0.0206)

0.169***
(0.0216)
-0.0118
(0.0189)
0.0520**
(0.0207)

0.464***
(0.0484)
-0.0175
(0.0572)
0.136**
(0.0555)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

424,529
0.064

424,529
0.065

295,815
0.080

128,658
0.067

81,966
0.082

62,125
0.088

75,119
0.115

Table 7
Spreads and Dealer D's Collapse
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spread with the existing of bilateral relationships between seller and Dealer D. The sample period is the third and fourth quarter of 2008. "Fraction of Purchase Transactions with Dealer
D" is the fraction of bonds purchased by seller i from Dealer D averaged over 2007. "Post" is a dummy equal to one after the Dealer D' default. We control for the log of the size of the transaction, the bond rating, and the fraction of bond i
held in inventory by seller s in the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding. All columns include both week and bond fixed effects. Seller and buyer fixed effects are sequentially included in Columns (3) and (4). Columns (5) is the
most conservative specification which includes seller×month and buyer×month fixed effects. "Fraction of Sale Transactions with Dealer D" is the fraction of sales of this seller to this buyer in 2007 and its interaction with Post is included in
columns (6)-(10). Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Fraction of Purchase Transactions with Dealer D × Post
Fraction of Purchase Transactions with Dealer D

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-4.790***
(1.089)
0.706
(1.054)

-5.151***
(1.204)
-1.214
(1.113)

-4.008***
(1.030)

-4.320***
(1.058)

-3.208
(3.096)

-6.528*
(3.492)
-4.200**
(1.914)

-5.355*
(3.009)
-6.226***
(1.984)

-8.145***
(2.800)

-8.104**
(2.910)

-21.93***
(5.161)

-2.343***
(0.237)
-0.464***
(0.0873)

-1.003***
(0.256)
-0.546***
(0.0664)

0.00630
(0.425)
-1.067**
(0.385)

0.0778
(0.509)
-1.496***
(0.446)

-0.988***
(0.256)
-0.546***
(0.0664)

0.0386
(0.0347)
-1.081***
(0.387)

0.116
(0.506)
-1.509***
(0.447)

6.619***
(1.759)
1.899
(3.682)

-2.305***
(0.237)
-0.485***
(0.0867)
6.599***
(1.749)
0.166
(2.914)

4.847
(2.995)

4.442
(3.199)

21.82**
(8.009)

Fraction Selling to Counterparty
Fraction Buying from Counterparty
Fraction of Sale Transactions with Dealer D
Fraction of Sale Transactions with Dealer D × Post

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Controls
Seller Fixed Effect
Buyer Fixed Effect
Seller × Month Fixed Effects
Buyer × Month Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

29,145
0.143

28,074
0.157

28,027
0.246

27,903
0.291

27,396
0.371

29,145
0.144

28,074
0.158

28,027
0.247

27,903
0.291

27,396
0.371

Table 8
Changes in Dealers' Inventories
This table investigates how the dealers' inventory changes around the collapse of Dealer D for bonds that
experience different degree of selling pressure by the clients, which is defined as the amount sold by
clients to dealers normalized by the amount outstanding. The sample period in Columns (1) and (2) is a
three-month window aroung Dealer D's collapse, while in Column (3) it is a one-month before and after
this event. The dependent variable is the dealer's inventory normalized by the standard deviation of the
inventory for each dealer. "Post" is a dummy equal to one after the Dealer D' default. "Top Tercile
Selling Pressure" is a dummy variable equal to one for the bonds that experience the highest selling
pressure by the clients. "Middle Tercile Selling Pressure" is a dummy variable equal to one for the bonds
that experience an intermediate selling pressure by the clients.The omitted category is the indicator for
the bonds in the bottom tercile. All specifications include dealer and week fixed effects. Robust standard
errors clustered at the dealer level in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%,
*=10%).

Dealer's Inventory
Top Tercile Selling Pressure × Post

-0.269**
(0.104)

-0.302***
(0.105)

-0.205*
(0.116)

Middle Tercile Selling Pressure × Post

-0.248**
(0.0968)

-0.251**
(0.0983)

-0.0331
(0.101)

Top Tercile Selling Pressure

-0.0952
(0.0692)

-0.160**
(0.0730)

-0.148
(0.114)

Middle Tercile Selling Pressure

0.0326
(0.0609)

0.000412
(0.0624)

0.0673
(0.106)

Post

-0.174*
(0.0907)

-0.714***
(0.182)

0.122
(0.123)

+/- 3 months
N

+/- 3 months
Y

+/- 4 weeks
Y

6,711
0.033

6,711
0.257

1,937
0.317

Time Period around Dealer D's Collapse
Dealer and Week Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Table 9
Trading Chains after Dealer D's Collapse
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the lenght of the trading chain with Dealer D's default. The
sample period is the third and fourth quarter of 2008. "Post" is a dummy equal to one after the Dealer D'
default. "Log(Transaction Volume)" is the size of the transaction. "Rating" captures the numerical equivalent of
the bond rating, with higher number capturing riskier bonds. "Market Share" is the fraction of bond i held in
inventory by seller s in the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding. All columns include both bond
and week fixed effects. Column (2) includes also industry×month fixed effects. Column (3) focus on
transactions where the seller is in the core (top 30 dealers), while Column (4) focus on transactions where the
seller is in the periphery. Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are
reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Seller is in the
All Bonds
All Bonds
Seller is in the Core
Periphery
Post

0.0280***
(0.00937)

0.0277**
(0.0101)

0.0541***
(0.0109)

0.0153
(0.0220)

Log(Transaction Volume)

-0.0341***
(0.00469)
-0.00515
(0.0103)
0.561
(0.522)
-4.118***
(0.334)

-0.0342***
(0.00460)
-0.00524
(0.0101)
0.570
(0.518)
-4.124***
(0.333)

-0.0404***
(0.00749)
0.00274
(0.0100)
-0.526
(0.713)
2.076***
(0.617)

-0.00849
(0.0104)
-0.0213
(0.0170)
0.600
(0.800)
-1.397
(0.868)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

125,527
0.193

125,527
0.193

69,099
0.150

56,102
0.275

Rating
Market Share
Seller Network Centrality

CUSIP Fixed Effects
Week Fixed Effects
Industry × Month Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Table 10
Spreads over Trading Chains
This table investigates how the spread charged over the intermediation chain depending on the position of the dealer in the chain. The
first position is always captured by the buyer, who is the client. The benchmark is then the spread charged by the intermediary in the
second position. The sample period is the third and fourth quarter of 2008. Transaction controls include the size of the transaction, as
well as the numerical equivalent of the bond rating, the market share and the type of transaction, i.e. if it is a core-core, core-periphery
or periphery-core transaction. Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in
parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Third Intermediary in the Chain
Fourth Intermediary in the Chain
Fifth Intermediary in the Chain

Week Fixed Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.271***
(0.0307)
-0.326***
(0.0387)
-0.383***
(0.0632)

-0.264***
(0.0291)
-0.323***
(0.0385)
-0.377***
(0.0629)

-0.310***
(0.0297)
-0.307***
(0.0402)
-0.313***
(0.0587)

-0.262***
(0.0285)
-0.240***
(0.0350)
-0.231***
(0.0596)

-0.149***
(0.0218)
-0.167***
(0.0298)
-0.181***
(0.0643)

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

112,401
0.044

112,401
0.047

111,997
0.139

106,155
0.139

106,039
0.197

CUSIP Fixed Effects
Transaction Controls
Seller Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Table 11
Dealers' Inventory and Change in Trading Chains
This table investigates how the dealers' inventory changes around the collapse of Dealer D for bonds for
which the change in trading chain is above or below the median change. The sample period in Columns (1)
and (2) is a three-month window aroung Dealer D's collapse, while in Column (3) it is a one-month before
and after this event. The dependent variable is the dealer's inventory normalized by the standard deviation of
the inventory for each dealer. "Post" is a dummy equal to one after the Dealer D' default. All specifications
include dealer and week fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the dealer level in parenthesis.
Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Dealer's Inventory
Above Median Change Chain Length × Post
Above Median Change Chain Length
Post

Time Period around Lehman
Dealer and Week Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

-0.291***
(0.0718)
0.0219
(0.0530)
-0.182**
(0.0847)

-0.297***
(0.0757)
0.00262
(0.0558)
-0.526***
(0.0857)

-0.226**
(0.0709)
0.106
(0.0963)
0.180**
(0.0604)

+/- 3 months
N

+/- 3 months
Y

+/- 4 weeks
Y

6,731
0.027

6,731
0.261

1,939
0.335

Table A.0
Additional Summary Statistics
The table reports additional descriptive statistics for the main variables employed in our analysis. In the Panel A, we present the main bond characteristics: the
bonds' credit quality, issue size, age and maturity, as provided by a confidential version of TRACE for the period 2005-2011 for the three different samples.
The first set report the statistics for the full data sample. The remaining two sets of rows report the summary statistics for the main estimation sample which
restricts attention to buy and sell transactions observed within an hour from each other, and for the sample used in the robustness checks in the appendix.
Panel B provides summary statistics for these characteristics and for the transactions, such as the profit margins, the volume, the holding period and the seller's
centrality measure.

Panel A
Full Sample
By Bonds
Rating
Size
Age
Maturity
By Trade
Rating
Size
Age
Maturity
Estimation Sample
By Bonds
Rating
Size
Age
Maturity
By Trade
Rating
Size
Age
Maturity
Appendix Estimation Sample
By Bonds
Rating
Size
Age
Maturity
By Trade
Rating
Size
Age
Maturity

Mean

P1

BBB+
$21.0 M
2.9
9.6

D
$400
0

BBB
$93.1 M
3.9
11.8

D
$400
0

Median

P99

Std Dev

0.5

A$2.5 M
1.9
7.5

AAA
$798 M
78.5
100.2

$41.2 M
3.3
8.6

0.5

BBB+
$59.9 M
3.1
10

AAA
$798 M
82.0
100.2

$97.3 M
3.5
8.8

A$21.8 M
3.2
10.0

D
$16,700
0.0
1.0

A$2 M
2.1
8.0

AA+
$200 M
15.9
31.0

$41.8 M
3.4
8.7

BBB+
$76 M
4.1
11.7

D
$125,300
0.0
2.0

BBB
$49 M
3.2
10.0

AAA
$398 M
16.6
31.0

$90 M
3.7
8.2

A$21 M
3.1
9.8

D
$15,600
0.0
1.0

A
$1.7 M
2.1
7.8

AA
$ 199 M
15.7
31.0

$41 M
3.4
8.6

BBB+
$90 M
4.1
11.2

D
$208,200
0.0
3.0

BBB
$64 M
3.4
10.0

AAA
$398 M
16.4
30.5

$92 M
3.6
7.9

Panel B
Full Sample
By Bonds
Volume of Trade
Holding Period (days)
Average Spread
Centrality Measure
Number of Trades
Market Concentration
By Trade
Volume of Trade
Holding Period (days)
Average Profit Margin
Centrality Measure - Rank

Mean

P1

Median

P99

Std Dev

1,785.5
59.8
0.0189
44.6
920
54.3%

0.2
0
-0.7143
1
1
0%

90
37.2
0.0068
39.4
109
54.4%

250,000
1,454.4
99
844.9
138,271
100%

7,258.3
69.8
0.6269
30.8
3,527
22.8%

401
107
0.1056
41.7

0.24
0
0
1

25
16.8
0.0055
21

619,550
3,447
2926.928
1,152

1,777
214
0.6
64.4

1,565.1
0.6
59.1
170.3
0.6

4.3
-0.1
3.0
1.0
0.0

75.0
0.5
51.7
37.0
0.7

26,000.0
3.1
269.7
2,037.0
1.0

8,356.1
0.8
50.3
526.8
0.2

443.0
0.6
52.2

0.0
-1.2
1.0

25.0
0.2
25.0

5,850.0
4.5
554.0

2,156.2
1.4
94.3

984.8
0.3
56.5
1,142.4
0.6

4.3
-0.3
5.0
1.0
0.0

66.7
0.2
49.3
141.0
0.6

12,695.0
1.5
208.7
16,732.0
1.0

4,375.3
0.4
42.1
4,180.1
0.2

314.0
0.4
49.0

0.0
-3.6
1.0

20.0
0.2
20.0

5,000.0
5.8
554.0

1,509.3
1.3
95.9

Estimation Sample
By Bonds
Volume of Trade
Average Spread
Centrality Measure
Number of Trades
Market Concentration
By Trade
Volume of Trade
Average Profit Margin
Centrality Measure - Rank
Appendix Estimation Sample
By Bonds
Volume of Trade
Average Spread
Centrality Measure
Number of Trades
Market Concentration
By Trade
Volume of Trade
Average Profit Margin
Centrality Measure

Table A.1
Spreads: Clients vs Dealers
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spread (defined as the difference between sell and average buy price by other dealers in the same week for the same bond) with the type of buyer. The
sample includes bond transactions for the period 2005-2011 as reported in an enhanced version of TRACE. "Client Buyer" is a dummy equal to one if the buyer is a client. "Log(Transaction Volume)" is
the size of the transaction. "Rating" captures the numerical equivalent of the bond rating, with higher number capturing riskier bonds. "Market Share" is the fraction of bond i held in inventory by seller s in
the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding. Columns (6) and (7) divide the sample between investment grade and non-investment grade bonds, whereas Columns (8) and (9) differentiate
between sellers in the core or in the periphery. Column (5) shows the most conservative specification in which we control for week, bond, seller and industry×month fixed effects. Robust standard errors
double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All Bonds

Client Buyer

0.936***
(0.0279)

(8)

(9)

Investment
Grade Bonds

Non-Investment
Grade Bonds

Core Dealers

Periphery
Dealers

0.988***
(0.0268)

1.044***
(0.0283)

1.045***
(0.0283)

0.942***
(0.0317)

1.133***
(0.0414)

0.894***
(0.0281)

1.147***
(0.0317)

-0.0751***
(0.00414)

-0.0431***
(0.00452)
0.00506
(0.00339)
0.286***
(0.0933)

-0.0303***
(0.00345)
0.00621*
(0.00341)
0.518***
(0.0841)

-0.0304***
(0.00346)
0.00605*
(0.00347)
0.516***
(0.0843)

-0.0356***
(0.00451)
0.0180***
(0.00633)
0.243***
(0.0934)

-0.0643***
(0.0107)
0.00535
(0.00592)
0.466*
(0.263)

-0.0645***
(0.00499)
0.00822*
(0.00429)
0.370***
(0.130)

-0.00315
(0.00529)
0.00437
(0.00407)
-0.104
(0.119)

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

5,296,107
0.119

4,674,197
0.139

4,674,110
0.185

4,673,924
0.212

4,673,924
0.215

3,538,560
0.229

1,135,540
0.128

2,714,184
0.195

1,959,725
0.203

Rating
Market Share

Observations
R-squared

(7)

1.005***
(0.0285)

Log(Transaction Volume)

Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Seller Fixed Effects
Industry × Month Fixed Effects

(6)

Table A.2
Spreads and Network Structure
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spreads (defined as the difference between sell and average buy price by other dealers in the same week for the same bond) with the type of
counterparty. The sample includes bond transactions for the period 2005-2011 as reported in an enhanced version of TRACE. "Core-Periphery" is a dummy equal to one if the seller is a core dealer and the
buyer is a peripheral dealer, while "Periphery-Periphery" identifies transactions between dealers in the periphery, and "Periphery-Core" is a dummy equal to one for transactions where the seller is in the
periphery and the buyer is in the core. The comparison group are interdealer transactions between core dealers. Controls include: "Log(Transaction Volume)" which is the size of the transaction, "Rating"
which captures the numerical equivalent of the bond rating, and "Market Share" which is the fraction of bond i held in inventory by seller s in the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding.
Column (4) shows the most conservative specification in which we control for week, bond, and industry×month fixed effects. Columns (5) and (6) divide the sample between investment grade and noninvestment grade bonds. Columns (7)-(9) perform a similar analysis but controlling for the interaction between the type of transaction (i.e. Core-Periphery, Periphery-Periphery and Periphery-Core) with the
volatility index VIX as provided by CBOE. In these columns we also control for the the log of the transaction size, the bond rating and the market share interacted with the VIX. Robust standard errors
double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All Bonds

Core-Periphery
Periphery-Periphery
Periphery-Core

0.110***
(0.00950)
0.00233
(0.00750)
-0.172***
(0.0120)

0.0884***
(0.00794)
-0.0173**
(0.00775)
-0.193***
(0.0119)

0.0883***
(0.00810)
-0.0440***
(0.00815)
-0.212***
(0.0126)

0.0893***
(0.00809)
-0.0435***
(0.00808)
-0.213***
(0.0126)

(5)

(6)

(1)

(3)

(4)

Investment
Grade Bonds

Non-Investment
Grade Bonds

All Bonds

Investment Grade
Bonds

Non-Investment
Grade Bonds

0.0973***
(0.00868)
-0.0369***
(0.00864)
-0.206***
(0.0125)

0.0513***
(0.0151)
-0.0792***
(0.0186)
-0.248***
(0.0230)

0.247***
(0.0140)
0.0802***
(0.0152)
0.143***
(0.0143)

0.0834***
(0.00641)
-0.211***
(0.0104)
-0.0393***
(0.00834)

0.0587***
(0.0177)
-0.305***
(0.0233)
-0.0978***
(0.0188)

0.0441***
(0.00891)
-0.160***
(0.0136)
-0.0218**
(0.0105)

0.0490***
(0.00828)
-0.142***
(0.0143)
0.00478
(0.0103)

0.0220
(0.0296)
-0.253***
(0.0251)
-0.126***
(0.0220)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3,171,700
0.027

2,401,220
0.033

770,467
0.027

Core-Periphery × VIX
Periphery-Core × VIX
Periphery-Periphery × VIX

Controls
Controls×VIX
Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Industry × Month Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

3,613,400
0.009

3,172,063
0.012

3,171,960
0.022

3,171,960
0.026

2,401,439
0.027

770,508
0.019

Table A.3
Spreads and Bilateral Relationships
This table reports the coefficient estimates relating the spreads (defined as the difference between sell and average buy price by other dealers in the same week for the same bond) with the existing of bilateral relationships
between seller and buyer and to their network centrality. The sample includes bond transactions for the period 2005-2011 as reported in an enhanced version of TRACE. "Fraction Selling to Counterparty" is the fraction
of sales of this seller to this buyer computed in the previous quarter. Similarly for the "Fraction Buying from Counterparty". "Log(Transaction Volume)" is the size of the transaction. "Rating" captures the numerical
equivalent of the bond rating, with higher number capturing riskier bonds. "Market Share" is the fraction of bond i held in inventory by seller s in the previous quarter normalized by the bond outstanding. The centrality
measures are computed using the eigenvector centrality measure in the previous quarter. VIX is the volatility index as provided by CBOE. We also control for the bond rating, the market share and the log of the
transaction size interacted with the VIX. Robust standard errors double clustered at both the CUSIP and the week level are reported in parenthesis. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Fraction Selling to Counterparty
Fraction Buying from Counterparty

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.650***
(0.0286)
0.595***
(0.0231)

-0.674***
(0.0294)
0.626***
(0.0244)

-0.676***
(0.0295)
0.629***
(0.0242)

-0.367***
(0.0164)
0.332***
(0.0162)

-0.371***
(0.0167)
0.359***
(0.0166)

-0.396***
(0.0173)
0.337***
(0.0156)
-0.126***
(0.0244)
-0.0273*
(0.0160)
1.149***
(0.139)
-0.959***
(0.121)

-0.397***
(0.0177)
0.364***
(0.0160)
-0.130***
(0.0246)
-0.0327**
(0.0157)
1.210***
(0.140)
-0.987***
(0.120)

-0.398***
(0.0178)
0.366***
(0.0159)
-0.130***
(0.0247)
-0.0319**
(0.0158)
1.237***
(0.140)
-0.986***
(0.121)

1.983***
(0.149)
-1.295***
(0.0995)

2.239***
(0.156)
-1.273***
(0.105)

2.011***
(0.118)
-1.242***
(0.0820)

2.282***
(0.124)
-1.209***
(0.0846)

2.298***
(0.124)
-1.213***
(0.0847)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

2,819,921
0.031

2,819,779
0.025

2,819,672
0.037

2,819,672
0.040

Fraction Selling to Counterparty × VIX
Fraction Buying from Counterparty × VIX
Seller Network Centrality × VIX
Buyer Network Centrality × VIX

Seller Network Centrality
Buyer Network Centrality

Controls
Controls×VIX
Week Fixed Effects
CUSIP Fixed Effects
Industry × Month FE
Seller × Month FE
Buyer × Month FE
Observations
R-squared

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

2,970,946
0.015

2,970,842
0.025

2,970,842
0.028

2,820,028
0.020

