NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR SUPPLY EFFECTS OF OCCUPATIONAL REGULATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE NURSE LICENSURE COMPACT
Christina DePasquale
Kevin Stange
Working Paper 22344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22344

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We are grateful to Thomas Buchmueller, Sam Kleiner, Francine Lafontaine, Yesim Orhun, Sarah
Stith, and seminar participants at the Rollins School of Public Health, University of Virginia
School of Law, Ford School of Public Policy, ASHEcon 2014, APPAM 2014, ASSA Annual
Meetings 2016, and SOLE 2016 for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Christina DePasquale and Kevin Stange. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Supply Effects of Occupational Regulation: Evidence from the Nurse Licensure Compact
Christina DePasquale and Kevin Stange
NBER Working Paper No. 22344
June 2016
JEL No. J21,J44,J61
ABSTRACT
There is concern that licensure requirements impede mobility of licensed professionals to areas of
high demand. Nursing has not been immune to this criticism, especially in the context of perceived
nurse shortages and large expected future demand. The Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC) was introduced
to solve this problem by permitting registered nurses to practice across state lines without obtaining
additional licensure. We exploit the staggered adoption of the NLC to examine whether a reduction
in licensure-induced barriers alters the nurse labor market. Using data on over 1.8 million nurses and
other health care workers we find no evidence that the labor supply or mobility of nurses increases
following the adoption of the NLC, even among the residents of counties bordering other NLC states
who are potentially most affected by the NLC. This suggests that nationalizing occupational licensing
will not substantially reduce labor market frictions.

Christina DePasquale
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Dr.
Atlanta, GA, 30322
depasquale@emory.edu
Kevin Stange
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
5236 Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
kstange@umich.edu

1 Introduction
Occupational licensing is pervasive in the US and Europe. Nearly 29% of the US
workforce requires a federal- or state-granted license to practice or work in their occupation
(Kleiner and Krueger 2008; Thornton and Timmons, 2013) and over 800 occupations are licensed
by at least one state (Kleiner 2000). While licensing aims to protect consumers and ensure safety
by certifying provider quality, it may also create rents for incumbent members of the licensed
occupation by restricting supply.
One mechanism through which licensing could restrict supply is by impeding geographic
mobility. Since licensing and certification is primarily at the state level, workers typically must
obtain separate licenses for each state in which they work and a new license whenever they move
between states. Such barriers to mobility may prevent workers from seeking jobs across state lines,
misallocating workers geographically and depressing employment and labor force participation.
Moreover, licensed professionals may be less likely to move to areas of high demand. Such
barriers may be problematic, as interstate migration is historically an important mechanism
through which labor markets adjust to regional shocks (Blanchard and Katz, 1992) and recent
analysis suggests mobility’s role has decreased (Dao, Furceeri, Loungani, 2014). More generally,
licensing may have contributed to the steady reduction in internal migration in the U.S. over the
past several decades, but this channel not been explored (Molloy, Smith, Wozniak, 2011).
Policy-makers have recently taken note of the potential economic and human costs of
licensing-induced barriers. The Department of Treasury Office of Economic Policy, the Council
of Economic Advisers, and the Department of Labor recently released a report detailing best
practices for occupational licensing (U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Economic Policy,
Council of Economic Advisers, and the Department of Labor, 2015). The report acknowledges
that while licensing improves service quality, it can create economic inefficiencies by restricting
worker mobility, reducing employment opportunities for excluded workers, and increasing costs
to consumers. Military families are particularly vulnerable, both because of their high rates of
involuntary movement and the large share of military spouses that are teachers and registered
nurses, both of which require licenses (U.S. Department of Treasury and U.S. Department of
Defense, 2012). The report suggests that states should try to harmonize requirements and
recognize licenses from other states.
In this paper, we examine the impact of such a policy on the labor market for nurses,

2

exploiting a unique policy change that made it substantially easier for nurses to work and, to a
lesser extent, move across state lines. Nursing is an important occupation to focus on, as the
availability of nurses is important for community health, hospital care, and disaster relief.
Furthermore, an already acute nursing shortage is expected to increase over the next decade, as
more nurses retire and the aging population increases demand for health care services (Buerhaus,
Staiger, Auerbach, 2009). Insurance expansions embodied in the Affordable Care Act may only
exacerbate this shortage. Removing licensing barriers is one mechanism to better utilize the
existing supply of trained nurses. The ability for technology to improve health care delivery is also
hampered by cross-state licensing barriers for health care workers, which makes telemedicine
difficult legally (Sulentic 1991) as health providers must be licensed in the states in which their
patients reside.
Surprisingly, compelling evidence on the impact of licensing on the geographic scope of
labor markets is thin. Several studies, dating back a half-century, document a cross-sectional
correlation between licensing restrictions and interstate mobility of professionals (Holen, 1965;
Pashigian, 1979; Conrad and Dolan,1980; Kleiner, Gay, and Greene, 1982). A challenge with this
cross-sectional analysis is that licensure practices may correlate with other unobserved state-level
attributes that influence migration. Peterson, Pandya, LeBang (2014) address this problem by
exploiting changes in residency training requirements for immigrant physicians within states over
time, finding that states that impose more stringent requirements receive fewer immigrant
physicians. We add to this literature by examining a recent policy change, the Nurse Licensure
Compact (NLC), with a compelling research design that lets us control for several sources of bias
that may confound previous estimates. This study is the first to provide direct evidence on the
likely effects of nationalizing licensure for a large and important occupation.
The NLC was introduced to reduce licensing burdens by permitting registered nurses
living in member states to practice across state lines. It also made licensure easier to obtain for
nurses moving between member states. Twenty-five states have implemented the NLC since its
inception in 2000 and another six states currently have NLC legislation pending. We exploit the
staggered adoption of the NLC across states and over time to examine whether a reduction in
licensure-induced barriers is associated with a greater labor force participation and hours worked,
greater likelihood of cross-state commuting, and longer travel time to work among nurses. We
estimate difference-in-differences models, comparing nurses in states adopting the NLC to those

3

in states that do not. While this controls for time-invariant characteristics of states that may
correlate with both labor market outcomes and licensure laws, state-specific time-varying factors
may still bias estimates of the policy. A unique feature of our setting is that we are able to use
non-nurse health workers (who are not affected by the NLC) to construct triple difference models
to control for any health care labor market changes that may happen to correlate with NLC
adoption. We find that this feature is important, as results from the triple difference models are
different than those from the basic difference-in-differences approach for some outcomes,
suggesting a time-varying source of bias in the latter. Since many workers may be unaffected by
the Compact since they do not live near another Compact state, we also implement a similar
research design focused on residents of counties that border other states. Even within NLC states,
some counties share a border with another NLC state, while others do not.
Using data on over 1.8 million nurses and other health care workers from the 1990 and
2000 Census and the 2001-2012 American Community Surveys, we find no effect of NLC
adoption on a variety of labor market outcomes of nurses such as labor force particpation,
employment levels, hours worked, earnings, and likelihood of working across state lines. This null
effect persists even when focusing on those workers most likely to be affected by the NLC. That is,
we estimate the treatment effect of living in a border county in a Compact state that also borders
another Compact state and find no effect on the same labor market outcomes. We do find positive
effects of NLC adoption on travel time to work for nurses living in MSAs, but discount this finding
as we do not see a similar increase those living in border counties. We also find minimal effect of
the NLC on workers’ overall likelihood of moving across state lines, though estimates specifically
for young and mobile workers are consistent with greater mobility rates, though these estimates are
imprecise. We supplement our main analysis with event-study models to test if there are
systematic pre-trends in workforce characteristics or labor supply outcomes before the
introduction of the NLC. We find little evidence to suggest that pre-trends may be biasing our
difference-in-difference estimates nor is there any evidence that NLC adoption is associated with
greater labor supply. Finally, we see no effect of NLC exposure on the aggregate number of nurse
hours worked at hospitials using hospital-level data from the American Hospital Association
survey.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide a simple conceptual
framework, background on nurse licensing and the NLC, and a review of the literature. Next, our

4

methods and data are described in Section 3 and results are discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section
5 offers concluding remarks.

2 Framework and Background
A. Conceptual Framework
We frame our analysis with a simple static model of individuals’ joint work and migration
decisions. The labor market is characterized by three geographic areas: the current home state (H),
an area in a nearby state that is commutable without moving (N), and a distant labor market in
another state that would require moving to work in (F). Workers receive wage offers in the three
markets each period {𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖,𝐻𝐻 , 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖,𝑁𝑁 , 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖,𝐹𝐹 } . Workers also receive random draws of the utility
associated with living in the home state (H) and the alternative far state (F): {𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝐻𝐻 , 𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝐹𝐹 }. These

shocks include things like job offers received by spouses, health shocks of distant family members,
and other non-job factors influencing mobility decisions.
Commuting to a nearby state requires commute cost 𝐷𝐷𝑁𝑁 , whereas moving to the far state

imposes a moving cost 𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹 . Finally, professionals working in the nearby state or moving to the far

state must pay a cost L to obtain an occupational license in that new state before they can work.

We view the adoption of the Compact as an elimination of L, since it permits nurses to work across
state lines and to be easily licensed after moving between Compact states. This will have several
impacts on the migration and labor supply choices of licensed professionals:
•

Migration. Workers will move if max{𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹 − 𝐿𝐿, 0} + 𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 > max{𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝐷𝐷𝑁𝑁 −

𝐿𝐿, 0} + 𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 . Note that moving may be desirable even if the financial returns are not high if
the utility draw associated with moving is high enough. For instance, workers may move to

take care of an elderly relative or due to a spousal job change. We expect that elimination
of L most likely increases cross-state migration. However, a reduction of licensing barriers
also increases the value of working from the home state (by increasing the value of
cross-state commuting), which may partially diminish the incentive to move.
•

Employment and labor supply. Workers choosing to remain in the home state will work if
max{𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝐷𝐷𝑁𝑁 − 𝐿𝐿} > 0 while those who choose to move to the new state will work

if 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝐿𝐿 > 0. Thus all workers, regardless of their tenure in a given locale, will have a
greater incentive to work when cross-state licensing barriers are minimal, though the
specific mechanism is different. Non-mobile workers will increase employment by

5

accepting opportunities in nearby states (or telecommuting). Nurses that moved for
non-job reasons (e.g. a high 𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) will be more likely to work if L is low. We generalize this
intuition to other measures of labor supply on the extensive (e.g. labor force participation)
and intensive (e.g. hours worked, wage income received last year) margins.
•

Cross-state commuting. Workers that do not move will work in a nearby state (rather than
the current home state) if 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝐷𝐷𝑁𝑁 − 𝐿𝐿 > 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 . Thus reducing licensing barriers should
directly increase rates of cross-state commuting.

•

Aggregate labor supply. Finally, we examine measures of aggregate use of nurses (e.g.
total hours worked at hospitals) as a summary measure of the combined effects of
migration and extensive/intensive labor supply responses. Since a reduction in L reduces
the hiring costs associated with licensed workers, we expect aggregate utilization of nurses
to increase.

We examine each of these aspects in our empirical work. There are other aspects that we do not
consider but are important to keep in mind. First, the current licensing regime may affect the
decision to enter the nursing profession. Second, the reduction or elimination of licensing barriers
may change the shape of the labor supply curve, altering the wage and employment consequences
of local labor demand shocks. More specifically, we would expect the labor supply curve to flatten
and to become more elastic. Furthermore, as the NLC is adopted, we may see a reduction in the
variability in wages due to this flatter supply and a consequent diminishing effect of demand
shocks on wages. While exploring these predictions is beyond the scope of this paper, we plan to
do so in subsequent work.

B. Nurse Licensure and the Nurse Licensure Compact
Obtaining a license
In 1947, New York became the first state to require mandatory licenses for nurses.
Today, every state requires a nurse to obtain a license to practice within the state (Benefiel, 2011).
Obtaining a license typically requires a degree from an accredited program (certificate, associates
degree, or bachelor’s degree), passing a licensing examination, and meeting requirements that are
set by each state individually.

6

Until 1994, exam requirements differed across states. With a call for uniformity across
states (Barnum, 1997), the National Council of States Boards of Nursing ntroduced the computer
adaptive test known as the National Council Licensure Examination (NCLEX) for registered
nurses and licensed practical nurses.
Besides an examination, there are monetary costs associated with obtaining an initial
license in a state. For example, in the state of California, the examination registration fee is $200
plus the fee for verification of licensure ($60) plus the application fee of $100.
When an already licensed nurse moves to a new state he or she is required to apply for
“licensure by endorsement” which allows for the transferring of state licenses. The costs
associated with “licecnsure by endorsement” varies across states in terms of time and money. For
instance, application fees range from under $50 in Colorado to over $200 in Florida. These
application fees include a temporary license while nurses wait for their permanent license to be
issued. The wait time and validity of these licenses also varies substantially across states. Texas
nurses need only wait 10 days for a temporary licensed to be issued yet in California nurses may
need to wait up to 6 weeks in order to begin practicing. Georgia, on the other hand, does not issue
any temporary licenses. These temporary licenses are typically valid anywhere from 30 days in
Virginia to as much as 6 months in California, North Carolina, and Kentucky. Nurses are usually
not required to retake the National Council Licensure Examination (NCLEX) if they have already
passed an equivalent exam in another state (U.S. Department of the Treasury, U.S. Department of
Defense, 2012).

The Nurse Licensure Compact
The Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC) was first passed in 1999 by Utah and Arkansas, and
first implemented by Maryland, Texas, Utah, and Wisconsin in 2000. The compact allows a nurse
licensed in one NLC-member state to practice in other NLC states without obtaining a separate
license for the other state. Each state that is a member mutually recognizes other member states.
Since its introduction, 25 states have implemented the Nurse Licensure Compact and another six
states currently have NLC legislation pending. 1 Figure 1 depicts the number of states that are part
of the NLC over time. While about half of the states joined the Compact in its first two years of
existence, an average of 1-2 states per year have continued to join the compact since. Figure 2
1

Table A1 in the Appendix lists the date of implementation for each Compact state.

7

identifies the Compact states in 2000 (its first year) and 2012 (the last year of our analysis). It is
worth noting that each member state currently has another member state that is adjacent to it
except for Rhode Island (although Massachusetts currently has legislation pending).
In order for a state to join the NLC, they must meet four requirements. First, the bill
language drafted by state legislators must mirror that of the “NLC Model Legislation,” which is
provided by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing. The model legislation is attached as
Appendix B. Second, the state legislature must pass the legislation. Third, the State Board of
Nursing must implement the Compact. 2 Finally, the state must pay $3000 per year to keep their
membership in the NLC active. The NLC applies to registered nurses (RNs), licensed practical
(LPNs) and licensed vocational nurses (LVNs) only. 3 To be eligible for a multistate license, a
nurse’s primary state of residence must be a compact-member state. As long as a nurse declares a
compact state as a primary state of residence and the nurse is in good standing, the license
automatically becomes a multistate license and the nurse can practice physically or electronically
in other compact states. If a nurse works in a compact states but lives (i.e. has a primary state of
residence) in a non-compact state, he/she is not eligible for a multistate license.
If a compact-eligible nurse permanently relocates to another compact state, that is, the
nurse obtains a new driver’s license, votes, or files taxes in another state, the nurse must apply for
licensure by endorsement and declare the new state as his/her primary state of residence. This must
be completed within 30 to 90 days of moving (depending on the state), although some states are
currently in the process of amending the amount of time a nurse may practice with a license issued
by another state. By contrast, nurses moving from or to a non-Compact state must generally obtain
a license in the new state before they can practice in the new state. Thus movement between
Compact states provides nurses with a grace period of one to three months in which they can work
that is not experienced by residents of non-Compact states. Figure 3 provides a flow chart
explaining the process through which a new nursing graduate obtains either a single-state or
multi-state license.
Advocates of the NLC cite five main benefits. First, The NLC clarifies the authority to
practice for many nurses currently engaged in telenursing or interstate practice. Second, the NLC
provides greater mobility for nurses. (They cite the U.S. Department of Health and Human
2

The takes approximately one year from the time the bill is passed.
Advanced Practical Registered Nurses (APRNs) do not fall under the NLC, but instead have their own
separate APRN Compact that provides for a multistate license.
3

8

Services Health Resources and Services Administration’s 2010 report, “Health Licensing Board
Report to Congress” as evidence.) Third, the NLC improves access to licensed nurses during a
disaster or other times of great need for qualified nursing services. Fourth, the NLC improves
access to nursing care. Finally, the NLC enhances discipline and information-sharing among
participating states.

C. Related Literature on Occupational Licensing
Relative to its prevalence, there is little research on the labor market effects of
occupational licensing and restrictions. 4 Prior work on the labor market effects have focused
primarily on wages, generally finding that restrictive licensing is associated with higher wages
(Thornton and Timmons, 2013). 5 Using unique data on the dental health of Air Force recruits,
Kleiner and Kudrle (2000) find that restrictive licensing increases dental prices and earnings of
dentists. Weeden (2002) finds that licensed occupations have higher wages, controlling for a
whole host of other individual- and occupation-specific determinants of earnings, such as the skill
and task requirements of the job and education level. Kugler and Sauer (2005) find very large
returns to acquiring an occupational license among immigrant physicians in Israel. A unique
feature of their study is that they exploit variation in licensing that is driven by a policy that assigns
immigrant physicians to different re-training regimes based on their experience. This represents an
advance over much of the prior literature, which simply compared licensed with similar unlicensed
occupations. More recently, Kleiner and Park (2010) and Kleiner, Marier, Won Park, and Wing
(2011) find that changes in occupational regulations for dental hygienists and nurse practitioners,
respectively, increase wages for these occupations.
While the evidence of licensing’s effect of wages is robust, there is little direct evidence on
whether reduced labor supply or mobility is the primary channel. Several studies document a
cross-sectional correlation between licensing restrictions and interstate mobility. Fifty years ago,
Holen (1965) found that the in-migration of dentists, lawyers, judges, physicians, and surgeons
was higher in states that had easier re-licensing. Pashigian (1979) found that the in-migration of

4

Kleiner (2000) and Kleiner (2006) provide an overview of much of the theoretical and empirical literature
on occupational regulation.
5
There is also a very small literature on the effect of licensing on provider and service quality (Kleiner and
Kudrle 2000; Angrist and Guryan, 2003; Sass, 2015) and output markets (Schaumans and Verboven, 2008;
Hotz and Xiao, 2011; Kleiner, Marier, Won Park, and Wing 2011; Stange, 2014).

9

lawyers was hampered by restrictive licensing. Kleiner, Gay, and Greene (1982) examined
mobility in 14 different occupations as it relates to licensure restrictiveness. They found that states
with less restrictive licensing and easier endorsement from other states have higher rates of
in-migration. Thus restrictive licensing creates a barrier to mobility, misallocating workers across
states. Thornton and Timmons (2013) add to this evidence by showing that the occupational
regulation of massage therapist through state licensing appears to reduce the number of massage
therapists, while Zapletal (2014) finds no effect of occupational licensing on the number of
cosmetologists. Conrad and Dolan (1980) showed that reciprocity rules limit the migration of
professions into restrictive states. A challenge with these cross-sectional analyses is that licensure
practices may correlate with other state-level attributes that influence migration (beyond the
variables controlled for). Peterson, Pandya, LeBang (2014) address this problem by exploiting
changes in residency training requirements for immigrant physicians within states over time,
finding that states that impose more stringent requirements receive fewer immigrant physicians.
Similarly, Federman, Harrington, and Krynski (2006) find that states requiring English language
proficiency have fewer Vietnamese manucurists. Work standards – not just occupational
regulations – also may influence mobility. Bloomfield, Bruggemann, Christensen, and Leuz
(2015) find that the harmonization of accounting standards across EU countries increased
cross-country mobility of accountants in the EU by a substantial amount.
We add to this literature in four ways. First, the nature of the policy change which
affected nurses but not other health workers permits us to estimate triple difference models, which
control for time-varying sources of demand for health care workers that may happen to correlate
with NLC adoption. Second, our analysis of residents of border counties permits us to narrowly
focus on the individuals most likely to be affected by exposure the change in licensure regime.
Third, we study a very recent policy change, whereas most of the literature relies on data from
forty years ago, when labor market institutions and structures may have been quite different.
Finally, we examine nurses, who are the second largest licensed profession behind teachers
(Kleiner 2000) and whose supply and geographic distribution are targets of extensive policy
deliberation.

3. Empirical Approach
A. Worker Data and Samples

10

We analyze nurses and other health care workers surveyed in the public use micro
surveys from the 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census and the 2001 to 2012 American Community Survey
(ACS) harmonized by IPUMS-USA. The ACS is an ongoing survey that provides yearly
information about communities in the years between the Decennial Censuses. Detailed
information is collected about age, sex, race, income, education, where one works, commuting
distance, where one lives, as well as occupation. Current labor force participation and employment
status are collected, as is the usual hours worked and wage or salary income from the prior year.
The Census data provides similar information, albeit on a ten-year basis and for larger samples.
While the ACS helps provide additional information in the years when states are joining the NLC,
the Census data provides information before the advent of the NLC. Both identify Registered
Nurses (RNs) and Licensed Practical Nurses (LPNs) specifically, who are both subject to the
NLC. 6
Our data include all workers in health occupations, including nurses, physicians, medical
assistants, home health aids, and several other smaller occupational categories. 7 Non-nurse health
care workers are not subject to the Nurse Licensure Compact but work in similar settings and thus
potentially form a good control group with which to compare RNs and LPNs. Locational
information allow us to identify whether an individual lives and/or works in a NLC state as well as
whether they live in an MSA. Our full sample includes 1.8 million health workers, about 38% of
which are nurses.
For some of our analysis we focus on individuals residing in counties on state borders. Of
the 3142 counties in the U.S., approximately one-third border at least one other state. However, the
county of residence is identifiable for only a subset of the sample in the Census/ACS and only
since 2005. Specifically, respondents are assigned to census-constructed areas of 100,000
residents called Public Use Micro Areas (PUMAs), which do not cross state lines. Thus county of
residence is identifiable in cases where the PUMA uniquely identifies a county (i.e. county is
6

The ACS sample changes over time. As described at https://usa.ipums.org/usa/sampdesc.shtml, the 2001
through 2004 ACS samples were 1 in 232 or 1 in 261 sample of the U.S. population not in group quarters, as
the ACS was being rolled out and tested in those years. The 2005 ACS is a 1% sample of the population
excluding group quarters. The 2006 and later ACS are 1% samples of the population including group
quarters. The 2001-2004 samples do not include geographic identifiers lower than the state.
7
Occupation is collected for all persons age 16+ who had worked within the previous five years, excluding
new workers with no experience. Since our sample is based on occupation, we necessarily exclude
individuals who have not worked for five years. Thus, our analysis should be interpreted as conditional on
having some reasonable amount of attachment to the labor force.

11

coterminous with a single PUMA or is composed of multiple PUMAs that do not extend into other
counties). Approximately 380 counties are identifiable in our sample each year, accounting for
57% of the full sample. Across all years, the sample includes 189 border counties in 44 states.
Identifiable counties are necessarily larger than average, so conclusions from our border county
analysis may not necessarily apply to residents of small or rural communities. Our border county
sample represents 21% of the full sample and includes 348,486 health workers, 37% of which are
nurses.
Table 1 provides summary statistics for our full and border county samples of nurses and
all health workers across all years. 8 Statistics are shown separately by whether the individual
currently lives in a compact state. Across all states and years, 3-4% of nurses and other health
workers commute across state lines to work, with an average travel time of 23 to 24 minutes
(among those that work). Cross-state commuting and travel time are both higher among workers
living in Compact states. Eighty-seven percent of the nurses in the sample are currently in the labor
force, with almost all of those who are labor force participants being currently employed, working
an average of 34 hours and earning $32,689 the previous year. 9 Unsurprisingly, residents of
border counties are much more likely to commute across state lines to work, with the average
rising to 6% for all health workers and 7% for nurses. Labor force participation, earnings, and
travel time to work is also higher among these individuals, though hours worked are quite similar
to the full sample.
Interestingly, nurses are more mobile and have greater labor force participation rates when
the Compact is in place. This pattern is most striking for nurses in border counties: individuals
residing in and bordering a Compact state are about twice as likely to commute across state lines
than individuals that do not. However, many of these patterns are also observed for the broader
sample of health workers, even though two-thirds of them should be unaffected by the Compact.
Furthermore, there are some observed differences between nurses and other health workers
residing in Compact states or treated counties that could also relate to labor market outcomes.
Workers exposed to the NLC are slightly older, have smaller families, and are less likely to be
immigrants (naturalized citizens or not). These differences underscore the need to more carefully
8

The summary statistics do not yet include the ACS samples from 2001 to 2005, so differ slightly from our
estimation sample.
9
Nurses have among the lowest unemployment rates of any occupation. The implied unemployment rate of
2% in our sample is consistent with official rates reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

12

control for observed and unobserved characteristcs of workers and locations that may correlate
with NLC exposure.

B. Hospital Data and Sample
To complement our worker-level analysis, we use data from the American Hospital Association’s
(AHA) Annual Survey to look at changes in the number of nurses and nurses per hospital
admission at the hospital-level before and after the compact controlling for hospital characteristics
that effect demand for labor. The AHA annual survey provides data for 98% of US hospitals,
including location, employment levels for certain occupations, ownership status, number of beds,
admissions, patient days, and information on hospital system affiliation. The full sample of
hospitals for the years 1995-2009 contains 93,463 hospital-year observations. The survey includes
hospitals outside the 50 United States in Guam, American Samoa, the Marshall Islands, Puerto
Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. After restricting to hospitals in the 50 states, we are left with
92,488 hospital-year observations and 7,727 individual hospitals.
Labor supply of RNs, LPNs, and Total Nurses (RNs + LPNs) are measured as the number
of “full-time equivalent” employees. The number of full-time equivalent employees is calculated
by summing the total number of hours worked by all employees of the same occupational category
(e.g. registered nurse) over a 12 month period, divided by the normal number of hours worked by
a fulltime employee for that same time period (typically regarded as 40 hours per week, but left to
hospital discretion). Admissions data used are adjusted by the AHA for outpatient visits. Summary
statistics for the AHA sample are presented in Appendix Table A6.

C. Identification Strategy and Method
The raw summary statistics suggest that nurses have greater labor supply and are more
mobile when the NLC is in place. However, this raw correlation is unlikely to provide a good
estimate of the causal effect of the policy on labor supply or worker mobility. Time trends, state
characteristics, worker characteristics, or labor market shocks that happen to correlate with the
presence of the NLC are likely to bias estimates of its effect. To address these, we exploit the fact
that states adopted the NLC at different times and that it only pertained to nurses to construct
several difference-in-difference estimates of the effect of exposure to the Compact.

13

State-Level Difference-in-Differences Analysis
Our first approach is to compare changes in outcomes of nurses between states that adopted
the NLC with those that did not during the same time period. We begin by estimating simple
difference-in-differences models on the sample of registered and licensed practical nurses using
regressions of the form:

Yist = β 0 + β1Treatment st + β x X ist + γ s + γ t + e ist

(1)

Our dependent variable, Yist , is the outcome (indicators for labor force participation, employed,
usual hours worked, log of wage or salary income, works in different state, log of commute time to
work, indicator for moved to another state in next year) for individual i residing in state s during
year t. We use two different measures of Treatment. The first, Compact st , is simply an indicator for
whether state s is a compact state in year t. However, this simple indicator variable does not fully
campute the dynamics of the policy change because the value of belonging to the Comapct
depends on which other states have decided to join. For instance, the value of the Compact to Utah
in 2000 (when only a few states were part of the Compact) was substantially less than in 2012
(when half of states were). To address this, we construct a second measure of treatment which
equals the fraction of other states that are part of the compact, weighted by the share of workers the
state receives from each sending state. If a state is not part of the compact, then the treatment is
equal to zero. Specifically,
K

Treament st = Compact st * ∑ Compact kt * Weight ks
k =1

Where Weightks is share of all the workers that move to state s from state k among all workers
who move to state s. These weights are estimated using the 1990 and 2000 decennial census and
represent five-year migration rates. This treatment estimated by this variable can be thought of in
two ways. First, it is the effect of joining the Compact when all the other states have already joined.
Second, it provides the effect of all the other states joining the Compact among states that already
have joined. In practice, estimates using this continuous treatment variable are quite similar to a
rescaling of the estimates obtained using the binary treatment, by a ratio of about 3. Figure 4
depicts this continous treatment variable for six select states. For early adopting states, such as

14

Texas and Utah, much of the treatment variation occurs after adoption, as neighboring states enter
the Compact. For later adopting states, such as New Mexico, treatment variation arises mostly in
the first year of adoption.

Aggregate time trends in the prevalence of cross-state commuting and employment are accounted
for by year fixed effects γ t . State fixed effects control for average differences in commuting and
employment prevalence across areas that may be related to the adoption of the NLC. For instance,
states that typically have many nurses commuting across the border may have a greater incentive
to join the compact. In some specifications, we also control for time-varying individual X ist
characteristics, such as worker demographics that may influence outcomes and also happen to
correlate with adoption of the compact. The coefficient of interest β1 is the change in outcomes
following the adoption of the NLC relative to the time pattern experienced by other states.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level, to address the possibility that observations within
states are not independent.

Triple Difference Model
The simple difference-in-differences specification assumes that outcomes for treatment
and control states would trend similarly in the absence of treatment. Labor market trends and
shocks could violate this assumption if, for instance, states adopt the NLC in anticipation of
growing demand for nurses or as a response to declining supply. Several features of the NLC
naturally facilitate variations on the basic specification to probe the validity of this main
identifying assumption. Most importantly, we exploit the fact that only nurses (registered and
licensed vocational/practical) are affected by the compact while other health professionals
(physicians, medical assistants, etc.) are not to construct a triple difference estimator. We first
estimated (1) on the sample of non-nurse health workers and test whether there is any “effect” on
these workers when there should not be. We then explicitly use these workers as a control group,
and estimate the following model of the form:

Yist = β 0 + β1Treatment st + β 2 Nurseist + β 3Treatment st * Nurseist

15

+ β x X ist + γ s + γ t + ε ist

(2)

The coefficient on Treatment st captures any change in commuting patterns among non-nurse
health care workers that are correlated with NLC adoption. The coefficient on the interaction term

Treatment st * Nurseist captures the differential impact on nurses and is our coefficient of interest.
This specification controls for any time-varying labor market shocks that similarly affect nurses
and other health care workers.

Event-study Analysis
An alternative approach to ruling out violation of the key identifying assumption in D-in-D models
is to look for evidence of differential trends between Compact and non-Compact states before the
former enact the NLC. It is possible that there are systematic pre-trends in workforce
characteristics and labor supply outcomes before the introduction of the NLC. To test for such
pre-trends in several of our outcome variables we estimate event-study models, we estimate the
following model for all registered nurses and licensed practical nurses:

Yist = β 0 + ∑n = − N Compact stn β n + β x X ist + γ s + γ t + ε ist
N

(3)

where Yist , is the outcome for individual i residing in state s during year t. Compact itn are a set of
dummy variables indicating each observation’s timing relative to the introduction of the compact.
The omitted category is the year prior to the Compact’s implementation. Xist is a vector of
demographic controls, γ s and γ t are state and time fixed-effects, respectively, and standard
errors are clustered at the state level. We test for whether outcomes are trending even before the
compact was enacted.
Finally, it is possible that demographic characteristics of the sample are systematically
changing over time and whose effects we incorrectly attribute to the introduction of the compact.
To examine how worker characteristics change in relation to the start of the compact, we also
estimate (3) using various control variables as outcomes (but excluding control variables on the
right hand side). As a parsimonious way of examining changes in worker characteristics, we
construct an index of workers’ propensity to participate in the labor force based on observed
characteristics and estimate (3) with this index as the outcome. This index was constructed by
estimating (via a Probit model) the relationship between labor force participation and our full set of

16

control variables in the 1990 Census, then predicting out of sample to all subsequent years.

Border County Analysis
Since Compact states likely include many individuals that are minimally affected by the Compact
because they do not live close to another Compact state, our second approach focuses specifically
on residents of the 189 border counties identified in the data. We estimate equations (1) and (2) at
the county-level, c, instead of the state-level, s. Specifically, we construct our treatment variable,
Treatmentct, for each county in each year. This variable equals one if county c is in a Compact state
and borders at least one other compact state in year t. We then compare changes in outcomes of
nurses between border counties that experienced this treatment with those that did not during the
same time period. In addition, we include county fixed effects to control for average differences in
commuting and employment prevalence across counties that may be related to the adoption of the
NLC by the own or bordering state. Figure 5 depicts our border county strategy graphically.
Border counties are categorized by whether they are in a Compact state and whether they border
another Compact state in 2000 and 2012. Treatment counties are marked in black – they are both in
a state that is part of the Compact and border another state that is also part of the Compact. The
experience of these counties over time is compared to all other border counties, including those in
the same state that happen not to border another Compact state (dark grey) and those in
non-Compact states (light grey).

Hosptial-level Analysis
To get a better sense of more aggregated labor supply effects of the NLC, we examine
hospital-level data to see how the number of nurses, among other outcomes, changes after the state
in which the hospital resides joins the Compact. If the Compact encourages labor force
particpation, we would expect the number of nurses to rise after a hospital’s state joins the
Compact. Similarly, if the Compact encourages nurses to move to Compact states, we would also
expect the number of nurses to rise after a hospital’s state joins the Compact. We implement this
analysis by estimating (1) and (3) on hospital-level data. We examine the following labor supply
outcomes: log number of RNs, log number of LPNs, log number of total nurses (RNs + LPNs), and
nurses per hospital admission.

17

D. Threats to Identification
Since occupational licensing regimes are not experimentally assigned, there are several
possible threats to identification that confound estimates of the effect of NLC participation. First, it
is possible that other policies are adopted simultaneously with the NLC that only impact nurse
labor markets (but not other health workers). We are not aware of any such policies, but cannot
rule this out entirely. We think this type of bias is unlikely to affect our border county analysis
since treatment depends on the actions of multiple states. Second, our approach takes residency
location decisions as exogenous. If the NLC also impacts where nurses choose to live, our
estimates may confound true causal effects with changes in the composition of nurses who work in
compact states. We explore the robustness of our results to including or excluding observed worker
attributes such as education, sex, age, nativity, and family structure and also specifically examine
trends in these characteristics leading up to and following states’ adoption of the Compact. Finally,
we take workers’ occupational classification as given, ignoring movements between nursing and
other occupations. If the NLC actually alters who enters or remains in nursing (vs. other
occupations), then this could create selection bias of unknown direction. Our labor supply results
should be interpreted as conditional on chosing to become or remain a nurse.

4. Results
A. State-level analysis
Tables 2 and 3 present our main results for the full sample and each of our labor supply and
commuting outcomes. Specifically, Table 2 shows the results using the binary Compact treatment
variable and Table 3 displays the results using the continuous measure of treatment. All
specifications include year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and the full set of demographic and
background controls. The first column for each outcome presents difference-in-difference
estimates on the sample of nurses, as described by equation (1). 10 These difference-in-difference
estimates imply that NLC adoption is actually associated with lower levels of labor force
participation, employment, labor supply, and lower wage income among nurses (though the
estimates are insignificant). The inclusion of demographic cotnrols has little impact on diff-in-diff
point estimates (not reported), suggesting that worker composition does not change dramatically
10

The full set of estimates, including the controls, is reported in the Appendix Table A5. Many
relationships are as expected: nurses that are more educated have higher labor force attachment and
earnings; nurses with young children or larger families work fewer hours.

18

when the NLC is adopted. We only report estimates with controls included, as these are more
precise. 11 In columns (9), (11), and (13) we find that cross-state employment and commute time
(among the employed) also has minimal association with the adoption of the Compact.
These basic difference-in-difference estimates are biased if nurses are subject to other
policy or labor market shocks or trends that coincide with NLC adoption, such as states adopting
the NLC in response to a declining supply of health workers or demand for health services. In this
case, states that do not join the NLC would be an inappropriate control for the states that do. The
second column for each outcome presents triple difference estimates (equation 2), explicitly using
non-nurse health workers as a control group that should be unaffected by NLC adoption. As such,
we believe this is a superior form of identification to the basic difference-in-difference model and
will be the specifcation that we focus on going forward. In these specifications the parameter of
interest is the the interaction between living in a compact state and being a nurse. Estimates are
reduced towards zero and tend to be insignficant for almost all outcomes.
Triple difference point estimates suggest that labor force participation, employment, hours
worked, or wage income of nurses are unaffected (relative to non-nurse health workers) by the
adoption of the NLC. Estimates are sufficiantly precise that we can rule out small positive effects
on labor force participation (95% CI = -0.006 to 0.006), employment (-0.008 to 0.008), and hours
worked (-0.22 to 1.04). Estimated effects on cross-state employment are positive but small and
imprecise, though we do find nurses spend approximately 3.6% more time commuting to work
(significant at the 1% level) than other health workers when the NLC is adopted.
Table 3 presents displays the effects of the NLC on the outcomes of interest using the
continuous measure of treatment described in section 3C. This is our preferred measure of
treatment as the simple binary indicator fails to account for the dynamics of policy change or that
the effectiveness of the Compact depends on how many other states belong. In general, the results
are qualitatively similar, but the magnitudes are much larger because they are scaled by the inverse
of the fraction of states that have adopted. The binary Compact treatment provides the effect for a
typical state given states’ actual participation level in the Compact during our analysis period. The

11

State and year fixed effects do have a material impact on estimates, suggesting that states adopting the
NLC have different labor market characteristics than those that do not and that participation and labor
supply are trending over time. Inclusion of demographic controls has little impact on diff-in-diff point
estimates (but does improve precision), suggesting that worker composition does not change dramatically
when the NLC is adopted.

19

continuous treatment, in contrast, provides the effect of joining the Compact conditional on all
other states having already joined. Despite the larger coefficients, our insignificant point estimates
on labor force participation (95% CI = -0.016 to 0.011) and employment (95% CI = -0.025 to
0.013) are still precise enough that we can likely reject any meaningful impact of treatment.
Imprecision however, does not rule out positive effects on hours worked, wage, and cross-state
employment. The triple difference point estimate suggests that nurses spend approximately 11.2%
more time commuting to work (significant at the 5% level) than other health workers after
“treatment,” but this result does not hold in our analysis of border counties (discussed below) so
we are cautious of pushing this finding too far.
Table 4 reports results for cross-state migration. Here treatment is defined as in the analysis
for labor supply outcomes, but instead we use the share of each states’ out-migrants to each other
state to construct weights. Unforutnately the Census and ACS collect migration outcomes that are
not comparable, so we are restricted to only examine the ACS for our migration analysis. 12 For the
typical nurse, we find no effect of NLC exposure on the likelihood of moving to another state
within a year. However, the extremeley low rates of migration make it difficult to detect effects.
The next two specifications restrict analysis to the health workers that are in the top quintile of
predicted likelihood of moving states, as predicted by baseline demographic characteristics.
Young individuals with no children are the most likely to move across state lines. For these
individuals, NLC adoption is associated with a 1.5 percentage point increase in the likelihood of
moving to any state and 1.0 percentage point increase in the likelihood of moving to a compact
state, a sizable increase relative to a base of 5.7 and 2.1%, respectively. 13 However, these
estimates are imprecise and not significantly different from zero. Furthermore, triple difference
estimates using non-nurse health workers as an additional control group suggest much weaker
effects, particularly for the likelihood of moving to any other state.
Columns (5)-(8) of Table 4 present the cross-state migration results when the full sample is
stratified for nurses and health workers who are in “low wage” states and “high wage” states. We
define low wage and high wage states using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’
Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates. States in the highest 50th percentile of wages for
RNs and LPNs are defined as “high wage” states and states in the lowest 50th percentile of wages
12

The Census collects 5-year migration information but the ACS collects 1-year migration information.
The outcome mean for “moved to Compact state” is taken across the entire sample, which includes early
years when few states are part of the Compact.
13

20

are defined as “low wage” states. 14 We stratify the data accordingly because it is plausible that the
migration decisions of nurses currently living in a low wage state may be particilarly sensitive to
NLC adoption as it potentially opens more high wage opportunties. Similar to our other results,
however, both the difference-in-difference and triple-difference results are insiginficant, nor do
they substantially differ across low wage and high wage states. If anything, the results indicate that
the migration of nurses in high-wage states is more responsive to the NLC than nurses in low-wage
states. This pattern is inconsistent with the NLC improving flows of nurses from low- to
high-wage states, which presumably have greater demand for nurses.
We also address the possibility that workers in urban areas may have different commuting
and labor supply patterns than workers in rural areas. To examine this, we estimate equations (1)
and (2) but stratify by nurses and health workers living in an MSA and those who are not assigned
to an MSA. These results are presented in Appendix Table A2. For the triple difference results, the
only statistically significant treatment effect is on comuting time for those living in MSAs.

B. Event-Study Analysis
The key assumption of the difference-in-difference approaches above is that the treatment counties
and states would have followed similar trends as non-treatment counties/states in the absence of
exposure to the NLC. While inherently not testable, this assumption is more plausable in cases
where outcomes and sample characteristics are trending similarly for treated and non-treated
groups in the years leading up to NLC adoption.
Figure 6 presents event-study estimates of NLC introduction on the characteristics of
nurses. As a parsimonious way of combining many covariates, we construct an index which
captures individuals’ propensity to participate in the labor force. This index was constructed by
estimating (via a Probit model) the relationship between labor force participation and our set of
control variables in the 1990 Census sample, then predicting out of sample to the other years. 15 As
measured by this index, there is no obvious change in nurse characteristics leading up to and
following the adoption of the NLC by states. Some individual characteristics do experience
modest changes, but taken together these have no systematic pattern with labor force participation.
14

Dividing the wage data into quartiles and examining changes over time indicates that states very rarely
change quartiles throughout the sample period. Therefore, we treat the characteristic of being a high wage
and low wage state as constant over time.
15
Estimates from the first stage model are reported in Appendix Table A4.

21

This echoes our earlier finding that controlling for observed characteristics of nurses has minimal
impact on estimates of the effect of the NLC.
Figures 7 and 8 present event-study estimates for our labor supply and commuting
outcomes, respectively. Neither labor force participation, employment, or hours worked are
systemically trending in Compact states relative to non-Compact states in the years leading up to
NLC adoption. Some of these outcomes trend dowward following NLC adoption, consistent with
the difference-in-difference estimates. Figure 8 depicts event-study estimates for our commuting
outcomes. Again, we see no evidence suggesting pre-trends may bias our difference-in-difference
estimates nor is there any evidence that NLC adoption is associated with changes in commuting
patterns.

C. Border County Analysis
One limitation of the state-level analysis presented in Tables 2 and 3 is that the benefits of the NLC
likely acrue to only a modest share of nurses in each Compact state. Many may not have
opportunities to work in another Compact state, either because of prohibative distance or because
the nearest state is not part of the Compact. In order to focus on nurses most likely to be affected by
participation in the Compact, we estimate difference-in-difference and triple difference models
exclusively on residents of the 189 border counties identified in our data. Our main explanatory
variable is now an indicator for whether the indiviudal resides in a Compact state and borders at
least one other state that is also a Compact member. Thus variation in treatment arises both
because indivudals’ own state joins the NLC and bordering states do.
Table 5 reports border county estimates for labor supply and commuting outcomes. Even for
nurses for whom the NLC expands the geographic reach of their credential the most, we see no
increase in labor supply, measured by labor force participation, employment, or hours worked. In
fact, point estimates for these outcomes are all negative (and insignificant). Triple difference
models, using non-nurse health workers as a within-Compact control group, yield similarly null
results. Precision is such that for the triple difference estimates, we can rule out small postive
effects for labor force participation (95% CI = -0.017 to 0.009), employment (-0.022 to 0.004),
hours worked (-0.472 to 0.551), wage/salary income (-0.096 to 0.020), and likelihood of working
in a different compact state (-0.0156 to 0.0016) Estimated effects on cross-state employment and
commute time are insignificant in the triple difference model, though imprecision prevents us from

22

ruling out modest postive effects.
Table 6 explores the robustness of the border county triple-difference estimates to alternative
specifications and controls. Column (1) repeats our base triple-difference model, which includes
county and year fixed effects and full controls. In specification (2) we demonstrate that the
inclusion of an exensive vector of observed characteristics have virtually no impact on our point
estimates. The characteristics are quite predictive of each outcome (e.g. the R-squared improves
from 0.01 to 0.12 when controls are included in the model for hours worked), but do not alter the
estimated relationship between treatment and outcomes. The implication is that NLC
implementation is uncorrelated with observed changes in nurse charactersitcs.
Our base specification uses the experience of all border counties to form the counterfactual
time path for counties exposed to the NLC treatment. The next three columns relax this feature and
use the experience of counties that are arguably more similar to treated counties to contruct
counterfactuals. In (3) we include state-specific year fixed effects, which implicitly compares
treated border counties to border counties in the same state that happen to not border another
Compact state. For example, counties along South Carolina’s border with North Carolina (a
Compact state) are compared to those along its southern border with Georgia (not a Compact
state). Similar comparisons can be made in Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Maryland,
Mississippi, Nebraska, New Hampshire, Tennessee, and Texas. Specifications (4) and (5) restrict
analysis to only states that had ever joined the NLC and only to treated counties, respectively. In
these specifications time trends are estimated from counties that are part of states that have chosen
to join the NLC, so should experience a similar policy environment. Specification (6) clusters our
standard errors at the county level rather than state level. With a few exceptions, the (mostly null)
results from the base model are quite robust to these alternative ways of contructing the
counterfactuals. We find no obvious evidence that exposure to the NLC expanded nurse labor
supply on the extensive margin. The only evidence we find on the intensive margin is for
specifications that focus on NLC states and treated counties. In these specifications, we do find
that hours worked increased 0.87 or 1.69 hours (signficiant at the 1% level), which correspond to a
2.5% or 4.8% increase over the mean, respectively. We also find that the wage of nurses in
treated counties increases by about 10% (singificant at the 1% level).
Interestingly, the coefficeint for works in a different compact state remains negative and
remarkably similar to the base specification throughout. While we do not think that the NLC

23

actually reduces the likelihood of working in a Compact state for border counties, we interpret this
as pretty strong evidence that the NLC did not increase it.

D. Hospital-level Analysis
Other than the migration analysis of Table 4, our previous analysis with individual microdata
estimates labor supply effects conditional on nurses’ choice of where to live. Shifts in the
allocation of nurses across states could generate aggregate changes in the nurse workforce that are
not picked up by this micro analysis. To get a more complete picture of the labor supply effects of
the NLC, we extend our analysis and examine workforce changes before and after the Compact at
the hospital-level using data from the AHA’s Annual Survey. Results from estimating equation (1)
are presented in Table 7. Panel A displays the results for changes in the log number of full-time
equivalent LPNs, RNs, and Total Nurses (RNs + LPNs). The first column of each outcome simply
uses an indicator whether the hospital’s state is a member of the Compact as the treatment variale,
whereas the second column uses the fraction of other states that are part of the compact, weighted
by the share of workers the state receives from each sending state, as the treatment. The results are
qualitatively similar to those seen using the ACS dataset as every coefficient on both the binary
indicator and the continuous treatment are insiginficant indicating little effect of the NLC on the
aggregate quantity of nurses employed by hospitals.
From a quality of care perspective, total RNs, LPNs, and overall total nurses may not be the
appropriate outcome of interest. While it may seem undesirable to not see an increase in number of
nurses, or perhaps even a decrease, following Compact adoption, this has less of an impact on
patient care if admissions do not change or decrease. As a result, we also examine changes in the
number of LPNs, RNs, and Total Nurses per admission and display the results in columns (1)-(6)
in Panel B of Table 7. Again, none of the coefficients on the treatment variables are significant.
Figures 9 and 10 present event-study estimates for the same outcomes examined in Table 7.
Treatment in these figures is whether the state in which the hospital is located is part of the
Compact. In Figure 9, the coefficient on log full-time equivalent RNs is positive and becomes
marginally significant (10% level) for years 2 and 3 post-compact introduction, but is small in
magnitude (less than 2%). The same is true for year 2 when examining total nurses. In Figure 10,
we see no discernable effect of the Compact on the ratio of Nurses per Admission in the years
following the introduction of the Compact. For neither set of outcomes do we see any evidence

24

that employment of hospital-based nurses is trending prior to the enactment of the Compact, giving
us confidence that our AHA difference-in-difference estimates are not biased by pre-treatment
differences between treatment and control states.

5. Conclusion
The Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC) was first introduced in 2000 and allows Registered Nurses
and Licensed Practical Nurses with licenses in one NLC-member state to practice in other NLC
states without obtaining a separate license. The Compact was created with the intention of
providing greater mobility for nurses, clarifying the authority to practice for nurses currently
engaged in telenursing or interstate practice, improving access to nursing care in general and
during a disaster or other times of great need, and enhancing information-sharing among member
NLC states. While only four states joined the Compact in its first year, currently 25 states are now
members and a few more have pending legislation. Furthermore, the NLC has been promoted as a
model for other occupations to follow (U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2015). In fact, the
Interstate Medical Licensure Compact was recently adopted by nine states to address the same set
of issues for physicians, albeit with some important procedural differencess from the NLC
(Chaudhry et. al, 2015).
In this paper, we estimate the effects of the Compact on labor force, migration, and
commuting outcomes. In comparison to other health workers who were not affected by the
Compact, we find little evidence that the labor supply or mobility of nurses increased following the
adoption of the Compact in the nurses’ home state. Specifically, we find no effect on labor force
particpation, employment levels, hours worked, wages or the probability of working across state
lines. When limiting our sample to nurses that live in border counties and examining the effect of
living in a Compact state and bordering another member state, we similarly find no effect on labor
market outcomes, including commuting times, for most specifications. Effects on cross-state
migration are imprecise, but leave open the possibility that the NLC impacts cross-state migration
for very mobile workers. Supplemental hospital-level analysis also revealed no measureable
impact of NLC exposure on the aggregate nurse hours worked at hospitals.
While this is the first study to empirically look at the inter-state licensing, we recognize
that it is only a first step towards fully identifying its consequences. Our measures are not rich
enough to capture the diverse work arrangements enabled by the NLC, including telnursing or

25

working in multiple states simultaneously. To get a fuller picture of the effect of the NLC, it is
necessary to test whether access to care increased following the adoption of the Compact in a
patient’s home state, and how this has affected the prevalence and scope of telenursing throughout
the United States. Furthermore, it is possible that the benefits of a cross-state system of
occupational licensing will only acrue if the licensing regime is truly national. Even with the
Compact, nurses still face barriers when moving across states or working in non-Compact states.
Although the requirements of licensing and “licensing by endorsement” vary across states, they do
not vary substantially. Application fees and waiting periods for temporary licenses top off around
$250 and 6 weeks, respectively (U.S. Department of the Treasury, U.S. Department of Defense,
2012). While these amounts are non-trivial, they may not be large enough that the elimination of
these barriers will yield measureable effects on mobility. Furthermore, nurses that move between
NLC states will still have to pay the application fee to obtain a new license, though they are
permitted to work immediately. Though the NLC provides the best evidence to date on the likely
effects of a nationalized licensing system, it still may not go far enough to generate measurable
impacts on the nurse labor market.
While we do not find that the multistate licensing provided by the NLC reduces labor
market frictions caused by occupational licensing, it is important to note that we necessarily focus
on nurses. The results may not generalize to other licensed professionals, such as lawyers,
therapists, physicians and teachers. From a healthcare delivery perspective, our results indicate
that the NLC is likely not to increase the labor supply of nurses. We find no evidence that reducing
licensing barriers will increase the pool of workers from which hospitals draw or that it will bring
nurses into the labor force. As a result, this reduction in licensing barriers does not appear to be a
solution to an aggregate shortage of nurses.

26

References

Angrist, J. D., and Guryan, J. (2008). Does teacher testing raise teacher quality? Evidence from
state certification requirements. Economics of Education Review, 27(5), 483-503.
Barnum, B. (1997). Licensure, Certification, and Accreditation, Online Journal of Issues in
Nursing, 2(3).
Benefiel, D. (2011). The Story of Nurse Licensure, Nurse Educator, 36(1), 16-20.
Blanchard, O. and L.F. Katz. (1992). “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1, Vol. 3, pp. 1-77.
Bryson, A., and Kleiner, M. M. (2010). The Regulation of Occupations. British Journal of
Industrial Relations, 48(4), 670-675.
Buerhaus, P.I., Auerbach, D.I., and Staiger, D.O. (2009). The recent surge in nurse employment:
causes and implications. Health Affairs, 28(4), w657-w668.
Chaudhry, Humayun J., Lisa A. Robin, Eric M. Fish, Donald H. Polk, and J. Daniel Gifford. 2015.
“Improving Access and Mobility – The Interstate Medical Licensure Compact.” The New
England Journal of Medicine 372, no. 17: 1581-1583.
Dao, M., D. Furceri, and P. Loungani. (2014). “Regional Labor Market Adjustments in the United
States.” IMF Working Paper No 14-211. (November 2014).
Holen, A. S. (2012). Effects of Professional Licensing Arrangements on Interstate Labor Mobility
and Resource Allocation. Journal of Political Economy, 73(5), 492-498
Hotz, V. J., and Xiao, M. (2009). The Impact of Regulations on the Supply and Quality of Care in
Child Care Markets, Working paper, (pp. 1-52).
Kleiner, M. M., (2000). Occupational Licensing. Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 189-202.
Kleiner, M.M., (2006) Licensing Occupations: Ensuring Quality or Restricting Competition?
Kalamazoo, Mich.: W. E. Upjohn Institute.
Kleiner, M. M. (2011). Occupational Licensing. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(4),
189-202.
Kleiner, M. M., and Krueger, A. B. (2009). Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational
Licensing on the Labor Market. NBER Working Paper (pp. 1-35).
Kleiner, M. M., and Krueger, A. B. (2010). The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational Licensing.
British Journal of Industrial Relations, 48(4), 676-687.

27

Kleiner, M. M., and Kudrle, R. T. (2000). Does Regulation Affect Economic Outcomes? The Case
of Dentistry. Journal of Law and Economics, 43(October), 547-582.
Kleiner, M. M., Gay, R. S., and Greene, K. (1982b). Licensing, Migraton, and Earnings: Some
Empirical Insights. Review of Policy Research, 1(3), 510-522.

Kleiner, M. M., Gay, R. S., and Greene, K. (1982a). Barriers to Labor Migration: The Case of
Occupational Licensing. Industrial Relations, 21(3), 383-391.
Kleiner, M. M., and Won Park, K. (2010). Battles Among Licensed Occupations: Analyzing
Government Regulations on Labor Market Outcomes for Dentists and Hygienists,
Working paper, (pp. 1-40).
Kleiner, M. M., Marier, A., Won Park, K., and Wing, C. (2010). Relaxing Occupational Licensing
Requirements: Analyzing Wages and Prices for a Medical Service, Working paper.
Kugler, A. D., and Sauer, R. M. (2005). Doctors without Borders? Relicensing Requirements and
Negative Selection in the Market for Physicians. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(3),
437-465.
Molloy, R., C.L. Smith, and A. Wozniak. (2011). “Internal Migration in the United States.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3): 173-196.
Pashigan, B. P. (1979).Occupational Licensing and the Interstate Mobility of Professionals,.
Journal of Law and Economics, 22(1), 1-25.
Peterson, B. D., Pandya, S. S., and Leblang, D. (2014). Doctors with borders: occupational
licensing as an implicit barrier to high skill migration. Public Choice, January.
Sass, Tim R. (2015). Licensure and Worker Quality: A Comparison of Alternative Routes to
Teaching. Journal of Law and Economics, 58 (February): 1-35
Schaumans, C., and Verboven, F. (2008). Entry and regulation: evidence from health care
professions. The Rand Journal of Economics, 39(4), 949-72.
Sulentic, A. M. (1999). Crossing Borders?: The Licensure of Interstate. Journal of Legislation,
25(1), 1-37.
Stange, K. (2014). How Does Provider Supply and Regulation Influence Health Care Markets?
Evidence from Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistants. Journal of Health Economics,
33(2014), 1-27.
Thornton, R. J., and Timmons, E. J. (2013). Licensing One of the World s Oldest Professions?:
Massage. Journal of Law and Economics, 56(2), 371-388.

28

U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Economic Policy, Council of Economic Advisers, and
the Department of Labor. (2015). Occupation Licensing: A Framework for Policymakers.
Retrieved May 5, 2016 from
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/licensing_report_final_nonembargo.
pdf.
U.S. Department of Treasury and U.S. Department of Defense. (2012). Supporting our Military
Families: Best Practices for Streamlining Occupational Licensing Across State Lines.
Retrieved May 5, 2016 from
http://archive.defense.gov/home/pdf/Occupational_Licensing_and_Military_Spouses_Re
port_vFINAL.PDF

Weeden, K. A. (2002). Why Do Some Occupations Pay More than Others? Social Closure and
Earnings Inequality in the United States. American Journal of Sociology, 108(1), 55-101.
Zapletal, M. (2014). The Effects of Occupational Licensing: Evidence from Detailed
Business-Level Data, Working paper, (pp. 1-54).

29

0

10

Number of states
20
30

40

50

Figure 1. Number of States Participating in NLC, 1995 to 2011

1995

2000

2005

2010

year

Notes: States are considered to be participating in the NLC during a given year if the implementation date is
in February of that year or earlier.
Source: https://www.ncsbn.org/nurse‐licensure‐compact.htm

30

Figure 2. Nurse Licensure Compact States, 2000 and 2012
RN Licensure Compact States, 2000
WA

ND

MT

MN

ID
WY
NE
UT

NV

IL

CO

KS

MO

OK

NM

MI

KY
TN

AR
MS
LA

TX

OH

IN

PA
NJ
WV DC
MDDE
VA

NC
SC

GA

AL

NH
VT
MA
RI
CT

NY

IA

CA
AZ

ME

WI

SD

OR

FL

AK
HI

RN Licensure Compact States, 2012
WA

ND

MT

MN

ID
WY
NE
NV

UT

KS

CA
AZ

MO

OK

NM

MI

NY

IA
IL

CO

ME

WI

SD

OR

TX

AR
MS
LA

IN

OH

KY
TN
AL

GA

NH
VT
MA
RI
CT

PA
NJ
WV DC
MDDE
VA

NC
SC

FL

AK
HI

Notes: States are considered to be participating in the NLC during a given year if the implementation date is
in February of that year or earlier.
Source: https://www.ncsbn.org/nurse‐licensure‐compact.htm

31

Figure 3. Flow Chart for Obtaining Nurse License

Is your primary/legal state of residence (PSOR) a compact state?
(This is the state in which you hold a driver’s license, are registered to vote, and/or
file federal income tax)
No

Single-state
license

Yes

Apply for
licensure by
examination in
any one state of
choice.

Multi-state
license

Apply for licensure
by examination in
your primary state
of residence
(PSOR)

Follow the NCLEX examination steps

Apply for licensure
with one Board of
Nursing (BON)

Register with
Pearson VUE (see
candidate bulletin)

Receive receipt of
registration from
Pearson VUE

Receive eligibility
from Board of
Nursing

Receive results
from BON

Arrive for exam –
present photo ID
and ATT (see
candidate bulletin)

Schedule an exam
with Pearson VUE
via website or
telephone

Your new single-state license grants privilege to practice in
only the state of issuance (other single-state licenses may be
acquired via licensure by endorsement)

Receive an
Authorization to
Test (ATT) via
letter or email from
Pearson VUE

Your new multi-state license grants privilege to
practice in all NLC states contingent upon remaining a
resident of the issuing state.

Source: https://www.ncsbn.org/nurse‐licensure‐compact.htm

32

Figure 4. Continuous Treatment for Six States

NH

NM

TX

UT

WI

0
.6
0

.2

.4

Treatment

.2

.4

.6

AR

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

year
Notes: Graphs plot, separately for six states, the fraction of other states that are part of the Compact,
weighted by the share of workers each reported state receives from each sending state. If a state is not
part of the compact, then the treatment is equal to zero. Weights are estimated using the 1990 and 2000
decennial census and represent five‐year migration rates.

33

Figure 5. Border Counties Exposed to Compact

Border Counties in US, 2000

Not border, not Compact

Border, not Compact

Not border, Compact

No bordering Compact

Border Counties in US, 2012

Not border, not Compact

Border, not Compact

Not border, Compact

34

No bordering Compact

Bordering Compact

Figure 6. Changes in Worker Characteristics Leading up to and Following NLC Adoption

Predicted Pr(In Labor Force)
.01

.005

0

-.005

-.01
-5+

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

3

4

5

5+

Notes: Outcome is labor force participation as predicted with covariates from a two‐step approach. First,
labor force participation is regressed on covariates using the 1990 Census. Second, model estimates are
then used to predict labor force participation based on the same covariates, but in all years. Figure plots
coefficients on indicators for time until or since NLC adoption. Model includes state and year fixed effects.
Dashed lines represent 95% confidence interval. Standard errors clustered by state.

35

Figure 7. Changes in Labor Supply Leading up to and Following NLC Adoption (Nurses only with Controls)
In Labor Force

Employed

with controls

with controls

.02

.02

.01

.01

0
0
-.01
-.01
-.02
-.02

-.03
-5+

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

3

4

5

5+

-5+

-5

Usual Hours Worked (last year)

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

3

4

5

5+

5

5+

Log(Wage Income last year)

with controls

with controls
.1

1

.5
.05
0

0

-.5

-1
-.05
-5+

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

3

4

5

5+

-5+

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

3

4

Notes: Figure plots coefficients on indicators for time until or since NLC adoption. Model includes state and
year fixed effects and a full set of control variables. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence interval.
Standard errors clustered by state. Coefficients normalized to zero in the year before adoption. Year zero is
first year of adoption.

36

Figure 8. Changes in Commuting Outcomes Leading up to and Following NLC Adoption (Nurses only with
Controls)
Work in Different State

Work in Different Compact State

with controls

with controls

.02

.02

.015

.01

.01
0
.005
-.01
0
-.02

-.005
-5+

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

3

4

5

5+

3

4

5

5+

-5+

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

3

4

5

5+

Log(Transit Time to Work)
with controls
.06

.04

.02

0

-.02

-.04
-5+

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Year

1

2

mai

Notes: Figure plots coefficients on indicators for time until or since NLC adoption. Model includes state and
year fixed effects and a full set of control variables. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence interval.
Standard errors clustered by state. Coefficients normalized to zero in the year before adoption. Year zero is
first year of adoption.

37

Figure 9. Changes in Aggregate Hospital Nurse Hours Leading up to and Following NLC Adoption

Notes: Figure plots coefficients on interaction between time until or since NLC adoption. Model includes
hospital and year fixed effects and a full set of control variables. The y‐axis for LPNs, RNs, and Total Nurses
are log points. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence interval. Standard errors clustered by state. Year
zero is first year of adoption. Sample includes all hospitals in the US in the AHA, 1995‐2009.

38

Figure 10. Changes in Labor Supply per admission leading up to and Following NLC Adoption

Notes: Figure plots coefficients on interaction between time until or since NLC adoption. Model includes
hospital and year fixed effects and a full set of control variables. The y‐axis for Nurse per Doctor is
measured in levels. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence interval. Standard errors clustered by state.
Year zero is first year of adoption. Sample includes all hospitals in the US in the AHA, 1995‐2009.

39

Table 1. Summary Statistics, Census and ACS Sample
Nurses only
All counties
Currently
Not
currently in
part of
Full
Compact
sample
Full sample
Compact

Border counties only
State and
Not state
and border
border
compact
compact

Full sample

All health workers
All counties
Currently
part of
Not currently
Full
Compact
in Compact
sample

Border counties only
State and
Not state
border
and border
compact
compact

In labor force
Employed
Work in different state
Travel time to work
Usual hours worked (last year)
Wage/salary income, $1999 (last year)
Registered nurse
LPN
Male
White
Black
American Indian
Asian
Other
Less than high school
High school
Some college
College graduate
Graduate degree
Age
Single household
Family size
No Child Household
One Child Household
Two Children Household
Few Children Household
Many Children Household
No Child Under 5 in Household
American Citizen
Born Abroad
Naturalized citizen
Not citizen

0.87
0.85
0.04
24.01
33.84
32,689
0.79
0.21
0.07
0.82
0.10
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.01
0.09
0.48
0.31
0.11
44.74
0.18
2.88
0.47
0.22
0.20
0.10
0.01
0.86
0.89
0.01
0.07
0.04

0.88
0.86
0.04
24.40
34.36
32,788
0.79
0.21
0.08
0.83
0.11
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.09
0.49
0.33
0.09
45.45
0.18
2.80
0.50
0.21
0.19
0.10
0.01
0.86
0.91
0.01
0.05
0.03

0.87
0.85
0.03
23.91
33.70
32,664
0.79
0.21
0.07
0.82
0.10
0.01
0.06
0.01
0.01
0.10
0.48
0.31
0.11
44.56
0.18
2.90
0.46
0.22
0.21
0.10
0.01
0.86
0.88
0.01
0.07
0.04

0.87
0.86
0.07
25.14
33.73
35,681
0.83
0.17
0.07
0.73
0.16
0.00
0.08
0.01
0.01
0.09
0.42
0.35
0.13
44.68
0.19
2.93
0.46
0.22
0.21
0.11
0.01
0.86
0.82
0.01
0.11
0.05

0.89
0.87
0.14
25.65
34.62
35,834
0.83
0.17
0.08
0.71
0.21
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.00
0.08
0.41
0.39
0.12
45.84
0.20
2.79
0.50
0.22
0.18
0.09
0.00
0.87
0.83
0.01
0.10
0.05

0.87
0.86
0.06
25.10
33.66
35,669
0.83
0.17
0.07
0.73
0.16
0.00
0.08
0.01
0.01
0.09
0.42
0.35
0.13
44.59
0.19
2.94
0.46
0.22
0.21
0.11
0.01
0.85
0.82
0.01
0.11
0.05

0.86
0.83
0.03
23.21
34.31
31,395
0.30
0.08
0.19
0.79
0.12
0.01
0.05
0.02
0.04
0.22
0.36
0.21
0.17
42.33
0.19
2.89
0.50
0.21
0.19
0.10
0.01
0.84
0.87
0.01
0.07
0.04

0.86
0.84
0.04
22.98
34.21
29,673
0.29
0.08
0.17
0.79
0.13
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.23
0.38
0.21
0.14
42.68
0.19
2.84
0.51
0.21
0.18
0.09
0.01
0.85
0.91
0.01
0.05
0.03

0.86
0.83
0.03
23.27
34.34
31,831
0.30
0.08
0.19
0.78
0.11
0.01
0.06
0.02
0.04
0.22
0.36
0.21
0.18
42.24
0.19
2.90
0.50
0.21
0.19
0.10
0.01
0.84
0.87
0.01
0.08
0.05

0.87
0.84
0.06
25.49
34.54
34,520
0.30
0.06
0.20
0.69
0.19
0.00
0.07
0.03
0.04
0.21
0.32
0.23
0.20
42.41
0.20
2.95
0.49
0.21
0.19
0.10
0.01
0.84
0.80
0.01
0.12
0.07

0.88
0.86
0.12
24.61
34.72
33,027
0.32
0.07
0.17
0.67
0.23
0.01
0.05
0.02
0.03
0.19
0.35
0.26
0.18
43.21
0.21
2.83
0.52
0.21
0.18
0.09
0.01
0.85
0.83
0.01
0.10
0.06

0.86
0.84
0.06
25.55
34.52
34,631
0.30
0.06
0.20
0.69
0.19
0.00
0.07
0.03
0.04
0.21
0.32
0.23
0.20
42.35
0.20
2.95
0.49
0.21
0.19
0.10
0.01
0.84
0.80
0.01
0.12
0.07

Observations
Number of states
Number of counties

680,623
51
All

136,505
24
All

544,118
51
All

127,639
44
189

9,452
16
38

118,187
43
185

1,824,923
51
All

300,880
24
All

1,456,217
51
All

348,486
44
189

24,158
16
38

324,328
43
185

Notes: All counties sample includes all nurses or health professionals in the 1990 and 2000 Census (5% sample) and 2001-2012 ACS. Border county sample includes those in the 189 counties on state borders that are
identified in the Census and ACS. Compact classification refers to the status during the year of the observation; observations for states or counties that eventually become treated are in included in the "Not currently
in Compact" and "Not state and border Compact" columns.

40

Table 2. Main Results for Full Sample
Binary Treatment
In labor force
(current)

Employed
(current)

Usual hours worked
(last year)

Log(Wage income)
(last year)

Work in different
state

Work in different
compact state

Log(Commute time)
(current)

(1)
-0.0034
(0.0040)

(2)
-0.0034
(0.0027)
0.0247***
(0.0016)
0.0003
(0.0031)

(3)
-0.0041
(0.0040)

(4)
-0.0037
(0.0036)
0.0338***
(0.0017)
-0.0004
(0.0042)

(5)
-0.3332**
(0.1335)

(6)
-0.4139**
(0.1960)
0.9091***
(0.0970)
0.4145
(0.3151)

(7)
-0.0069
(0.0122)

(8)
-0.0148
(0.0143)
0.3468***
(0.0139)
0.0263
(0.0303)

(9)
0.0011
(0.0023)

(10)
-0.0003
(0.0030)
0.0059***
(0.0020)
0.0007
(0.0034)

(11)
0.0039
(0.0024)

(12)
0.0020
(0.0020)
0.0007
(0.0004)
0.0014
(0.0012)

(13)
-0.0132
(0.0088)

(14)
-0.0104
(0.0079)
0.0549***
(0.0093)
0.0357**
(0.0145)

Observations
R-squared

680,588
0.1282

1,824,791
0.0843

680,588
0.1159

1,824,791
0.0788

680,588
0.1259

1,824,791
0.1223

617,305
0.1557

1,602,769
0.2972

564,580
0.0381

1,482,355
0.0333

564,580
0.0179

1,482,355
0.0195

559,723
0.0295

1,458,395
0.0407

Sample
Outcome mean

Nurses
0.884

All health
0.871

Nurses
0.867

All health
0.842

Nurses
34.41

All health
34.40

Nurses
10.30

All health
10.02

Nurses
0.035

All health
0.030

Nurses
0.008

All health
0.008

Nurses
2.97

All health
2.93

Compact state
Nurse
Compact state X Nurse

Notes: All specifications include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and full controls. Controls include indicators for LPN, male, race category, education category, a quadradic in age, indicators for single
family household, number of children, and no children under the age of 5, family size (linear), naturalized citizen, and non-citizen. Standard errors clusted by state in parentheses. Sample includes all nurses or
health professionals in the 1990 and 2000 Census (5% sample) and 2001-2012 ACS. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

Table 3. Main Results for Full Sample
Continous Treatment
In labor force
(current)

Employed
(current)

Usual hours worked
(last year)

(1)
-0.0202*
(0.0106)

(2)
-0.0121
(0.0078)
0.0249***
(0.0017)
-0.0026
(0.0068)

(3)
-0.0191
(0.0114)

(4)
-0.0085
(0.0095)
0.0341***
(0.0018)
-0.0059
(0.0096)

Observations
R-squared

680,588
0.1282

1,824,791
0.0933

680,588
0.1159

1,824,791
0.0788

680,588
0.1259

Sample
Outcome mean

Nurses
0.884

All health
0.871

Nurses
0.867

All health
0.842

Nurses
34.41

Treatment
Nurse
Treatment X Nurse

(5)
(6)
-1.0994*** -1.0127**
(0.4054) (0.4494)
0.9195***
(0.0927)
1.2608
(0.7593)

Log(Wage income)
(last year)

Work in different
state

Work in different
compact state

Log(Commute time)
(current)

(7)
-0.0343
(0.0376)

(8)
-0.0461
(0.0393)
0.3491***
(0.0129)
0.0598
(0.0810)

(9)
-0.0023
(0.0069)

(10)
-0.0059
(0.0078)
0.0058***
(0.0020)
0.0027
(0.0092)

(11)
0.0117
(0.0085)

(12)
0.0071
(0.0072)
0.0006
(0.0004)
0.0055
(0.0040)

(13)
-0.0413
(0.0263)

(14)
-0.0426*
(0.0222)
0.0555***
(0.0088)
0.1119**
(0.0423)

1,824,791
0.1223

617,305
0.1557

1,602,769
0.2971

564,580
0.0381

1,482,355
0.0333

564,580
0.0179

1,482,355
0.0195

559,723
0.0295

1,458,395
0.0407

All health
34.40

Nurses
10.30

All health
10.02

Nurses
0.035

All health
0.030

Nurses
0.008

All health
0.008

Nurses
2.97

All health
2.93

Notes: All specifications include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and full controls. Controls include indicators for LPN, male, race category, education category, a quadradic in age, indicators for
single family household, number of children, and no children under the age of 5, family size (linear), naturalized citizen, and non-citizen. Standard errors clusted by state in parentheses. Sample includes
all nurses or health professionals in the 1990 and 2000 Census (5% sample) and 2001-2012 ACS. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

42

Table 4. State-level Migration Results
All workers

Panel A. Moved to Any State
Treatment

All health

Nurses

All health

Nurses

All Health

Nurses

All Health

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0032
(0.0057)

-0.0009
(0.0037)
0.0008
(0.0008)
-0.0024
(0.0030)

0.0146
(0.0190)

-0.0009
(0.0125)
0.0028
(0.0025)
0.0038
(0.0078)

-0.0010
(0.0055)

0.0021
(0.0046)
0.0006
(0.0008)
0.0004
(0.0038)

0.0060
(0.0038)

0.0002
(0.0031)
-0.0008
(0.0005)
0.0021
(0.0015)

0.023

0.027

0.057

0.056

0.023

0.026

0.022

0.026

0.0028
(0.0030)

-0.0001
(0.0026)
0.0009*
(0.0005)
0.0005
(0.0020)

0.0097
(0.0136)

-0.0002
(0.0083)
0.0021
(0.0016)
0.0083
(0.0061)

0.0024
(0.0080)

0.0023
(0.0082)
0.0013
(0.0009)
0.0002
(0.0033)

-0.0051
(0.0083)

-0.0115
(0.0082)
0.0007
(0.0008)
0.0029
(0.0022)

0.008

0.009

0.021

0.020

0.010

0.010

0.012

0.014

379,763
yes

1,004,596
yes

48,420
yes

200,915
yes

120,383
yes

318,462
yes

145,138
yes

383,048
yes

Nurse
Treatment X Nurse

Outcome mean
Observations
State FE

High Wage States

(1)

Treatment X Nurse

Panel B. Moved to Compact State
Treatment

Low Wage States

Nurses

Nurse

Outcome mean

Very mobile workers

Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects and full controls. Controls include indicators for LPN, male, race category, education category, a quadradic
in age, indicators for single family household, number of children, and no children under the age of 5, family size (linear), naturalized citizen, and non-citizen.
Standard errors clusted by state in parentheses. Sample includes all nurses or health professionals in the 2001-2012 ACS that lived in a US state (or DC) in
prior year. Treatment variable is the share of all other states that are part of Compact, interacted with indicator for current state being part of the Compact.
Other states are weighted by their share of the current state's out-migrants in 1990 and 2000 census. Very mobile workers are those in the top quintile of
predicted likelihood of moving, based on baseline characteristics. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

43

Table 5. Results for Border County Sample
In labor force
(current)
Resident & border state both Compact

(1)
-0.0072
(0.0066)

Nurse
Resident & border state both Compact X Nurse

Employed
(current)

Usual hours worked
(last year)

Log(Wage income)
(last year)

Work in different
state

(2)
-0.0063
(0.0073)
0.0210***
(0.0027)
-0.0039
(0.0066)

(3)
-0.0117
(0.0071)

(4)
-0.0047
(0.0092)
0.0297***
(0.0029)
-0.0094
(0.0066)

(5)
-0.2956
(0.3180)

(6)
-0.4571
(0.3134)
0.8340***
(0.1359)
0.0397
(0.2535)

(7)
-0.0431*
(0.0217)

(8)
-0.0086
(0.0139)
0.3503***
(0.0175)
-0.0379
(0.0287)

(9)
-0.0201
(0.0122)

(10)
-0.0181
(0.0137)
0.0065
(0.0050)
0.0076
(0.0092)

Work in different
compact state

Log(Commute time)
(current)

(11)
(12)
0.0220*** 0.0300***
(0.0071) (0.0075)
-0.0002
(0.0010)
-0.0070
(0.0043)

(13)
(14)
-0.0536** -0.0532***
(0.0256) (0.0155)
0.0288*
(0.0156)
0.0281
(0.0246)

Observations
R-squared

127,633
0.1354

348,472
0.0882

127,633
0.1211

348,472
0.0813

127,633
0.1316

348,472
0.1205

115,990
0.1551

307,219
0.2944

106,284
0.1739

284,578
0.1421

106,284
0.1574

284,578
0.1227

105,366
0.0776

280,485
0.0975

Sample

Nurses

All health

Nurses

All health

Nurses

All health

Nurses

All health

Nurses

All health

Nurses

All health

Nurses

All health

Outcome mean
0.894
0.884
0.875
0.854
34.47
34.59
10.39
10.11
0.067
0.061
0.012
0.012
3.06
3.05
Notes: All specifications include county fixed effects, year fixed effects, and full controls. Controls include indicators for LPN, male, race category, education category, a quadradic in age, indicators for single family
household, number of children, and no children under the age of 5, family size (linear), naturalized citizen, and non-citizen. Standard errors clusted by state in parentheses. Sample includes all nurses or health
professionals in the 189 counties on state borders that are identified in the 1990 and 2000 Census and 2005-2012 ACS and that have nurses or other health professionals included in the sample. Among these, 38 counties
were treated. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

44

Table 6. Effect of Residing in and Bordering Compact State
Robustness for Triple Difference with All Health Workers
Only NLC
states
(4)

Only treated
counties
(5)

Cluster by
county
(6)

Panel A. In labor force (mean = .884)
Coeff -0.0039
-0.0034
-0.0031
(SE) (0.0066)
(0.0056)
(0.0068)

-0.0002
(0.0071)

0.0038
(0.0075)

-0.0039
(0.0062)

Panel B. Employed (mean = .854)
Coeff -0.0094
-0.0089
-0.0083
(SE) (0.0066)
(0.0058)
(0.0069)

-0.0054
(0.0076)

-0.0010
(0.0091)

-0.0094
(0.0066)

Panel C. Usual hours worked (mean = 34.59)
0.0397
0.1823
0.0279
0.8687***
(SE) (0.2535)
(0.2793)
(0.2517)
(0.2082)

1.6866***
(0.3644)

0.0397
(0.2453)

Panel D. Log (wage income) (mean = 10.11)
-0.0379
-0.0442
-0.0362
0.0247
(SE) (0.0287)
(0.0384)
(0.0285)
(0.0235)

0.1004***
(0.0310)

-0.0379
(0.0246)

Panel E. Work in different state (mean = .0605)
0.0076
0.0074
0.0072
0.0136
(SE) (0.0092)
(0.0094)
(0.0093)
(0.0084)

-0.0020
(0.0050)

0.0076
(0.0078)

Panel F. Work in different compact state (mean = .012)
-0.0070
-0.0070
-0.0073*
-0.0075*
(SE) (0.0043)
(0.0043)
(0.0042)
(0.0042)

-0.0078
(0.0053)

-0.0070*
(0.0038)

Panel G. Log(Commute time) (mean =3.052 )
0.0281
0.0281
0.0286
0.0046
(SE) (0.0246)
(0.0276)
(0.0235)
(0.0174)

-0.0123
(0.0200)

0.0281
(0.0189)

48,482
16
38

348,472
44
189

Base model
(1)

No controls
(2)

State X Year
FE
(3)

Coeff

Coeff

Coeff

Coeff

Coeff

Observations
Number of states
Number of counties

348,472
44
189

348,472
44
189

348,472
44
189

97,932
22
70

Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient and standard error on the interaction between Nurse and an
indicator for living in and bordering a compact state from a separate regression. All specifications include
year fixed effects, county fixed effects, Nurse, indicator for living in and bordering a compact state, and
(except column 2) full controls. Controls include indicators for LPN, male, race category, education
category, a quadradic in age, indicators for single family household, number of children, and no children
under the age of 5, family size (linear), naturalized citizen, and non-citizen. Standard errors clusted by
state (county in specification 6) in parentheses. Sample includes all health workers in the 189 counties
on state borders that are identified in the Census and ACS and have nurses in the sample. Reported
sample size is for Panels A and B. Subsequent panels have smaller sample sizes as they are conditional
on being employed or having positive income. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

45

Table 7: Effect of Nurse Licensure Compact on Nurse Labor Supply Results (using AHA data)

Panel A: Aggregate Hospital Nurse Hours
Compact State

Log Full-time Equivalent
LPNs
(1)
(2)
0.0012
(0.0264)

Treatment

Observations
R-squared
Y mean

Log Full-time Equivalent
RNs
(3)
(4)
-0.0016
(0.0148)

0.0585
(0.0884)
89,451
0.8148
2.6899

89,451
0.8148
2.6899

92,395
0.9610
4.4071

-0.0001
(0.0037)

0.0046
(0.0122)
89,444
0.491
0.0158

92,395
0.9610
4.4071

Full-time Equivalent RNs
per Admission
(3)
(4)

(0.0037)

Observations
R-squared
Y mean

-0.0071
(0.0146)
-0.0061
(0.0571)

Full-time Equivalent LPNs
per Admission
(1)
(2)
Panel B: Aggregate Hospital Nurse Hours (Normalized)
Compact State
-0.0001
Treatment

Log Full-time Equivalent
Nurses
(5)
(6)

-0.0236
(0.0564)
92,419
0.9613
4.6293

Full-time Equivalent
Nurses per Admission
(5)
(6)
-0.0004
(0.0070)

0.0086
(0.0124)

89,444
0.4910
0.0158

92,388
0.1856
0.0331

92,419
0.9613
4.6293

92,388
0.1856
0.0331

0.0128
(0.0234)
92,412
0.3581
0.0483

92,412
0.3581
0.0483

Notes: All specifications include hospital fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for whether a hospital is in a system, ownership type, total hospital
beds, total inpatient days, and adjusted admissions (in panel A only). Omitted hospital ownership category is "government-owned." Standard errors clusted
by state in parentheses. Sample includes all hospitals surveyed by the AHA in the United States for years 1995-2009. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

46

Table A1. Implementation Dates for Nurse Licensure Compact States
Date of implementation
Arizona

7/1/2002

Arkansas

7/1/2000

Colorado

10/1/2007

Delaware

7/1/2000

Idaho

7/1/2001

Iowa

7/1/2000

Kentucky

6/1/2007

Maine

7/1/2001

Maryland

7/1/1999

Mississippi

7/1/2001

Missouri

6/1/2010

Montana

10/1/2015

Nebraska

1/1/2001

New Hampshire

1/1/2006

New Mexico

1/1/2004

North Carolina

7/1/2000

North Dakota

1/1/2004

Rhode Island

7/1/2008

South Carolina

2/1/2006

South Dakota

1/1/2001

Tennessee

7/1/2003

Texas

1/1/2000

Utah

1/1/2000

Virginia

1/1/2005

Wisconsin
1/1/2000
States with legislation pending include Illinois, Massachusetts, Minnesota,
New Jersey, New York, and Oklahoma.
Source: https://www.ncsbn.org/nurse-licensure-compact.htm

47

Table A2. Main Labor Supply Results for Full Sample, by MSA
In labor force
(current)
(1)

Usual hours worked
(last year)

(3)

(4)

-0.0318** -0.0320***
(0.0131) (0.0107)
0.0223***
(0.0014)
0.0016
(0.0098)

-0.0369**
(0.0144)

-0.0264*
(0.0134)
0.0325***
(0.0018)
-0.0030
(0.0132)

Observations

378,229

1,034,563

378,229

1,034,563

378,229

Sample
Outcome mean

Nurses
0.892

All health
0.881

Nurses
0.875

All health
0.852

-0.0230*
(0.0115)

0.0068
(0.0128)
0.0220***
(0.0023)
-0.0145
(0.0097)

-0.0179
(0.0125)

Observations

204,314

513,225

Sample
Outcome mean

Nurses
0.885828

All health
0.879

Panel A. MSA
Treatment
Nurse
Treatment X Nurse

Panel B. Non-MSA
Treatment
Nurse
Treatment X Nurse

(2)

Employed
(current)

(5)

(6)

Log(Wage income)
(last year)

Work in different
state

Work in different
compact state

Log(Commute time)
(current)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

-0.0280
(0.0484)

-0.0389
(0.0450)
0.3623***
(0.0154)
0.0590
(0.0992)

-0.0095
(0.0120)

-0.0037
(0.0099)
0.0047*
(0.0024)
-0.0043
(0.0100)

0.0060
(0.0091)

0.0069
(0.0079)
-0.0001
(0.0005)
-0.0009
(0.0045)

-0.0440
(0.0297)

-0.0707**
(0.0282)
0.0393***
(0.0098)
0.1069**
(0.0428)

1,034,563

343,505

909,059

314,830

844,958

314,830

844,958

312,013

831,428

Nurses
34.570

All health
34.465

Nurses
10.363

All health
10.064

Nurses
0.029

All health
0.026

Nurses
0.005

All health
0.005

Nurses
3.012

All health
2.980

0.0106
(0.0189)
0.0295***
(0.0027)
-0.0121
(0.0110)

-0.8927
(0.6042)

-0.6504
(0.6727)
0.8255***
(0.1216)
0.5697
(0.4760)

-0.0616
(0.0474)

-0.0483
(0.0548)
0.3073***
(0.0105)
0.0507
(0.0449)

0.0135
(0.0116)

0.0090
(0.0111)
0.0079***
(0.0020)
0.0125
(0.0108)

0.0103
(0.0121)

0.0044
(0.0079)
0.0033**
(0.0014)
0.0095
(0.0076)

-0.0845**
(0.0393)

-0.0655
(0.0431)
0.0942***
(0.0073)
0.0239
(0.0301)

204,314

513,225

204,314

513,225

184,516

449,637

169,704

418,448

169,704

418,448

168,221

412,004

Nurses
0.867

All health
0.852

Nurses
34.118

All health
34.471

Nurses
10.222

All health
10.028

Nurses
0.048

All health
0.043

Nurses
0.018

All health
0.015

Nurses
2.945

All health
2.864

-1.4174*** -1.4858**
(0.5059) (0.6001)
1.0333***
(0.0909)
1.1816
(1.0055)

Notes: All specifications include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and full controls. Controls include indicators for LPN, male, race category, education category, a quadradic in age, indicators for single family household,
number of children, and no children under the age of 5, family size (linear), naturalized citizen, and non-citizen. Standard errors clusted by state in parentheses. Sample includes all nurses or health professionals in the
1990 and 2000 Census (5% sample) and 2006-2012 ACS. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

48

Table A3 Complete Labor Supply Results for Full Sample, Nurses Only

Compact state

LPN
Male
White
Black
Amer. Indian
Asian
Other race
Less than HS
High school
Some college
College
Age
Age-squared
Single household
Family size
No children in household
One child in household
Two children in household
3-5 children in household
No children under 5
Nationalized citizen
Not citizen

In labor force
(current)

Employed
(current)

Usual hours
worked
(last year)

Log(Wage
income)
(last year)

Work in
different state
(current)

Work in
different
compact state

Log(Commute
time)
(current)

-0.0106***
(0.0037)
-0.0223***
(0.0023)
0.0193***
(0.0017)
0.0151***
(0.0044)
0.0270***
(0.0053)
-0.0103
(0.0105)
0.0178***
(0.0052)
0.0198***
(0.0067)
-0.0980***
(0.0105)
-0.0455***
(0.0037)
-0.0092***
(0.0018)
-0.0070***
(0.0019)
0.0301***
(0.0006)
-0.0004***
(0.0000)
0.0113***
(0.0024)
-0.0025***
(0.0009)
0.0200**
(0.0090)
0.0417***
(0.0084)
0.0273***
(0.0078)
0.0155*
(0.0081)
0.0668***
(0.0019)
0.0147***
(0.0029)
-0.0274***
(0.0048)

-0.0113***
(0.0041)
-0.0324***
(0.0025)
0.0169***
(0.0025)
0.0259***
(0.0049)
0.0274***
(0.0060)
-0.0134
(0.0116)
0.0294***
(0.0067)
0.0243**
(0.0097)
-0.1427***
(0.0113)
-0.0575***
(0.0038)
-0.0107***
(0.0019)
-0.0040*
(0.0020)
0.0300***
(0.0006)
-0.0004***
(0.0000)
0.0047*
(0.0028)
-0.0044***
(0.0010)
0.0092
(0.0084)
0.0331***
(0.0077)
0.0233***
(0.0076)
0.0116
(0.0078)
0.0683***
(0.0022)
0.0217***
(0.0033)
-0.0273***
(0.0050)

-0.4139**
(0.1549)
-0.5661***
(0.1003)
3.4772***
(0.1795)
-0.6777***
(0.2389)
1.0182***
(0.1675)
0.7121
(0.4306)
0.6515
(0.4039)
0.4049
(0.5028)
-4.4644***
(0.3714)
-2.8143***
(0.1531)
-1.6409***
(0.0919)
-1.6730***
(0.1299)
1.3096***
(0.0235)
-0.0172***
(0.0003)
1.2077***
(0.0993)
-0.4046***
(0.0675)
0.1319
(0.3695)
1.2959***
(0.3365)
-0.2823
(0.3208)
-0.9529***
(0.3416)
4.1069***
(0.1167)
1.6452***
(0.1667)
0.1119
(0.2371)

-0.0089
(0.0137)
-0.3568***
(0.0075)
0.1752***
(0.0141)
-0.0036
(0.0121)
0.0262
(0.0181)
-0.0135
(0.0265)
0.1439***
(0.0154)
-0.0138
(0.0267)
-0.4206***
(0.0247)
-0.2914***
(0.0126)
-0.1886***
(0.0061)
-0.0959***
(0.0080)
0.1074***
(0.0013)
-0.0012***
(0.0000)
0.0349***
(0.0068)
-0.0399***
(0.0043)
-0.0350
(0.0336)
0.0227
(0.0326)
-0.0113
(0.0286)
-0.0420
(0.0252)
0.0429***
(0.0071)
0.0926***
(0.0124)
-0.0760***
(0.0125)

-0.0002
(0.0028)
-0.0059***
(0.0016)
0.0088***
(0.0026)
-0.0118**
(0.0055)
-0.0070
(0.0060)
0.0088
(0.0077)
-0.0110*
(0.0064)
-0.0078**
(0.0035)
-0.0096
(0.0069)
-0.0129***
(0.0038)
-0.0069**
(0.0027)
-0.0047***
(0.0012)
0.0005*
(0.0003)
-0.0000**
(0.0000)
-0.0003
(0.0015)
0.0004
(0.0006)
0.0062
(0.0055)
0.0031
(0.0055)
0.0004
(0.0054)
0.0006
(0.0054)
0.0004
(0.0014)
0.0063
(0.0058)
0.0015
(0.0035)

0.0056*
(0.0031)
-0.0010
(0.0006)
0.0012
(0.0010)
-0.0037
(0.0032)
-0.0057*
(0.0031)
0.0037
(0.0060)
-0.0055*
(0.0031)
-0.0045
(0.0034)
0.0030
(0.0036)
-0.0028**
(0.0012)
-0.0007
(0.0008)
-0.0010
(0.0007)
0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.0005
(0.0009)
0.0002
(0.0003)
0.0006
(0.0031)
0.0007
(0.0031)
0.0001
(0.0031)
-0.0005
(0.0028)
0.0010
(0.0008)
-0.0021**
(0.0010)
-0.0024**
(0.0010)

-0.0103
(0.0077)
-0.0609***
(0.0075)
0.0571***
(0.0088)
-0.0490***
(0.0176)
0.0561**
(0.0240)
-0.0302
(0.0372)
-0.0752***
(0.0220)
-0.0390
(0.0305)
-0.0897**
(0.0344)
-0.0907***
(0.0112)
-0.0603***
(0.0078)
-0.0334***
(0.0064)
0.0095***
(0.0013)
-0.0001***
(0.0000)
-0.0329***
(0.0062)
0.0224***
(0.0023)
0.1383***
(0.0266)
0.1015***
(0.0264)
0.0667***
(0.0244)
0.0329
(0.0239)
-0.0438***
(0.0052)
0.0906***
(0.0306)
-0.0073
(0.0308)

Observations
R-squared
Outcome mean

582,543
582,543
582,543
528,021
484,534
484,534
480,234
0.1406
0.1267
0.1275
0.1597
0.0380
0.0181
0.0304
0.890
0.872
34.416
10.315
0.035
0.010
2.989
Notes: All specifications include state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors clusted by state in parentheses. Sample includes all
nurses in the 1990 and 2000 Census (5% sample) and 2006-2012 ACS. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

49

Table A4 First Stage Estimates of Correlates of Labor Force Participation
Probit coeff
Male
0.2278
(0.0038)
White
0.1027
(0.0068)
Black
0.0789
(0.0075)
Asian
0.0475
(0.0089)
American Indian
-0.0126
(0.0163)
Less than high school
-0.6130
(0.0067)
High school
-0.3899
(0.0047)
Some college
-0.1956
(0.0044)
College
-0.1529
(0.0048)
Age
0.1034
(0.0006)
Age-squared
-0.0013
(0.0000)
Single household
-0.0191
(0.0045)
Family size
0.0045
(0.0016)
No children in househ -0.0896
(0.0049)
Number of children in -0.0793
(0.0025)
Constant
-0.4094
(0.0156)
Observations
1,547,920
Psuedo R-squared
0.0956
Notes: Sample includes all nurses or health professionals in the 1990 and
2000 Census (5% sample) and 2006-2012 ACS. Robust standard errors in
parentheses.

50

Table A5. Effect of Residing in and Bordering Compact State
Robustness for Difference-in-Differences with Nurses
Only NLC
states
(4)

Only treated
counties
(5)

Cluster by
county
(6)

Panel A. In labor force (mean = .895)
Coeff -0.0072
-0.0069
0.0155
(SE) (0.0066)
(0.0064)
(0.0131)

0.0020
(0.0070)

0.0114
(0.0245)

-0.0072
(0.0060)

Panel B. Employed (mean = .877)
Coeff -0.0117
-0.0119*
0.0075
(SE) (0.0071)
(0.0069)
(0.0150)

-0.0054
(0.0075)

-0.0060
(0.0240)

-0.0117**
(0.0058)

Panel C. Usual hours worked (mean = 34.45)
Coeff -0.2956
-0.2049
0.0975
-0.0065
(SE) (0.3180)
(0.3332)
(0.6728)
(0.4323)

0.8767
(1.2721)

-0.2956
(0.2868)

Panel D. Log (wage income) (mean = 10.39)
-0.0431*
-0.0432
-0.0441
-0.0292
(SE) (0.0217)
(0.0261)
(0.0437)
(0.0293)

-0.0465
(0.0780)

-0.0431*
(0.0223)

Panel E. Work in different state (mean = .0674)
-0.0201
-0.0200
-0.0498***
-0.0207*
(SE) (0.0122)
(0.0122)
(0.0125)
(0.0109)

-0.0381*
(0.0193)

-0.0201*
(0.0117)

Panel F. Work in different compact state (mean = .012)
0.0220***
0.0221***
0.0426***
0.0265***
(SE) (0.0071)
(0.0070)
(0.0150)
(0.0082)

0.0085
(0.0239)

0.0220***
(0.0072)

-0.1051***
(0.0313)

-0.0536***
(0.0184)

18,295
16
38

127,633
44
189

Base model
(1)

No controls
(2)

State X Year
FE
(3)

Coeff

Coeff

Coeff

Panel G. Log(Commute time) (mean =3.056 )
-0.0536**
-0.0483*
0.0160
-0.0261
(SE) (0.0256)
(0.0283)
(0.0260)
(0.0246)

Coeff

Observations
Number of states
Number of counties

127,633
44
189

127,633
44
189

127,633
44
189

36,919
22
70

Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient and standard error on an indicator for living in and bordering a
compact state from a separate regression. All specifications include year fixed effects, county fixed
effects, and (except column 2) full controls. Controls include indicators for LPN, male, race category,
education category, a quadradic in age, indicators for single family household, number of children, and
no children under the age of 5, family size (linear), naturalized citizen, and non-citizen. Standard errors
clusted by state (county in specification 6) in parentheses. Sample includes all nurses in the 186 counties
on state borders that are identified in the Census and ACS and have nurses in the sample. Reported
sample size is for Panels A and B. Subsequent panels have smaller sample sizes as they are conditional
on being employed or having positive income. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

51

Table A6: AHA Summary Statistics

One-year Before
Compact

Entire Sample
In a Compact State
Treatment
Full-time Equivalent RNs
Full-time Equivalent LPNs
Full-time Equivalent Total Nurses
RN/Admission
LPN/Admission
Total Nurses/Admission
In a System
For-profit
Not-for-profit
Government
Admissions (Adjusted)
Total Beds
Total In-Patient Days
Observations

0.11
0.03

One-year After
Compact
1.00
0.23

183.20
24.84
208.04
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.53
0.20
0.52
0.28
9507.71
162.20
39671.89

153.93
24.90
178.83
0.03
0.01
0.04
0.54
0.21
0.50
0.29
8206.99
142.68
34022.73

160.58
23.98
184.56
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.57
0.50
0.22
0.28
8605.79
139.53
33485.75

92,488

2,271

2,272

52

