                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           HIGH FREQUENCY EVIDENCE ON THE DEMAND FOR GASOLINE

                                         Laurence Levin
                                        Matthew S. Lewis
                                        Frank A. Wolak

                                       Working Paper 22345
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22345


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2016




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Laurence Levin, Matthew S. Lewis, and Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
High Frequency Evidence on the Demand for Gasoline
Laurence Levin, Matthew S. Lewis, and Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 22345
June 2016
JEL No. L91

                                         ABSTRACT

Daily city-level expenditures and prices are used to estimate the price responsiveness of gasoline
demand in the U.S. Using a frequency of purchase model that explicitly acknowledges the
distinction between gasoline demand and gasoline expenditures, we consistently find the price
elasticity of demand to be an order of magnitude larger than estimates from recent studies using
more aggregated data. We demonstrate directly that higher levels of spatial and temporal
aggregation generate increasingly inelastic demand estimates, and then perform a decomposition
to examine the relative importance of several different sources of bias likely to arise in more
aggregated studies.



Laurence Levin                                             Frank A. Wolak
VISA Decision Sciences                                     Department of Economics
901 Metro Center Boulevard                                 Stanford University
Mail Stop: M3-2B                                           Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Foster City , CA 94404-2775                                and NBER
llevin@visa.com                                            wolak@zia.stanford.edu

Matthew S. Lewis
John E. Walker Department of Economics
Clemson University
228 Sirrine Hall
Box 341309
Clemson, SC 29634-1309
mslewis@clemson.edu
1       Introduction

The price elasticity of demand for gasoline has been extensively studied over the last 40
years, and for good reason. Understanding gasoline demand responsiveness is critical in
determining gasoline tax rates and evaluating alternative policies that target the negative
externalities associated with automobile use (pollution, road congestion, etc.). In the U.S.,
continuing pressure to address climate change has prompted a variety of policy proposals at
the national level as well as legislative action at the state level. Starting in 2015, California
extended its cap-and-trade program for greenhouse gas emissions to cover transportation
fuels, and a number of other states have significantly increased their gasoline tax rates.
Gasoline prices have also become increasingly volatile as a result of periodic shortages in
available refining capacity and increased uncertainty in world oil markets. Understanding
consumers’ ability to respond to such price fluctuations is crucial for predicting the potential
macroeconomic impacts of future petroleum supply disruptions and for evaluating the ben-
efits of policy measures intended to mitigate these effects, such as the maintenance and use
of the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve or the use of temporary gasoline tax suspensions.

         While empirical studies of gasoline demand have adopted a variety of different es-
timation strategies, nearly all of them face the challenge of having to work with imperfect
and often highly aggregated data.1 Many utilize monthly, quarterly, or even annual ag-
gregate proxies of gasoline usage and average prices, often from a single national time
series.2 Others rely on cross-sectional data in an attempt to identify demand elasticities
based on price variation across regions or countries. In reality, individuals make gasoline
consumption decisions on a daily basis, responding directly to the gasoline prices observed
in their local area on that day. Empirical models relating monthly or annual gasoline vol-
umes to average prices across broad geographic areas necessarily aggregate these different
consumption decisions and are likely to mask a significant share of the response by con-
    1
      There are a number of survey articles and meta-analyses available (including Dahl and Sterner, 1991;
Goodwin, 1992; Espey, 1998; Basso and Oum, 2007; Brons et al., 2008) that summarize and analyze the
literature on gasoline demand estimation.
    2
      The most commonly used proxy for gasoline consumption from the U.S. Energy Information Administration
measures the volume of gasoline disappearing from refineries or pipelines minus the estimated volume of
gasoline exported.




                                                    1
sumers a local price change. Moreover, the use of highly aggregated data generally requires
strong assumptions that restrict the demand relationship from varying across locations or
over time. As a result, unobserved heterogeneity in underlying demand has the potential
to bias elasticity estimates. Perhaps not surprisingly given such challenges, these aggregate
studies have produced a wide range of different estimates of demand elasticity. Academic
and government studies evaluating potential policy interventions in gasoline markets fre-
quently rely on estimates from this literature or adopt the same problematic methods to
obtain estimates despite the fact that the elasticity values can often substantially impact
predicted policy outcomes.

         Our study uses daily gasoline prices and citywide gasoline expenditures from 243
U.S. cities to analyze the impact of daily prices on daily gasoline demand. These high-
frequency panel data have several important advantages. First, the expenditure informa-
tion comes from credit card transactions at the point of sale and, therefore, offers a much
more direct measure of consumer purchases. Second, observing sales and prices daily at
the city-level allows us to model demand at the level that purchase decisions actually occur,
rather than by relating average consumption across cities over some time-period to a cor-
responding average price. Finally, our panel data can be exploited by including extensive
fixed effects to better control for persistent differences in gasoline demand over time and
across locations.

         Our approach yields robust estimates of the elasticity of consumers’ demand for
gasoline by utilizing a more accurate point-of-sale measure of consumption and adopting
an empirical strategy that leverages the higher frequency and greater geographic detail of
our consumption and price data to avoid the biases potentially impacting the estimates and
policy conclusions of previous studies. Second, we derive a decomposition identifying the
different sources of bias that arise in more aggregate models and then examine the relative
magnitudes of these different biases by estimating demand models at varying levels of data
aggregation. The results of the decomposition help to clarify why the different empirical
approaches utilized in the literature tend to generate such different estimates of the demand
elasticity.



                                             2
        Unlike the existing literature our analysis also directly addresses the fundamental
difference between gasoline demand (or usage) and gasoline expenditures—a difference
that becomes even more pronounced when using daily data. The price of gasoline on a
particular day can influence both how much gasoline a consumer uses in that day as well as
whether they decide to make a gasoline purchase. Our approach more accurately models
the demand for gasoline in a manner that recognizes the distinction between expenditure
and consumption. We specify a two-equation model of the consumer’s probability of gaso-
line purchase and daily gasoline demand that separates the demand decision from the pur-
chase decision in the most flexible manner possible given our city-level expenditure data.
Because we observe both the number of gasoline transactions and the total expenditures on
gasoline, we are able to separately identify changes in consumers’ probability of purchase
from changes in consumers’ underlying demand for gasoline. Aggregating our two-equation
model of individual gasoline purchase and demand over all individuals in a metropolitan
area yields a model of daily aggregate gasoline expenditures that we can use to recover a
price elasticity of demand for the metropolitan area.

        Using this model we obtain estimates of gasoline demand elasticity ranging from
−.27 to −.35. These responses are nearly an order of magnitude more elastic than some
recent (and commonly cited) estimates from comparable studies (Hughes, Knittel and Sper-
ling, 2008; Small and Van Dender, 2007; Park and Zhao, 2010), implying that changes in
gasoline prices or taxes may have a much larger impact on gasoline usage or greenhouse
gas emissions than one might otherwise predict. Recent events seem to reflect this sub-
stantial responsiveness in gasoline demand. Declining gas prices during 2015 and 2016
have reportedly resulted in dramatic reductions in public transit ridership, increases in ve-
hicle miles traveled, and surge in sales of vehicles with lower fuel economy (Morath, 2016;
Sommer, 2015). While studies using aggregate data from the 1970’s and 80’s commonly
reported gasoline demand elasticity estimates around −.25 to −.303 , our aggregation re-
sults suggest that many of these estimates were also likely to have been biased and that
actual demand response in earlier decades may have been substantially more elastic than
   3
    Surveys of these earlier results include: Dahl and Sterner (1991); Goodwin (1992); Espey (1998); Basso
and Oum (2007)




                                                    3
previously thought.

       Like other studies using similar static models of gasoline demand, our estimates
should be interpreted to reflect the short-run demand response that occurs over a period
of several months or years, rather than the longer-run demand responses that could occur
over decades (potentially capturing expansions in public transit or the development of more
efficient cars). However, our daily data also allow us to also investigate whether demand
or consumer purchase decisions respond differently in the very short run. We consider
a dynamic two-equation frequency of purchase model which incorporates lagged prices,
allowing the immediate response of demand to a price change to differ from the longer
run demand response. We find evidence that gasoline expenditures respond even more
strongly in the days immediately following a price change (mainly due to a response in
the probability of purchase), but this temporary additional response largely dissipates after
4 to 5 days. The response that remains is nearly identical to that estimated by our main
(static) analysis. This further supports the argument that the estimates from our baseline
static model accurately reflect the same type of longer-run response that previous studies
attempt to estimate using monthly or annual data, rather than the very-short run response
that occurs in the days immediately following the shock.

       In the second part of our analysis we investigate the consequences of estimating
demand using more highly aggregated data as is common in previous studies. As a first
step, we use our data to estimate a standard demand model aggregated over time and
across cities to varying degrees. The resulting estimates become increasingly less elastic as
the level of data aggregation increases. Estimating the model using our data aggregated to a
national time-series of monthly total expenditures and average prices results in elasticities
that are indistinguishable from zero, suggesting that studies using aggregated data may
substantially underestimate consumers’ price responsiveness.

       Next, to better understand the impacts of data aggregation, we derive a decompo-
sition identifying three distinct components of bias that arise in more aggregate demand
models. First, demand models that assume a common price coefficient are often estimated
even though the underlying coefficients have the potential to differ across cities. While the



                                             4
coefficient obtained from this restricted model does estimate a weighted average of these
coefficients, the weighting applied to each individual coefficient will generally change when
the model is estimated at a more spatially and temporally aggregated level. A second possi-
ble source of bias arises from correlation between the aggregated prices and the aggregated
day-of-sample and city fixed effects that appear in the disaggregated model. While this
bias will not occur in panel data models that retain a complete set of two-way fixed effects,
many of the studies in the existing literature estimating time-series or cross-sectional mod-
els or panel models with incomplete fixed effects may be subject to this form of bias. The
final source of potential bias arises when correlation between the average prices and error
term is created as a result of aggregation. The typical OLS identification assumptions for
a disaggregate demand model would require the price in a given city on a given day to be
uncorrelated with the unobserved demand shock in that city on that day. However, correla-
tion between prices and demand shocks on other days or in other cities can cause the prices
and errors in the aggregated panel data to be correlated, resulting in biased estimates.

       Comparing our daily city-level estimates with those obtained using aggregated data
we are able to estimate the magnitude of the bias resulting from each of these three compo-
nents. The results reveal how the primary source of bias differs depending on the dimension
and degree of aggregation. Observed biases are largest in time series models where time-
period fixed effects can no longer be used to control for demand differences over time.

       The sources of bias identified in our decomposition and the magnitudes suggested
in our aggregated regressions help to provide a more systematic explanation of why stud-
ies using different methodologies have obtained different elasticity estimates. Consistent
with our findings, recent time-series studies including Hughes et al. (2008) and Park and
Zhao (2010) tend to produce very inelastic estimates, potentially caused by significant pos-
itive bias. Studies estimating panel regressions (though at a more aggregated level than
ours) including Davis and Kilian (2011) and Li et al. (2014) are not subject to the most
significant source of bias and report more elastic estimates. However, these panel estimates
are still lower than those obtained in our daily city-level regressions. Our decomposition
provides guidance to researchers in evaluating whether particular market environments or
data sources may be more susceptible to the forms of correlation that are likely to result in

                                             5
bias when estimating demand models using aggregate data, and is sufficiently general that
it can be used to evaluate almost any form of aggregation.

       Accurate estimates of gasoline demand elasticity are crucial to making effective pub-
lic policy decisions. As we discuss in Section 7, the stronger demand response revealed in
our analysis suggests that carbon tax and fuel tax policies may have a substantially larger
impact on fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions than might be concluded based on other
recent studies. Similarly, the predicted impact on gasoline prices resulting from a supply
restriction such as a refinery or pipeline outage or even from the implementation of an
emissions cap-and-trade policy is likely to be significantly smaller than might otherwise
be expected. Our findings help clarify the need to be cautious when in utilizing elastic-
ity estimates based on aggregate data and highlight how the availability of more detailed
information could substantially improve policy analysis.


2     Approaches to Estimating Gasoline Demand

2.1   Common Estimation Strategies

There are a number of survey articles available (including Dahl and Sterner, 1991; Good-
win, 1992; Espey, 1998; Basso and Oum, 2007) that summarize and analyze the literature
on gasoline demand estimation. Nevertheless, it is helpful to provide a brief overview of
some of the benefits and limitations of a number of commonly used empirical approaches
in order to motivate our analysis and highlight the contribution of our study.

       Most studies of aggregate gasoline demand estimate a simple log-linear model of
quantity as a function of the gasoline price and other variables such as average income to
control for shifts in demand. This specification is chosen mostly for convenience, so that the
coefficient on price represents an estimate of demand elasticity. A number of studies have
investigated alternative functional forms, and some find alternative forms to have a better
fit (e.g., Hsing, 1990), but generally the resulting elasticity estimates are not substantially
impacted by specification (see Sterner and Dahl, 1992; Espey, 1998).

       Such “static” demand models can be appropriate as long as the researcher believes


                                              6
that the price and quantity data in the sample represent observations from a stable rela-
tionship. In situations where it is thought that gasoline demand may take multiple peri-
ods to adjust to price changes, researchers often include a lagged dependent variable (the
parsimonious partial adjustment model approach) or specify a distributed lag model (the
more flexible approach) in which lagged values of prices and other control variables are
also included in the demand equation. Coefficients on lagged prices capture how demand
temporarily deviates from the longer-run equilibrium relationship as adjustment occurs, al-
lowing the sum of the coefficients on current and lagged prices to more accurately capture
the overall elasticity of demand in the longer run.


2.2   Identification

Regardless of functional form, demand specifications are most typically estimated using
OLS. As a result, if sufficient controls cannot be included in the demand equation, endo-
geneity of the price variable can arise as a result of supply side responses to unobserved
demand shifts. The instrumental variables approaches often adopted in other contexts are
rarely used in studies of gasoline demand due to a lack of credible instruments. Time-series
studies and even some panel-data studies rely almost exclusively on macroeconomic con-
trol variables, like average income, and seasonal dummy variables (when relevant), which
are certainly jointly determined with aggregate gasoline demand but do not perfectly pre-
dict fluctuations in gasoline usage. In this case, it is reasonable to expect this endogeneity
bias to make price elasticity estimates more inelastic than they should be. Higher levels of
data aggregation tend to exacerbate this problem, making it difficult to include sufficient
control variables and still have enough variation left in the data to identify demand. Our
identification strategy leverages the availability of high-frequency panel data to include ex-
tensive sets of time and cross-sectional fixed effects in order to eliminate potential sources
of endogeneity.

       Two main factors determine the severity of bias that will result from price endo-
geneity in OLS estimates of demand: the prevalence and magnitude of unobserved demand
shocks relative to unobserved supply shocks and the elasticity of the supply curve. If de-
mand shifts are relatively small or the relevant supply curve is fairly flat, then observed

                                              7
variation in price will mainly be the result of upward and downward shifts in the supply
curve. Correspondingly, our empirical specifications attempt to include fixed effects that
will remove most of the unobserved variation in demand while leaving a sufficient level of
supply variation to accurately identify the demand elasticity. Moreover, given the nature of
the gasoline storage and distribution infrastructure, the daily supply of gasoline is likely to
respond very elastically to any remaining daily demand shocks that are not absorbed by the
included fixed effects.4

         Most of the variation in daily city-level gasoline demand is likely to come from
persistent differences across cities in per-capita gasoline consumption and from economic
changes that influence gasoline demand over time nationwide. These demand shifts repre-
sent the primary sources of potential endogeneity, and so our baseline demand specification
controls for these by including both city and day-of-sample fixed effects. The fixed effects
also remove a significant amount of supply variation including that generated by fluctua-
tions crude oil prices over time or by persistent regional differences in costs, competition,
environmental restrictions, or gasoline tax levels. However, temporary regional gasoline
supply shocks resulting from refinery outages or pipeline disruptions or regional variation
in seasonal gasoline content restrictions can create significant variation in the relative price
levels across cities that will not be absorbed by fixed effects. Our identification of demand
relies largely on these periodic shifts in local supply. While it is possible that demand shifts
remain even with city and day-of-sample fixed effects included in the model, these will
mostly come from predictable seasonal patterns or day-of-week purchase patterns which
can be adequately planned for through adjustments to inventories, refinery production, or
pipeline delivery schedules. Any additional idiosyncratic day-to-day fluctuations in local
purchasing are likely small enough to be easily accommodated using local terminal in-
ventories, so that relative price fluctuations not absorbed by city and day-of-sample fixed
effects should entirely reflect localized supply-side cost shocks. In other words, within the
   4
     Based on average inventory levels and daily consumption, there is typically enough gasoline stored at local
distribution terminals and refineries to supply 4 weeks worth of demand (for more information see the U.S.
Energy Information Administration’s Petroleum Supply Monthly). In addition, gas stations often have several
days of inventory in their underground tanks. Day-to-day fluctuations in demand can easily be supplied from a
combination of these sources, allowing intertemporal arbitrage that minimizes the likelihood of any substantial
price response.



                                                       8
context of our model, the relevant daily supply curve is likely to be almost perfectly elastic,
minimizing any potential for endogeneity bias in our OLS estimates. For robustness, how-
ever, we are also able to estimate alternative specifications that include city-specific sets of
month-of-year and day-of-week fixed effects to control for potential differences across cities
in seasonal or weekly demand patterns yet still preserve the supply variation resulting from
unexpected refinery or pipeline disruptions.

         While studies using aggregate data generally must resort to controlling for demand
shocks with observable controls and/or a more limited set of fixed effects, several recent
papers have attempted identify and utilize instrumental variables to more accurately model
demand. Hughes et al. (2008) estimate a specification of nationwide monthly gasoline de-
mand using crude oil production disruptions as instruments for monthly gasoline prices, but
find the resulting elasticity estimates to be nearly indistinguishable from those obtained in
their baseline OLS specifications. Davis and Kilian (2011) utilize monthly state-level aggre-
gate gasoline consumption and average prices to estimate a first-differenced model in which
changes in state gasoline tax rates serve as instrumental variables for changes in gasoline
price. Their preferred IV estimate suggests a demand elasticity of −0.46 (s.e. = 0.23), while
the corresponding OLS monthly state-level panel regression produces a substantially less
elastic estimate of −0.19 (s.e. = 0.04) and an estimation using data aggregated to the na-
tional monthly time series level produces an even smaller elasticity of −0.09 (s.e. = 0.04).5
Davis and Kilian’s IV estimate is much closer to our disaggregated elasticity estimates, sug-
gesting that both their IV approach and our disaggregated panel fixed effects approach may
be overcoming the potential simultaneity bias caused by baseline demand differences over
time.6 While we don’t observe enough state tax changes during our sample to consider such
an instrument, as another robustness check we do estimate an IV specification (described in
Appendix C) using regional wholesale spot gasoline prices as an instrument for local retail
   5
      Coglianese, Davis, Kilian and Stock (2015) point out that the IV estimate of Davis and Kilian (2011) may
be biased as a result of consumers anticipating the tax change and buying more gas in the month before the tax
increase than in the month after. When one month leads and lags are included to control for this, the elasticity
estimate falls to −0.36 (s.e. = 0.24), nearly identical to the estimate we obtain from our frequency of purchase
model.
    6
      An important caveat is that their measure differs from ours in that it focuses on the demand response
occurring during the month in which the corresponding state gasoline tax rate change occurs, which is likely to
reflect a shorter run elasticity than is captured in our baseline model.



                                                       9
prices and obtain results similar to our OLS regressions.


3       Retail Gasoline Price and Expenditure Data

Our data contains daily gasoline price and expenditure data for 243 metropolitan areas
throughout the United States from February 1, 2006 to December 31, 2009. For each city
average daily retail prices of unleaded regular gasoline are obtained from the American
Automobile Association’s (AAA) Daily Fuel Gauge Report. The prices reported by AAA
are provided by the Oil Price Information Service (OPIS) which constructs the city average
prices using station-level prices collected from fleet credit card transactions and direct feeds
from gas stations.7

         Our expenditure data were obtained from the financial services company Visa Inc.
The data reflect the total dollar amount of purchases by all Visa debit and credit card users
at gas stations within a city on a given day. As with the price data, cities are defined
based on the geographic definition of the associated Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).
In addition to total citywide expenditures, the Visa data also include the number of gasoline
transactions or purchases taking place at gas stations in each city during each day. This
allows us to separate the daily probability of purchase from the daily demand for gasoline.
We also observe the total number of Visa cards that are actively purchasing (any product)
within the current month. We use this as a measure of the total population of cards at risk
of recording a gasoline purchase during each day of that month.8

         Although the data has many advantages, Visa does not directly observe the price
paid at the pump or the quantity of gasoline purchased by the customer. Instead, we con-
struct a measure of the total quantity of gasoline purchased in a particular MSA on a par-
ticular day by dividing the total expenditures of Visa card customers at gas stations by the
    7
      The OPIS price survey is the most comprehensive in the industry and is commonly used in research on
gasoline pricing.
    8
      At two points during the sample period (August 1, 2006 and August 1, 2007) Visa made small adjustments
to their merchant classification methodology which produce discrete jumps in our measure of gas station ex-
penditures in some cities. To correct for this we estimate all models with additional city-specific data-period
fixed effects allowing the average expenditures and transaction counts to differ before, between, and after these
two dates.




                                                      10
average regular unleaded gasoline price in the city on that day. This approximation raises
several potential issues which we explore and address below.

         First, in dividing total gas station expenditures by the regular gasoline price we are
ignoring the fact that around 15% of gas purchases are for mid-grade or premium gasoline
which sell at higher prices. If the fraction of regular-grade purchases were fairly constant
over time, we would not expect this unobserved price difference to impact our demand
elasticity estimates. However, the results of Hastings and Shapiro (2013) suggest that some
consumers may substitute from premium to regular grade gasoline when prices increase. In
Appendix A we discuss this possibility in more detail, derive an expression for the potential
bias, and use the estimates of Hastings and Shapiro (2013) to show that any such bias is
very likely to be negligible in our context.

         A second and potentially more important source of bias arises from the fact that to-
tal gas station expenditures are also likely to include some non-gasoline purchases. Simply
dividing total expenditure by the gasoline price to produce a measure of quantity ignores
this possibility. If non-gasoline purchases are present, expenditures will appear more elastic
to gasoline price changes. Even if the prices and demand for non-gasoline items are not
correlated with the price of gasoline, dividing these expenditures by the price of gasoline
will mechanically generate an elasticity of −1 for the non-gasoline portion of the trans-
action.9 In general, the share of revenues generated by non-gasoline items is small but
non-trivial. According to the 2007 U.S. Economic Census, gasoline stations in the U.S. re-
ceive just over 21% of their total revenues from non-fuel sales.10 Fortunately, biases from
non-fuel purchases are only a concern for in-store transactions, and our data includes the
daily city-level expenditures and number of transactions separately for pay-at-pump and in-
store purchases. Pay-at-pump purchases represent over 76% of total expenditures and over
64% of all transactions in our data.11 Estimating gasoline demand using only pay-at-pump
   9
      See Appendix B for a more complete discussion of the resulting bias.
  10
      Most of these non-fuel revenues come from food, cigarettes, and alcohol. Fuel sales often generate less
than half of a station’s profits, but given the high volume sold it still represents the vast majority of station
revenues.
   11
      On average pay-at-pump transactions are larger (in dollar value) than in-store transactions. The most likely
explanation is that some in-store transactions include only non-fuel items which tend to be less expensive than
the typical gasoline purchase. Unfortunately, our data do not allow us to examine the distribution of individual
transaction amounts since we only observe the total expenditure for the day in each city.


                                                       11
transactions gives an alternative estimate of elasticity that is not subject to this bias and may
give some indication of the magnitude of the bias for in-store transactions. In addition, in
Appendix B we derive the magnitude of the bias that would be expected when non-gasoline
expenditures are present in the data, and use outside estimates of non-gasoline expendi-
tures to construct bias-corrected elasticity estimates. The results are consistent with the
notion that estimating elasticities using pay-at-pump purchases fully eliminates (or perhaps
even over-compensates for) any bias resulting from non-gasoline expenditures.

        In the interest of completeness our analysis will present estimates utilizing all pur-
chases as well as estimates using only pay-at-pump purchases. To be conservative however,
we will mostly use pay-at-pump purchase data in our alternative specifications and supple-
mentary analysis.


3.1   Descriptive Statistics

Before we begin our empirical analysis it is helpful to highlight some important features
of the data. First, the price data reveal significant idiosyncratic fluctuation across cities.
Though prices in all cities are impacted by common factors like world oil prices, there are
many other factors that influence prices locally. Persistent price differences across states
arise as a result of differences in gasoline tax rates or in the blends of gasoline that are
required. More importantly, significant transitory differences in daily prices across the MSAs
arise frequently during our sample period. Figure 1 compares retail price fluctuations in Los
Angeles, Chicago, and New York over a typical 100 day period in 2007. It is clear that daily
city-level prices provide much richer price variation than monthly data with which to study
demand response.

        Daily gasoline expenditures also follow different patterns across MSAs, presumably
due to both independent retail price movements and other city-specific events. Note that
daily expenditures necessarily change with retail prices because they represent the total
quantity purchased multiplied by the price paid. As noted earlier, we create a measure of the
total quantity of gasoline purchased each day using total daily expenditures divided by the
daily average retail price for each MSA . Figure 2 presents a normalized seven-day moving


                                               12
            Figure 1: Daily Average Retail Gasoline Prices for Selected Cities


          3.40




          3.20




          3.00




          2.80


             8/22/07        9/11/07         10/1/07        10/21/07     11/10/07     11/30/07

                                            Retail Price − Los Angeles, CA
                                            Retail Price − Chicago, IL
                                            Retail Price − New York, NY




Figure 2: Seven Day Moving Average of Total Quantity Purchased for Selected Cities Nor-
malized by the City Average


         1.15


         1.10


         1.05


         1.00


         0.95


         0.90
            8/22/07        9/11/07          10/1/07        10/21/07     11/10/07     11/30/07

                       7−day Moving Average of Normalized Quantity Purchased
                          Los Angeles, CA              Chicago, IL           New York, NY




                                                      13
average of this measure of the daily quantity purchased for the same three cities depicted
in Figure 1 over the same period.12 The daily quantities for each MSA are normalized by
the average quantity purchased in that MSA over the sample period. Just as with the prices,
the quantities move together at times but also exhibit significant differences. As an example
of the type of variation that will be important for our empirical identification of demand,
note that as the daily average price in California increases from being the lowest to the
highest of the three cities by the end of the time period in Figure 1, the normalized quantity
demanded falls from being the highest to the lowest over the same time period in Figure 2.

          The daily expenditure data allows us to examine high frequency features of gasoline
purchase patterns. Gasoline demand is known to exhibit strongly seasonal variation, and
our data reflects this general pattern. We are also able to document a very strong within-
week pattern in gasoline purchasing behavior. Our data show that consumers buy roughly
17% more gasoline on Fridays than the daily average and buy 15% less on Sundays than
the daily average. Within each city this pattern varies to some extent but Friday is always
the highest demand day and Sunday is always the lowest demand day.

          Variation in the total expenditures across days can result either from fluctuations in
the number of transactions that occur or from fluctuations in the amount people purchase
per transaction. The within-week pattern in expenditure per transaction is notably different
from that of overall expenditures, and it exhibits much less day-to-day variation overall.
This reveals that the within-week pattern observed in total expenditures results largely
from fluctuations in the number of transactions occurring in each day. Figures reporting
average expenditures by day of week and average expenditures per transaction by day of
week are presented in Appendix E.


4        Model of Consumer Demand and Purchase Behavior

Because we are working with daily data, the effect of price on the amount of gasoline
purchased may be very different from the effect on the amount of gasoline people are
    12
    A moving average of daily quantity is used here to eliminate the strong within-week purchase patterns that
are described below.



                                                     14
actually demanding at any given time. Consumers can buy and store gasoline in their car,
which implies that a consumer’s daily demand for gasoline can differ from its expenditures
on gasoline. This section presents a theoretical model that recovers an estimate of the
daily price elasticity of the unobserved demand for gasoline from data on the daily number
of purchases and expenditures on gasoline for each MSA. A latent customer-level daily
demand for gasoline and daily purchase probability give rise to an econometric model for
customer-level daily gasoline expenditures that we then aggregate to the MSA level.

        Suppose the daily demand for each customer in a city j on a day d takes the form:

                           djd = exp(αj + λd + βln(pjd ) + jd ),                             (1)

where αj is a fixed-effect for MSA j, λd is the fixed-effect for day-of-sample d, pjd is the price
of gasoline for day d in region j, and β is the price elasticity of demand. For each j, the jd
are a sequence of unobserved mean-zero random variables that may be heteroscedastic and
correlated over time within each MSA but are distributed independently across MSAs and
are independent of pjd . Consumers must periodically purchase gasoline to satisfy this level
of daily usage. The probability that a consumer in MSA j purchases gasoline on a day d is
assumed to equal:

                                       ρjd = γj + δd .                                        (2)

where γj is a fixed-effect for MSA j and δd is the day-of-sample fixed effect for day d. We
assume that the expenditure on gasoline during day d by each customer in MSA j, ejd , is
related to the consumer’s daily purchase probability and daily gasoline demand through the
following relationship:

                                               pjd djd
                                       ejd =           .                                      (3)
                                                ρjd

This model implies that the actual quantity of gasoline purchased (if purchase occurs) times
the daily probability of purchase is equal to the daily quantity demanded by that customer.
Because our data is at the MSA level we aggregate the customer-level model of daily gaso-
line expenditures over the total number of customers in MSA j during day d, Njd . The
number of customers in MSA j during day d making a gasoline purchase is equal to njd .

                                                15
Therefore, Ejd , total gasoline expenditures during day d for MSA j can be expressed as:
                                              pjd d(pjd , jd )njd
                            Ejd = ejd njd =                        .                      (4)
                                                     ρjd

       Because we observe the total number of active Visa cards (Njd ) in MSA j during day
d, and the total number of gasoline transactions (njd ), njd /Njd is an unbiased estimate of
ρjd , the probability of purchase for MSA j during day d. Accordingly, we can estimate the
parameters of equation 2 using OLS applied to:
                                   njd
                                       = γj + δd + νjd ,                                  (5)
                                   Njd
where the νjd are a sequence of mean-zero random variables that may be heteroscedastic
and correlated with jd and over time within each MSA but are distributed independently
across MSAs. We can use the fitted values ρ̂jd = γ̂j + δ̂d to obtain a consistent estimates
of the ρjd . Substituting the estimated purchase probability into Equation 4 and taking logs
generates our econometric model of gasoline expenditures:

             ln(Ejd ) = αj + λd + (β + 1)ln(pjd ) + ln(njd ) − ln(ρ̂jd ) + jd .          (6)

This model can alternatively be expressed in terms of the quantity purchased:

                ln(Qjd ) = αj + λd + βln(pjd ) + ln(njd ) − ln(ρ̂jd ) + jd ,             (7)

       The empirical model in Equation 7 makes it possible to identify the underlying MSA-
level elasticity of demand for gasoline (β) using data on prices, the quantity purchased, and
the number of transactions. In Equations 1 & 2 the demand and probability of purchase are
both assumed to vary by city and day of sample, but different combinations of fixed effects
can easily be used to generate alternative specifications for each of these functions. We will
also consider a specification that includes both lagged and current prices in the demand
and purchase probability equations.


5     Estimation and Results

5.1   Frequency of Purchase Model

We begin by estimating city-level demand for gasoline using the model expressed in Equa-
tion 7. Results are reported in Table 1. Following the discussion of data concerns in Sec-

                                               16
                    Table 1: Estimates of Baseline Empirical Model of Demand

                            Dependent Variable = ln(quantityjd )
                                   Pay-at-Pump Only                  All Purchases
                                 (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)
   ln(pricejd )                −0.295 −0.364 −0.301          −0.378 −0.465 −0.408
                                (0.031) (0.022) (0.006)        (0.030) (0.022) (0.008)
   ln(# of transactionsjd )                  1      0.996                   1      1.021
                                                   (0.002)                       (0.004)
   ln(predicted probability                −1     −0.003                  −1       0.006
      of purchasejd )                              (0.001)                       (0.002)
Note: Day-of-sample fixed effects and city fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors in
Columns 1 & 4 are robust and clustered to allow serial correlation within city. Standard errors for the remaining
specifications are generated using a nonparametric bootstrap that allows errors to be serially correlated within
a city and jointly distributed with the error term in the first-stage regression.



tion 3, our main specifications are estimated using pay-at-pump purchases only, but we
also report the results when all purchases are used. The model implies that coefficients
on ln(njd ) and ln(ρ̂jd ) should be 1 and −1 respectively. We estimate the model with this
restriction imposed and without it. To facilitate comparisons with earlier studies of gasoline
demand we also include (in Columns 1 & 4) estimates from a basic log-linear aggregate
demand model. For the basic model we report heterskedacticity consistent standard error
estimates that allow for arbitrary serial correlation within each city. Standard error esti-
mates for the purchase model are generated using a nonparametric bootstrap to account
for the fact that the predicted probability of purchase is estimated in a first-stage regres-
sion.13

          When estimated using pay-at-pump transactions only, the model with all restrictions
yields an elasticity estimate of −.36, while the unrestricted model produces a similar elas-
ticity estimate of −.30. The unrestricted coefficient on ln(njd ) is very close to 1, but the
  13
     Given that there are C cities and D days in the sample, the procedure first re-samples with replacement C
pairs of OLS residual vectors of length D from the purchase probability equation and the expenditure equation
for the same city. These are combined with the OLS estimates of the fitted values for both equations to compute
re-sampled purchase frequencies and expenditure levels vectors of length DC. The two-step estimation pro-
cedure is then repeated for the resampled purchase frequency equation and then for the expenditure equation
with the logarithm of the fitted value from the estimated purchase frequency equation used as a regressor in the
expenditure equation to obtain estimates for the parameter values for both equations for that re-sample. The
sample variance of these re-samples is then used to compute the estimated standard errors for both parameter
vectors.


                                                        17
coefficient on ln(ρ̂jd ) is very close to zero; far from the −1 implied by the theory. This
may be because the fixed effects absorb most of the variation in the probability of purchase
(given the functional form specified in Equation 7), and any variation left may be measured
with error. The estimated price elasticity is still similar to that from the model with restric-
tions imposed. Estimates of both the restricted and unrestricted models are somewhat more
elastic when using data from all purchases as would be expected if the inclusion of in-store
purchases results in some bias from non-gasoline transactions. Nevertheless, the pattern of
estimates across specifications is similar for the pay-at-pump and all-transaction samples.
The coefficient estimates from the basic demand model in Columns 1 & 4 are quite close to
those generated by our frequency of purchase model.

       Including time fixed effects helps to control for shifts in demand, but it can also mask
supply shifts that could help to better identify demand elasticity. Hence, as an alternative
specification we estimate the demand model using month-of-sample fixed effects rather
than day-of-sample. Day-of-week fixed effects are also included to control for the weekly
pattern in demand suggested by Figure 3. The resulting coefficient estimates, reported in
Table 2, Column 1, are very similar to those of the benchmark pay-at-pump specification,
with the price elasticity estimated to be −.28, suggesting that month-of-sample and day-of-
sample fixed effects appear to work similarly in controlling for macroeconomic or gasoline
market specific fluctuations that might impact gasoline demand at the national level.

       In all the specifications estimated to this point, demand elasticities are identified
off of city-specific variation in price and quantity purchased. However, large city-specific
or regional demand shifts occurring over time have the potential to bias these elasticity
estimates. Therefore, we estimate an additional set of specifications that include additional
controls for city-specific demand patterns. Table 2, Column 2 reports the results of a regres-
sion including month-of-sample effects for each city as well as day-of-week fixed effects.
Column 3 contains the estimates from a model including a full set of national day-of-sample
fixed effects in addition to the city-specific month-of-year effects to allow seasonal patterns
in demand to differ across cities. Column 4 adds further flexibility by including both day-
of-sample and city-specific month-of-sample fixed effects. The estimated elasticities vary
somewhat across these models, but are all of a similar magnitude to the baseline estimates

                                              18
                        Table 2: Estimates from Alternative Specifications

                            Dependent Variable = ln(quantityjd )
                                                Pay-at-Pump Transactions
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)
        ln(pricejd )                  −0.278       −0.271       −0.301   −0.351
                                       (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.006)  (0.005)
        ln(# of transactionsjd )        1.007        1.010        0.989    0.994
                                       (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.002)  (0.002)
        ln(predicted probability        0.009        0.011      −0.003   −0.002
           of purchasejd )             (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.001)  (0.001)

        Fixed Effects:
          Day of Week                               X              X
          Month of Sample                           X
          Day of Sample                                                            X               X
          City                                      X
          Month of Year × City                                                     X
          Month of Sample × City                                   X                               X
             Note: Standard errors are generated using a nonparametric bootstrap that allows
             errors to be arbitrary serial correlated within a city and jointly distributed with the
             error term in the first-stage regression.



in Table 1. It is important to note, however, that once separate month-of-sample fixed ef-
fects are included for each city they absorb any deviations from the national average that
last longer than one month. As a result, the elasticity estimate in Column 4 only reflects the
response in demand that occurs in the 4 weeks following a change in price. This estimate is
slightly more elastic than in the other specifications suggesting that very short run demand
response is even more elastic than that which persists over a longer time horizon.14 In gen-
eral, however, the results reveal that relatively elastic estimates of demand can be obtained
using a variety of different sources of variation within the data and are not sensitive to a
particular functional form.

        Though the ability to include extensive fixed effects should minimize any poten-
tial endogeneity bias that might result from unobserved demand shocks, it is difficult to
conclude with certainty that these demand shocks have been entirely eliminated. Unob-
  14
   This result is confirmed when we explore the differences in longer-run vs shorter-run demand response in
more detail in Section 5.2.


                                                         19
served city-specific demand shocks could still bias our elasticity estimates downward if lo-
cal distribution terminals are not able to plan ahead or use inventories to costlessly absorb
these differences (i.e., if the local supply curve is not highly elastic with respect to daily
adjustments). As a final robustness check, we have estimated an instrumental variables
specification that utilizes spot market (wholesale) gasoline prices from large regional re-
fining centers (New York Harbor, the Gulf Coast, or Los Angeles) as instruments for local
retail prices. Market-wide fluctuations in wholesale gasoline prices resulting from a com-
bination of changes in demand and changes in crude oil and refining costs are captured
by day-of-sample fixed effects, but differences in wholesale gasoline prices between regions
still exhibit significant variation largely driven by unexpected refinery shocks. Under the
assumption that this regional variation in spot prices is relatively unaffected by temporary
city-specific demand fluctuations, using this IV approach could help to eliminate any re-
maining endogeneity generated by correlation between city-level prices and local demand
shocks.

          The results of these IV specifications (described in more detail and reported in Ap-
pendix C) largely confirm that the robustness of the main OLS findings. The IV estimates of
both the basic aggregate demand model and the frequency of purchase model are slightly
more elastic but of a relatively similar magnitude to those reported in Tables 1 & 2.

          What is most striking about these findings, in general, is that the elasticity estimates
from both our frequency of purchase model and the basic log-linear aggregate demand
model are consistently several times more elastic than those from comparable recent studies
including Hughes et al. (2008) whose estimates range from −.034 to −.077 for the period
2000–2006 and Park and Zhao (2010) whose time-varying estimates ranges from around
−.05 in 2000 to around −.15 in 2008. Our daily city-level purchase data clearly reveal a
much greater degree of demand response than has been suggested by much of the literature.

          It is important to highlight that the use of daily data rather than, say, monthly
data does not imply that our elasticity estimates describe a “shorter run” demand response.
The relevant response horizon of any elasticity estimate depends on the variation in prices
used to identify the response parameter and when these movements occur relative to when



                                                20
demand is observed. Prices change in this market on a daily basis and consumers make
purchase decisions on a daily basis, so behavior is likely to be more accurately represented
using a model of daily demand for gasoline. However, as in most studies, our baseline model
is static and does not allow the degree of demand responsiveness to change depending on
how long it has been since a price change occurred, so price changes occurring several
months ago are just as important as price changes occurring days or weeks ago in terms of
identifying demand elasticity.15 As a result, we believe that our main elasticity estimates
reflect the same type of consumer response that other studies attempt to measure using
more aggregated monthly or quarterly data. In the next section, we leverage our daily data
by relaxing these assumptions in the model to investigate if demand responds differently in
the very short run.


5.2    Short Run vs Longer Run Demand Elasticity

To this point our models have assumed that prices influence gasoline demand entirely
through the current gasoline price, implying that all demand response occurs immediately.
In practice, however, it is not unusual for the demand curves to be more elastic in the
short run than in the long run. Perhaps the most common of these situations occurs when
consumers can hold inventories and in the short run choose to add to or withdraw from
inventories in response to price changes even when they do not significantly change their
consumption in the long run. Gasoline consumers obviously hold small inventories of gaso-
line in their vehicle’s tank, so this behavior is feasible on a limited scale. Similarly, con-
sumers may have the ability to postpone (or expedite) some necessary trips or utilize public
transportation in response to a temporary increase (or decrease) in price, regardless of how
they change their overall driving habits. These types of behavior imply that, for a given
gasoline price today, the amount of gasoline purchased today might depend on whether the
price has been at or near its current level for a while or whether it was significantly higher
or lower a few days or a few weeks ago.

        The elasticity estimate from most gasoline demand models (including our baseline
  15
     Specifically, our model of daily demand implies that if the daily price rose by 10 percent and remained
at this higher level, daily gasoline demand would remain lower by an amount equal to 10 percent times our
demand elasticity for as long as the daily price remained 10 percent higher.


                                                    21
model) represent some average of these shorter-run and longer-run responses. However,
with daily data it is possible to separately identify these different responses by allowing
demand to depend on past prices as well as current price levels. Moreover, by using the
structure of our consumer purchase model and including past prices along with current
prices in both the individual demand and purchase equations, we are able to decompose
any potential short-run responses to examine whether consumers appear to be significantly
altering gasoline usage or simply shifting when they make purchases in the days following a
price change. If consumers are substituting away from driving in response to price increases
then their daily demand may be influenced by past prices. If consumers are using their
inventories of gasoline strategically, both current and past prices may influence a consumer’s
probability of purchase. We alter Equations 1 & 2 to allow for these types of behavior. The
demand for each customer in a city j on a day d can be specified as:
                                                       X
                 djd = exp(αj + λd + βln(pjd ) +             ζl ln(pj,d−l ) + jd ),             (8)
                                                       l∈L

where pj,d−l represents the price l days prior to the current period and L represents the set
of lags lengths included in the specification. Similarly, the probability of purchase can be
expressed as:
                                                        X
                      ρjd = γj + δd + ψln(pjd ) +             ηl ln(pj,d−l ).                    (9)
                                                        l∈L

Leaving the consumer purchase model from Section 3 otherwise unchanged results in the
following final representation of the aggregate quantity purchased in city j on day d:
                                          X
       ln(Qjd ) = αj + λd + βln(pjd ) +         ζl ln(pj,d−l ) + ln(njd ) − ln(ρ̂jd ) + jd ,   (10)
                                          l∈L

where the predicted purchase probability can be estimated from an OLS regression of:

                   njd                         X
                       = γj + δd + ψln(pjd ) +   ηl ln(pj,d−l ) + νjd .                         (11)
                   Njd
                                                      l∈L


       In both the demand equation and the purchase probability equation we include log
of the current price and the lagged log prices from each of the previous 5 days as well as
longer lags of 10 and 20 days. Lags longer than 20 days are omitted as their inclusion


                                                 22
                        Table 3: Purchase Model with Lagged Prices

                                         Traditional Model           Purchase Frequency Model
                                             Demand                  Purchase      Demand
                                             Equation                Equation      Equation
                                                 (1)                   (2)            (3)
  ln(pricejd )                                −0.775                 −0.009        −0.458
                                               (0.081)                (0.002)       (0.009)
  ln(pricej,d−1 )                             −0.607                 −0.028          0.098
                                               (0.098)                (0.002)       (0.008)
  ln(pricej,d−2 )                               0.637                  0.023       −0.002
                                               (0.091)                (0.001)       (0.007)
  ln(pricej,d−3 )                               0.393                  0.014         0.052
                                               (0.044)                (0.001)       (0.006)
  ln(pricej,d−4 )                               0.184                  0.003         0.020
                                               (0.046)                (0.002)       (0.007)
  ln(pricej,d−5 )                               0.055                  0.003       −0.011
                                               (0.039)                (0.002)       (0.007)
  ln(pricej,d−10 )                            −0.076                 −0.003          0.0002
                                               (0.021)                (0.001)       (0.003)
  ln(pricej,d−20 )                            −0.119                 −0.001          0.004
                                               (0.021)                (0.001)       (0.004)
  ln(# of transactionsjd )                                                           0.995
                                                                                    (0.002)
  ln(predicted probability                                                         −0.003
     of purchasejd )                                                                (0.001)
  Total Implied Elasticity                     −0.308                  0.061       −0.296
  20 Days After a Price Change
Note: City and day of sample fixed effects are present in all specifications. The dependent variable in
Column 1 is the log of the average quantity purchased at the pump per capita by Visa customers in city
j on day d. Standard errors in Column 1 are robust and clustered to allow arbitrary serial correlation
within a city. The dependent variables Columns 2 & 3 are the share of Visa customers purchasing at
the pump and the log of the quantity purchased at the pump by Visa customers in city j on day d.
Standard errors in Columns 2 & 3 are generated using a nonparametric bootstrap that allows errors to
be arbitrary serial correlated within a city and jointly distributed with the error term in the first-stage
regression.




                                                   23
requires the use of a shorter sample for estimation, but when price lags of 40 and 60 days
are included their coefficients are small in magnitude and do not substantially affect the
estimates of the existing coefficients. For comparison we also estimate a similar version
of the more traditional single-equation demand specification that includes lagged prices.
Coefficient estimate from the traditional model are reported in in Column 1 of Table 3
and estimates from the demand and purchase probability equations from the frequency of
purchase model are reported in Columns 2 & 3. All specifications are estimated using only
pay-at-pump purchases. The final row of the table includes the total implied elasticity of
the probability of purchase or of demand response after 20 days.16 Estimates from the
traditional demand model and the demand equation in the purchase model are directly
comparable to the corresponding specifications without lags in of Table 1.

         In the traditional demand model (Column 1), the coefficients on the current and
previous day’s log price are negative and much larger in magnitude than the corresponding
elasticity estimated without lags. The sum of the first two coefficient estimates in Column 1
imply that the amount of gasoline purchased one day after a 1% price increase will will
be 1.38% lower than it would have been without the price increase. During the following
3 to 4 days, however, the amount purchased tends to increase sharply, back towards its
original level, canceling out much of the very strong initial response in purchasing. The 10-
and 20-day lags reveal that the price response becomes slightly stronger once again, several
weeks after the price change. Adding together the coefficients of all the price lags in the
regression gives the response of demand 20 days after a permanent price change. This sum
of coefficients is reported in the last row of Table 3 and implies that the elasticity of demand
response after 20 days is −.31, nearly identical to the elasticities of −.30 identified in our
baseline model with no lags.

         Coefficient estimates from the frequency of purchase model in columns (2) and (3)
of Table 3 reveal that the large response in the amount of gasoline purchased in the days
following a price change results almost entirely from a temporary change in the probability
of making a purchase rather than a change in gasoline demand or usage. The probability
  16
     For the demand equations this is simply the sum of all the log-price coefficients. For the probability of
purchase equation this is the sum of all the log-price coefficients divided by the mean probability of purchase.



                                                      24
of purchase falls (rises) significantly on the day of and particularly on the day following a
price increase (decrease). The coefficients on ln(pj,d ) and ln(pj,d−1 ) imply that the purchase
probability one day after a price change exhibits an elasticity with respect to price of around
−1.12 all else equal.17 However, this response in the probability of purchase in the day of
and the day after a price change is entirely counteracted over the following few days to
leave the elasticity of the overall response of purchase probability after 20 days to be small
and slightly positive at .06.

         In the demand equation (Column 3) the inclusion of lagged prices causes the coef-
ficient on the current value of ln(pjd ) to increase in magnitude, suggesting an even larger
immediate demand response to price changes. As in the basic demand specification of Col-
umn 1, however, the sum of the coefficients on the current and lagged values of ln(pjd )
in the demand equation are very similar to the coefficient estimates for ln(pjd ) when no
lagged prices are included (Table 1, Column 3). In other words, the total demand response
to a price shock that lasts longer than a few days exhibits a demand elasticity of around
−.30, nearly identical to the estimates in our baseline purchase model. The results also
reveal a small additional response within the first few days of a price shock, consistent with
the idea that consumers delay/expedite gasoline usage by a few days in response to price
fluctuations, but this effect does not appear to be as large as those resulting from changes
in the probability of purchase.

         The results of both the traditional demand model and the purchase frequency model
provide evidence of a stronger responsiveness to price changes in the very short run, but
also confirm that these responses occur in addition to a more persistent response which
very closely resembles that implied by our earlier specifications. We conclude from this that
previous studies utilizing monthly or annual data did not obtain lower elasticity estimates
a result of consumers being less responsive to price changes that persist over longer time
periods. Instead, as we show in the next section, the use of such temporally aggregated
data is likely to bias elasticity estimates causing demand to appear less responsive than can
be revealed when using daily data.
   17
      The average probability of purchase by a cardholder on a give day is 0.033, so the elasticity of the probability
of purchase is computed as (−.009 −.028)/.033 = −1.12.



                                                         25
6         Examining the Divergence from Previous Findings

Given the rather large discrepancy between our elasticity estimates and those found in other
recent studies, we discuss in this section a number of differences in our analyses that could
potentially explain this disparity.


6.1         Sources of Gasoline Consumption Data

Perhaps the biggest challenge in studying gasoline demand is finding an accurate measure
of consumption. Nearly all available measures are recorded at a highly aggregated level
and are likely to measure actual gasoline usage within the specified time interval with a
considerable amount of error. The most common source used in recent time series or panel
studies (e.g., Hughes et al., 2008; Park and Zhao, 2010; Lin and Prince, 2013) is the U.S.
Energy Information Administration’s (EIA’s) data on finished motor gasoline “product sup-
plied”. These data are constructed from surveys of refineries, import/export terminals, and
pipeline operators, and the volumes reported reflect the disappearance of refined product
from these primary suppliers into the secondary distribution system (local distributers and
storage facilities). Each month the EIA reports amounts disappearing as the product sup-
plied in each of the nation’s five Petroleum Area Defense Districts (PADDs). Unfortunately,
given distribution lags and storage capabilities, the amount of product flowing from sec-
ondary distributors to retailers and ultimately to consumers could differ substantially from
the amount received by these suppliers in any given time period. In addition, to generate
a measure that represents domestic gasoline usage, the EIA must net out from total pro-
duction the estimated quantity of gasoline exported for use in other countries. This step
provides yet another dimension for potential error, and created serious measurement issues
in 2011 during a period of rapidly growing refined product exports.18

             Another potential data source for gasoline consumption is the Federal Highway Ad-
ministration (FHWA), which collects information from each state on the number of gallons
of motor gasoline for which state excise taxes have been collected each month. This mea-
sure would appear to be more closely linked to consumption and it is available at the state
    18
         See Cui (2012).


                                                26
level rather than the PADD level. However, a significant amount of measurement error is
generated by the fact that each state has its own procedures and systems for collecting this
information. The point in the supply chain at which the fuel is taxed also varies across
states. Some require taxes to be paid when the distributer first receives the fuel, while
others tax the volume of gasoline sold by the distributor. In fact, the FHWA includes in its
publications the disclaimer that the reported volumes “may reflect time lags of 6 weeks or
more between wholesale and retail levels.”19

          In contrast to the EIA and FHWA data, our measure of gasoline expenditures from
Visa is recorded at the final step of the distribution process—when the consumer purchases
the product from the retailer. This eliminates the possibility that changes in consumer pur-
chase volumes are masked by additions or withdrawals from local storage. Moreover, it
allows daily city-specific volumes to be observed and more accurately linked with contem-
poraneous local prices, providing for a more direct identification of demand response.


6.2      Estimating Demand Elasticity Using Aggregated Data

In general, using highly aggregated data can mask much of the temporal and geographic
co-movements in prices and quantities that result from consumer demand response and
also make it more difficult to empirically identify consistent estimates of such response. To
illustrate this point, suppose the per-capita daily demand for gasoline in MSA c during day
d can be represented as:

                                    qcd = Dcd (pcd , Xcd ) + cd ,                        (12)

where pcd is price of gasoline in region c on day d and Xcd is the vector of characteristics of
region c and day d that enter the demand function for that region and day. These daily de-
mand functions for each MSA imply that Qm , the national average daily per-capita demand
for gasoline during month m, is equal to the sum of total consumption (qcd Ncd ) across cities
and days divided by the sum of the total population (Ncd ) across cities and days:
                 P         PC                          P        PC
                    d ∈ Am   c=1 Ncd Dcd (pcd , Xcd )   d ∈ Am   c=1 Ncd cd
          Qm = P             PC                       +P        PC           ,            (13)
                      d ∈ Am   c=1 Ncd                   d ∈ Am  c=1 Ncd
 19
      FHWA Highway Statistics 2010, Table MF-33GA, Footnote 1.


                                                    27
where C is the total number of MSAs in the sample and Am denotes the set of days in
month m. This aggregation process implies that the national monthly demand for gasoline
depends on the daily prices for all days during that month for all MSAs, rather than simply
a single monthly national average price. Similarly, a monthly state-level average demand
would depend on the daily prices for all days during that month for all MSAs in that state.
However, this is not the model estimated in most empirical studies of aggregate demand.
Typically these studies only have access to aggregated price measures as well, and, as a
result estimate something like:
                                                                             C
                                                                       1 1 X X
               Qm = D̃(pm , X̃m ) + ˜m          where        pm =             pcd .            (14)
                                                                      Am C
                                                                              d ∈ Am   c=1


           Given the data generating process in (12), the model in (14) will only hold under
very specific assumptions, such as the case in which the Dcd (pcd , Xcd ) function is linear and
identical across cities and each cd is uncorrelated not just with pcd and Xcd but also with
the values of these variables in other cities and periods over which aggregation occurs.20
If these conditions are not collectively satisfied in the markets being examined, then biases
arising from aggregation have the potential to explain the large differences observed be-
tween our elasticity estimates and those from previous studies. Fortunately, we are able to
investigate the impact of aggregation by using our data to create new data sets with varying
levels of temporal and geographic aggregation. We construct daily data sets of state level
and nationwide total quantity purchased and average price, as well as three monthly data
sets at the city, state, and national levels. To facilitate a more direct comparison with other
studies, we estimate basic log-log aggregate demand models and use aggregate per-capita
quantities calculated as the corresponding sum of the daily quantity purchased divided by
the total number of Visa customers in the combined area. For consistency, average prices
are also computed as a per-capita weighted average across cities and days.

           As in our main analysis, a complete set of time period and cross-sectional fixed ef-
fects are used whenever possible to control for shifts in demand. When using daily national
time series data we include day-of-week and month-of-sample fixed effects. For the monthly
national time series we are restricted to using month of year (i.e. seasonal) fixed effects, so
 20
      The various issues necessities such strong assumptions will be detailed in Section 6.3.


                                                        28
per capita real personal disposable income is included as an additional control for demand
shifts.21 This final specification is identical to that of Hughes et al. (2008).

        The demand estimates for each level of aggregation appear in Panel A of Table 4.
The top rows report the results when estimated using pay-at-pump purchases only while
the bottom rows report the results for all purchases. The first column reports the daily
city-level results again for comparison. The next three columns contain panel regressions
with varying levels of temporal and/or geographic aggregation. Price elasticity estimates
from these specifications are all very similar to each other (between −.22 and −.25 for
pay-at-pump purchases and between −.30 and −.34 for all purchases) and are less elastic
than corresponding estimates from the disaggregated regression in Column 1. The elasticity
estimates from the two time series regressions in Columns 5 & 6 are even smaller in magni-
tude, being indistinguishable from zero for pay-at-pump purchases and ranging from −.12
to −.14 for all purchases; much closer to the elasticities reported by Hughes et al. (2008)
in their national time-series study.22 Clearly, increasing levels of aggregation lead to less
elastic estimates of demand, particularly when moving from panel to time series data.


6.3    Sources of Aggregation Bias

In this section we decompose the impact of using different forms of aggregate price and
quantity data on the resulting elasticity estimates. Rather than assess the impact of aggre-
gating data with a log-log demand specification and have to deal with the fact that the sum
across days or cities of the log price or quantity is not the same as the log of the sum, we
consider a linear demand specification that can be aggregated using linear operations. To
evaluate the importance of this functional form choice, we begin by estimating estimating
these linear demand models at different levels of aggregation, just as was done with the
log-log model. In Panel B of Table 4, we report both coefficient estimates and the implied
elasticities evaluated at mean values of quantity per capita, price, and income per capita.
Although the linear and log-log specifications have the potential to yield different results,
  21
    Data on per capita personal disposable income comes from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
  22
    In Appendix D we replicate the exact model of Hughes et al. (2008) using their data source but from
our 2006–2009 time period and show the results to be very similar to our pay-at-pump national time-series
estimates.


                                                   29
                        Table 4: Regressions Using Aggregated Data
Geography:                 city    city     state    state     national national
Periodicity:              daily monthly daily monthly            daily  monthly
                          (1)     (2)       (3)      (4)         (5)      (6)
Panel A: Log-Log Model: Dependent Variable = ln(quantity per capita)
Pay-at-Pump Only:
  ln(priceit )          −0.323 −0.246 −0.245 −0.215            −0.014 −0.002
                         (0.025) (0.028) (0.059) (0.066)        (0.067) (0.021)
  ln(incomeit )                                                          0.339
                                                                        (0.171)
All Purchases:
  ln(priceit )          −0.405 −0.338 −0.325 −0.295            −0.137 −0.130
                         (0.024) (0.028) (0.065) (0.073)        (0.064) (0.016)
  ln(incomeit )                                                          0.458
                                                                        (0.146)
Panel B: Linear Model: Dependent Variable = quantity per capita
Pay-at-Pump Only:
  priceit               −0.046 −0.037 −0.030 −0.025            −0.009 −0.003
                         (0.004) (0.004) (0.009) (0.010)        (0.008) (0.002)
  incomeit                                                               0.005
                                                                        (0.002)
  Implied Elasticities:
  price                 −0.312 −0.247 −0.201 −0.164            −0.062 −0.008
  income                                                                 0.379

All Purchases:
  priceit                     −0.077 −0.064 −0.058 −0.050                     −0.035       −0.026
                              (0.006) (0.007) (0.016) (0.018)                 (0.009)      (0.003)
   incomeit                                                                                  0.010
                                                                                            (0.002)
   Implied Elasticities:
   price                 −0.379 −0.313 −0.285 −0.245                          −0.174       −0.128
   income                                                                                   0.613

Fixed Effects:
  Day of Sample                   X                      X
  Day of Week                                                                      X
  Month of Sample                             X                      X             X
  Month of Year                                                                                 X
  City                            X           X
  State                                                  X           X
Note: Standard errors for panel specifications are robust and clustered at the level of the cross-
sectional unit to allow for arbitrary serial correlation. Standard errors for time-series specifications
are estimated using the Newey-West (1987) procedure and are robust to the forms of serial correla-
tion they consider. Implied elasticities are calculated at the sample-wide mean values of quantity per
capita, price, and income.
                                                  30
for our data, the levels of the elasticity estimates evaluated at the sample mean of the data
and the degree to which they change across increasing levels of aggregation are quite sim-
ilar. We conclude from this comparison that the differences in estimates resulting from
data aggregation apparent in our setting is relatively pervasive and is not the result of a
particular functional form assumption or a particular mode of aggregation.


6.3.1   Decomposing the Impact of Aggregation on Elasticities in a Linear Model


Most studies of gasoline demand focus on a model in which all locations are assumed to
have the same price coefficient, our decomposition analysis considers a more general data
generating process in which the daily city-level per-capita demand for gasoline depends
linearly on the price of gasoline with a slope that may differ across cities:

                                 Qcd = αd + λc + βc pcd + cd ,                                    (15)

where c=1,...,C, d=1,...,D, C = 241 is the number of cities, and D = 1430 is the number of
days in our sample. This model can be written in matrix notation as:

                       Q = (IC ⊗ ιD )α + (ιC ⊗ ID )λ + Pβ + ,                                     (16)

where Q = (Q01 , Q02 , ..., Q0C )0 , Qc = (Qc1 , Qc2 , ..., QcD )0 , ιC is a C × 1 vector on 1’s, ιD
is a D × 1 vector on 1’s, IC is a C × C identity matrix, ID is a D × D identity matrix, α is
a C × 1 vector of city fixed effects, and λ is a D × 1 vector of day-of-sample fixed effects.
To account for the fact that each city can potentially have a different slope coefficient, P is
a CD × C matrix with the cth column having zeros everywhere but the cth block of length
D which is replaced with the D × 1 vector pc = (pc1 , pc2 , ..., pcD )0 , β = (β1 , β2 , ..., βC )0
and  = (01 , 02 , ..., 0C )0 , c = (c1 , c2 , ..., cD )0 . Let Z = [IC ⊗ ιD | ιC ⊗ ID ] equal the
DC × (D + C) matrix and δ = (α0 , λ0 )0 a (D + C) × 1 vector. In terms of this notation
(16) becomes:

                                     Q = Zδ + Pβ + .                                              (17)


        Equation 17 can be estimated directly using OLS to recover an estimate of each
city’s βc . However, it is more common for a more restricted model of gasoline demand to be

                                                   31
estimated in which all locations are assumed to have the same price coefficient, implying
the following true model:

                                 Q = Zδ ∗ + (PιC )β ∗ + ∗ .                            (18)

PιC is a DC × 1 vector that equals p = (p01 , p02 , ..., p0C )0 and β ∗ is a scalar.

        Applying OLS to (17) yields:

                                    Q = Zd + Pb + e,                                    (19)

where d, b, and e are the OLS estimates of δ, β, and , respectively. Pre-multiplying both
sides of (19) by MZ = IDC − Z(Z0 Z)−1 Z0 yields

                                    MZ Q = MZ Pb + e,                                   (20)

where b = (P0 MZ P)−1 P0 MZ Q. In terms of this notation, the OLS estimate of β ∗ is
b∗ = (ιC0 P0 MZ PιC )−1 ι0C P0 MZ Q. Substituting the expression for Q from (19) and rec-
ognizing that MZ Z = 0 and MZ e = e yields

             b∗ = (ιC0 P0 MZ PιC )−1 ι0C P0 MZ Pb = (p0 MZ p)−1 p0 MZ Pb,               (21)

Note that if (16) is the true data generation process, then the OLS estimate b∗ is a weighted
average of the OLS estimates of βc in which the relative weighting of each city’s βc is based
on the degree of within-city variation in the residual prices (after controlling for city and
day-of-sample fixed effects). As we demonstrate below, different data aggregations will
yield different weighted sums of the OLS estimates of the βc as a component of the estimated
slope coefficient.

        Using this notation, we can also derive expressions for the OLS estimate of the slope
coefficient with different quantity and price aggregates in terms of d, b, and e . Consider a
regression model aggregated to the month and state level. Suppose their are S states and
M months. This can be accomplished by pre-multiplying Q and p by a SM × DC matrix A.
Assume that the rows of this matrix are ordered in blocks by states and within each block
by months and the columns of the matrix are ordered in blocks by cities and then by days
within each block. The mth row of the sth block is composed zeros for all elements except

                                                 32
those where city c is contained in state s and day d is contained in month m. In those cases
the element of the matrix is equal to Ncd the number of active purchasers in city c in day
d divided by the sum of all of the Ncd values in mth row of block s. Let p+ = Ap and
Q+ = AQ. These are the SM × 1 vectors of monthly per capita prices and quantities for
each state. Let Z+ = [IS ⊗ ιM | ιS ⊗ IM ] the SM × (S + M ) matrix of indicator variables
for the state and month-of-sample fixed effects. The OLS estimate of the slope coefficient
using state and month per capital variables is:

                              b+ = (p0 A0 MZ+ Ap)−1 p0 A0 MZ+ AQ.                                           (22)

Substituting (19) into (22) yields:

       b+ = (p0 A0 MZ+ Ap)−1 p0 A0 MZ+ AZd + (p0 A0 MZ+ Ap)−1 p0 A0 MZ+ APb
                                                                                                            (23)
                                                              +(p0 AMZ+ Ap)−1 p0 AMZ+ Ae.

This produces the following expression for the difference between b+ and b∗ :

           b+ − b∗ = [(p0 A0 MZ+ Ap)−1 p0 A0 MZ+ A − (p0 MZ p)−1 p0 MZ ]Pb
                                                                                                            (24)
            +(p0 A0 MZ+ Ap)−1 p0 A0 MZ+ AZd + (p0 A0 MZ+ Ap)−1 p0 A0 MZ+ Ae.

This difference can be decomposed into three components (represented by the three terms
of 24). The first results from the fact that aggregation changes how the city-specific price
response parameters in b are weighted within b+ relative to how they are weighted in b∗ .
Specifically, the b+ estimate from the aggregate model weights elements of b from each state
based on the degree of relative variation in the monthly state-level average prices across
cities and months, while the b∗ estimate from the disaggregate model weights each city’s
coefficient based on the degree of relative variation in daily city-level prices.23 . The second
component of the difference arises when the residuals of the state-level, monthly weighted
average prices regressed on state and month-of-sample fixed effects are correlated with the
state-level, monthly weighted average of the the city and day-of-sample fixed effects. If the
models using aggregate panel data retain a complete set of time-series and cross-section
  23
    Note that the product Pb represents a vector of the elements βc pcd . Thus, in the second term of the
 +
β estimate in (23), premultiplying Pb by A produces a population-weighted average of these region-specific
predicted price effects across days of the month and cities within each state, while premultiplying these averages
by (p0 MZ p)−1 p0 A0 MZ+ produces a variance-weighted average across states and months of these population-
weighted state-month average price effects.


                                                       33
fixed effects, this term will be zero. However, this will not be true when aggregating to
a time-series. The third term is non-zero if the residual from regressing state and month-
of-sample weighted-average prices on state and month-of-sample fixed effects is correlated
with residual from regressing the state and month-of-sample weighted-average values of
the OLS residuals from (19), e, on state and month-of-sample fixed effects. Although a
necessary condition for the consistency of the OLS estimates of δ and β is that pcd and cd
are contemporaneously uncorrelated, if there is correlation between any prices in the same
state and month and any values of demand shock () in same state and month, this third
term will be non-zero.

           When comparing estimates obtained using time-series aggregated data, the specific
terms of the decomposition change but maintain a similar structure. For example, aggre-
gating to the daily national average level requires replacing the aggregation matrix A with
a new matrix B which will be a D × DC matrix where each row is composed of C blocks of
length D. All of the elements of the dth row are zero except for the dth element of each of
the C blocks, each of which is equal to Ncd divided by Nd = C
                                                            P
                                                               c=1 Ncd . Using this notation,

Bp is the daily national per-capita weighted average price and BQ is the daily national
per-capita weighted average quantity. Although it is no longer possible to include day-of-
sample fixed effects, more time-aggregated fixed-effects can be included. Let Z# equal the
D × M matrix that is composed of M blocks each of length equal to the number of days
                                                                  0             0
in month m for m = 1, 2, ..., M . Define MZ# = ID − Z# (Z# Z# )−1 Z# . Suppose that
the daily weighted-average quantity is regressed on the daily weighted-average price and
month-of-sample fixed effects. The slope coefficient from this regression is:

                           b# = (p0 B0 MZ# Bp)−1 p0 B0 MZ# BQ.                          (25)

Therefore, the logic above yields the following expression for the difference between b#
and b∗ :

            b# − b∗ = [(p0 B0 MZ# Bp)−1 p0 B0 MZ# B − (p0 MZ p)−1 p0 MZ ]Pb
                                                                                        (26)
             +(p0 B0 MZ# Bp)−1 p0 B0 MZ# BZd + (p0 B0 MZ# Bp)−1 p0 B0 MZ# Be.

           The three components of (26) differ in several important ways from those in (24).
Because the matrix B generates a population-weighted national average, the first term in

                                              34
(26) now represents the difference between a simple population-weighted average of the
elements of b and the residual-price-variation weighted average reflected in b∗ . The second
term is due to correlation between the residual of daily weighted average prices regressed
on month-of-sample fixed effects and the residual from regressing the fitted values from
the city and day-of-sample fixed effects on month-of-sample fixed effects. In other words,
within-month fluctuations in nationwide demand that are correlated with national average
prices but do not represent demand response will now result in endogeneity bias due to
the inability to include daily fixed effects. The third term is non-zero if the residual from
regressing daily weighted-average prices on month-of-sample fixed effects is correlated with
the residual from regressing the state and month-of-sample weighted average values of
the OLS residuals from (19), e, on state and month-of-sample fixed effects. If there is
correlation between prices for same day and values of demand shock in same state and
month, this term will be non-zero.

       While we allow the true price responsiveness of demand to vary across cities, our
decomposition reflects a comparison to the restricted OLS model which assumes a common
slope coefficient, in large part because nearly all studies of gasoline demand estimate such
models. In fact, for our daily city-level data, OLS estimation of the unrestricted model (15)
does reveal some degree of heterogeneity, though the city-specific price coefficients are
reasonably tightly centered around the mean of −.049 with a standard deviation of .010.
This mean also turns out to be quite close to the OLS estimate from the restricted model
(18), which produces b∗ = −.047. In other words, in the disaggregate data, the estimate of
the weighted average of the βc reflected in b∗ is very close to the unweighted average of the
estimates of the βc . We will see that with aggregation this will no longer be the case.

       In Table 5 we examine the extent to which the three different sources of bias dis-
cussed above arise in our data. Each column presents the estimation results for a particular
degree of aggregation. The top panel presents the price coefficient from the aggregate
model and compares it to the price coefficient obtained using disaggregate data. Because
a linear demand model is used in all specifications, we also report the elasticity implied
by the coefficient when evaluated at the mean of the data. In the lower panel of Table 5
we decompose the difference in estimates from aggregate and disaggregate models by cal-

                                             35
Table 5: Difference between Aggregate and Disaggregate Estimates of Responsiveness to
Price


                                     (Pay-at-Pump Transactions Only)
                                            Aggregated Panel Models                  Time-Series Models
 Geography:                                   city     state   state                  national   national
 Periodicity:                               monthly daily monthly                       daily    monthly
                                             (1)       (2)      (3)                     (4)        (5)
 Disaggregated:
   b∗ (from Eq 18)                          −0.047 −0.047 −0.047                       −0.047       −0.047
                                            (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)                    (0.004)      (0.004)
   Implied Elasticity                       −0.312 −0.312 −0.312                       −0.312       −0.312

 Aggregated:
   b+ (from Eq 22)                  −0.037 −0.030 −0.025                               −0.009       −0.001
                                     (0.004) (0.009) (0.010)                           (0.007)      (0.004)
   Implied Elasticity               −0.247 −0.201 −0.164                               −0.062       −0.004
 Decomposition of the Difference (b+ − b∗ ) :
   Eq. 24, Term 1                     0.0002 0.004    0.005                            −0.0001      −0.0001
   Implied Impact on Elasticity       0.001   0.028   0.035                            −0.001       −0.001

   Eq. 24, Term 2                             0           0           0                  0.042        0.046
   Implied Impact on Elasticity               0           0           0                  0.282        0.305

   Eq. 24, Term 3                             0.010       0.012       0.017            −0.005         0.0005
   Implied Impact on Elasticity               0.064       0.083       0.112             0.031         0.003
   Note: Included fixed effects in each specification are the same as those indicated in Table 4. Stan-
   dard errors for panel specifications are robust and clustered at the level of the cross-sectional unit
   to allow for arbitrary serial correlation. Standard errors for time-series specifications are estimated
   using a Newey-West procedure and are robust to first-order serial correlation. Implied elasticity terms
   represent the associated coefficient estimate multiplied by the sample mean price and divided by the
   sample mean of the quantity per capita measure.



culating the values of the three different terms in Equation 24. In the aggregated panel
regressions (first 3 columns), the first term in Equation 24 contributes a moderate positive
impact making demand appear up to 11% less elastic in aggregate models. This suggests
that cities in which demand is more responsive are being relatively under-weighted in the
aggregated models, either because weighting within state is now based on population or
because weighting relative to cities in other states now depends on the degree variation


                                                     36
in state weighted average prices. In addition, the third term in Equation 24 consistently
contributes an even larger positive impact on the aggregated panel estimates, making de-
mand appear of up to 36% less elastic as a result of positive correlation between prices and
unexplained demand shifts occurring on other days within the month and in other cities
within the state.

         In the aggregated time-series models (Columns 4 & 5 of Table 5) the source of bias is
entirely different, resulting instead from the inability to include the time-period fixed effects
that are present in the panel regressions. The incomplete set of time dummy variables
are only partially able to control for macroeconomic fluctuations that may influence both
gasoline demand and gasoline prices, and as a result, these models exhibit very inelastic
estimates (due to the large positive impact from the second term in Equation 26). Similar
issues will arise if data is aggregated over time necessitating the use of cross-sectional or
short-panel models that are no longer able to include a complete set of location fixed effects.
In this case, the inability to control for unobserved locational characteristics that influence
gasoline demand and are correlated with price local levels has the potential to substantially
bias elasticity estimates (most likely toward higher magnitudes).24 While not reported here,
models estimated after aggregating our data to city- or state-level cross-sections result in
estimates that are several times more elastic than our disaggregated results suggest.

         We conclude from our decomposition that several important sources of bias may
result from estimating gasoline demand using aggregate data, and that the source and
degree of bias is likely to differ across the various levels of potential aggregation. Moreover,
the generalized decomposition provided above can be used to evaluate the effects of almost
any form of aggregation. As long as the aggregation process can be written as a matrix
times the original vector of daily city-level data, a decomposition of the sources of bias can
be computed as shown.
  24
    For example, people in highly populated areas might consume less gasoline per capita due to higher density
and/or public transportation, but might also face higher gasoline prices that reflect higher costs of distribution
and retailing.




                                                       37
6.4   Implications for Studies Utilizing Aggregate Data

The findings from our bias decomposition analysis provide a framework for researchers
designing or implementing new studies of gasoline demand response to evaluate the scope
of potential biases that might arise from their data and empirical setting. In addition, by
revealing how estimates from different empirical designs are likely to be biased and in what
direction they may be biased, this will enable researchers and policymakers to utilize more
appropriately and effectively demand elasticity estimates from existing studies. The wide
ranging estimates of demand elasticity observed in the literature can be rationalized as
reflecting, at least in part, the varying biases resulting from different levels and dimensions
of data aggregation.

       As an example, consider recent studies by Li, Linn and Muehlegger (2014) and
Rivers and Schaufele (2015) that examine how gasoline demand responds to changes in
gasoline-related taxes. Li et al. (2014) estimate a panel two-way fixed effects demand
model using state-level annual averages of gasoline deliveries and prices (very similar to
the type of log-log models we estimate in Table 4), obtaining estimates that are relatively
consistent with our similarly aggregated panel results. Rivers and Schaufele (2015) take a
similar approach using monthly province-level data from Canada. The focus of both studies,
however, is on distinguishing price changes generated by gasoline tax rate adjustments
from other non-tax related price changes and separately estimating the elasticity of demand
response to these two types of price changes. They consistently find demand to be more
elastic with respect to a change in gasoline tax. While both studies conclude that this
result may reflect differences in persistence or salience, our aggregation model illustrates
how different types of price changes (i.e., tax vs non-tax related) could result in different
degrees of aggregation bias. For a given level of aggregation, the magnitude of the bias
depends on the degree of heterogeneity and cross-correlation between consumption and
prices in different cities or on different days over which aggregation is occurring. Unlike
gas price fluctuations, gasoline taxes (and changes) are uniform across cities in the state and
exhibit only occasional (and coordinated) discrete changes across the days of each year. As
a result, tax-related prices changes are less likely to be correlated with unobserved demand


                                              38
fluctuations in other cities. In this case, an estimate of the elasticity of demand to state tax
changes could be more elastic simply because it exhibits less bias than an estimate based
on non-tax related price changes. This mechanism may also explain why Davis and Kilian
(2011) and Coglianese et al. (2015) obtain more elastic estimates when using gasoline tax
changes as an instrumental variable for gasoline price in order to identify demand response.


7    Summary and Conclusions

In this study we use high frequency panel data on gasoline prices and expenditures to re-
examine the nature of gasoline demand in the U.S. We specify a model of gasoline purchase
behavior that allows us to identify a measure of the short run elasticity of gasoline demand
from data on gasoline expenditures. Our demand estimates are significantly more elastic
than those of other recent studies. To investigate this discrepancy we aggregate our data,
estimate demand models similar to those used in previous studies, and then perform a
decomposition that identifies the degree of aggregation bias resulting from each of several
possible sources. The results suggest that the sources of bias can differ depending on the
degree and dimension of aggregation, but clearly show that the strongest bias occurs in
time series models where a complete set of time-period fixed effects can not be included.

       We also take advantage of the high frequency of our data to more carefully study
how consumers respond immediately following a change in gasoline prices. Using our
purchase frequency model we are able to separately identify the elasticity of gasoline usage
or demand from the change in consumers’ probability of purchase. Our findings reveal a
temporary response in the probability of purchase in the days following a price change as
well as an immediate response in usage that does not dissipate over time. The resulting
longer-run demand response implied by the dynamic model is consistent with the estimate
from our static model.

       Gasoline demand elasticity estimates are frequently used in policy evaluation and in
broader economic research. Our results provide robust evidence that gasoline demand may
be considerably more responsive to short term price fluctuations than one might conclude
based on the recent literature, and the estimates differ by magnitudes large enough to


                                              39
substantially impact subsequent policy evaluation or market analysis.

         Hughes et al. (2008), for example, estimate that gasoline demand has become ex-
tremely inelastic in recent years and conclude that emission reduction goals that rely on
reductions in gasoline consumption will be difficult to achieve using gasoline taxes alone.
They suggest that alternative measures such as CAFE standards may be needed to meet
desired reductions while avoiding politically infeasible tax levels. Based on our more elastic
estimates, however, the required gasoline tax increase needed to achieve a particular reduc-
tion in consumption would be at least 5 times smaller than what would be predicted using
the estimates of Hughes et al. (2008).

         Studies evaluating the impacts of cap-and-trade policies, like Borenstein, Bushnell,
Wolak and Zaragoza-Watkins (2015) who analyze expected permit prices under California’s
greenhouse gas emissions cap-and-trade program, also rely directly on existing parameter
estimates such as the price responsiveness of gasoline demand. Partly in response to recent
estimates like those of Hughes et al. (2008), they adopt a rather inelastic value for gaso-
line demand elasticity which may contribute to their overall prediction that the supply of
emissions abatement will be relatively inelastic to permit prices. Acknowledging a greater
elasticity in the demand for gasoline could reduce predicted GHG permit price levels and
volatility.

         More accurate elasticity estimates can also substantially impact the inferences one
draws when evaluating the macroeconomic costs of gasoline and oil market disruptions and
the benefits of policies responses like maintaining a Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) that
are intended to reduce these costs. If gasoline demand were significantly more elastic than
previously thought, prices will likely increase substantially less than would otherwise be
predicted in response to a oil supply disruption, and the quantity consumers will purchase
at these prices will be substantially smaller. As a result, the overall macroeconomic dis-
placement effect is likely to be much smaller that would have previously been predicted.
In addition, when consumers have more elastic demand, the release of a certain volume
of fuel from the SPR during a market disruption will not be as effective as a policy lever
aimed at reducing price levels. Our elasticity results strengthen any argument in favor of



                                             40
eliminating or reducing the size of the SPR or mechanisms setting price for greenhouse gas
emissions by demonstrating a significantly larger price-responsiveness of gasoline demand.

       In addition to providing a more robust and precise estimate of gasoline demand
response, our aggregation analysis and decomposition of the sources of aggregation bias in
this setting should help researchers and policy analysts to more successfully evaluate the
reliability of existing estimates and to improve empirical design and identification in future
studies.


References
Basso, Leonardo J. and Tae Hoon Oum, “Automobile Fuel Demand: A Critical Assessment
  of Empirical Methodologies,” Transport Reviews, 2007, 27 (4), 449–484.
Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell, Frank A. Wolak, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins,
  “Expecting the Unexpected: Emissions Uncertainty and Environmental Market Design,”
  Working Paper 20999, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2015.
Brons, Martijn, Peter Nijkamp, Eric Pels, and Piet Rietveld, “A meta-analysis of the price
  elasticity of gasoline demand. A {SUR} approach,” Energy Economics, 2008, 30 (5), 2105
  – 2122.
Coglianese, John, Lucas W. Davis, Lutz Kilian, and James H. Stock, “Anticipation, Tax
  Avoidance, and the Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand,” February 2015. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 20980.
Cui, Carolyn, “Questions Arise on Gasoline Data,” The Wall Street Journal, March 21, 2012,
  p. C1.
Dahl, Carol and Thomas Sterner, “Analysing Gasoline Demand Elasticities: A Survey,”
  Energy Economics, July 1991, 13 (3), 203–210.
Davis, Lucas W. and Lutz Kilian, “Estimating the Effects of a Gasoline Tax on Carbon
  Emissions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, November/December 2011, 26 (7), 1187–
  1214.
Espey, Molly, “Gasoline Demand Revisited: An International Meta-analysis of Elasticities,”
  Energy Economics, 1998, 20 (3), 273–295.
Gicheva, Dora, Justine Hastings, and Sofia Villas-Boas, “Revisiting the Income Effect:
  Gasoline Prices and Grocery Purchases,” November 2007. NBER Working Paper No.
  13614.
Goodwin, P. B., “A Review of New Demand Elasticities with Special Reference to Short and
  Long Run Effects of Price Changes,” Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, May 1992,
  26 (2), 155–169.

                                             41
Hastings, Justine S. and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Fungibility and Consumer Choice: Evidence
 from Commodity Price Shocks*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (4),
 1449–1498.

Hsing, Yu, “On the variable elasticity of the demand for gasoline: The case of the {USA},”
  Energy Economics, 1990, 12 (2), 132 – 136.

Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling, “Evidence of a Shift
 in the Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand,” The Energy Journal, 2008, 29 (1),
 93–114.

Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger, “Gasoline Taxes and Consumer Behav-
   ior,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (4), 302–42.

Lin, C.-Y. Cynthia and Lea Prince, “Gasoline Price Volatility and the Elasticity of Demand
  for Gasoline,” Energy Economics, July 2013, 38, 111–117.

Morath, Eric, “Lower Gas Prices Drove Down Transit Use,” The Wall Street Journal, April 6,
 2016.

Park, Sung Y. and Guochang Zhao, “An estimation of U.S. gasoline demand: A smooth
  time-varying cointegration approach,” Energy Economics, 2010, 32, 110–120.

Rivers, Nicholas and Brandon Schaufele, “Salience of carbon taxes in the gasoline mar-
  ket,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, November 2015, 74, 23 –
  36.

Small, Kenneth A. and Kurt Van Dender, “Fuel Efficiency and Motor Vehicle Travel: The
 Declining Rebound Effect,” Energy Journal, 2007, 28 (1), 25–51.

Sommer, Jeff, “Cheap Gas Is a Thrill, but a Costly One,” The New York Times, December 11,
  2015.

Sterner, Thomas and Carol Dahl, “Modeling Transport Fuel Demand,” in Thomas Sterner,
  ed., International Energy Economics, Chapman-Hall, 1992, pp. 65–79.




                                           42
                                       Appendices

A    Exploring Potential Biases due to Substitution from Regular
     Grade to Premium Grade Gasoline

Our data include daily total revenues at gas stations aggregated to the city level and a city-
level average of regular grade gasoline prices. Our measure of the quantity purchased in
a city on a given day is generated by dividing the aggregate gasoline station revenue by
the average price. One concern with this approach arises from the fact that roughly 15%
of gasoline purchases are purchases of mid-grade or premium grade gasoline which sells
at a higher prices than regular grade. As a result, dividing total revenues (from sales of
all grades) by the price of regular grade gasoline generates a slight overestimate of the
number of total gallons purchased. If the relative shares of premium, mid-grade, and reg-
ular gasoline remains fairly constant over time the presence of premium and mid-grade
purchases would not bias our elasticity estimates, as all identification is based on rela-
tive changes in prices and quantities over time. However, Hastings and Shapiro (2013)
present evidence that gasoline consumers substitute from premium to regular grade fuel
when gasoline prices increase. If the relative purchase shares of regular and premium gaso-
line fluctuate with price this substitution could bias our elasticity estimate. The following
calculation approximates the potential size of such a bias.

       Assuming that premium gasoline sells at a γ% premium over the regular grade price,
the true quantity of gasoline purchased can be represented by:

                                       Sreg ∗ R (1 − Sreg ) ∗ R
                             Qtrue =           +                ,
                                         Preg    Preg ∗ (1 + γ)

where Sreg is the share of all gasoline purchased that is of regular grade and (1 − Sreg )
represents the share of premium grade purchases, Preg represents the price of regular grade
gasoline, R is the total observed revenues from all gasoline sales. (For simplicity I am
considering just regular and premium grades.)

       The measure of quantity we use in the paper does not adjust for the price difference



                                              43
between premium and regular grade sales, so our measure can be expressed as:

                                          R     Sreg ∗ R (1 − Sreg ) ∗ R
                           Qmeasured =        ≡         +                .
                                         Preg     Preg        Preg

As a result, the bias in our measure of quantity will simply be:

                                    (1 − Sreg ) ∗ R (1 − Sreg ) ∗ R    γ                 R
 BiasQ = Qtrue − Qmeasured =                       −                =     (1 − Sreg ) ∗      ,
                                         Preg        Preg ∗ (1 + γ)   1+γ               Preg
         γ
where   1+γ   reflects the percentage discount at which regular grade sells relative to premium
                γ
grade, and     1+γ (1   − Sreg ) then represents the percent to which our quantity measure is
biased (upward) from the true quantity as a result of assuming that all gasoline is sold at
the regular-grade price.

        Once again, if γ and Sreg are constant over time our demand elasticity estimates will
not be affected by this bias. On the other hand, if the share of consumers buying regular
grade gasoline (Sreg ) increases when prices rise (as Hastings and Shapiro (2013) suggest)
then some of the decrease in quantity we observe could be a result of people substituting
to cheaper regular grade gasoline rather than people reducing gasoline consumption alto-
gether. The magnitude of this effect, however, is almost sure to be rather small. Hastings
and Shapiro (2013) estimate that a $1.00 increase in the gasoline price is associated with a
1.4 percentage point increase in the share of people buying regular grade gasoline. Given
that prices average around $3.00 per gallon during our sample and the baseline share of
people buying regular grade gasoline is around 85%, this would imply a price elasticity of
substitution to regular grade gasoline of around 0.0005.

        Measuring gasoline price in cents per gallon and assuming a mark-up on premium
gasoline of around 10% over regular, this implies that:

                ∂P ercentBiasQ     γ     ∂Sreg
                               =      (−       ) = 0.1 ∗ (−0.014) = −0.0014,
                     ∂Preg       1 + γ ∂Preg

which in the absence of any actual demand response and at an average gasoline price of
$3.00 would generate a false elasticity of demand of around −0.0014 ∗ 3 = −0.0042. Given
that our demand elasticity estimates are two orders of magnitude larger than this, any
substitution from premium to regular gasoline associated with price changes will have a
negligible impact on our analysis.

                                                 44
B    Exploring the Bias in Estimated Gasoline Demand Elasticity
     Resulting from Non-Gasoline Purchases

As is discussed in Section 3, measuring quantity using the total revenues earned by gas
stations in a city on a particular day divided by the city’s average price of gasoline will
result in upward bias since around 21% of these revenues come from non-gasoline items.
More importantly for our demand analysis, the estimated response of gasoline consumption
to changes in prices will also biased upward (in absolute value). In our analysis we attempt
to avoid this issue by using only pay-at-pump transactions in our quantity calculations.
However, it is also possible to derive a reasonably accurate approximation of the magnitude
of the bias that would result from using all transactions to calculate the quantity of gasoline
sold. In this section we will derive the expected bias and show that it is fairly similar to
the difference in estimated elasticities found when using only pay-at-pump transactions as
opposed to all transactions.
                                                                                         K
       Dividing total revenues by price results in a quantity measure Q̃ = Q +           P,   where
Q represents the true quantity of gasoline sold, K represents the revenues from all non-
gasoline sales, and P is the price of gasoline. Using this representation, the response of our
measure of Q to a change in price will be:
                                  ∂ Q̃   ∂Q K(P )   1 ∂K(P )
                                       =    −   2
                                                  +          .
                                  ∂P     ∂P   P     P ∂P
Here we have allowed for the possibility that the demand for non-gasoline items may also
be influenced by changes in the price of gasoline. As a result, the elasticity of our measure
of Q with respect to price will be:
                     ∂ Q̃ P       ∂Q P             K(P ) P           1 ∂K(P ) P
              ˜ =            =            K
                                               −             K
                                                                 +                K
                     ∂P Q̃        ∂P Q +   P
                                                    P2 Q +   P
                                                                     P ∂P Q +     P
                                                     K                   K
                                ∂Q P Q               P        ∂K(P ) P   P
                              =                −          +
                                ∂P Q Q + K  P     Q  + K
                                                       P
                                                                ∂P   K Q +   K
                                                                             P
                              = g σg − (1 − σg ) + (1 − σg ) ∗ k

                              = g σg + (1 − σg )(k − 1),

             ∂Q P                                                                     ∂K(P ) P
where g =   ∂P Q    represents the true elasticity of demand for gasoline, k =       ∂P K      rep-
resent the elasticity of non-gasoline revenues with respect to the price of gasoline, and

                                                   45
         PQ
σg =   P Q+K    represents the share of total revenues coming from gasoline sales. Alterna-
tively, the true elasticity of demand for gasoline can be expressed as a function of our
all-transactions elasticity estimate:

                                               ˜   1 − σg
                                       g =       +        (k − 1).
                                              σg      σg

         Based on this result, we can approximate the expected bias using estimates of pa-
rameters from previous studies. A survey of gas station consumers conducted by the Na-
tional Association of Convenience Stores (NACS) estimates that around 27% of gas stations
transactions are in cash, and only 44% of customers enter the store during their visit.25
Assuming that all cash paying customers enter the store, at most 17% of all customers
(or 39% of those entering the store) are potentially making non-gasoline purchases with a
credit card. Data from the U.S. Economic Census suggests that 21% of all gas station rev-
enues come from non-gasoline items. Supposing that gasoline revenues can be attributed
proportionally across all payer types and non-gasoline revenues attributed proportionally
across customers entering the store, this would suggest that non-gasoline purchases repre-
sent roughly 6% of non-cash customers’ total spending.26

         There are no direct estimates of how the demand for non-gasoline items at the sta-
tion responds to changes in the price of gasoline, but Gicheva et al. (2007) have examined
how gasoline prices impact consumer spending more generally. They estimate that con-
sumers reduce spending on food away from home by 45-56% when gas prices increase by
100%. However, they also find that grocery spending actually increases as consumers cook
at home more and that consumers substitute from more expensive to less expensive items
within each category. In some ways, food and drink from a gasoline convenience store
can be considered part of the food away from home category, but packaged items from the
convenience store could also be considered as similar to grocery items (or less expensive
options compared with other food away from home). As a result, it could be that spending
  25
     See the 2014 NACS Retail Fuels Report (http://www.nacsonline.com/YourBusiness/
FuelsReports/GasPrices_2014/Pages/default.aspx). Survey data from previous years could
not be used because the question determining the share of customers entering the store was not included.
  26
     The 6% results from multiplying the fraction those visiting the store that do not pay cash times the share
of revenues that are non-gasoline (39% × 21%) and then dividing this by the the overall share of non-cash
customers times the share of revenues from gasoline (73% × 79%).


                                                     46
in convenience stores decreases when gas prices rise, but probably not to the same extent
as other food away from home.

        Considering these findings, suppose the share of total credit card customer revenues
coming from gasoline sales (σg ) is 94% (= 1 − .06), and the elasticity of non-gasoline
revenues with respect to the price of gasoline (k ) is 33%. Then, based on the bias derived
above and the demand elasticity estimated using all purchases in our data, the true gasoline
demand elasticity can be approximated as:

                                  ˜
                          g =       − .064 ∗ (−1.33) = 1.064˜
                                                              + .085.
                                 .94

Interestingly, the bias-adjusted elasticity estimates implied by this relationship are relatively
similar in magnitude to the elasticities obtained by estimating demand using only pay-at-
pump transactions (reported in Table 1). For example, applying this bias-adjustment to
the elasticity estimate of −.328 from the traditional demand model estimated using all
transactions (Column 4) would imply a true elasticity of gasoline of g = 1.064(−.328) +
.085 = −.264, which is very close to the coefficient of −.259 that we obtain when estimating
the same model using only pay-at-pump transactions (Column 1). The estimate from our
probability of purchase model (Column 6) would imply a bias-adjusted elasticity estimate
of around −.336 which is also much closer to (though not as low as) the estimate of −.288
obtained using only pay-at-pump transactions (Column 3).

        We conclude from the calculations above that biases resulting from the presence of
non-gasoline purchases in our data are non-negligible in magnitude but are nowhere near
large enough to explain the differences between our elasticity estimates and those obtained
by other recent studies. Moreover, our ability to estimate demand using only pay-at-pump
purchases appears to eliminate, or perhaps over-correct for, any bias resulting from non-
gasoline purchases.




                                               47
C    Instrumental Variables Estimates

Table 6 reports the instrumental variables estimation results for both the basic model (Col-
umn 1) and the restricted and unrestricted versions of the consumer purchase model (Columns
2 & 3) presented in Section 4. All specifications are estimated using only pay-at-pump pur-
chases. In an attempt to utilize exogenous variation refinery market conditions to identify
supply-driven price fluctuations we use the log of the current "spot market" price of gaso-
line in the region as an instrument for local retail prices. While using measures of refinery
outages directly as instruments might seem like attractive alternative, the relationship be-
tween outages and gasoline prices is complex and difficult to capture in a model because the
impact depends also on the level of inventories in the market, the ease of importing from
alternative sources, the available capacity at other refineries in the area, etc. Using spot
market prices reveals the net impact of these outages on gasoline markets. Input prices fur-
ther upstream are also not likely to be useful instruments here, as oil prices do not exhibit
the regional variation necessary to identify fluctuations in relative gasoline prices across
different parts of the country.

        We use the spot market gasoline price data reported by the Department of Energy’s
Energy Information Administration for either New York Harbor, the Gulf Coast, or Los An-
geles depending on which of these large refining centers is most closely integrated into the
city’s gasoline supply network. Petroleum Area Defense District (PADD) geographic defini-
tions are used to classify this supply network integration. The New York Harbor spot price is
used as an instrument for cities in the New England and Central Atlantic portions of PADD
1; the Gulf Coast spot price is used for cities in the Lower Atlantic region of PADD 1 and
for cities in PADDs 2, 3, and 4; and the Los Angeles spot price is used for PADD 5 cities.
Resulting estimates are directly comparable to the OLS estimates from Columns 4 through
6 of Table 1.




                                             48
                   Table 6: IV Estimates of Baseline Empirical Model of Demand

                                Dependent Variable = ln(quantityjd )
                                                        Pay-at-Pump Only
                                                   (1)         (2)        (3)
                   ln(pricejd )                 −0.357      −0.431     −0.323
                                                 (0.050)     (0.085)    (0.017)
                   ln(# of transactionsjd )                      1       0.996
                                                                        (0.002)
                   ln(predicted probability                    −1      −0.003
                      of purchasejd )                                   (0.009)
           Note: Day-of-sample fixed effects and city fixed effects are included in all specifications.
           Log retail gasoline prices in each city are instrumented for using the log of the spot price
           of gasoline from the either New York Harbor, the Gulf Coast, or Los Angeles depending on
           which of these refining centers is most closely linked with the city’s supply infrastructure.
           Standard errors in Columns 1 & 4 are robust and clustered to allow serial correlation within
           city. Standard errors for the remaining specifications are generated using a nonparametric
           bootstrap that allows errors to be serially correlated within a city and jointly distributed with
           the error term in the first-stage regression.



D       Replication of Hughes et al. (2008) Model and Comparison to
        Visa Data

Once aggregated to a national time series our elasticity estimates are fairly close to those of
Hughes et al. (2008) who estimate an identical specification using data from 2000–2006.
Although our data is from a later period, we can generate a more accurate comparison by
replicating the same specification using their data sources but for our later time period. As in
their study, gasoline consumption is measured using the EIA’s monthly nationwide estimate
of motor gasoline “product supplied”. Price is measured using the U.S. city average price for
unleaded regular gasoline as reported in the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ CPI-Average
Price Data and is converted to constant 2005 dollars using the GDP implicit price deflator.

           To check our ability to replicate the Hughes et al. (2008) analysis we first estimate
their baseline double-log specification (equivalent to Column 5 of Table 4 above) for the
period 2001–2006. Results are reported in Table 7, Column 1. The estimate of price elastic-
ity (−.042) is identical to that of Hughes et al. (2008).27 Estimating the same specification
 27
      Our estimate of the income elasticity is .32 as opposed to their estimate of .53. This discrepancy appears


                                                           49
            Table 7: Elasticity Estimates from Replication of Hughes et al. (2008)

                           Dependent Variable = ln(quantity per capita)
   Date Range:             2000–2006       2006–2009        2006–2009                   2006–2009
   Data Source:             EIA/BLS          EIA/BLS         Visa/AAA                    Visa/AAA
                                                          (all purchases)             (pay-at-pump)
                              (1)               (2)              (3)                        (4)
   ln(pricet )              −0.042             0.026         −0.122                        0.004
                             (0.010)          (0.024)          (0.016)                    (0.017)
   ln(incomet )               0.321          −1.272             0.154                      0.093
                             (0.066)          (0.405)          (0.167)                    (0.189)
   Month-of-Year                X                X                X                           X
   Fixed Effects
Note: Columns (1) and (2) use EIA data on “product supplied” to measure quantity and the CPI average price
data for unleaded regular to measure price. Column (3) uses our Visa expenditure data to measure quantity
and a weighted average of our AAA average price data to measure price. Standard errors are estimated using a
Newey-West procedure and are robust to serial correlation.



using data from 2006–2009 yields a price elasticity that is slightly positive and not signifi-
cantly different from zero. This is very similar to our estimate from the same specification
using aggregated Visa pay-at-pump purchase data (reported in Column 4) but is much less
elastic than our estimate using all Visa purchases (Column 3). The use of an alternative
data source may be partially responsible for differences between our elasticity estimates
and those of previous studies, but overall the results above suggest that most of the differ-
ence likely a result of the level of data aggregation.




to have been caused by the fact that Hughes et al. (2008) use previously published estimates of disposable
personal income that have since been revised by the BEA. We utilize the updated estimates so that our income
measures are consistent with those available for the 2006–2009 sample period.


                                                    50
E   Additional Figures

Figure 3: Day-of-Week Averages of Daily Nationwide Gasoline Expenditures by Visa Cus-
tomers in our 243 Cities

                                   $320


                                   $300


                                   $280
         Dollars in Millions




                                   $260


                                   $240


                                   $220


                                   $200
                                          Sunday     Monday    Tuesday     Wednesday    Thursday   Friday   Saturday

                                                                          Day of Week




Figure 4: Day-of-Week Averages of Nationwide Gasoline Expenditures per Transaction by
Visa Customers in our 243 Cities


                                   $26.75




                                   $26.50
         Dollars Per Transaction




                                   $26.25




                                   $26.00




                                   $25.75
                                            Sunday    Monday    Tuesday     Wednesday   Thursday   Friday   Saturday

                                                                          Day of Week
                                                                          51
