                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




UNEMPLOYMENT FLUCTUATIONS, MATCH QUALITY, AND THE WAGE CYCLICALITY
                          OF NEW HIRES

                                        Mark Gertler
                                    Christopher Huckfeldt
                                      Antonella Trigari

                                     Working Paper 22341
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22341


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2016




We thank Pierre Cahuc, Jordi Galí, Giuseppe Moscarini, and Rüdiger Bachman, as well as
participants at various seminars, for many helpful comments. Financial support from EIEF is
gratefully acknowledged. Financial support from EIEF and Baffi Carefin Centre is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Mark Gertler, Christopher Huckfeldt, and Antonella Trigari. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unemployment Fluctuations, Match Quality, and the Wage Cyclicality of New Hires
Mark Gertler, Christopher Huckfeldt, and Antonella Trigari
NBER Working Paper No. 22341
June 2016
JEL No. E32,J3,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

Macroeconomic models often incorporate some form of wage stickiness to help account for
employment fluctuations. However, a recent literature calls in to question this approach, citing
evidence of new hire wage cyclicality from panel data studies as evidence for contractual wage
flexibility for new hires, which is the relevant margin for employment volatility. We analyze data
from the SIPP and find that the wages for new hires coming from unemployment are no more
cyclical than those of existing workers, suggesting wages are sticky at the relevant margin. The
new hire wage cyclicality found in earlier studies instead appears to reflect cyclical average wage
gains of workers making job-to-job transitions, which we interpret as evidence of procyclical
match quality for new hires from employment. We then develop a quantitative general
equilibrium model with sticky wages via staggered contracting, on-the-job search, and variable
match quality, and show that it can account for both the panel data evidence and aggregate labor
market regularities. An additional implication of the model is that a sullying effect of recessions
emerges, along the lines originally suggested by Barlevy (2002)

Mark Gertler                                     Antonella Trigari
Department of Economics                          Bocconi University
New York University                              Via Roentgen 1
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor                     20136 Milano
New York, NY 10003                               Italy
and NBER                                         antonella.trigari@unibocconi.it
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

Christopher Huckfeldt
Department of Economics
Cornell University
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
ckh55@cornell.edu
1        Introduction
Aggregate wage data suggests relatively little variation in real wages as compared to output
and unemployment. This consideration has motivated incorporating some form of wage
rigidity in quantitative macroeconomic models to help account for business cycle fluctua-
tions, an approach that traces back to the early large scale macroeconometric models and
remains prevalent in the recent small scale DSGE models.1 Such considerations have also
motivated the inclusion of wage rigidity in search and matching models of the labor market
in the tradition of Diamond, Mortensen and Pissarides. Most notably, Shimer (2005) and
Hall (2005) show that the incorporation of wage rigidity greatly improves the ability of
search and matching models to account for unemployment fluctuations.2
        An influential paper by Pissarides (2009), however, argues that the aggregate data
may not provide the relevant measure of wage stickiness: what matters for employment
adjustment is the wages of new hires, which need to be disentangled from aggregate measures
of wages. In this regard, there is a volume of panel data evidence beginning with Bils (1985)
that finds that wages of new hires are substantially more cyclical than those of existing
workers. Pissarides interprets the findings of this literature as evidence for a high degree
of contractual wage flexibility among new hires, calling into question efforts to incorporate
wage rigidity into macroeconomic models.
        In this paper, we revisit new hire wage cyclicality and the associated implications for
aggregate unemployment fluctuations. We argue that the interpretation of wage cyclicality
as direct evidence of wage flexibility ignores confounding cyclical variation in new hire wages
that is due to workers moving to better jobs during expansions. We adopt a novel empirical
strategy to separate contractual wage flexibility from cyclical match quality. Guided by
an existing empirical and theoretical literature, we argue that cyclical changes in match
quality should be more prevalent among employed workers. We use a detailed dataset to
argue that typical findings of excess wage cyclicality among new hires can be attributed to
cyclical match quality among new hires from employment. We find no evidence of excess
wage cyclicality among new hires from unemployment. We then develop a quantitative
macroeconomic model that is able to account for both the aggregate and panel data evi-
dence.
        Key to our approach is the observation that the existing empirical literature identifies
new hire wage cyclicality using an econometric specification that does not distinguish be-
    1
     See for, example, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007), Gertler, Sala,
and Trigari (2008), Galı́, Smets, and Wouters (2011), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2015), and
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2016).
   2
     Gertler and Trigari (2009), Hall and Milgrom (2008), Blanchard and Galı́ (2010), and Christiano, Eichen-
baum, and Trabandt (2016) build on this approach and model the wage setting mechanism in greater detail.



                                                     2
tween new hires from unemployment and those from coming other jobs. First, we note
that the key wage for understanding unemployment fluctuations is that of new hires from
unemployment, as argued by Haefke, Sonntag, and van Rens (2013). Second, we argue
that in pooling these two types of new hires, the prototypical regression conflates possible
wage flexibility of new hires with procyclical improvements of match quality for new hires
from employment. Drawing upon existing literatures on cyclical upgrading and job-to-job
changes, we argue that excess wage cyclicality for workers from employment should be
interpreted as evidence of cyclical match quality.
   To address these concerns, we construct a unique dataset from the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP) that allows us to separately estimate the wage cyclicality of
new hires from unemployment from those making job-to-job transitions. We first show that
by pooling the two types of new hires with our data, we can replicate the typical result
of the existing literature: new hire wages appear to be more flexible than the wages of
continuing workers. When we estimate separate terms for both types of new hires, however,
we find no evidence of excess wage cyclicality for new hires coming from unemployment,
but substantial evidence of procyclical match improvement for workers making job-to-job
transitions.
   Then, to drive our point home, we develop a search and matching model with staggered
wage contracting, variable match quality, and on-the-job search with endogenous search
intensity. We show that the model is consistent with both the aggregate data and the panel
data evidence. In particular, while the wages of new hires are sticky within the model,
cyclical improvements in match quality generate new hire wage cyclicality, offering the
appearance of wage flexibility among new hires. All the three ingredients of the model are
critical for achieving this consistency. Further, the cyclical job reallocation within the model
generates a quantitatively important sullying effect of recessions, as originally conceived by
Barlevy (2002).
   Our results are aligned with a rich literature on earnings growth and job-to-job transi-
tions. Beginning with Topel and Ward (1992), an extensive empirical literature has doc-
umented that a large fraction of the wage increases experienced by a given worker occur
through job-to-job transitions. Such job movements can be understood as employed workers
actively searching for higher paying jobs, along the lines of Burdett and Mortensen (1998).
A related theoretical literature has shown that such match improvements are more easily
realized during expansions than during recessions (Barlevy, 2002; Menzio and Shi, 2011). In
contrast, such job-ladder models offer no systematic prediction for wage changes of work-
ers searching from unemployment, as such workers are predicted to adopt a reservation
wage strategy that is not contingent on their most recent wage. We conclude that, while
other mechanisms could be in play to generate cyclical match quality for new hires from


                                               3
unemployment, the existing literature suggests that it should be most apparent for workers
making job-to-job changes.
    While the interpretation of flexible wages for new hires is still prevalent in the literature,
other papers have documented that the addition of finer controls weakens the case for excess
wage flexibility for new hires. Gertler and Trigari (2009) provide suggestive evidence that
the wage cyclicality of new hires relative to continuing workers is driven by procyclical match
quality of job changers. A similar idea is pursued in Hagedorn and Manovskii (2013), who
develop indirect measures of match quality to challenge empirical findings of excess new hire
wage cyclicality and implicit contracts a la Beaudry and DiNardo (1991). Martins, Solon,
and Thomas (2012) use data from Portugal to isolate wage cyclicality of workers newly
hired into a fixed set of “entry jobs”; their estimates suggest that new hire wage cyclicality
is roughly the same as that for continuing workers.3
    In terms of empirical methodology, our paper is closest to Haefke, Sonntag, and van
Rens (2013) who examine directly the wage cyclicality of new hires from unemployment.
They use cross-sectional data from the CPS and recover point estimates suggestive of excess
wage cyclicality of new hires from unemployment, although not statistically significant. We
instead use a rich, high-frequency panel data set from the SIPP. The panel aspect of our
data permits sharp controls for unobserved heterogeneity and compositional effects. To
this end, we find statistically significant evidence that new hires wages from unemployment
are no more cyclical than for existing workers. As a corollary, we show that the excess
wage cyclicality of new hires recovered by the literature is entirely driven by new hires
from employment, raising the possibility that this excess cyclicality is an artifact of cyclical
movements in match quality via the job ladder, as opposed to true wage flexibility. Finally,
as noted earlier, to support this hypothesis we develop a macroeconomic model with wage
rigidity, variable match quality, and on the job-search with endogenous search intensity. We
then show that simulated data from the model is consistent with both the aggregate and
panel data evidence.
    Section 2 provides the new panel data evidence. Section 3 describes the model and
Section 4 presents the numerical results. Concluding remarks are in Section 5.

    3
      More precisely, the semi-elasticities of wages to unemployment range from 1.48 to 1.81 for new hires
and 1.25 to 1.51 for incumbents, depending on the exact empirical specification. Moreover, while Martins,
Solon, and Thomas (2012) find roughly equivalent cyclicality for both continuing workers and new hires
within jobs, real wage variation in their data are largely driven by large exchange rate devaluations. This
is quite different from the type of real wage variation measured in the U.S., where most real wage variation
reflects changes in nominal wages.




                                                     4
2     Data and Empirics
This section presents new evidence on the wage cyclicality of new hires. We do so using
a rich new data set. We first show that we are able to replicate the existing evidence
showing greater cyclicality of the wages of new hires relative to existing workers. We then
proceed to show that there is no evidence of excess wage cyclicality for workers hired from
unemployment, but substantial evidence for procyclicality in match quality for job changers.
Our evidence is fully consistent with new hires having the same degree of wage flexibility
as existing workers. We first describe the data and then move to the estimation.

2.1    Data
We use data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) from 1990 to
2012. The SIPP is administered by the U.S. Census Bureau and is designed to track a
nationally representative sample of U.S. households. The SIPP is organized by panel years,
where each panel year introduces a new sample of households. Over our sample period the
Census Bureau introduced eight panels. The starting years were 1990-1993, 1996, 2001,
2004, and 2008. The average length of time an individual stays in a sample ranges from 32
months in the early samples to 48 in the more recent ones.
    Most key features of the SIPP are consistent across panels. Each household within a
panel is interviewed every four months, a period referred to as a wave. During the first wave
that a household is in the sample, the household provides retrospective information about
employment history and other background information for working age individuals in the
household. At the end of every wave, the household provides detailed information about
activities over the time elapsed since the previous interviews, including job transitions that
have occurred within the wave. Although individuals report earnings for each month of the
wave, we only use reported earnings from the last month of the wave to accommodate the
SIPP “seam effect.”4
    The SIPP has several features that make it uniquely suited for our analysis. Relative
to other commonly used panel data sets, the SIPP follows many more households, follows
multiple representative cohorts, and is assembled from information collected at a high fre-
quency (e.g. surveys are every four months as opposed to annually). This high frequency
structure of the data is crucial for constructing precise measurements of employment sta-
tus and wages. In particular, we use job-specific earnings to generate monthly records of
job-holding for each individual, allowing us to discern direct job-to-job transitions from job
   4
     Specifically, we find that the vast majority of earnings changes for workers employed at the same job
continuously across multiple waves occur between waves, as opposed to during a wave. The “seam effect” is
discussed in greater detail in the SIPP User’s Guide (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001, 1-6).



                                                    5
transitions with an intervening spell of non-employment.5 As the SIPP contains multiple
cohorts, at each point in time the sample is always representative of the U.S. population,
in contrast to other widely used panel datasets such as the NLSY.
         Crucial to our approach is that the SIPP maintains consistent job IDs. Fujita and
Moscarini (2013) document that, starting with the 1996 SIPP wave, a single job may be
assigned multiple IDs for an identifiable subset of survey respondents. In the appendix,
we develop a procedure that exploits a feature of the SIPP employment interview module
that allows us to identify jobs that may have been assigned multiple IDs. We find evidence
for recall employment, corroborating Fujita and Moscarini’s finding that recalls compose a
significant fraction of transitions to employment from non-employment.6
         The appendix provides further discussion of the data and the construction of the vari-
ables we use in the estimation.

2.2        Baseline Empirical Framework
We begin with a simple statistical framework to study the response of individual level wages
to changes in aggregate conditions that has been popular in the literature, beginning with
Bils (1985).7 Let wijt be the wage of individual i in job j at time t, xijt individual level
characteristics such as education and job tenure as well as a time trend, ut the unemployment
rate, I(newijt ) an indicator variable that equals unity if the worker is a new hire and zero
if not, and αi an individual fixed effect. The measurement equation for wages is then given
by
              log wijt = x0ijt πx + πu · ut + πn · I(newijt ) + πnu · I(newijt ) · ut + αi + eijt      (1)

where eijt is random error term.
         The inclusion of the unemployment rate in the regression is meant to capture the in-
fluence of cyclical factors on wages, while the interaction of the new hire dummy with the
unemployment rate is meant to measure the extra cyclicality of new hires wages. In par-
ticular, the coefficient πu can be interpreted as the semi-elasticity of wages with respect to
     5
     Starting with the 1996 panel, respondents report the start and end dates associated with a job. While
our measure is highly correlated with the self-reported measure, the self-reported measure is sometimes
inconsistent with self-reported activity from other waves– e.g., a worker will report a starting date that
corresponds to a prior wave for which the respondent had previously reported being unemployed or employed
at a different job. We use our earnings-based measure for all panels to avoid such issues of measurement
error and maintain consistency in our analysis of the pre- and post-1996 data.
   6
     We do not include these observations as new hires in our analysis; if these workers receive wages that
are only as cyclical as “stayers”, they would bias the estimation of wage cyclicality of new hires from
unemployment downwards.
   7
     Included among the many studies regressing individual level wages on some measure of unemployment
as a cyclical indicator are Beaudry and DiNardo (1991); Shin (1994); Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994);
Barlevy (2001); Carneiro, Guimarães, and Portugal (2012); Devereux (2002); Martins, Solon, and Thomas
(2012); and Hagedorn and Manovskii (2013).



                                                      6
unemployment, while πu +πnu gives the corresponding semi-elasticity for new hires. The key
finding in the literature is that πnu is negative (along with πu ), suggesting greater cyclical
sensitivity of new hires’ wages.
       At this point we make two observations: First, with exception of Haefke, Sonntag, and
van Rens (2013), the literature typically does not distinguish between new hires coming from
unemployment and those coming from other jobs. Second, since changes in wages of workers
making job-to-job transitions include variation in quality across jobs, cyclical movements
in job match quality will bias the new hire effect for workers coming from employment. We
turn to these issues shortly.
       We first show that with our data we can obtain the results in the literature. To obtain
consistent coefficient estimates of equation (1), it is necessary to account for the presence
of unobserved heterogeneity αi that may be correlated with observables. The convention
in the literature, accordingly, is to use either a first difference or a fixed effects estimator,
depending on the properties of the error term. The low serial correlation of the error terms
in the exercises we perform suggests that the fixed effects estimator is preferred. However,
since Bils (1985) and others used a first difference estimator, we show the results are robust
to either approach.8
       The regressions are based on monthly data.9 For comparability to Bils (1985), we only
use observations for men between the ages of 20 and 60. Accordingly, unemployment is the
prime age unemployment rate. As our measure of hourly wages, we use job-specific earnings.
In cases in which an hourly wage is directly available, we use that as our measure. In cases
in which an hourly wage is not directly available, we use job-specific earnings divided by the
product of job-specific hours per week and job-specific weeks per month. Wages are deflated
by a four months average of the monthly PCE. Finally, we define “new hires” as individuals
who are in the first four months of their tenure on a job.10 The appendix provides additional
information on variable construction, including the individual level characteristics we use.
       Table 1 presents the results. The first column presents the estimates of equation (1)
using fixed effects and the second presents estimates using first differences. The results
are robust across specifications. Similar to Bils (1985), we find that new hires’ wages are
significantly more cyclical than those for existing workers. When estimating the equation
in first differences, the semi-elasticity of new hire wages is −1.445, compared to −0.448
for continuing workers. With fixed effects, the new hire semi-elasticity is estimated to
be −1.409, compared to −0.162 for continuing workers. In both specifications, the semi-
   8
     As in Bils (1985), we difference the unemployment      rate in the interaction term but not the new hire
identifier itself, i.e. I(newijt ) · ∆ut rather than ∆ I(newijt ) · ut .
   9
     While we have monthly information, as we noted earlier we only use wage information from the final
month of each four month wave to avoid the “seam” effect.
  10
     Note that given this definition we will only have one wage observation for a new hire since we only use
the final month of a four month wave to obtain wage data.


                                                      7
elasticity is significant at the 1% level for continuing workers; and the new hire differential is
significant at the 1% level. We find no evidence of serial correlation in the predicted errors,
implying that fixed effects are more efficient than first differences. Hence, our preferred
estimates come from the fixed effects regression.
       While we recover precise coefficient estimates that imply both continuing worker wage
cyclicality and a new hire effect, our estimates reveal less cyclicality than most of the
existing literature. Using annual NLSY data from 1966-1980, Bils (1985) finds a continuing
worker semi-elasticity of 0.6, versus 3.0 for changers. Barlevy (2001) uses both PSID and
NLSY through 1993 and recovers a semi-elasticity of 3.0 for job changers. We speculate
that our lower estimates are due mainly the high-frequency of our data (every four months
as opposed to every year). If workers are on staggered multi-period contracts (as will be
the case in the quantitative model we present), then a smaller fraction of wages are likely
to be adjusted over a four month interval than would be the case annually. In any case,
our quantitative model will generate data consistent with the degree of wage cyclicality
suggested by the evidence in Table 1.

2.3      Robustness of the New Hire Effect
We now present evidence that the estimated new hire effect in the literature reflects cyclical
wage gains of workers making job-to-job transitions, rather than greater wage flexibility of
new hires.
       We begin by distinguishing new hires that come from unemployment from those that
come from other jobs. As Haefke, Sonntag, and van Rens (2013) emphasize, the hiring
margin that is key for generating unemployment volatility in search and matching models
with sticky wages is that of workers coming from unemployment, not that of workers making
job-to-job transitions. Yet most empirical studies do not distinguish between new hires that
are job changers and workers hired from unemployment.                 11   Accordingly, it is important to
isolate the wage behavior for new hires coming from unemployment. To do so, we estimate
a variant of (1) that allows for a separate new hire effect for workers coming from non-
employment and workers making direct job-to-job transitions:

  log wijt = x0ijt πx + πu · ut + πnu
                                   EN E                               EE
                                        · I(newijt &EN Eijt ) · ut + πnu · I(newijt &EEijt ) · ut
             + πnEN E · I(newijt &EN Eijt ) + πnEN E · I(newijt &EN Eijt ) + αi + eijt ,                    (2)
  11
    One exception is Hyatt and McEntarfer (2012), who use quarterly data from the LEHD to study the
cyclicality of job-to-job changes. While they do not discuss the differential wage cyclicality of new hires from
employment and new hires from non-employment, their Figure 2 seems to suggest that earnings changes for
workers with 3 to 8 months of nonemployment between jobs are less cyclical than for workers who make
job changes within a quarter. Relative to Hyatt and McEntarfer, we use data that contains hourly wages,
permits precise measures of job transitions, and also covers a longer time span.



                                                       8
where we use the notation EN E to signify workers with an intervening spell of non-
employment and EE to signify workers who made direct job-to-job transitions.12
       Table 2 presents the results. For robustness, we consider four different measures of
what constitutes a new hire from non-employment. In the baseline case presented in the
first column we use the broadest measure: all new hires who did not receive a wage in
the previous month, independent of how long the unemployment spell. The second column
addresses the concern that new hires from nonemployment who have only missed a single
month of pay might in fact be job-changers taking a short break between jobs; here, we
group such new hires with workers making direct job-to-job transitions. In the third column
for EN E transitions we exclude new hires with excessively long unemployment spells, which
we consider to be a spell of greater than nine months. We do this to address concerns that
such workers may have atypical wage outcomes. Finally, the fourth column addresses at
the same time both concerns of long-term unemployment and short break in-between jobs.
       As the table shows, for all three specifications, the new hire effect disappears for workers
                                           EN E is not statistically significant in each
coming from unemployment. The coefficient πnu
case. Thus, for new hires coming from unemployment, wages are no more cyclical than those
for existing workers. Moreover, while the new hire effect disappears for workers coming from
unemployment, we find substantial evidence of procyclical changes in match quality for job
changers. Indeed, the coefficient on the job-changer interaction term is higher than the
coefficient on the interaction term for the baseline regressions in Table 1, where both types
of new hires are pooled together.13
       Although we expect to obtain more efficient estimates from the fixed effects regressions,
it will be convenient to use estimates of the various interaction terms from the first difference
regressions when we examine our results with a quantitative model. We proceed identically
in Table 3 as in Table 2, except we estimate the regression in first differences. Our results
do not change: we find no evidence of wage cyclicality for new hires from unemployment,
but recover a negative and statistically significant coefficient on the interaction term for
new hires from employment.
                                              EE as indicative of procyclical match quality for
       We regard the negative coefficient on πnu
employed workers. Pissarides (2009) interprets a negative coefficient on the new hire term
pooled across all new hires as indicative of greater flexibility in new hire wages. According to
this interpretation, the results from Table 2 might suggest that firms have substantial leeway
to adjust the wages of new hires from employment but not of new hires from unemployment.
First, we note that such an interpretation would still not detract from one of our main
  12
     Note that workers making EN E transitions may have gone a full wave without employment. We drop
this observation, as the worker is not employed and earns zero wages.
  13
     We can reject the null hypothesis that the wage cyclicality for new hires from non-employment equals
the wage cyclicality for new hires from employment at the 5% level.



                                                   9
points: the primal wage for studying the volatility of unemployment is that of new hires
from unemployment and this wage is no more cyclical than the wage of continuing workers.
Second, we find such an interpretation implausible: it is hard to rationalize a bargaining
mechanism whereby wages for new hires from employment are flexible, but wages for new
hires from unemployment are not. Instead, we interpret our results in line with (i) an
empirical literature finding that job changers realize substantial wage gains from switching
jobs (Topel and Ward, 1992), and (ii) a theoretical literature arguing that is easier for
workers in employment to locate better matches during expansions than recessions (Barlevy,
2002).14
       How does our interpretation map into the regression equation (2)? Note that while the
regression specification allows for time-invariant person fixed effects, it does not control
for match specific effects that differ across jobs. Suppose that the error term eijt in the
regression equation (2) takes the form

                                           eijt = qij + εijt                                        (3)

where qij represents unobserved match quality. If workers find better matches when the
unemployment rate is low – or similarly, if the share of workers moving from bad to good
matches of total job flows procyclical – then changes in eijt across jobs should be correlated
with the change in the unemployment rate due to cyclical changes in qij :

                                        Cov(∆qij , ∆Ut ) < 0.                                       (4)

It follows that, among new hires from employment, the error term eijt will be correlated with
the unemployment rate Ut in differences (if the regression is estimated in first-differences)
and mean deviations (if the regression is estimated in fixed effects). As a consequence, the
                                                                                       EE , will
estimated coefficient intended to identify the excess cyclicality of new hires wages, πnu
                                                             EE would reflect composition
be biased downward. If so, estimates of a negative value of πnu
bias rather than greater cyclicality of new hire wages.
       Figure 1 illustrates how procyclical match upgrading for job changers may bias estimates
of new hire wage cyclicality. The figure portrays cyclical wage variation across two jobs:
a good match and a bad match. For each match, the solid and dotted lines are the wage
with and without cyclical effects, where within each type of match, wages are only modestly
cyclical. Consider, however, a worker employed in a bad match through period τ + 1 paying
a wage wB . When the aggregate state turns from recession to expansion at period τ + 2,
  14
    In the next section, we develop a formal model consistent with this interpretation and show that the
model well accounts for aggregate unemployment and wage volatility, as well as the micro findings shown
here.



                                                  10
the worker moves to a good match paying wage wG . There are two cyclical sources of
the worker’s wage increase: the modest cyclical increase in wages for all workers in good
matches (wG vs. wG ), but more importantly, the improvement in match quality facilitated
by the expansion (wG vs. wB ). While it is clear that the wage growth of such job changers is
more cyclical than that of continuing workers, it is impossible to discern whether any of the
excess cyclicality is due to greater wage flexibility for new hires absent appropriate controls
for match quality. One possible way to control for match quality would be to introduce
fixed effects at the person-job level and identify wage flexibility for new hires from wage
variation within a job. However, we do not observe individuals on specific jobs for periods
sufficiently long to tightly identify the job-person fixed effect.
         We view our regression estimates as conditional moments from the data. In the next
section, we develop a model of equilibrium unemployment with on-the-job search, variable
match quality, and wage stickiness for new hires. We follow the typical strategy of targeting
steady state quantities (such as the average wage growth of new hires from employment and
unemployment) and leave the cyclical moments as model outcomes. We find that the model
is successfully able to simultaneously match the untargeted micro and macro moments.
         Crucially, in our model, new hires wages are no more flexible than those for existing
workers; yet data generated from the model will give rise to the appearance of new hire
wage flexibility when evaluated by the typical regression from the literature.



3         Model
We model employment fluctuations using a variant of the Diamond, Mortensen, and Pis-
sarides search and matching model. Our starting point is a simple real business cycle model
with search and matching in the labor market, similar to Merz (1995) and Andolfatto (1996).
As in these papers, we minimize complexity by imposing complete consumption insurance.
Our use of the real business cycle model is also meant for simplicity. It will become clear
that our central point of how a model with wage rigidity can account for the micro wage
evidence will hold in a richer macroeconomic framework.15
         We make two main changes to the Merz/Andolfatto framework. First we allow for stag-
gered wage contracting with wage contracts determined by Nash bargaining, as in Gertler
and Trigari (2009). Second, we allow for both variable match quality and on-the-job search
with variable search intensity. These features will generate procyclical job ladder effects, in
    15
     Similarly, Gertler and Trigari (2009) have investigated the role of staggered Nash bargaining within
a real business cycle model with technology shocks as the only driving force. Gertler, Sala, and Trigari
(2008) have then verified that the insights on the role of the contracting structure in generating plausible
movements in the labor share and the relevant labor market variables carry over to a more general setup
that features multiple sources of cyclical fluctuations and additional propagation mechanisms.


                                                    11
the spirit of Barlevy (2002) and Menzio and Shi (2011). As we will show, both these variants
will be critical for accounting for both the macro and micro evidence on unemployment and
wage dynamics.

3.1   Search, Vacancies, and Matching
There is a continuum of firms and a continuum of workers, each of measure unity. Workers
within a firm are either good matches or bad matches. A bad match has a productivity
level that is only a fraction φ of that of a good match, where φ ∈ (0, 1). Let nt be the
number of good matches within a firm that are working during period t and bt the number
of bad matches. Then the firm’s effective labor force lt is the following composite of good
and bad matches:
                                        lt = nt + φbt                                                  (5)

   Firms post vacancies to hire workers. Firms with vacancies and workers looking for jobs
meet randomly (i.e., there is no directed search). The quality of a match is only revealed
once a worker and a firm meet. Match quality is idiosyncratic. A match is good with
probability ξ and bad with complementary probability 1 − ξ. Hence, the outcome of a
match depends neither on ex-ante characteristics of the firm or the worker. Whether or not
a meeting becomes a match depends on the realization of match quality and the employment
status of the searching worker.
   Workers search for jobs both when they are unemployed and when they are employed.
Before search occurs, matches are subject to an exogenous separation shock. With probabil-
ity ν, workers will search on-the-job; absent successful search that generates a new match at
a different firm, these workers will remain at the firm for another period. With probability
1 − ν, the match is terminated. Workers who are subject to the separation shock and do
not successfully find a job by the end of the period will be unemployed at the start of the
next period.
   There are three general types of searchers: the unemployed, the employed, and the
                                                                  R                      R
recently separated. We first consider the unemployed. Let n̄t =    i nt di   and b̄t =       i bt di   be
the total number of workers who are good matches and who are bad matches, respectively,
where firms are indexed by i. The total number of unemployed workers ūt is then given by

                                      ūt = 1 − n̄t − b̄t .                                            (6)

We assume that each unemployed worker searches with a fixed intensity, normalized at
unity. Under our parameterization, it will be optimal for a worker from unemployment to
accept both good and matches.
   The second type of searchers we consider are those who search on the job. Absent

                                               12
other considerations, the only reason for an employed worker to search is to find a job with
improved match quality.16 In our setting, the only workers who can improve match quality
are those currently in bad matches. We allow such workers to search with variable intensity
ςbt . As has been noted in the literature, however, not all job transitions involve positive
wage changes (see Tjaden and Wellschmied, 2014). Accordingly, we suppose that workers in
good matches may occasionally leave for idiosyncratic reasons, e.g. locational constraints.17
We assume that these workers search with fixed intensity ςn and only accept other good
matches.
       Finally, we assume that the fraction 1 − ν of workers separated during period t search
with fixed intensity ςu . Such workers are either hired by another firm to work in the
subsequent period or remain unemployed. As is the case with workers searching from
unemployment, workers separated within the period will find it optimal to both accept
good or bad matches. We include such flows to be consistent with the observation that
workers observed making job-to-job transitions sometimes are observed to take pay cuts;
and, as pointed out by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2016), flows in the data
that appear to be job-to-job transitions may in fact be separations immediately followed by
successful job search.
       We derive the total efficiency units of search effort s̄t as a weighted sum of search
intensity across the three types:

                             s̄t = ūt + ν(ςbt b̄t + ςn n̄t ) + (1 − ν)ςu (n̄t + b̄t )                        (7)

The first term reflects search intensity of the unemployed; the second term, the search
intensity of the employed; the third, the search intensity of workers separated within the
period. As we will show, the search intensity of bad matches on the job will be procyclical.
Furthermore, the cyclical sensitivity of the efforts of workers in bad matches to find better
jobs will ultimately be the source of procyclical movements in match quality and new hire
wages.
       The aggregate number of matches m̄t is a function of the efficiency weighted number of
  16
     Strictly speaking, with staggered wage contracting, workers in good matches may want to search if their
wages are (i) sufficiently below the norm and are (ii) not likely to be renegotiated for some time. However,
because the fraction of workers likely to be in this situation in our model is of trivial quantitative importance,
due to the transitory nature on average of wage differentials due to staggered contracting, we abstract from
this consideration.
  17
     For similar reasons, structural econometric models formulated to assess the contribution of on-the-job
search to wage dispersion in a stationary setting often include a channel for exogenous, non-economic job-
to-job transitions with wage drops. Examples include Jolivet, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2006) and Lentz
and Mortensen (2012).




                                                        13
searchers s̄t and the number of vacancies ῡt , as follows:

                                          m̄t = σm s̄σt ῡt1−σ ,                          (8)

where σ is the elasticity of matches to units of search effort and σm reflects the efficiency
of the matching process.
    The probability pt a unit of search activity leads to a match is:

                                                      m̄t
                                               pt =                                       (9)
                                                      s̄t
The probability the match is good pnt and the probability it is bad pbt are given by:

                                         pnt = ξpt                                       (10)
                                          pbt = (1 − ξ)pt                                (11)

The probability for a firm that posting a vacancy leads to a match qtm is given by

                                                        m̄t
                                              qtm =                                      (12)
                                                        ῡt

Not all matches lead to hires, however, and hires vary by quality. The probability qtn a
vacancy leads to a good quality hire and the probability qtb it leads to a bad quality one are
given by

                            qtn = ξqtm                                                   (13)
                                                                       !
                                                      ν(ςbt b̄t + ςn n̄t ) m
                            qtb = (1 − ξ) 1 −                              qt            (14)
                                                               s̄t

Since all workers accept good matches, qtn is simply the product of the probability of a match
being good conditional on a match, ξ, and the probability of a match, qtm . By contrast,
since on the job searchers do not accept bad matches, to compute qtb we must net out the
fraction of searchers who are doing so on the job, ν(ςbt b̄t + ςn n̄t )/s̄t .
    Finally, we can express the expected number of workers in efficiency units of labor that
a firm can expected to hire from posting a vacancy, qt , as

                                            qt = qtn + φqtb                              (15)

It follows that the total number of new hires in efficiency units is simply qt υt .




                                                   14
3.2   Firms
Firms produce output yt using capital and labor according to a Cobb-Douglas production
technology:
                                         yt = zt ktα lt1−α ,                                 (16)

where kt is capital and lt labor in efficiency units. Capital is perfectly mobile. Firms rent
capital on a period by period basis. They add labor through a search and matching process
that we describe shortly. The current value of lt is a predetermined state.
   Labor in efficiency units is the quality adjusted sum of good and bad matches in the
firm (see equation (5)). It is convenient to define γt ≡ bt /nt as the ratio of bad to good
matches in the firm. We can then express lt as the follow multiple of nt :

                                  lt = nt + φbt = (1 + φγt )nt ,                             (17)

where as before, φ ∈ (0, 1) is the productivity of a bad match relative to a good one. The
labor quality mix γt is also a predetermined state for the firm.
   The evolution of lt depends on the dynamics of both nt and bt . Let ρit be the probability
of retaining a worker in a match of type i = n, b. Letting qti denote the probability of filling
a vacancy with a worker leading to a match of type i, we can express the evolution of nt
and bt as follows:

                                     nt+1 = ρnt nt + qtn υt                                  (18)
                                     bt+1 =      ρbt bt   +   qtb υt                         (19)

where qti υt is the quantity of type i matches and where equations (13) and (14) define qtn
and qtb . The probability of retaining a worker is the product of the job survival probability
ν and the probability the worker does not leave for a job elsewhere (1 − ςit pnt ):


                                  ρit = ν(1 − ςit pnt ), i = n, b,                           (20)

   It follows from equations (17) and (20) that we can express the survival probability of
a unit of labor in efficiency units, ρt , as the following convex combination of ρnt and ρbt :

                                               ρnt + φγt ρbt
                                        ρt =                                                 (21)
                                                  1 + φγt
The hiring rate in efficiency units of labor, xt , is ratio of new hires in efficiency units qt υt
to the existing stock, lt
                                                   qt υt
                                            xt =                                             (22)
                                                    lt


                                                 15
where the expected number of efficiency weighted new hires per vacancy qt is given by
equation (15). The evolution of lt is then given by:

                                             lt+1 = (ρt + xt ) lt                                        (23)
                                           
       It is useful to define γ̄tm ≡ qtb υt / (qtn υt ) = qtb /qtn as the ratio of newly-formed bad to
good matches. Then, making use of equations (15), (17), (18), (19) and (22) to characterize
how the quality mix of workers γt = bt /nt evolves over time, we obtain:

                                                              γt   b     γ̄tm
                                     ρb γt + qtb υt /nt     1+φγt ρt + 1+φγ̄tm xt
                             γt+1   = tn                =                                                (24)
                                      ρt + qtn υt /nt         1    n       1
                                                            1+φγt ρt + 1+φγ̄tm xt


where 1/(1 + φγt ) is the share of good matches among incumbent workers and 1/(1 + φγ̄tm )
is the share of good matches among new hires and where γt /(1 + φγt ) and γ̄tm /(1 + φγ̄tm )
are the complementary shares of bad matches.
       We now turn to the firm’s decision problem. Assume that labor recruiting costs are
quadratic in the hiring rate for labor in efficiency units, xt , and homogeneous in the existing
stock lt .18 Then let Λt,t+1 be the firm’s stochastic discount factor (i.e., the household’s
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution), rt be the rental rate of capital, and wt be the
wage per efficiency unit of labor. Then the firm’s decision problem is to choose capital kt
and the hiring rate xt to maximize the discounted stream of profits net recruiting costs,
subject to the equations that govern the laws of motion for labor in efficiency units lt and
the quality mix of labor γt , and given the expected paths of rents and wages. We express
the value of each firm Ft (lt , γt , wt ) ≡ Ft as

                                                κ 2
                    Ft = max{zt ktα lt1−α −      x lt − wt lt − rt kt + Et {Λt,t+1 Ft+1 }}
                          kt ,xt                2 t

subject to equations (23) and (24), and given the values of the firm level states (lt , γt , wt )
and the aggregate state vector. The firm’s decision problem is formulated according to the
following intra-period timing protocol: (i) realization of aggregate and firm-level shocks,
(ii) wage bargaining and production, (iii) realization of match-level separation shocks, and
(iv) search and matching. For the time being, we take the firm’s expected wage path as
given. In Section 3.4 we describe how wages are determined for both good and bad workers.
       Given constant returns and perfectly mobile capital, the firm’s value Ft is homogeneous
in lt . The net effect is that each firm’s choice of the capital/labor ratio and the hiring rate
is independent of its size. Let Jt be firm value per efficiency unit of labor and let ǩt ≡ kt /lt
  18
    We assume quadratic recruiting costs because we have temporary wage dispersion due to staggered
contracts and perfectly mobile capital. With proportional costs, all capital would flow to the low wage firms.



                                                       16
be its capital labor ratio. Then
                                                       Ft = Jt · lt                                      (25)

with Jt ≡ Jt (γt , wt ) given by

                                             κ 2
                    Jt = max{zt ǩtα −        x − wt − rt ǩt + (ρt + xt )Et {Λt,t+1 Jt+1 }}.            (26)
                           ǩt ,xt           2 t

subject to (23) and (24).
       The first order condition for capital rental is

                                                   rt = αzt ǩtα−1 .                                     (27)

Given Cobb-Douglas production technology and perfect mobility of capital, ǩt does not vary
across firms.
       The first order condition for hiring is

                                                         ∂Jt+1   ∂Jt+1 ∂wt+1 ∂γt+1
                                                                                                
                 κxt = Et Λt,t+1       Jt+1 + (ρt + xt )       +                                         (28)
                                                         ∂γt+1   ∂wt+1 ∂γt+1 ∂xt

The expression on the left is the marginal cost of adding worker, and the expression on the
right is the discounted marginal benefit. The first term on the right-hand side of (28) is
standard: it reflects the marginal benefit of adding a unit of efficiency labor. The second
term reflects a “composition effect” of hiring. While the firm pays the same recruitment
costs for bad and good workers (in quality adjusted units), bad workers have separate
survival rates within the firm due to their particular incentive to search on-the-job. The
composition term reflects the effect of hiring on period-ahead composition, and the implied
effect on the value of a unit of labor quality to the firm.19

3.3       Workers
We next construct value functions for unemployed workers, workers in bad matches, and
workers in good matches. These value functions will be relevant for wage determination,
as we discuss in the next section. Importantly, they will also be relevant for the choice of
search intensity by workers in bad matches who are looking to upgrade.
       We begin with an unemployed worker: Let Ut be the value of unemployment, Vtn the
value of a good match, Vtb the value of a bad match, and uB the flow benefit of unemploy-
ment. Then, the value of a worker in unemployment satisfies
                                         n         h                                       io
                       Ut = uB + Et Λt,t+1 pnt V̄t+1
                                                  n
                                                     + pbt V̄t+1
                                                              b
                                                                 + (1 − pt ) Ut+1               .        (29)
  19
       Under our calibration, the effect will be zero, up to a first order. See appendix for details.


                                                           17
where pnt = ξpt , pbt = (1 − ξ)pt , pt is given by (9), and where V̄t+1
                                                                     n and V̄ b are the average
                                                                             t+1
values of good and bad matches at time t + 1.20
    For workers that begin the period employed, we suppose that the cost of searching as a
function of search intensity is given by

                                                           ς0
                                            c (ςit ) =         ς 1+ης
                                                         1 + ης it

where i = b, n, u. Let wit be the wage of a type i worker, i = b, n. The value of a worker in
a bad match Vtb (γt , wt ) ≡ Vtb is given by

                    Vtb = max{wbt + τt − [νc(ςbt ) + (1 − ν)c(ςu )]
                                 ςbt

                               +Et {Λt,t+1 {ν[(1 − ςbt pnt )Vt+1
                                                              b
                                                                 + ςbt pnt V̄t+1
                                                                              n
                                                                                 ]
                               +(1 − ν)[ςu pnt V̄t+1
                                                  n
                                                     + ςu pbt V̄t+1
                                                                 b
                                                                    + (1 − ςu pt )Ut+1 ]}}                  (30)

The flow value is the wage wbt net the expected costs of search plus a term τt we describe
below. If the worker “survives” within the firm, which occurs with probability ν, he searches
with variable intensity ςbt . If he is separated, which occurs with probability 1−ν, he searches
with fixed intensity ςu . The first term in the continuation value is the value of continuing in
the match, which occurs with probability ν(1 − ςbt pnt ). The second term reflects the value
of switching to a good match, which occurs with probability νςbt pnt . The third term and
fourth term reflect the value of being separated but immediately finding a good or bad job.
The final term reflects the value of being separated into unemployment.
    A worker in the bad match chooses the optimal search intensity ςbt according to (30),
satisfying                                     n                           o
                                      ης
                                  ς0 ςbt = Et Λt,t+1 pnt V̄t+1
                                                            n      b
                                                               − Vt+1                                       (31)

Search intensity varies positively with the product of the likelihood of finding a good match,
pnt , and the net gain of doing so, i.e. the difference between the value of good and bad
matches. One can see from equation (31) how the model can generate procyclical search
intensity by workers in bad matches. The probability of finding a good match will be highly
procyclical and the net gain roughly acyclical. Thus, the expected marginal gain from
search will be highly procyclical, leading to procyclical search intensity.
   20
      Technically, the average value of employment in the continuation value of Ut should be that of a new
hire rather than the unconditional one. However, Gertler and Trigari (2009) show that the two are identical
up to a first order. Hence, we use the simpler
                                           R i formulation for clarity. In particular, the unconditional
                                       i
average value for a type i match is V̄t+1 = Vt+1  dGt+1 , where G denotes the joint distribution
                                                                                             R i of wages and
                                                                                    i
composition,R while the average value conditional on being a new hire is given by V̄x,t+1 = Vt+1  (xt /x̄t ) dGt ,
                                                                                           i        i
where x̄t = xt dGt . Since w, γ and x in the steady state are identical across firms, V̄x,t+1  = V̄t+1  up to a
first order.



                                                         18
    If there is dispersion of wages among bad matches due staggered contracting, then search
intensities can differ across these workers. To simplify matters, we assume that the family
provides an insurance scheme that smooths out search intensities across its family members,
much in the same way it offers consumption insurance. In particular, we assume that there
is a transfer scheme that insures that the sum of the wage and the transfer equals the average
wage across matches, w̄bt . In particular, τt = (w̄bt − wbt ), which implies wbt + τt = w̄bt . With
the transfer, the discounted marginal benefit to search (the right side of equation (31)) does
not depend on worker-specific characteristics, so that Vtb = V̄tb . Search intensity is thus the
same across all workers in bad matches.
    The value of a worker in a good match Vtn (γt , wt ) ≡ Vtn is analogous to the value
function for a bad match.

                  Vtn = wnt − [νc(ςn ) + (1 − ν)c(ςu )]
                             +Et {Λt,t+1 {ν[(1 − ςn pnt )Vt+1
                                                           n
                                                              + ςn pnt V̄t+1
                                                                          n
                                                                             ]
                             +(1 − ν)[ςu pnt V̄t+1
                                                n
                                                   + ςu pbt V̄t+1
                                                               b
                                                                  + (1 − ςu pt+1 )Ut+1 ]}}               (32)

One key difference is that on-the-job search intensity is fixed for good matches. Note that
up to a first order, however, there are zero expected gains from search given that workers
in good matches only move to other good matches. Hence, we rule out variable search by
workers in good matches without loss of generality.
    We assume that the the search intensities of good and bad matches are identical in steady
state (i.e., ςbt = ςn in steady state). As we show in Appendix B, this greatly simplifies the
analysis of the firm’s problem, as it implies that the average retention rates of workers
in good and bad matches are the same. In the absence of direct evidence of the broader
relation of job quality and match retention, we interpret this as a neutral assumption.21

3.4    Nash Wage
As in GT, workers and firms divide the joint match surplus via staggered Nash bargaining.
For simplicity, we assume that the firm bargains with good workers for a wage. Bad workers
then receive the fraction φ of the wage for good workers, corresponding to their relative
productivity. Thus if wt is the wage for a good match within the firm, then φwt is the wage
for a bad match. It follows that wt corresponds to the wage per unit of labor quality. We
note that this simple rule for determining wages for workers in bad matches approximates
  21
     One study of job tenure and match quality over the business cycle is Bowlus (1995), who uses job tenure
as a proxy for match quality. When she allows controls for starting wages, she finds no systematic relation of
match quality and tenure to aggregate conditions. Her conclusions are consistent with a central implication
of our model: “Workers take these mismatched jobs during recessions and then move on when times are
better” (p. 346).


                                                     19
the optimum that would come from direct bargaining. It differs slightly due mainly to
differences in duration of good and bad matches with firms. The gain from imposing
this simple rule is that we need only characterize the evolution of a single type of wage.
Importantly, in bargaining with good workers, firms also take account of the implied costs
of hiring bad workers.
    Our assumptions are equivalent to having the good workers and firms bargain over
the wage per unit of labor quality wt . For the firm, the relevant surplus per worker is
Jt , derived in section 3.2 (equation (26)). For good workers, the relevant surplus is the
difference between the value of a good match and unemployment:

                                              Ht = Vtn − Ut                                             (33)

As in GT, the expected duration of a wage contract is set exogenously. At each period, a firm
faces a fixed probability 1 − λ of renegotiating the wage. With complementary probability,
the wage from the previous period is retained. The expected duration of a wage contract is
then 1/(1 − λ).22 Workers hired in between contracting periods receive the prevailing firm
wage per unit of labor quality wt . Thus in the model there is no new hire effect: Adjusting
for relative productivity the wages of new hires are the same as for existing workers.
    Let wt∗ denote the wage per unit of labor quality of a firm renegotiating its wage contract
in the current period.23 The wage wt∗ is chosen to maximize the Nash product of a unit of
labor quality to a firm and a worker in a good match, given by

                                                 Htη Jt1−η                                              (34)

subject to                              (
                                            wt with probability λ
                              wt+1 =         ∗
                                                                                                        (35)
                                            wt+1 with probability 1 − λ
       ∗
where wt+1 is the wage chosen in the next period if the parties are able to re-bargain and
where η is the households relative bargaining power.
    Let Ht∗ ≡ Ht (γt , wt∗ ) and Jt∗ ≡ Jt (γt , wt∗ ) (where Ht ≡ Ht (γt , wt ) and Jt ≡ Jt (γt , wt )).
  22
     We use the Calvo formulation of staggered contracting for convenience, since it does not require keeping
track of the distribution of remaining time on the contracts. We expect very similar results from using
Taylor contracting, where contracts are of a fixed duration. An advantage with Taylor contracting is that
wages are less likely to fall out of the bargaining set, since with Calvo a small fraction of firms may not
adjust wages for a long time. Nonetheless, given that the broad insights from Calvo and Taylor contracting
are very similar, we stick with the simpler Calvo formulation.
  23
     We suppress the dependence of w∗ and similar objects on the firm’s composition in the notation.




                                                     20
Then the first order condition for wt∗ is given by24

                                     ∂Ht∗ ∗              ∂Jt∗
                                                                    
                                   η      Jt = (1 − η) −      Ht∗                                      (36)
                                     ∂wt∗                ∂wt∗

where
                            ∂Ht∗                                  ∂Ht+1
                                                                              
                              ∗  = 1 + ν (1 − ςn pnt ) λEt Λt,t+1                                      (37)
                            ∂wt                                    ∂wt∗
and
                             ∂Jt∗                             ∂Jt+1
                                                                          
                                  = −1 + (ρt + xt )λEt Λt,t+1                  .                       (38)
                             ∂wt∗                              ∂wt∗
Under multi–period bargaining, the outcome depends on how the new wage settlement
affects the relative surpluses in subsequent periods where the contract is expected to remain
in effect. The net effect, as shown in GT, is that up a first order approximation the contract
wage will be an expected distributed lead of the target wages that would arise under period-
by-period Nash bargaining, where the weights on the target for period t + i depend on the
likelihood the contract remains operative, λi .
       In general, the new contract wage will be a function of the firm level state γt (the ratio of
bad to good matches), as well as the aggregate state vector. However, given our assumptions
that steady state search intensities are the same for good and bad matches and that wages
are proportional to productivity, wt∗ is independent of γt in the first order approximation.
Accordingly, to a first order, we can express the evolution of average wages wt as

                                       wt = (1 − λ)wt∗ + λwt−1

where 1 − λ is the fraction of firms that are renegotiating and λ is the fraction that are not
and where the average wage per unit of labor quality is defined by
                                                Z
                                         wt =          wdGt (γ, w)
                                                 w,γ


with Gt (γ, w) denoting the time t fraction of units of labor quality employed at firms with
wage less than or equal to w and composition less than or equal to γ. (See the appendix
for details.)

3.5       Households: Consumption and Saving
We adopt the representative family construct, following Merz and Andolfatto, allowing for
perfect consumption insurance. There is a measure of families on the unit interval, each with
  24
    For simplicity, we omit additional terms in the expression for ∂H ∗ /∂w∗ that will be zero up to a first
order. See the appendix for details.



                                                       21
a measure one of workers. Before making allocating resources to per-capita consumption and
savings, the family pools all wage and unemployment income. Additionally, the family owns
diversified stakes in firms that pay out profits. The household can then assign consumption
c̄t to members and save in the form of capital k t , which is rented to firms at rate rt and
depreciates at the rate δ.
       Let Ωt be the value of the representative household. Then,

                                       Ωt = max {log(c̄t ) + βEt Ωt+1 }                                   (39)
                                             c̄t ,k̄t+1


subject to

                               ς0 nh 1+ης                i     h
                                                                    1+ης
                                                                                        i o
             c̄t + k t+1 +          νςn   + (1 − ν)ςu1+ης n̄t + ν ς¯bt   + (1 − ν)ςu1+ης b̄t
                             1 + ης
                     = w̄t n̄t + φw̄t b̄t + (1 − n̄t − b̄t )uB + (1 − δ + rt )k t + Tt + Πt ,             (40)

and

                                          n̄t+1 = ρ̄nt n̄t + ξpt s̄t                                      (41)
                                          b̄t+1 =         ρ̄bt b̄t   +   ξγ̄tm pt s̄t                     (42)

where Πt are the profits from the household’s ownership holdings in firms and Tt are lump
sum transfers from the government.25
       The first-order condition from the household’s savings problem gives

                                          1 = (1 − δ + r)Et {Λt,t+1 }                                     (43)

where Λt,t+1 ≡ βc̄t /c̄t+1 .

3.6      Resource Constraint, Government Policy, and Equilibrium
The resource constraint states that the total resource allocation towards consumption, in-
vestment, vacancy posting costs, and search costs is equal to aggregate output:

                                           ȳt = c̄t + k̄t+1 − (1 − δ)k t
         κ                    ς
             Z                     h                          i     h                        i 
                                0                                         1+ης
       +        x2t lt di +          νςn1+ης + (1 − ν)ςu1+ης n̄t + ν ς¯bt      + (1 − ν)ςu1+ης b̄t .      (44)
         2    i             1 + ης
  25
     Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) show the addition of non-separable utility from leisure can
greatly increase the difficulty of generating sufficient unemployment volatility when the model is calibrated to
match the estimated cyclicality of the opportunity cost of employment. For simplicity we do not include non-
separable utility from leisure, but in ongoing work we show that our model with staggered wage contracting
is robust to this critique.


                                                           22
The government funds unemployment benefits through lump-sum transfers:
                                                       
                                     Tt + 1 − n̄t − b̄t uB = 0.                                    (45)

    A recursive equilibrium is a solution for (i) a set of functions {Jt , Vtn , Vtb , Ut }; (ii) the
contract wage wt∗ ; (iii) the hiring rate xt ; (iv) the subsequent period’s wage rate wt+1 ; (v)
the search intensity of a worker in a bad match ςbt ;(vi) the rental rate on capital rt ; (vii)
the average wage and hiring rates, w̄t and x̄t ; (viii) the capital labor ratio ǩt ; (ix) the
average consumption and capital, c̄t and k̄t+1 ; (x) the average employment in good and
bad matches, n̄t and b̄t ; (xi) the density function of composition and wages across workers
dGt (γ, w); and (xii) a transition function Qt,t+1 . The solution is such that (i) wt∗ satisfies
the Nash bargaining condition (36); (ii) xt satisfies the hiring condition (28); (iii) wt+1 is
given by the Calvo process for wages (35); (iv) ςbt satisfies the first-order condition for search
                                                                                 R
intensity of workers in bad matches ( 31); (v) rt satisfies (27); (vi) w̄t =      w,γ   wdGt (γ, w) and
        R                                                                                   
x̄t =   w,γ xdGt (γ, w); (vii) the rental market for capital clears, ǩt = k̄t / n̄t + φb̄t ; (viii) c̄t
and k̄t+1 solve the household problem (39); (ix) n̄t and b̄t evolve according to (41) and (42);
(x) the evolution of Gt is consistent with Qt,t+1 ; (xi) Qt,t+1 is defined in the appendix.

3.7         New Hire Wages and Job-to-Job Flows
Here we describe how our model is able to capture the panel data evidence on new hire wage
cyclicality, despite new hires’ wages being every bit as sticky as those for existing workers
(conditional on match quality). To do that, we derive an expression for the average wage
growth of job changers that permits to interpret the semi-elasticity of job changers’ wage
to changes in unemployment that is implied by the model.
    The model includes two types of job-to-job transitions: those due to on-the-job search
and those due to separations followed by search and finding of a new job within the same
period, with no spell of unemployment between the jobs. Since workers searching on the job
only accept good matches, the first type of transitions leads to bad-to-good and good-to-
good job flows. The second type of transitions instead leads to the full range of job-to-job
flows. For example, the bad-to-good job flow consists of two components: the first due to
on-the-job search, ν ς¯bt ξpt b̄t ; the second from match separation and successful job-finding
within the period, (1 − ν) ςu ξpt b̄t .
    Let ḡtw denote the average wage growth of continuing workers, ḡtEE the average wage
growth of new hires who are job changers, and cw                    EE due compositional
                                               t the component of ḡt
effects (i.e. changes in match quality across jobs). Further, let δBG,t be the share of flows
moving from bad to good matches out of total job flows at time t and let δGB,t be the share
moving from good to bad matches. Then to a first order (see the appendix for details) we


                                                   23
can express average wage growth for changers:


                              ḡtEE = g̃ EE + (1 − ω)ḡtw + ω cbw
                                                                t                       (46)

with
                                      ḡtw = w̄
                                             b t − w̄
                                                   b t−1                                (47)


                              cbw
                                t = πBG δBG,t−1 − πGB δGB,t−1
                                        b             b                                 (48)

where zb denotes log deviations of variable z from steady state and ω ∈ [0, 1) is the steady
state share of average job changer wage growth that is due to changes in match quality. As
shown in the appendix, the parameters ω, πBG , and πGB are all positive and are functions
of model primitives.
   Equation (46) indicates that average wage growth for job changers is a convex combi-
nation of average wage growth for existing workers and a composition component. Absent
the composition effect (i.e. if ω = 0), average wage growth for job changers would look
no different than for continuing workers. With the composition effect present, however,
cyclical variation of the composition of new match quality enhances the relative volatility
of job changers wages.
   In particular, the cyclical composition effect cw
                                                   t varies positively with the share in to-
tal job flows of workers moving from bad to good matches, δBG,t−1 , and negatively with
the share moving from good to bad, δGB,t−1 . As we have discussed, the search intensity
by workers in bad matches, ς¯bt , is highly procyclical, leading to δBG,t−1 being procyclical
and δGB,t−1 countercyclical. The dynamics of the shares also depends on the average firm
composition, γ̄t , determining the relative stocks of bad and good matches available to make
a job-to-job transition. During expansions composition slowly improves (γ̄t decreases) so
that over time less workers in bad matches remain available to make a bad-to-good tran-
sition and more workers in good matches can make a good-to-bad transition. Specifically,
after substituting the expressions for the flow shares (see the appendix for details), the
compositional component can be rewritten as

                                   cbw
                                     t = πγ γ̄ t−1 + πς ς¯bt−1
                                            b           b                               (49)

where the parameters πγ and πς are positive and functions of model primitives. In the
next section, we show that the net effect of procyclical search intensity and countercyclical
composition is that cw
                     t is procyclical, i.e. the composition effect on job changers’ enhance
wage growth in good times and weakens it in bad times. In this way the model can produce
the kind of cyclical movements in match quality that can lead to estimates of new hire


                                               24
wage cyclicality that suffer from the kind of composition bias we discussed in Section 2. We
demonstrate this concretely in the next section by showing that data generated from the
model will generate estimates of a new hire effect on wages for job changers, even though
new hires’ wages have the exact same cyclicality as for existing workers.


4         Results
In this section we present some simulations to show how the model can capture both the
aggregate evidence on unemployment fluctuations and wage rigidity and the panel data
evidence on the relative cyclicality of new hires’ versus continuing workers’ wages. We first
describe the calibration before turning to the results.

4.1        Calibration
We adopt a monthly calibration. There are 16 parameters in the model for which we
must select values. We calibrate 10 of the parameters using external sources. Five of
the externally calibrated parameters are common to the macroeconomics literature: the
discount factor, β; the capital depreciation rate, δ; the “share” of labor in the production
technology, α; and the autoregressive parameter and standard deviation for the productivity
process, ρz and σz . Our parameter choices are standard: β = 0.991/3 , δ = 0.025/3, α = 1/3,
ρz = 0.951/3 , and σz = 0.0075.26,27
         Five more parameters are specific to the search literature. Our choice of the matching
function elasticity with respect to searchers, σ, is 0.4, guided by the estimates from Blan-
chard and Diamond (1989).28 We set the worker’s bargaining power η to 0.5, as in GT. We
normalize the matching function constant, σm , to 1.0. We set the elasticity of search costs,
ησ , to 0.5. This is in the range of values estimated by Lise (2013), who obtains separate
parameter estimates of 0.249 and 0.168, and Christensen et al. (2005), who estimate an
elasticity of 1.19. We choose λ to target the average frequency of wage changes. Taylor
(1999) argues that medium to large-size firms adjust wages roughly once every year; this
is validated by findings from microdata by Gottschalk (2005), who concludes that wages
are adjusted roughly every year. We consider two values of this parameter: a conservative
    26
     Note that, in contrast to the frictionless labor market model, the term α does not necessarily correspond
to the labor share, since the labor share will in general depend on the outcome of the bargaining process.
However, because a wide range of values of the bargaining power imply a labor share just below α, here we
simply follow convention by setting α = 2/3.
  27
     The parameter σz is chosen to target the standard deviation of output,
  28
     This value lays slightly outside the range of values identified by Pissarides and Petrongolo (2001) and
well below the value estimated by Shimer (2005). Note that in these papers, only the unemployed search
and enter the matching function, while searchers in our model comprise both unemployed and employed
workers. When we simulate data from our model and estimate the matching function elasticity under the
assumption that only the unemployed search, we recover an elasticity in excess of 0.6.


                                                     25
value of λ = 8/9, implying that wages are renegotiated on average every 3 quarters, and a
second value of λ = 11/12, implying an average duration between negotiations of one year.
The parameter values are given in Table 4.
       The remaining six parameters are jointly calibrated to match model-relevant moments
measuring aggregate labor flows, individual-level wage dynamics, and the value of leisure.29
We calibrate the inverse productivity premium, φ ; the probability that a new match is good,
ξ; the hiring cost parameter, κ; the scale parameter of the search cost, ς0 ; the separation
probability, (1 − ν); and the flow value of unemployment, uB , to match six moments: the
average wage change of workers making E-E transitions in our data; average wage loss of
workers making an E-N-E transition in our data; the U-E probability; the E-E probability;
the E-U probability; and the relative value of non-work. Although there is not a one-to-one
mapping of parameters to moments, there is a sense in which the identification of particular
parameters are more informed by certain moments than others. We use this informal
mapping to provide a heuristic argument of how the various parameters are identified.
       We calibrate φ to target the average wage change of workers making direct job-to-job
transitions in our data, 4.8% (see Table 3, column 1); holding everything constant, a higher φ
implies a smaller (positive) average percentage wage increase for job changers. We recover
φ = 0.65. We calibrate ξ to match the average wage loss of workers making an E-N-E
transition, 5.1% (see Table 3, column 1). Holding fixed the inverse productivity premium
φ and the steady state value of γ, a lower ξ corresponds to a lower probability of finding
a good match from unemployment; and hence, a lower ξ generates a larger wage loss for
workers making E-N-E transitions. We recover ξ = 0.02.
       We calibrate the separation probability (1 − ν) to match the empirical E-U probability
of 0.034. Note that separated workers have the opportunity to find a new job and avoid
unemployment. Hence, the E-U in the model equals (1−ν)(1−ςu p̃), implying (1−ν) = 0.06
(where z̃ denotes steady state of a variable z). The hiring cost parameter κ determines
the resources that firms place into recruiting, and hence, influences the probability that a
worker finds a job. We set the steady state job finding probability p̃ to match the monthly
U-E transition probability, 0.44; and then calibrate κ to be consistent with p̃. We restrict
ςu = ςn = ς˜b and note that a higher search cost implies a lower E-E probability. We calibrate
ςi to match an E-E probability of 0.029; we obtain ς0 = 0.03.30
       We interpret the flow value of unemployment uB as capturing both unemployment
insurance and utility of leisure. We calibrate uB to target a relative value of nonwork to
work activity ūT equal to 0.71 as in Hall and Milgrom (2008). In our setting, the relative
  29
      The joint calibration can be interpreted as a method of moments estimation with a diagonal weighting
matrix of ones.
   30
      The values for the E-U and U-E probabilities are from Shimer (2012). The value for the EE probability
is from Menzio and Shi (2011).


                                                    26
value of nonwork activities satisfies
                                                h                         i
                                  uB +    ς0
                                         1+ης   νςi1+ης + (1 − ν)ςu1+ης
                          ūT =                                               ,
                                                ã + (κ/2)x̃2

where ã = (1 − α) ỹ/˜l. Note that the value of nonwork includes saved search costs from
on-the-job search and the value of work includes saved vacancy posting costs. Finally,
when taking the model to the data, we assume that workers employed in bad matches
suffer a lower disutility from labor. We capture this feature by adding to their surplus
a term proportional to uB , with scaling factor (1 − φ). This makes the period surplus
from unemployment in bad match proportional to the period surplus in a good match:
φw + (1 − φ)uB − uB = φ (w − uB ).
    The full list of parameter values and targeted moments are given in 5. Having fully
calibrated the model, we now evaluate whether it provides an accurate description of ag-
gregate and individual-level dynamics. We first test the ability of the model to match the
cyclical properties of aggregate unemployment and wages. Second, we assess the ability of
the model to generate the correct relative cyclicality in wage growth for job changers versus
continuing workers.

4.2       Model Simulations of Aggregate and Panel Data Evidence
We first explore whether the model provides a reasonable description of labor market volatil-
ity. In particular, we compare the model implications to quarterly U.S. data from 1964:1 to
2013:2. We take quarterly averages for monthly series in the data. Given that the model is
calibrated to a monthly frequency, we take quarterly averages of the model simulated data
series.
    We measure output y as real output in the nonfarm business sector. The wage w is
average per worker earnings of production and non-supervisory employees in the private
sector, deflated with the PCE. Total employment n + b is measured as all employees in the
nonfarm business sector. Unemployment u is civilian unemployment 16 years and older.
Vacancies υ are a composite help-wanted index computed by Barnichon (2010) combining
print and online help-wanted advertising. The data and model output are detrended with
an HP filter with the conventional smoothing parameter.
    To explore the how the model works to capture the aggregate data, we first compute
impulse responses to a one percent shock to productivity. The solid line is the response of
the baseline model with staggered wage contracting and the dashed line is the model with
period-by-period Nash bargaining. The model with wage rigidity produced an enhanced
response of output and the various labor market variables, relative to the flexible wage



                                                    27
case. This result is standard in the literature dating back to Shimer (2005) and Hall (2005)
and in close keeping with Gertler and Trigari (2009), who use a similar model of staggered
wage contracting, but without job-to-job transitions. We see that the addition of job-to-job
transitions does not alter the main implications of wage rigidity for aggregate dynamics.
   We then compute a variety of business cycle moments obtained from stochastic simula-
tion obtained from feeding in a random sequence of productivity shocks. We do not mean
to suggest that productivity shocks are the main business cycle driving forces. Rather, the
simple real business cycle model offers a convenient way of studying the model implications
for unemployment and wage dynamics.
   We first consider the model implications of an impulse response to a one percent increase
in productivity. The plots are given in Figure 2. To highlight the role of staggered wage
contracting, we plot the model generated output for the staggered case (λ = 8/9) and the
flexible wage case (λ = 0). Under period-by-period contracting, the model implications
are reminiscent of those of the standard Nash bargaining model discussed by Hall (2005)
and Shimer (2005). Wages immediately increase following a technology shock, whereas
employment, unemployment, and vacancy posting respond only gradually and moderately.
In the case with staggered contracting, the pattern is reversed: wages adjust gradually
and only modestly, whereas there are larger changes in employment, unemployment, and
vacancies. We also find a greater increase in the job-finding probability under staggered
bargaining. Additionally, we see that for both period-by-period and staggered bargaining,
the stock of workers in good matches increases while the stock of workers in bad matches
decreases; however, the quantitative magnitude of the change is greater for the economy
with staggered bargaining.
   Table 6 compares the various business cycle statistics and measures of labor market
volatility generated by the model with the data. The top panel gives the empirical standard
deviations, autocorrelations, and correlations with output of output, wages, employment,
unemployment, and vacancies. All standard deviations are normalized relative to output.
The bottom panels compute the same statistics using the model. We simulate the model for
recontracting on average every three quarters (λ = 8/9), every four quarters (λ = 11/12),
and continuous recontracting (λ = ∞).
   Overall, the model does a reasonable job of accounting for the relative volatility of
unemployment (5.12 and 4.72 in the model with λ = 11/12 and λ = 8/9 versus 5.74 in the
data) and for wages (0.43 and 0.47 versus 0.48). As is common in the literature, the model
understates the volatility of employment; here, the absence of a labor force participation
margin is relevant. Consistent with Shimer (2005) and Hall (2005), the wage inertia induced
by staggered contracting is critical for the ability of the model to account for the volatility
of unemployment. This result is robust to allowing for on-the-job search and procyclical


                                              28
match quality.
   We next turn to the model’s ability to account for the panel data evidence, and we sim-
ulate the model to generate time series for unemployment rates and wages of new hires and
continuing workers. We use the simulated data to perform two validation checks. First, we
estimate equation (1), where we estimate a single term for new hire wage cyclicality. Second,
we estimate equation (2), where we allow separate terms for new hires from unemployment
and non-employment. Both equations are estimated in first differences.
   Results for the first exercise are given in Table 7, where we compare the results from
the panel data (the first column) with those obtained from data from our model with wage
contracts fixed for three quarters on average (the second column), four quarters on average
(the third column), and flexible wages (the fourth column). The calibrated models with
staggered contracting generate wage semi-elasticities similar to the coefficient estimates
from the SIPP (aside from the slightly low wage elasticities for continuing workers in the
4Q calibration). The estimated excess wage cyclicality for new hires, however, is an artifact
of cyclical composition bias, as wages for new hires in the model are no more flexible than
wages of continuing workers. In the last column we explore the implications of period-by-
period Nash bargaining for wage determination. Although the model generates a new hire
effect, the estimated wage elasticities are too large. Thus, to account for the panel data
estimates it is necessary to have not only procyclical movements in new hires’ match quality
but also some degree of wage inertia as, for example, produced by staggered multi-period
contracting.
   Table 8 gives results for the second exercise, where we estimate separate terms for
new hires from unemployment and employment. The results show that the excess wage
cyclicality of new hires in the model is driven by those coming from employment. Notice
that, although the average match quality of new hires from unemployment is acyclical in the
model, we still recover modest excess cyclicality from the coefficient estimates. This excess
sensitivity also reflects a indirect compositional effect, though one that is both different in
nature and quantitatively smaller than the one underlying job changers wage cyclicality.
While we relegate further discussion of this effect to Appendix B.6, we note that the EN E
coefficient from the model simulated data falls within a one standard error confidence band
of the estimates from Table 3.
   Figures 3 and 4 illustrate how compositional effects influence wage dynamics. We repeat
the experiment of a one percent increase in TFP. Figure 3 then reports impulse responses
for labor in efficiency units, good matches, bad matches and job flows between good and
bad matches. In the wake of the boom, labor quality increases. Underlying this increase is
a rise in good matches and a net fall in bad matches. The rise in good matches is due in
part to good matches being hired out of unemployment. But it is mostly due to an increase


                                              29
in the job flow share of workers moving from bad to good matches and a decline in the
reverse flow share, as the two bottom left panels indicates. This pattern in the net flows
also leads to a net decline in bad matches.31
      Figure 4 the decomposes the response of new hires’ wage growth into the part due to the
growth of contracts wages and the part due to compositional effects, using equations (46),
(47), and (48). The sold line in the top panel is total new hires’ wage growth, the dashed
line is the part due to composition, and the dashed line is average contract wage growth. As
the figure illustrates, most of the new hires’ wage response is due to compositional effects.
The bottom panel then relates the compositional effect mainly to the increase in the share
of job flows moving from bad to good matches.
      Finally, while our motivation for introducing procyclical job reallocation is to account
for the panel data evidence, we note that it also generates interesting implications for
the cyclical behavior of productivity. In particular, total factor productivity in the model
depends on the allocation of workers between good and bad matches. To see this, we take
the production function (16) and the definition of labor quality (17) to obtain an expression
for how productivity depends on the quality composition, measured by γt = bt /nt :

                              yt = zt ktα (nt + φbt )1−α
                                         1 + φγt 1−α α
                                                
                                 = zt                  kt (nt + bt )1−α
                                          1 + γt

                         1+φγt 1−α
                              
where the term zt         1+γt       is the effective level of TFP. Loglinearizing this term yields
the effect of cyclical reallocation on cyclical productivity:

                                                        1 1−φ
                                      zbt − (1 − α)                γbt
                                                      1 + γ 1 + φγ

Since γbt is countercyclical, the effect of labor reallocation on productivity is procyclical.
      In Figure 5 we report the response of the endogenous component of productivity et to
a one percent increase in the exogenous component zt , where ebt can be expressed as

                                                        1 1−φ
                                     ebt = −(1 − α)                γbt .
                                                      1 + γ 1 + φγ

The endogenous component has a substantial and highly persistent effect on productivity,
as the top panel suggests. The bottom panel shows the effect on output: the improvement
in aggregate match quality due to the reallocation of labor leads to a similar increase in
output. Hence, the experiment implies a sizeable impact for labor reallocation on both the
 31
   In gross term there are bad matches due to workers being hired from unemployment; however, the
behavior of the job-to-job flows swamps this effect.



                                                      30
initial increase and subsequent decay to output.


5    Concluding Remarks
We present panel data evidence suggesting that the excess cyclicality of new hires’ wages
relative to existing workers may be an artifact of compositional effects in the labor force that
have not been sufficiently accounted for in the existing literature. We reinforce this point
by developing a model of aggregate unemployment that generates quantitative implications
consistent with both macro and micro data. In the model, new hires’ wages are the same
as continuing workers of the same match productivity; but, as we find in our estimates
from panel data, new hire wages appear to be more cyclical due to the procyclicality of job
quality in new matches. Our bottom line: it is reasonable for macroeconomists to continue
to make use of wage rigidity to account for economic fluctuations. The focus should be on
how best to model wage rigidity rather than whether it is appropriate to model at all.
    Finally, our model of unemployment fluctuations with staggered wage contracting differs
from much of the DSGE literature in allowing a channel for procyclical job-to-job transitions.
For many purposes, it may be fine to abstract from this additional channel. However
in major recessions like the recent one, a slowdown in job reallocation is potentially an
important factor for explaining the overall slowdown of the recovery. A recent study by
Haltiwanger, Hyatt, and McEntarfer (2015) provides evidence that the rate of job-to-job
transitions has not recovered relative to the overall job-finding rate in the current recovery.
Our model provides a hint about how the slowdown in job reallocation might feedback into
other economic activity, by reducing overall total factor productivity. It might be interesting
to explore these issues and consider other factors, such as financial market frictions, that
have likely hindered the reallocation process in the recent recession.




References
Andolfatto, David. 1996. “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search.” American Economic
 Review 86 (1):112–32.

Barlevy, Gadi. 2001. “Why Are the Wages of Job Changers So Procyclical?” Journal of
  Labor Economics 19 (4):837–78.

———. 2002. “The Sullying Effect of Recessions.” Review of Economic Studies 69 (1):65–96.

Barnichon, Regis. 2010. “Building a composite Help-Wanted Index.” Economics Letters
  109 (3):175–178.


                                              31
Beaudry, Paul and John DiNardo. 1991. “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement
  of Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data.” Journal of Political
  Economy 99 (4):665–88.

Bils, Mark J. 1985. “Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data.”
  Journal of Political Economy 93 (4):666–89.

Blanchard, Oliver Jean and Peter Diamond. 1989. “The Beveridge Curve.” Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity 20 (1):1–76.

Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Galı́. 2010. “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New
  Keynesian Model with Unemployment.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  2 (2):1–30.

Bowlus, Audra J. 1995. “Matching Workers and Jobs: Cyclical Fluctuations in Match
  Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (2):335–50.

Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and
  Unemployment.” International Economic Review 39 (2):257–73.

Burgess, Simon and Hélène Turon. 2010. “Worker flows, job flows and unemployment in a
  matching model.” European Economic Review 54 (3):393–408.

Carneiro, Anabela, Paulo Guimarães, and Pedro Portugal. 2012. “Real Wages and the
  Business Cycle: Accounting for Worker, Firm, and Job Title Heterogeneity.” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (2):133–52.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Loukas Karabarbounis. 2016. “The Cyclicality of the Oppor-
  tunity Cost of Employment.” Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.

Christensen, Bent Jesper, Rasmus Lentz, Dale T. Mortensen, George R. Neumann, and
  Axel Werwatz. 2005. “On-the-Job Search and the Wage Distribution.” Journal of Labor
 Economics 23 (1):31–58.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidi-
  ties and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, University of Chicago Press 113 (1):1–45.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2015. “Understand-
  ing the Great Recession.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1):110–67.

———. 2016. “Unemployment and Business Cycles.” Econometrica forthcoming.

Davis, Steven J. and Til von Wachter. 2011. “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 43 (2 (Fall)):1–72.

Devereux, Paul J . 2002. “Occupational Upgrading and the Business Cycle.” Labour
  16 (3):423–452.

Fujita, Shigeru and Giuseppe Moscarini. 2013. “Recall and Unemployment.” NBER Working
  Papers 19640, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                           32
Galı́, Jordi, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters. 2011. “Unemployment in an Estimated New
 Keynesian Model.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, Volume 26, NBER Chapters.
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 329–360.

Gertler, Mark, Luca Sala, and Antonella Trigari. 2008. “An Estimated Monetary DSGE
 Model with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Money,
 Credit and Banking 40 (8):1713–1764.

Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered
 Nash Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Political Economy 117 (1):38–86.

Gottschalk, Peter. 2005. “Downward Nominal-Wage Flexibility: Real or Measurement
 Error?” The Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (3):556–568.

Haefke, Christian, Marcus Sonntag, and Thijs van Rens. 2013. “Wage rigidity and job
  creation.” Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (8):887–899.

Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii. 2013. “Job Selection and Wages over the Business
  Cycle.” American Economic Review 103 (2):771–803.

Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.” Amer-
  ican Economic Review 95 (1):50–65.

Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on
  the Wage Bargain.” American Economic Review 98 (4):1653–74.

Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer. 2015. “Cyclical Reallocation of
  Workers Across Employers by Firm Size and Firm Wage.” NBER Working Papers 21235,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Hyatt, Henry and Erika McEntarfer. 2012. “Job-to-Job Flows in the Great Recession.”
  American Economic Review 102 (3):580–83.

Jolivet, Grégory, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2006. “The empirical content
  of the job search model: Labor mobility and wage distributions in Europe and the {US}.”
  European Economic Review 50 (4):877 – 907.

Lentz, Rasmus and Dale T. Mortensen. 2012. “Labor Market Friction, Firm Heterogeneity,
  and Aggregate Employment and Productivity.”

Lise, Jeremy. 2013. “On-the-Job Search and Precautionary Savings.” Review of Economic
  Studies 80 (3):1086–1113.

Martins, Pedro S., Gary Solon, and Jonathan P. Thomas. 2012. “Measuring What Em-
 ployers Do about Entry Wages over the Business Cycle: A New Approach.” American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (4):36–55.

Menzio, Guido and Shouyong Shi. 2011. “Efficient Search on the Job and the Business
 Cycle.” Journal of Political Economy 119 (3):468 – 510.



                                           33
Merz, Monika. 1995. “Search in the labor market and the real business cycle.” Journal of
 Monetary Economics 36 (2):269–300.

Pissarides, Christopher A. 2009. “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness
  the Answer?” Econometrica 77 (5):1339–1369.

Pissarides, Christopher A. and Barbara Petrongolo. 2001. “Looking into the Black Box: A
  Survey of the Matching Function.” Journal of Economic Literature 39 (2):390–431.

Shimer, Robert. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacan-
  cies.” American Economic Review 95 (1):25–49.

———. 2012. “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment.” Review of Economic
 Dynamics 15 (2):127–148.

Shin, Donggyun. 1994. “Cyclicality of real wages among young men.” Economic Letters
  46:137–142.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
  Bayesian DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review 97 (3):586–606.

Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A Parker. 1994. “Measuring the Cyclicality of
  Real Wages: How Important Is Composition Bias?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  109 (1):1–25.

Stinson, Martha H. 2003. “Technical Description of SIPP Job Identification Number Editing
  in the 1990-1993 SIPP Panels.” Tech. rep., U.S. Census Bureau.

Taylor, John B. 1999. “Staggered price and wage setting in macroeconomics.” In Handbook
  of Macroeconomics, Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1, edited by J. B. Taylor and
  M. Woodford, chap. 15. Elsevier, 1009–1050.

Tjaden, Volker and Felix Wellschmied. 2014. “Quantifying the Contribution of Search to
  Wage Inequality.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (1):134–61.

Topel, Robert H. and Michael P. Ward. 1992. “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young
  Men.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2):pp. 439–479.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2001. Survey of Income and Program Participation Users’ Guide. U.S.
  Census Bureau, Washington, D.C., 3rd ed.




                                           34
Table 1: “Standard regression” (e.g. Bils, 1985) and the new hire effect

                                             1990-2012 sample
                                             (1)          (2)

             Unemployment rate            −0.162∗∗∗    −0.448∗∗∗
                                          (0.0582)     (0.0920)
             Unemp. rate · I(new)         −1.247∗∗∗    −0.997∗∗
                                          (0.2477)     (0.4465)
             I(new)                       −0.010∗∗∗      0.011∗∗∗
                                          (0.0014)      (0.0037)

                                           Fixed         First
             Estimator
                                          Effects     Differences
             No. observations             379,104      321,397

             Robust standard errors in parenthesis
             * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                        35
Table 2: Job changers (EE) vs. new hires from unemployment (ENE), fixed effects

                                                      1990-2012 sample
                                      (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)

   UR                               −0.160∗∗∗     −0.160∗∗∗      −0.159∗∗∗    −0.159∗∗∗
                                    (0.0582)      (0.0582)       (0.0582)     (0.0582)
   UR · I(new & EE)                 −1.921∗∗∗     −1.927∗∗∗      −1.920∗∗∗    −1.926∗∗∗
                                    (0.4696)      (0.4403)       (0.4696)     (0.4403)
   UR · I(new & EN E)               −0.326             0.120     −0.487        0.005
                                    (0.5086)          (0.5636)   (0.5616)     (0.6353)
   UR · I(new & LT U )                 –                –         0.963        0.964
                                       –                –        (1.1325)     (1.1325)
   I(new & EE)                        0.007∗∗∗         0.004∗     0.007∗∗∗     0.004∗
                                     (0.0021)         (0.0020)   (0.0021)     (0.0020)
   I(new & EN E)                    −0.031∗∗∗     −0.035∗∗∗      −0.026∗∗∗    −0.029∗∗∗
                                    (0.0027)      (0.0031)       (0.0029)     (0.0034)
   I(new & LT U )                      –                –        −0.067∗∗∗    −0.067∗∗∗
                                       –                –         (0.0087)    (0.0087)

       EE = π EN E )
   P (πnu                             0.019            0.004      0.046        0.011
             nu
                                                                                      
   Unemp. spell for ENE               0+               1+          0, 9         1, 9
   No. observations                375,649        375,649        375,649      375,649
   No. of fixed effects             56,878            56,878     56,878       56,878

   Robust standard errors in parenthesis
   * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                 36
Table 3: Job changers (EE) vs. new hires from unemployment (ENE), first differences

                                                       1990-2012 sample
                                       (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)

    UR                               −0.415∗∗∗     −0.410∗∗∗       −0.397∗∗∗    −0.395∗∗∗
                                     (0.0912)      (0.0912)        (0.0911)     (0.0911)
    UR · I(new & EE)                 −1.556∗∗      −1.523∗∗        −1.540∗∗     −1.510∗∗
                                     (0.6609)      (0.6068)        (0.6609)     (0.6068)
    UR · I(new & EN E)               −0.289        −0.267          −0.748       −0.743
                                     (0.6364)      (0.6990)        (0.7497)     (0.8593)
    UR · I(new & LT U )                 –                –         −0.067       −0.068
                                        –                –          (1.1398)    (1.1400)
    I(new & EE)                        0.048∗∗∗         0.041∗∗∗    0.048∗∗∗     0.040∗∗∗
                                      (0.0045)         (0.0043)    (0.0045)     (0.0043)
    I(new & EN E)                    −0.051∗∗∗     −0.068∗∗∗       −0.039∗∗∗    −0.053∗∗∗
                                     (0.0062)      (0.0072)        (0.0065)     (0.0076)
    I(new & LT U )                      –                –         −0.174∗∗∗    −0.175∗∗∗
                                        –                –          (0.0197)    (0.0197)

        EE = π EN E )
    P (πnu                             0.163           0.171        0.424        0.463
              nu
                                                                                        
    Unemp. spell for ENE               0+               1+           0, 9         1, 9
    No. observations                318,771        318,771         318,771      318,771

    Robust standard errors in parenthesis
    * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                  37
                            Table 4: Calibration

                                Parameter values
Discount factor                        β     0.997 = 0.991/3
Capital depreciation rate              δ     0.008 = 0.025/3
Production function parameter          α     0.33
Technology autoregressive parameter ρz       0.983 = 0.951/3
Technology standard deviation          σz    0.0075
Elasticity of matches to searchers     σ     0.4
Bargaining power parameter             η     0.5
Matching function constant             σm 1.0
Search cost elasticity                 ης    0.5
Renegotiation frequency                λ     0.92 8/9 or 11/12 (3 or 4 quarters)




                   Table 5: Jointly calibrated parameters


       Parameter    Description            Value    Target
       φ            Inverse productivity    0.65    Average E-E wage
                    premium                         increase (4.8%)
       ξ            Prob. of good            0.02   Average E-N-E wage
                    match                           decrease (5.1%)
       κ            Hiring cost            102.87   U-E probability
                    parameter                       (0.44)
       ς0           Scale parameter of       0.03   E-E probability
                    search cost                     (0.029)
       1−υ          Separation               0.06   E-U probability
                    probability                     (0.034)
       uB           Flow value of            2.67   Relative value,
                    unemployment                    non-work (0.71)




                                      38
               Table 6: Aggregate statistics

                      y           w     n+b       u        υ
                          U.S.   Economy, 1964:1-2013:02
Relative St. Dev.     1.00        0.48   0.64      5.74  6.38
Autocorrelation       0.88        0.88   0.94      0.92  0.92
Correlation with y    1.00        0.57   0.79     -0.87 0.91
                     Model Economy, λ = 8/9 (3 quarters)
Relative St. Dev.    1.00    0.47    0.36     4.72 11.41
Autocorrelation      0.86    0.95    0.88     0.88   0.85
Correlation with y   1.00    0.73    0.94    -0.94 0.98
                     Model Economy, λ = 11/12     (4 quarters)
Relative St. Dev.     1.00    0.43    0.40        5.12 11.86
Autocorrelation       0.87    0.96    0.89        0.89    0.86
Correlation with y    1.00    0.67    0.94       -0.94 0.98
                      Model Economy, λ = ∞ (Flex wages)
Relative St. Dev.     1.00    0.64    0.26   3.40   9.37
Autocorrelation       0.85    0.81    0.91   0.91   0.87
Correlation with y    1.00    1.00    0.88  -0.88   1.00




                            39
          Table 7: Wage semi-elasticities: All new hires

           Semi-elasticities of wages w/r.t. unemployment

                   SIPP     Model, 3Q     Model, 4Q    Model, flex
     UR             -0.45      -0.37        -0.24        -0.92
     UR · I(new)    -1.00      -0.94        -0.88        -1.91




          Table 8: Wage semi-elasticities: EE vs. ENE

           Semi-elasticities of wages w/r.t. unemployment

                       SIPP    Model, 3Q     Model, 4Q      Model, flex
UR                     -0.42      -0.37        -0.24          -0.92
UR · I(new & EE)       -1.56      -1.61        -1.47          -3.57
UR · I(new & ENE)      -0.29      -0.66        -0.65          -1.10




                                 40
       Figure 1: New hires from employment and cyclical composition bias

wt
            Recession               Expansion                  Recession

wG
                                                                    Good match
wG

wG
                           Job changer


wB
                                                                     Bad match
wB

wB
                                Continuing worker

     τ +1               τ +2             τ +3         τ +4             τ +5      t




                                         41
           Figure 2: Impulse responses to productivity shock




1.6                              1                                  1
                 y                                  w                             n+b
1.4
                 y flex                             w flex                        n + b flex
                                0.5                                0.5
1.2

  1                              0                                  0
       0    50            100         0        50            100         0   50                100

0.5                             10                                  5
                 b                                  n                                 u
  0                                                                 0
                 b flex                             n flex                            u flex
                                 5
-0.5                                                                -5

 -1                              0                                 -10
       0    50            100         0        50            100         0   50                100

 20                              6                                  4
                 υ                                  p                                 x
 15                              4
                 υ flex                             p flex                            x flex
                                                                    2
 10                              2

  5                              0                                  0
       0    50            100         0        50            100         0   50                100

1.5                              4                                  1
                 k                                  i                                 z
  1                              3
                 k flex                             i flex                            z flex
                                                                   0.5
0.5                              2

  0                              1                                  0
       0    50            100         0        50            100         0   50                100




                                          42
          Figure 3: Labor market composition and job flows




 1                                10                                  0.2
                   l                                   n                              b
                   l flex                              n flex           0             b flex
0.8                                8

                                                                      -0.2
0.6                                6
                                                                      -0.4
0.4                                4
                                                                      -0.6

0.2                                2
                                                                      -0.8

 0                                 0                                   -1
      0    50               100        0        50              100          0   50            100



 9                                 8                                    1
                δBG                                  δGB                              z
 8              δBG flex           6                 δGB flex                         z flex
                                                                      0.8

 7                                 4
                                                                      0.6
 6                                 2

                                                                      0.4
 5                                 0


 4                                -2                                  0.2
      0    50               100        0        50              100          0   50            100




                                           43
                Figure 4: Wage growth and components



0.8
                                                                   gtEE
0.6                                                                cwt comp.
                                                                   gtw comp.

0.4

0.2

  0

-0.2
       0   10       20      30        40     50        60     70               80



 15
                                                            cwt
                                                            δBG,t−1   comp.
 10                                                         δGB,t−1   comp.


  5


  0


  -5
       0   10       20      30        40     50        60     70               80




                                 44
               Figure 5: TFP, productivity, and output




1.2
                                                                   zt + e t
 1                                                                 zt


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2
      0   10        20       30        40      50        60   70              80



1.5
                                                                   yt
1.4
                                                                   yt − e t
1.3

1.2

1.1

 1

0.9

0.8
      0   10        20       30        40      50        60   70              80




                                  45
A        Data appendix
We use data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) from 1990
to 2012. The SIPP is administered by the U.S. Census Bureau and is designed to track
a nationally representative sample of U.S. households. The SIPP is organized by panel
years, where each panel year introduces a new sample of households. From 1990 to 1993,
the Census Bureau would introduce a new panel on an annual basis, where each panel is
administered for a period of 32 to 40 months. Hence for certain years in the early 1990s, data
is available from multiple panels, each consisting from around 15,000 to 24,000 households.
Starting in 1996, the Census changed the structure of the survey to follow contiguous panels.
Since the redesign, new panels have been introduced in 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008. For
each of these panels, the Census has followed a larger sample of households (e.g. 40,188 in
1996) over a longer period.
       Survey respondents are interviewed every four months on activity since the previous
interview, a period referred to as a wave. However, some information (including for em-
ployment) is available at different frequencies within a wave. For example, the SIPP provides
weekly measures of employment status, monthly measures of earnings, and job identifiers
are constant for the entire period of the wave. As described in the main text, we combine
monthly earnings records specific to each job to discern the pattern of job flows and sources
of earnings over the wave.
       The SIPP has several advantages relative to other commonly used panel data sources
such as the PSID or the NLSY. Relative to the PSID, the SIPP follows a larger number
of households, is nationally representative, and has more frequent observations. For the
purposes of this paper, the PSID also suffers the disadvantage that it is difficult to identify
wage earnings with a particular job in years where multiple jobs are held. Relative to the
NLSY, the SIPP follows a larger number of households, but more importantly, multiple
cohorts. Relative to both surveys, the SIPP suffers the disadvantage that it follows any
particular individual for a shorter overall duration. But as mentioned before, the SIPP
collects rich retrospective information that gets around problems of left-censoring: in par-
ticular, we observe start dates for jobs held during the first wave but started prior to the
first interview (including the 1990 to 1993 panels). We then use our earnings-based mea-
sures of job transitions to determine the following sequence of jobs spells for the rest of the
sample.32
  32
     For each wave, the survey contains fields for up to two jobs. The survey maintains longitudinally con-
sistent job IDs for each individual and tracks certain job-specific characteristics at a monthly frequency,
including earnings. We follow the procedure detailed by Stinson (2003) to correct inconsistent job identifi-
cation variables for the 1990 to 1993 panels. We use monthly earnings data within waves to determine at
which job the individual is working and for what months the individual is working at each potential job.
From these data, we determine within a wave whether an individual made a job transition; and whether the


                                                    46
A.1     Variables and sample selection
Following Bils (1985), we only consider males between the ages of 20 and 60. We drop
observations for individuals who are disabled, self-employed, serving in the armed forces,
or enrolled in school full-time. We use the monthly employment status recode variable to
identify and drop observations where an individual reports not working for the entire month.
We drop observations where an individual works less than 10 or greater than 100 hours a
week. We also drop observations where the wage is top-coded or below the minimum wage.
All observations are associated with a job-specific wage. As such, we drop observations
where a worker is working at multiple jobs. Such observation may either reflect a job-to-
job transition or multiple job-holding; but in either case, it is difficult to determine which
observation should be included in the estimation.
    We use hourly wages as our measure of earnings. In some instances, SIPP includes hourly
wages and total monthly earnings. In cases where the hourly wage is directly available, we
use that as our measure of wages. In cases where the hourly wage is not available, we
construct a measure of implied hourly wages from monthly earnings divided by the product
of weeks worked and hours worked per week. For the 1990 to 1993 waves, all of these
variables are job-specific. Starting with the 1996 panel, the measure for weeks worked is no
longer job-specific. We instead construct a measure of weeks worked from weeks with job
minus weeks absent from work. Note that the implied hourly wage measure is subject to
greater measurement error at the beginning of a job, when an individual does not necessarily
spend a full month working at a job. In such cases, we use the second observation as the
“new hire” wage. There is no considerable change for the fixed effects regression if we do
not apply this correction, but many of the coefficients are not statistically significant for
the first-differences regression, including for new hires from employment. We deflate wages
using a four-month average of the PCE. Covariates include four indicators for educational
attainment, separate indicators for union coverage and marital status, a quadratic in job
tenure, and a time trend. We use combined weights across panels, applying the method
recommended by in the SIPP User’s Guide (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001). We use monthly
prime-aged male unemployment.

A.2     Identifying recalls
The SIPP maintains job-specific longitudinally consistent employment information over
waves for which an individual reports non-zero employment. For such case, the SIPP
maintains the same job identifier for a given job, allowing users to distinguish new jobs
from “recalls” (to adopt the terminology of Fujita and Moscarini 2013). Table A.1 gives
job transition was characterized by an intervening period of non-employment.



                                                   47
an example employment history of an individual who works at a job, spends four months
in non-employment, but returns to the same job. The SIPP correctly records that the
individual returned to the job that she left.
      But starting in 1996, the SIPP resets employment records for individuals who are with-
out employment for an entire wave. If individuals return to a previously held job after
spending an entire wave in non-employment, the SIPP will incorrectly record the individual
as starting a new job. Hence, a single job can be given multiple job identifiers. Table A.2
gives a sample employment history of an individual who works at a job, spends an entire
wave out of work, and then returns to the same job. As in the previous example, the indi-
vidual spends four months not working; but because those four months happen to fall over
the entirety of a wave, the job is given a new identifier when the individual returns to work.
For such individuals, we could mistakenly label a recall to be a transition across separate
jobs.
      We exploit an additional source of information recorded by the SIPP to identify potential
recalls. Every time that a distinct job identifier is associated with an individual, the survey
also adds a start date. This is indicated by the box around “start date” in the third row
of table A.2. When we observe a start date that falls before the date that the SIPP purges
job identifiers, we have a good indication that the “new job” is in fact a recall.
      To what extent do respondents report the date that they began the job, inclusive of
employment gaps, versus the date that they last began a contiguous employment spell?
We note that the survey question recording start dates is explicitly designed to identify the
start date to be the former of the two, as it is designed to distinguish jobs that began within
the wave from jobs that began before the wave.
      For example, in the 1996 panel, respondents are asked “Did [FIRST AND LAST NAME]
begin [HIS HER] employment with [NAME OF EMPLOYER] at some time between [MONTH1]
1st and today?” (variable STRTJB). If individuals respond in the affirmative, they are asked
about the month and day within the wave that the job began (STRTREFP). Otherwise,
they are asked to give their “BEST estimate” of the year, month, and date that the job
began (variables STRTMONJB, STRTJYR, STRTJMTH).33
      To identify potential recalls, we apply the following criterion: for individuals with an
incomplete employment record – e.g. respondents who have spent a complete wave in non-
employment – we consider any job with a start date prior to the period of non-employment
(the date at which the SIPP purges internal employment records) as a potential recall, and
we do not count the individual as a new hire.
      We illustrate our criterion in tables A.3 and A.4. In table A.3, we observe an individual
 33
    See the 1996 Panel Wave 02 Questionnaire at http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/programs-
surveys/sipp/questionnaires/1996/SIPP%201996%20Panel%20Wave%2002%20-
%20Core%20Questionnaire.pdf


                                                48
work a wave at Job A, spend an entire wave in non-employment, and then start work at Job
B in wave 3. The start date of Job B is before the “gap date”, and hence, it is more likely
that Job B is the same as Job A. Hence, we do not consider the individual as a new hire
at Job B. In table A.4, we similarly observe an individual work at Job A, spend a wave in
non-employment, and then work at Job B; however, the start date for job B in this instance
is after the gap date, and hence, we consider the worker to be a new hire in wave 3.
   We apply the gap date criterion with two small additions: first, for a subset of job
dissolutions, workers report the cause of the dissolution. If the worker reports that he left
the pre-gap job to take another job, we do preclude the possibility that the post-gap job is
a recall to the first job. Second, if the start date at a post gap job is missing or statistically
imputed, we identify the job as a potential recall and do not count the worker as a new
hire.




                                               49
Table A.1: Two separate employment spells, one job, correct IDs. Job ID preserved across contiguous
employment spells because individual reports employment for each wave.
                           Time         Recorded    Recorded     Employment      Actual
               Wave
                          Period         Job ID    Start Date    within wave     Job ID
               1        01/96-04/96        A         09/95         M1-M4           A
               2        05/96-08/96        A         09/95           M1            A
               3        09/96-12/96        A         09/95         M2-M4           A




Table A.2: Two separate employment spells, one job, incorrect IDs. Job ID information is lost when
individual spends an entire wave without employment. At wave 3, the job is incorrectly coded as being a
new job and the start date is asked again.
                           Time         Recorded    Recorded     Employment      Actual
               Wave
                          Period         Job ID    Start Date    within wave     Job ID
               1        01/96-04/96        A         09/95         M1-M4           A
               2        05/96-08/96        –            –           none           –
               3        09/96-12/96        B         09/95         M1-M4           A




Table A.3: Two separate employment spells, “gap date” falls after reported job start date for job “B”.
Rule out wave 3 job as “new hire”.
                      Time           Recorded    Recorded    Employment     Actual     Gap
          Wave
                     Period           Job ID    Start Date   within wave    Job ID     date
          1        01/96-04/96          A         09/95        M1-M4          A         –
          2        05/96-08/96          –            –          none          –       05/96
          3        09/96-12/96          B         09/95        M1-M4          A       05/96




                                                   50
Table A.4: Two separate employment spells, “gap date” is prior to reported job start date for job “B”.
Count wave 3 job as “new hire”.
                     Time         Recorded     Recorded     Employment     Actual     Gap
          Wave
                    Period         Job ID     Start Date    within wave    Job ID     date
          1       01/96-04/96        A          09/95         M1-M4          A         –
          2       05/96-08/96        –             –           none          –       05/96
          3       09/96-12/96        B          08/96         M1-M4          A       05/96




                                                 51
B      Model appendix
We now derive the log-linear equations that describe the first-order dynamics of the model.
Most of the derivations are standard or are similar to those in Gertler and Trigari (2009).
In the first section we derive loglinear expressions related to hiring and bargaining. Relative
to GT, where the only firm-specific state variable was wages, here we must also keep track
of composition. As might be expected, there is a non-trivial interplay between composition
and wages at the firm level. Composition is inherited from the previous period and influ-
ences the wage through the Nash wage bargain; the wage influences next-period composition
through hiring. We introduce a simplifying steady state restriction that lends analytic and
computational tractability to the analysis. We first state six results that will simplify the
derivation of the log-linear equations. We establish how these properties will be used to
show that the “composition effect” of hiring - wherein firms vary the hiring rate to vary
next-period composition - is zero up to a first order. We then go over the relevant equations
for determining the Nash wage: the worker and firm surpluses, certain derivatives of the
surpluses, and the Nash first order condition. We then derive recursive log-linear expres-
sions for the firm and worker surpluses. We derive similar expressions for the derivatives
of surpluses, which act as discount factors that differ across firms and worker in the deter-
mination of the Nash wage under staggered contracting. Then, we prove the steady-state
results that we repeatedly invoke in deriving recursive log-linear expressions for the worker
and firm surplus and discount factors and to linearize the composition term in hiring. In
the second section, we derive log-linear expressions for the wage growth of job changers
and the shares of job-to-job flows. In the third section, we derive a loglinear expression
for the wage growth of workers making an employment to employment transition with an
intervening spell of non-employment. There, we also discuss the indirect composition effect
relevant for the wage cyclicality of new hires from unemployment. In the last section, we tie
up a final loose end and define the operator mapping the distribution function from period
t to period t + 1.

B.1     Some useful results
Labor force composition affects firms through the average retention rate of an efficiency
unit of labor. Let z̃ denotes the steady state of variable z Assume that ςn = ς˜b , so that
ρ̃n = ρ̃b = ρ̃ (i.e., retention rates of good and bad workers are the same in steady state).
Then we obtain the following results:

    1. V art (γt ) = 0 up to a first order

    2. (∂γt+1 /∂xt ) |ss = 0

                                              52
   3. (∂ρt /∂γt ) |ss = 0

   4. (∂wt∗ (γt ) /∂γt ) |ss = 0

   5. (∂Jt (γt , wt )/∂γt ) |ss = 0

   6. (∂Ht (γt , wt )/∂γt ) |ss = 0

   These results guarantee that composition evolves as though it were an aggregate state
variable. We use these results to derive recursive log-linear equations for the worker and
firm surpluses, log-linear equations for the worker and firm discount factors, and to prove
that the “composition effect” of hiring is zero up to a first order.
   We will invoke these results in the following subsections and then prove them at the end
of the section.

B.2     Hiring equation
In the main text, we derive the first order condition for hiring. Given that next period wage
                                                                             ∗ (γ
equals this period wage wt with probability λ and next period contract wage wt+1 t+1 )
with probability 1 − λ, we can write the hiring condition at a firm with composition γt and
wage wt as
                                                                            ∗                     
       κxt (γt , wt ) = Et {Λt,t+1 λJt+1 (γt+1 , wt ) + (1 − λ) Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 ) }
                             +ωt (γt , wt ) ,

where the second term represents a retention motive in hiring:

          ωt (γt , wt ) = [ρt (γt ) + xt (γt , wt )] ×
                                                                                      ∗ (γ
                                                                       ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , wt+1
                                          ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , wt )                              t+1 ))
                                     
                      Et Λt,t+1 λ                            + (1 − λ)
                                              ∂γt+1                              ∂γt+1
                                                                               #       )
                                               ∗ (γ
                                ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , wt+1             ∗
                                                      t+1 )) ∂wt+1 (γt+1 ) ∂γt+1
                       +(1 − λ)          ∗ (γ                                              .
                                      ∂wt+1     t+1 )           ∂γt+1       ∂xt

The firm cares about composition for the implied retention rate of a unit of labor quality
(represented by the first two terms in square brackets) and through possible effects of firm
composition on future renegotiated wages (the third term).
   Since we will prove that ∂J/∂γ, ∂w∗ /∂γ, ∂γ 0 /∂x are all equal to 0 in the steady state,
it follows that up to a first order ωt (γt , wt ) = 0.




                                                         53
B.3       Staggered Nash bargaining
Consider the problem of a renegotiating firm and workers in good matches.34 We can write
the surplus of workers in good matches Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt )) as

             Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt )) = wt∗ (γt ) − uB − [νc(ςn ) + (1 − ν) c(ςu )]
                                              n          h                                         io
                                       +Et Λt,t+1 νςn pnt H̄t+1 − (1 − (1 − ν)ςu )pt H̄t+1
                                                                                       a


                                       +ν (1 − ςn pnt ) Et {Λt,t+1 [λHt+1 (γt+1 , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                              ∗                    
                                       + (1 − λ) Ht+1 γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 )

with                                                                            
                                 H̄ta ≡ ξ V̄tn − Ut + (1 − ξ) V̄tb − Ut .

Similarly, we can write firm surplus Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) as

                                                                     κ
                       Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) = at − wt∗ (γt ) −          xt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))2
                                                                     2
                                                   + [ρt (γt ) + xt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))] ×
                                                   Et {Λt,t+1 [λJt+1 (γt+1 , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                          ∗                   
                                                   + (1 − λ) Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 )

with

                      κxt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) = Et {Λt,t+1 [λJt+1 (γt+1 , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                           ∗                  
                                                    + (1 − λ) Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 )
                                                    +ωt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))

and
                                                  at ≡ (1 − α) zt ǩtα .

       The first order condition for Nash bargaining is

            ∂Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt ))                                  ∂Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                                        
                                             ∗
          η                      J t (γt , wt  (γt )) = (1 − η) −                      Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
               ∂wt∗ (γt )                                             ∂wt∗ (γt )

where the ∂H ∗ /∂w∗ and −∂J ∗ /∂w∗ act as cumulative discount factors applied by the worker
  34
    Note that the outcome of the bargaining problem will generally depend on labor composition within the
firm. Since V art (γt ) = 0 up to a first order, it is of no matter for studying the first-order model dynamics.




                                                             54
and the firm to value the contract wage stream. The worker discount factor is given by

          ∂Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt ))                                                 ∂Ht+1 (γt+1 , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                                                         
                                  = 1 + ν (1 −       ςn pnt ) λEt       Λt,t+1
             ∂wt∗ (γt )                                                             ∂wt∗ (γt )
                                       +ψt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))

with

                                                                       ∂Ht+1 (γt+1 , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                   
          ψt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) = ν (1 − ςn pnt ) Et Λt,t+1 λ
                                                                               ∂γt+1
                                                                      ∗
                                                                                 
                                                ∂Ht+1         γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 )
                                    + (1 − λ)
                                                                ∂γt+1
                                                                                                    #
                                                            ∗ (γ          ∗
                                                                                    
                                              ∂Ht+1 γt+1 , wt+1   t+1 ) ∂wt+1 (γt+1 )
                                    + (1 − λ)         ∗ (γ                            ×
                                                   ∂wt+1    t+1 )          ∂γt+1
                                     ∂γt+1 ∂xt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                    

                                      ∂xt      ∂wt∗ (γt )

Since we will prove that ∂H/∂γ, ∂w∗ /∂γ, ∂γ 0 /∂x are all equal to 0 in the steady state, it
follows that up to a first order ψt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) = 0.
    The firm discount factor is given by

                     ∂Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                            = −1 + [ρt (γt ) + xt (γt , w∗ (γt ))] λ ×
                         ∂wt∗ (γt )
                                                             ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , w∗ (γt ))
                                                                                         
                                                Et    Λt,t+1
                                                                   ∂w∗ (γt )

where we have used the fact that Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) is maximized with respect to xt (γt , wt∗ (γt )),
so that in taking the derivative with respect to wt∗ (γt ), we can hold xt (γt , w∗ (γt )) fixed at
its optimal value.

B.3.1    Surplus of workers in good matches

We now develop a first order approximation of the Nash condition. We start by loglinearizing
Ht (γt , w∗ (γt )). We will establish that composition is first-order equivalent across firms, that
is, V art (γt ) = 0. This permits us to drop composition as a separate argument of the value
function and the contract wage and allow it to be captured by the aggregate state. We can




                                                         55
then write

             Ht (wt∗ ) = wt∗ − uB − [νc(ςn ) + (1 − ν) c(ςu )]
                                   n                 h                                                            io
                            +Et Λt,t+1 νςn pnt H̄t+1 − (1 − (1 − ν)ςu )pt H̄t+1
                                                                            a

                                                             ∗
                            +ν (1 − ςn pnt ) Et Λt,t+1 Ht+1 wt+1
                                                                                           

                            +ν (1 − ςn pnt ) λEt Λt,t+1 Ht+1 (wt∗ ) − Ht+1 wt+1
                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                                    


Loglinearizing, we obtain:
                                       
             b t (w∗ ) =
             H                        bt∗
                                w̃/H̃ w
                   t
                                                      n                                 o
                            +(ν − ρ̃)βEt pbt + Λ
                                               b
                                                 t,t+1 + H̄ t+1
                                                         b

                                                                                                         ba
                                                                                                                    
                                                                       a
                            −(1 − (1 − ν)ςu )p̃β H̃ /H̃ Et                              pbt + Λb
                                                                                                 t,t+1 + H̄ t+1

                                                ν − ρ̃
                                                                                                   
                                                                                              ∗ 
                            +ρ̃βEt −                   pbt + Λ
                                                             b
                                                               t,t+1 + Ht+1 wt+1
                                                                       b
                                                  ρ̃
                                                    
                                             bt∗ − w ∗     
                            +ρ̃λβ w̃/H̃ ε̃Et w     bt+1


where
                                                ∂Ht (wt∗ )          1
                                        ε̃ =               |ss =
                                                  ∂wt∗           1 − ρ̃λβ
and                                         !                                               !
                   ba              H̃                                     H̃                             
                   H̄ t+1 =      ξ a                Vbtn − U
                                                           bt         + 1−ξ a                       Vbtb − U
                                                                                                           bt .
                                  H̃                                       H̃
Further simplifying gives
                                       
             b t (w∗ ) =                    wt∗ + ρ̃λβ ε̃Et w
                                                            bt∗ − w ∗                      
             H     t            w̃/H̃                             bt+1
                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                    
                            −(1 − (1 − ν)ςu )p̃β H̃ a /H̃ Et pbt + Λ
                                                                   b
                                                                     t,t+1 + H̄ t+1
                                                                             b
                                                      n                        o
                            +(ν − ρ̃)βEt Λ
                                         b
                                           t,t+1 + H̄ t+1
                                                   b
                                        n                                      o
                                                   ∗
                            +ρ̃βEt Λ t,t+1 + Ht+1 wt+1                              .
                                   b         b


B.3.2   Surplus of firms

Combining the expression of the firm surplus with the hiring condition and using the same
notation as for the worker surplus in good matches, i.e., dropping composition as a separate




                                                              56
argument of the value function and the contract wage, we can write the firm surplus as

                                              κ
                   Jt (wt∗ ) = at − wt∗ +       xt (wt∗ )2
                                              2
                                                          ∗ 
                                    +ρt Et Λt,t+1 Jt+1 wt+1
                                    +λρt Et Λt,t+1 Jt+1 (wt∗ ) − Jt+1 wt+1
                                                                       ∗
                                                                                          


where we have dropped the term ωt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) that is zero up to a first order.
   Loglinearizing yields
                                                                                  
                   Jbt (wt∗ ) =         ã/J˜ a          bt∗ + κx̃2 /J˜ x
                                              bt − w̃/J˜ w              bt (wt∗ )
                                                  n                                    o
                                                                 ∗
                                    +ρ̃βEt ρbt + Λ
                                                 b
                                                   t,t+1 + Jt+1 wt+1
                                                           b
                                                         
                                                     bt∗ − w
                                    −λρ̃β w̃/J˜ µ̃Et w       ∗      
                                                           bt+1 ,

where
                                                ∂Jt (wt∗ )          1
                                       µ̃ =                |ss =        .
                                                  ∂wt∗           1 − λβ
Rearranging further,
                                                            
                Jbt (wt∗ ) =             bt − w̃/J˜
                                   ã/J˜ a                         bt∗ + λρ̃β µ̃Et w
                                                                                   bt∗ − w ∗
                                                                                                
                                                                   w                     bt+1
                                                 
                                          bt (wt∗ )
                               + κx̃2 /J˜ x
                                            n                                     o
                                                            ∗
                               +ρ̃βEt ρbt + Λ
                                            b
                                              t,t+1 + Jt+1 wt+1
                                                      b                                .


B.3.3    Worker and firm discount factors

Following the same simplifications as for the worker and firm surpluses, we can write the
firm and worker discount factors as:

                    ∂Ht (wt∗ )                                  ∂Ht+1 (wt∗ )
                                                                                            
                                                 n
                               = 1 + ν (1 − ς  p
                                              n t  ) λEt Λt,t+1
                      ∂wt∗                                        ∂wt∗

                   ∂Jt (wt∗ )                                      ∂Jt+1 (wt∗ )
                                                                                            
                                                   ∗
                              = −1 + [ρ t + x t (wt  )] λEt Λt,t+1
                     ∂wt∗                                             ∂wt∗
where we have dropped from the worker discount factor the term ψt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) that is 0
up to a first order. Now define the variables t (w) and µt (w) as follows:

                                            ∂Ht (w)                             ∂Jt (w)
                           t (w) ≡                 ,          µt (w) ≡ −
                                              ∂w                                  ∂w




                                                              57
We can then write the worker and firm discount factors in bargaining as

                              t = 1 + ν (1 − ςn pnt ) λEt {Λt,t+1 t+1 }
                      µt (wt∗ ) = −1 + [ρt + xt (wt∗ )] λEt {Λt,t+1 µt+1 (wt∗ )}

and their corresponding loglinear expressions as
                                          n                  o
                           bt = ρ̃βλEt Λ
                                        b         bt+1 − (ν − ρ̃) βλpbt
                                          t,t+1 + 
                                                                   n                     o
               bt (wt∗ ) = βλ [ρ̃ρbt + (1 − ρ̃)x
               µ                               bt (wt∗ )] + βλEt Λ
                                                                 b         bt+1 (wt∗ )
                                                                   t,t+1 + µ


                                     bt (wt∗ ), first note that we have
To derive a recursive expression for µ
                                                                               
           bt+1 (wt∗ ) − µ     ∗
                                                                             bt∗ − w
                                          = − (1 − ρ̃) (λµ̃) (βλµ̃) w̃/J˜ Et w       ∗
                                                                                  
        Et µ             bt+1 wt+1                                                 bt+1


Combining, we obtain
                                                                   n                         o
           bt (wt∗ ) = βλ [ρ̃ρbt + (1 − ρ̃)x
           µ                               bt (wt∗ )] + βλEt Λ
                                                             b
                                                               t,t+1 + µ
                                                                             ∗ 
                                                                       bt+1 wt+1
                                                       
                                                             bt∗ − w
                          −βλ (1 − ρ̃) (λµ̃) w̃/J˜ (βλµ̃) Et w       ∗
                                                                    
                                                                   bt+1 .


B.4     Derivation of steady-state results
We now derive the steady-state results invoked at the beginning of the appendix.

B.4.1    The dynamics and cross-sectional variation of composition

Recall the expression for the retention rates of good and bad workers:

                                    ρit = ν(1 − ςit pnt ), i = n, b.

Because the steady state search intensities ςn and ς˜b are equal, so too are the steady state
retention rates:
                                               ρ̃n = ρ̃b .                                       (50)

Now, recall the expression for the dynamics of composition:

                                   ρbt γt / (1 + φγt ) + xt γ̄tm / (1 + φγ̄tm )
                          γt+1 =                                                .
                                       ρnt / (1 + φγt ) + xt / (1 + φγ̄tm )

Evaluating at the steady state, gives
                                               γ̃ = γ̃ m .                                       (51)



                                                   58
We use (50) and (51) to establish the first three useful results stated at the beginning of
the model appendix.
   Derive the log-linear equation for the evolution of composition:

                                                                    m
                                   γbt+1 = ρ̃γbt + (1 − ρ̃) γ̄b t − (ν − ρ̃) bς¯bt .

Hence, up to a first order, the dynamics of composition are not driven by any firm-specific
variable, implying that composition evolves equally at all firms and independently of the
individual firm’s history of wages and composition. In particular, starting from steady state,
the time path of composition across firms is first-order equivalent, so that

                                                        γbt = γ̄b t ,

and hence, V art (γt ) = 0 up to a first order.
   Take the derivative of γt+1 with respect to xt and evaluate at steady state:
                              "                                                                #
             ∂γt+1                       (1 + φγt ) (1 + φγ̄tm )      
                                                                           m n           b
                                                                                           
                          =                                             γ̄ t ρ t − γ t ρ t              = 0,
              ∂xt    ss           [ρnt (1 + φγ̄tm ) + xt (1 + φγt )]2                              ss

Now recall the expression of the survival probability of a unit of labor quality:

                                                         ρnt + φγt ρbt
                                                ρt =                   .
                                                            1 + φγt

Take the derivative with respect to γt and evaluate at steady state:
                                                                       
                                         ∂ρt            φ ρbt − ρnt
                                                    =                            = 0.
                                         ∂γt   ss       (1 + φγt )2
                                                                            ss


B.4.2    Effect of composition on contract wage, and firm and worker values

We show that ∂wt∗ (γt ) /∂γt = 0 in steady state. In doing so, we also show that in the steady
state ∂Jt /∂γt = 0 an ∂Ht /∂γt = 0.
   Define

                 zt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) ≡ ηt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                − (1 − η) µt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt ))




                                                             59
Since zt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) = 0 by the surplus sharing condition, we have

                                 ∂wt∗ (γt )      ∂zt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) /∂γt
                                            =−
                                   ∂γt         ∂zt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) /∂wt∗ (γt )

from the implicit function theorem.
   The term ∂zt (γt , wt∗ (γt )) /∂γt satisfies

               ∂zt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))           ∂t (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                         = η                       Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                     ∂γt                             ∂γt
                                                                   ∂Jt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                             +ηt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                            ∂γt
                                                                       ∗
                                                         ∂µt (γt , wt (γt ))
                                             − (1 − η)                          Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                                                 ∂γt
                                                                             ∂Ht (γt , wt∗ (γt ))
                                             − (1 − η) µt (γt , wt∗ (γt ))                          .
                                                                                       ∂γt

We will show that at steady state ∂H/∂γ, ∂J/∂γ, ∂/∂γ and ∂µ/∂γ are all proportional to
∂w∗ (γ) /∂γ, so that ∂w∗ (γ) /∂γ = 0 at steady state.

B.4.2.1    Effect of composition on worker surplus For any composition γt and wage
wt , we can write ∂Ht (γt , wt ) /∂γt as follows

           ∂Ht (γt , wt )                                             ∂Ht+1 (γt+1 , wt )
                                                                 
                            = ν (1 − ςn pnt ) Et Λt,t+1 λ
              ∂γt                                                           ∂γt+1
                                                                     ∗
                                                                                 
                                               ∂Ht+1         γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 )
                                   + (1 − λ)
                                                               ∂γt+1
                                                                                                    #
                                                             ∗ (γ          ∗
                                                                                
                                               ∂Ht+1 γt+1 , wt+1   t+1 ) ∂wt+1 (γt+1 ))
                                     + (1 − λ)         ∗ (γ                             ×
                                                    ∂wt+1    t+1 )          ∂γt+1
                                       ∂γt+1 ∂γt+1 ∂xt
                                                       
                                            +
                                        ∂γt     ∂xt ∂γt

Evaluating at steady state, using ∂γ 0 /∂x = 0 and rearranging:

                            ∂H              ∂γ 0                      ∂H ∂w∗ (γ) ∂γ 0
                                                  
                                     1 − ρβ            = ρβ (1 − λ)
                            ∂γ              ∂γ                        ∂w ∂γ ∂γ

The steady state value of ∂H/∂γ is proportional to the steady state value of ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ;
hence, if ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ is equal to zero at steady state, so is ∂H/∂γ.




                                                             60
B.4.2.2    Effect of composition on firm surplus For any composition γt and wage
wt , we can write ∂Jt (γt , wt ) /∂γt as

      ∂Jt (γt , wt )         ∂ρt (γt )
                        =              ×
          ∂γt                  ∂γt
                                                                               ∗           
                             Et Λt,t+1 λJt+1 (γt+1 , wt ) + (1 − λ) Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 )
                             + [ρt (γt ) + xt (γt , wt )] ×
                                            ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , wt )
                                         
                             Et Λt,t+1 λ
                                                    ∂γt+1
                                                            ∗ (γ
                                                                     
                                         ∂Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1      t+1 )
                             + (1 − λ)
                                                     ∂γt+1
                                                                                       #           )
                                                     ∗ (γ           ∗
                                                                           
                                       ∂Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1    t+1 ) ∂wt+1 (γt+1 ) ∂γt+1
                             + (1 − λ)         ∗ (γ
                                            ∂wt+1     t+1 )          ∂γt+1       ∂γt

where we have used the fact that Jt (γt , wt ) is maximized with respect to xt (γt , wt ), so that
in taking the derivative with respect to γt , we can hold xt (γt , wt ) fixed at its optimal value.
   Evaluating at steady state (using ∂ρ/∂γ = 0) gives

                              ∂J           ∂γ 0                     ∂J ∂w∗ (γ) ∂γ 0
                                                 
                                       1−β            = β (1 − λ)
                              ∂γ           ∂γ                       ∂w ∂γ ∂γ

The steady state value of ∂J/∂γ is proportional to the steady state value of ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ.

B.4.2.3    Effect of composition on worker discount factor For any composition γt
and wage wt , we can write ∂t (γt , wt ) /∂γt as

            ∂t (γt , wt )                                 ∂t+1 (γt+1 , wt ) ∂γt+1
                                                                                          
                              = ν (1 −      ςn pnt ) λEt
                                                    Λt,t+1
                ∂γt                                             ∂γt+1          ∂γt
                                                              ∂H      (γ     , wt)
                                                          
                                                                  t+1    t+1
                                +ν (1 − ςn pnt ) Et Λt,t+1 λ
                                                                    ∂γt+1
                                                            ∗
                                                                      
                                          ∂Ht+1 γt+1 , wt+1 (γt+1 )
                                + (1 − λ)
                                                     ∂γt+1
                                                                                               #
                                                           ∗ (γ          ∗
                                                                               
                                             ∂Ht+1 γt+1 , wt+1   t+1 ) ∂wt+1 (γt+1 )
                                   + (1 − λ)         ∗ (γ                            ×
                                                  ∂wt+1    t+1 )          ∂γt+1
                                     ∂xt (γt , wt ) ∂ (∂γt+1 /∂xt )
                                                                      

                                         ∂wt             ∂γt

where, for simplicity, we have used already that ∂γ 0 /∂x = 0 at steady state. Evaluate at
steady state:

             ∂               ∂γ 0            ∂H           ∂H ∂w∗ (γ) ∂x ∂ (∂γ 0 /∂x)
                                                                                
                      1 − ρβλ            = ρβ    + (1 − λ)
             ∂γ               ∂γ              ∂γ           ∂w ∂γ      ∂w     ∂γ

                                                           61
which is proportional to ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ since ∂H/∂γ is proportional to ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ.

B.4.2.4     Effect of composition on firm discount factor For any composition γt and
wage wt , we can write ∂µt (γt , wt ) /∂γt as

          ∂µt (γt , wt )      ∂ρt (γt ) ∂xt (γt , wt )                 ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , wt )
                                                                                      
                           =             +                  λEt Λt,t+1
              ∂γt               ∂γt             ∂γt                          ∂wt
                                                                     ∂µt+1 (γt+1 , wt ) ∂γt+1
                                                                                             
                             + [ρt (γt ) + xt (γt , wt )] λEt Λt,t+1
                                                                         ∂γt+1           ∂γt

Evaluating at steady state,

                                          ∂µ        ∂γ 0           ∂x ∂J
                                                          
                                             1 − λβ            =     λβ
                                          ∂γ        ∂γ             ∂γ ∂w

Now consider xt (γt , wt ) from the hiring condition and calculate ∂xt (γt , wt ) /∂γt .
   We have

         ∂xt (γt , wt )                        ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , wt )
                                                 
       κ                    = Et Λt,t+1 λ
             ∂γt                                   ∂γt+1
                                                          ∗ (γ
                                                                        
                                            ∂Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1     t+1 )
                                  + (1 − λ)
                                                     ∂γt+1
                                                                                    #        )
                                                          ∗ (γ           ∗
                                                                         
                                            ∂Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1    t+1 ) ∂wt+1 (γt+1 ) ∂γt+1
                                  + (1 − λ)         ∗ (γ
                                                 ∂wt+1     t+1 )          ∂γt+1       ∂γt
                                      ∂ωt (γt , wt )
                                  +
                                          ∂γt

with

    ∂ωt (γt , wt )
                     = [ρt (γt ) + xt (γt , wt )] ×
        ∂γt
                                        ∂Jt+1 (γt+1 , wt )
                                         
                           Et Λt,t+1 λ
                                            ∂γt+1
                                                   ∗ (γ
                                                                 
                                     ∂Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1     t+1 )
                           + (1 − λ)
                                              ∂γt+1
                                                                               #                  )
                                                   ∗ (γ           ∗
                                                                     
                                     ∂Jt+1 γt+1 , wt+1    t+1 ) ∂wt+1 (γt+1 ) ∂ (∂γt+1 /∂xt )
                           + (1 − λ)         ∗ (γ
                                          ∂wt+1     t+1 )          ∂γt+1           ∂γt


where, for simplicity, to write ∂ωt (γt , wt )/∂γt we have used already that ∂γ 0 /∂x = 0 at
steady state.




                                                       62
   Evaluating at steady state,

                        ∂x    ∂J           ∂J ∂w∗ (γ) ∂γ 0 ∂ω
                                                                      
                      κ    =β    + (1 − λ)                +
                        ∂γ    ∂γ           ∂w ∂γ      ∂γ    ∂γ

with
                      ∂ω    ∂J           ∂J ∂w∗ (γ) ∂ (∂γ 0 /∂x)
                                                                  
                         =β    + (1 − λ)
                      ∂γ    ∂γ           ∂w ∂γ          ∂γ
Thus, the steady state value of ∂x/∂γ is proportional to the steady state value of ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ.
This implies that the steady state value of ∂µ/∂γ is also proportional to ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ.

B.4.2.5    Effect of composition on contract wage Since all the terms comprising z
are proportional to ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ, we have that ∂w∗ (γ)/∂γ is equal to zero.

B.5     Wage growth of job changers
In this section, we derive expressions for the flow shares of the various types of job-to-job
flows; and we derive an expression for the average wage growth of job changers.

B.5.1     Job-to-job flows

We have two types of job-to-job transitions: those due to on-the-job search and those due to
separations followed by search and finding of a new job within the same period. The latter
are initiated by a match separation shock, but there is no spell of unemployment between
the jobs. We have the following job-to-job flows:

                           Bad to good :         [(1 − ν) ςu + ν ς¯bt ] ξpt b̄t
                           Good to bad :         (1 − ν) ςu (1 − ξ) pt n̄t
                             Bad to bad :        (1 − ν) ςu (1 − ξ) pt b̄t
                          Good to good :         [(1 − ν) ςu + νςn ] ξ p̄t n̄t

Summing over the flows we obtain total job flows as:

                          [(1 − ν) ςu (1 + γ̄t ) + νξ (ςn + ς¯bt γ̄t )] p̄t n̄t




                                                   63
The shares of flows over total flows then are defined as:

                                                  (1 − ν)ςu (1 − ξ)γ̄t
                             δBB,t =
                                         (1 − ν) ςu (1 + γ̄t ) + νξ (ςn + ς¯bt γ̄t )
                                                [(1 − ν)ςu + ν ς¯bt ]ξγ̄t
                             δBG,t =
                                         (1 − ν) ςu (1 + γ̄t ) + νξ (ςn + ς¯bt γ̄t )
                                                    (1 − ν)ςu (1 − ξ)
                             δGB,t =
                                         (1 − ν) ςu (1 + γ̄t ) + νξ (ςn + ς¯bt γ̄t )
                                                  [(1 − ν) ςu + νςn ] ξ
                             δGG,t =
                                         (1 − ν) ςu (1 + γ̄t ) + νξ (ςn + ς¯bt γ̄t )

   We also define the component of the share of bad-to-good flows due to on-the-job search,
δBGS,t , given by:
                                                       ν ς¯bt ξγ̄t
                             δBGS,t =
                                        (1 − ν) ςu (1 + γ̄t ) + νξ (ςn + ς¯bt γ̄t )

B.5.2      Average wage growth of job changers

Let ḡtw denote the average wage growth of continuing workers and ḡtEE the average wage
growth of workers making and employment-to-employment transition.
   Up to a first order, ḡtEE can be written as:

                                              φw̄t                      w̄t
                                                                                    
                     ḡtEE   = δBB,t−1 log            + δGG,t−1 log           +
                                             φw̄t−1                   w̄t−1
                                               w̄t                     φw̄t
                                                                         
                               δBG,t−1 log            + δGB,t−1 log
                                             φw̄t−1                   w̄t−1

   Simplifying, we obtain:
                                              ḡtEE = ḡtw + cw
                                                              t

with
                                                              w̄t
                                                                    
                                            ḡtw = log
                                                             w̄t−1
and
                                 cw
                                  t = (− log φ) (δBG,t−1 − δGB,t−1 )

Thus, average wage growth of new hires that are job changers equals average wage growth
of continuing workers plus a composition component measuring the change in match quality
among job changers. The composition component equals 0 if match quality is homogeneous
(φ = 1).
   Loglinearizing the average gross wage growth of job changers, we obtain:

                                                      1             c̃w w
                                ḡtEE = g̃ EE +            ḡtw +        cb
                                                   1 + c̃w        1 + c̃w t

                                                      64
       Loglinearizing the compositional effect, we obtain:

                                         1                                     
                            cbw
                              t =                 δ̃BG δbBG,t−1 − δ̃GB δbGB,t−1
                                    δ̃BG − δ̃GB

with
                                                 1 b         1 − δ̃BG
                                    δ̂BG,t =          γ̄ t +          δ̃BGS bς¯bt
                                               1 + γ̃          δ̃BG
                                                       γ̃ b
                                        δ̂GB,t = −         γ̄ − δ̃BGS bς¯bt
                                                     1 + γ̃ t
Rearranging, we find the expression relating the composition effect to variable search inten-
sity of workers in bad matches and firm average composition:
                                                                                      
                              δ̃BG + γ̃ δ̃GB                    1 − δ̃BG − δ̃GB
                  cbw
                    t =                            γ̄
                                                     b
                                                        t−1 +                            δ̃BGS bς¯bt−1
                          (1 + γ̃) δ̃BG − δ̃GB                       δ̃BG − δ̃GB


B.6       Excess wage cyclicality for new hires from unemployment
In our numerical results, we recover an indirect composition effect that lends additional
cyclicality to the wage growth of new hires from unemployment. This effect arises from the
countercyclical and slow-moving dynamics of inverse composition, and the countercyclical
but faster-moving dynamics of unemployment.
       Consider the peak of an expansion, when unemployment is at its lowest level. Although
unemployment is now increasing in its return to steady state, average match quality is high
and still improving. Thus, new hires from unemployment will have had particularly high
wages on their previous job, implying larger-than-average wage reductions upon reemploy-
ment; but also, the prevailing unemployment rate when they they are hired is higher than
that when they lost their previous job.35 Therefore, there is a negative correlation between
wage growth across jobs and changes in the unemployment rate across jobs for new hires
from unemployment, generating excess wage cyclicality.
       Hence, there are two composition effects associated with a boom. First, there is an
immediate improvement in match quality for workers searching on the job, correlated with
declining unemployment rates. This is the primary composition effect that is the focus of
the paper. Second, there is the effect discussed above, where a decline in wage growth across
jobs for new hires from unemployment is correlated with increasing unemployment rates as
the economy returns to steady state.36 While the second composition effect generates excess
  35
     Recall that, because match quality is iid, new hires from unemployment do not directly benefit from an
increase in average match quality. The only relevance of the increase in match quality to such workers is of
the average match quality of their previous job.
  36
     Similar implications for wages have been found for other search models. See the discussion in Davis and



                                                         65
cyclicality in the wages of new hires from unemployment - and illustrates yet another channel
by which cyclical match composition may generate spurious evidence of wage flexibility for
new hires - the effect is small compared to that of the composition effect for workers actively
searching on-the-job.
    We provide a more detailed analysis of wage cyclicality for new hires from unemployment
below.

B.6.1      ENE wage growth

We develop a recursive expression for the average last wage of the unemployed at time t,
denoted w̄tl . Key in what follows will be the within-period timing protocol: first, there is
production and wage bargaining; then separation and search take place.
    The expression for w̄tl is:

                                  w̄tl = (1 − ωtu ) w̄t−1
                                                      l
                                                          + ωtu w̄t−1
                                                                  a
                                                                      ,                   (52)

where ωtu is fraction of unemployed workers at time t who were newly unemployed at time
t − 1 (employed in t − 1, separated in t − 1 and unable to find a new match post-separation),
given by
                                       (1 − ut−1 )(1 − ν)(1 − ςu pt−1 )
                               ωtu =                                    ,                 (53)
                                                     ut
and where 1 − ωtu is the fraction of unemployed workers at time t who were unemployed at
the start of period t − 1 and failed to find a job in t − 1, given by

                                                    ut−1 (1 − pt−1 )
                                       1 − ωtu =                     .                    (54)
                                                           ut

Since there is no selection of unemployed workers into employment, the unemployed in t
who were unemployed for the entire period t − 1 will have an average last wage in t equal
     l . At the same time, there is no selection of employed into unemployment, implying
to w̄t−1
that unemployed workers in t who were newly unemployed workers in t − 1 will have an
                                                                                a . In turn,
average last wage in t equal to the average wage per worker in t − 1, denoted w̄t−1
the time t average wage per worker is given by

                                                    1 + φγ̄t
                                           w̄ta =            w̄t ,                        (55)
                                                     1 + γ̄t

where w̄t is the average contract wage per efficiency unit of labor and γ̄t is inverse composi-
tion. Note that the average wage exhibits excess cyclicality relative to the average contract
wage. The quality of jobs incorporated in the average wage improves in booms, raising the
von Wachter (2011) of Burgess and Turon (2010), p. 46.


                                                     66
average wage as inverse composition γ̄t decreases.
       The average wage of new hires from unemployment at time t, denoted w̄tEN E , is given
by
                                      w̄tEN E = (ξ + (1 − ξ)φ) w̄t .                                   (56)

Note that w̄tEN E exhibits no excess cyclicality relative to continuing workers: the compo-
sition of new hires from unemployment across good or bad matches is acyclical (as the
probability ξ that a match is good is constant) and all new hires receive the prevailing
per-efficiency unit contract wage.
       Then, keeping in mind the within-period time protocol, the relevant wage growth for
new hires from unemployment can be written as

                                    ḡtEN E = log w̄tEN E − log w̄t−1
                                                                  l
                                                                      ,                                (57)

where the subscript t − 1 indicates that the relevant last period wage is that of workers who
were unemployed during the production stage of period t − 1 but found a job at the end of
the period.37
       We obtain the elasticity of newly hired workers from unemployment regressing their wage
growth ḡtEN E on the relevant unemployment difference, denoted ∆EN E ūt . The relevant
change in unemployment for a new hire out of unemployment at time t is

                                         ∆EN E ūt = ūt − ūlt−1 ,                                    (58)

where ūlt is the average last unemployment rate while employed for the currently unemployed,
denoted ūlt and given by a similar recursive expressions as for the last wage:

                                   ūlt = (1 − ωtu ) ūlt−1 + ωt−1
                                                               u
                                                                   ūt−1 .                             (59)

The first term on the right-hand side represents the contribution of workers who entered
period t − 1 unemployed and remained unemployed for the entire period. The second term
represents the contribution of workers who were newly unemployed in time t − 1.

B.6.2       ENE wage cyclicality

To explain the indirect compositional effect associated with the ENE wage cyclicality in
a transparent manner and to make the parallel with the regression framework easier, we
make two simplifying assumptions. First, we focus on workers who are unemployed for a
single period, that is, we set ωtu = 1 in equations (52) and (59), which gives us the following
  37                                                                  a
    From equation (52), we see that the most recent average wage is w̄t−2 , associated with workers who lost
their job in t − 2 and were unemployed for a single period.


                                                     67
                            Figure B.1: Wage growth for new hires from unemployment



                             0.2                                                          1

                             0.1
                                                                                         0.9
                              0
           percent change




                                                                        percent change
                            -0.1                                                         0.8
                            -0.2

                            -0.3                                                         0.7

                            -0.4
                                                                                         0.6
                                            wage growth (cont)
                            -0.5
                                            wage growth (ENE)                                                     TFP (zt )
                            -0.6                                                         0.5
                                   0   10     20       30         40                           0   10    20         30         40
                                             months                                                     months



                            0.02                                                          0

                              0
                                                                                          -2
                          -0.02
percentage point change




                          -0.04                                                           -4
                                                                       percent change




                          -0.06
                                                                                          -6
                          -0.08

                            -0.1                                                          -8

                          -0.12
                                                                                         -10
                          -0.14                             ∆ut                                    Inverse composition (γt )
                          -0.16                                                          -12
                                   0   10     20       30         40                           0   10    20         30         40
                                             months                                                     months




                                                                       68
amended system for equations (57) and (58):

                                             ḡtEN E = log w̄tn − log w̄t−2
                                                                        a
                                                                                                        (60)
                                       ∆EN E ūt = ūt − ūt−2                                          (61)

Then, we shift the lagged structure one period, replacing the terms with subscript t − 2
with a subscript t − 1 to obtain38 :

                                         ḡtEN E = log w̄tn − log w̄t−1
                                                                    a
                                                                                                        (62)
                                              ∆ūt = ūt − ūt−1                                        (63)

The amended system behaves similarly to the original one, but allows for a clearer expla-
nation of the excess cyclicality of wages of new hires from unemployment. Substituting
(55) and (56) in the expression for ḡtEN E and rearranging we obtain an expression that
emphasizes the relation with the wage growth of continuing workers, ḡtw , as follows:

                                                                        1 + φγ̄t−1
                                                                                        
                        ḡtEN E   =   ḡtw   + log (ξ + (1 − ξ)φ) − log                                 (64)
                                                                         1 + γ̄t−1

where ḡtw = log (w̄t /w̄t−1 ) . This makes clear that the composition incorporated in the
subtracted average wage, the last term, changes the cyclicality of wages for new hires from
unemployment relative to continuing workers. Note that ḡtEN E varies positively with γ̄t−1 .
Loglinearizing equation (64) we obtain our final system

                                                  1                        γ̃ (1 − φ)
               ḡtEN E = g̃ EN E +                       ḡtw +                                  γ̄b    (65)
                                             1 + g̃ EN E        (1 + g̃ EN E ) (1 + φγ̃) (1 + γ̃) t−1
                 ∆ūt = ūt − ūt−1                                                                     (66)

       Both γ̄b t−1 and ūt − ūt−1 are countercyclical: crucially, however, they are countercyclical
over different frequencies. We see in Figure B.1 that the transition dynamics of unemploy-
ment are faster than those of TFP, while the transition dynamics of composition are slower
than TFP. We see that ūt − ūt−1 decreases sharply in response to a positive productivity
shock, but then starts to increase as unemployment returns to steady state. At the point at
which ūt − ūt−1 starts rising, however, inverse composition γ̄b t−1 is still decreasing. Hence,
ūt − ūt−1 and γ̄b t−1 can be either negatively or positively correlated following a productivity
shock depending on the frequencies over which the correlation is computed.
  38
    The logic of this substitution is that the dynamics from t − 2 to t are similar to those from t − 1 to t,
but in this way we can make the parallel with the regression framework easier.




                                                           69
   Compute the regression coefficient βEN E from the regression

                               ḡtEN E = αEN E + βEN E ∆ūt + εt ,                     (67)

where βEN E is the semi-elasticity of wage growth of new hires from unemployment with
respect to unemployment. We can show the following:

                                    cov(ḡtEN E , ∆ūt )
                      βEN E =
                                       var(∆ūt )
                                 ωḡw cov(ḡtw , ∆ūt ) + ωγ cov(γ̄b t−1 , ∆ūt )
                               =
                                                  var(∆ūt )
                               = ωḡw βw + ωγ βγ                                       (68)

where ωḡw and ωγ are the coefficients on ḡtw and γ̄b t−1 in equation (65), βw is the semi-
elasticity of the wage growth of continuing workers with respect to composition,

                                    ḡtw = αw + βw ∆ūt + εt ,                         (69)

and βγ is the estimated coefficient from the regression of γ̄b t on ∆ut ,

                                     γ̄b t = αγ + βγ ∆ūt + εt .                       (70)

   Hence, the wages of new hires from unemployment are more cyclical than the wages
of continuing workers if ωḡw βw + ωγ βγ < βw . Given that under our calibration ωḡw <
0, ωγ > 0, and βγ < 0, this condition is satisfied. Thus, despite the fact that wages
of new hires from unemployment are no more flexible than those of continuing workers
and that the composition of new hires from unemployment across good and bad jobs is
acyclical, wage growth of workers making ENE transitions (approximated by βEN E ) is more
cyclical with respect to ∆ūt than the wages of continuing workers. This is entirely due to
selection of workers based on the previous wage, which is decreasing in inverse composition,
γ̄t . This selection is due to the slower transition dynamics of composition compared to
unemployment.
   We can directly show the role of composition in generating excess cyclicality in ENE
wages in the model by shutting down composition in the model simulation. Once we do
this, the excess cyclicality of ENE wages goes from 0.65 to nearly zero (0.06).

B.7    Transition function
We now define the law of motion for the distribution function, Gt . Let C and W be the
sets of possible compositions and wages. Define the Cartesian product of the worker/firm


                                                  70
state space to be S ≡ C × W with σ-algebra Σ with typical subset S = (C × W). Define
the transition function Qs,s0 ((γ, w), C × W) as the probability that an individual retained
or hired by a firm characterized by (γ, w) transits to the set C × W next period when the
aggregate state transits from s to s0 . Then Qs,s0 satisfies

    Qt,t+1 ((γt , wt ), C × W)) = I(γt+1 (γt , wt ) ∈ C)
                                                                           xt (γt , wt ) + ρt (γt , wt )
                                  
                                × (1 − λ)I (wt∗ (γt+1 (γt , wt )) ∈ W)
                                                                                     x̄t + ρ̄t
                                              xt (γt , wt ) + ρt (γt , wt )
                                                                            
                                +λI (wt ∈ W )
                                                        x̄t + ρ̄t

where I(·) is the indicator function. Then,
                                       Z
                                                                            
              Gt+1 (C × W) =                     Qt,t+1 (γt , wt ), C × W) dGt (γt , wt ).
                                 (γt ,wt )∈C×W




                                                   71
