NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSURANCE AND THE HIGH PRICES OF PHARMACEUTICALS
David Besanko
David Dranove
Craig Garthwaite
Working Paper 22353
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22353

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We would like to thank Dan Barron, Amitabh Chandra, Niko Matouschek, Fiona Scott Morton,
Matthew Notodiwidgo, and Michael Powell for their helpful comments and suggestions. We are
grateful to Rena Conti for her comments and for giving us permission to use the data discussed in
Section The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by David Besanko, David Dranove, and Craig Garthwaite. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Insurance and the High Prices of Pharmaceuticals
David Besanko, David Dranove, and Craig Garthwaite
NBER Working Paper No. 22353
June 2016
JEL No. H0,H51,I0,I1,I11,L1,L13
ABSTRACT
We present a model in which prospective patients are liquidity constrained, and thus health
insurance allows patients access to treatments and services that they otherwise would have been
unable to afford. Consistent with large expansions of insurance in the U.S. (e.g., the Affordable
Care Act), we assume that policies expand the set of services that must be covered by insurance.
We show that the profit-maximizing price for an innovative treatment is greater in the presence of
health insurance than it would be for an uninsured population. We also show that consumer
surplus is less than it would be if the innovation was not covered. These results show that even in
the absence of moral hazard, there are channels through which insurance can negatively affect
consumer welfare. Our model also provides an economic rationale for the claim that
pharmaceutical firms set prices that exceed the value their products create. We empirically
examine our model's predictions by studying the pricing of oncology drugs following the 2003
passage of Medicare Part D. Prior to 2003, drugs covered under Medicare Part B had higher
prices than those that would eventually be covered under Part D. In general, the trends in pricing
across these categories were similar. However, after 2003 there was a far greater increase in
prices for products covered under Part D, and as result, products covered by both programs were
sold at similar prices. In addition, these prices were quite high compared to the value created by
the products---suggesting that the forced bundle of Part D might have allowed firms to capture
more value than their products created.
David Besanko
Department of Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
d-besanko@kellogg.northwestern.edu
David Dranove
Department of Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Craig Garthwaite
Department of Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Insurance and the High Prices of Pharmaceuticals
David Besankoy

David Dranovez

Craig Garthwaitex

June 9, 2016

Abstract
We present a model in which prospective patients are liquidity constrained, and thus health insurance
allows patients access to treatments and services that they otherwise would have been unable to a¤ord.
Consistent with large expansions of insurance in the U.S. (e.g., the A¤ordable Care Act), we assume that
policies expand the set of services that must be covered by insurance. We show that the pro…t-maximizing
price for an innovative treatment is greater in the presence of health insurance than it would be for an
uninsured population. We also show that consumer surplus is less than it would be if the innovation
was not covered. These results show that even in the absence of moral hazard, there are channels
through which insurance can negatively a¤ect consumer welfare. Our model also provides an economic
rationale for the claim that pharmaceutical …rms set prices that exceed the value their products create.
We empirically examine our model’s predictions by studying the pricing of oncology drugs following the
2003 passage of Medicare Part D. Prior to 2003, drugs covered under Medicare Part B had higher prices
than those that would eventually be covered under Part D. In general, the trends in pricing across these
categories were similar. However, after 2003 there was a far greater increase in prices for products covered
under Part D, and as result, products covered by both programs were sold at similar prices. In addition,
these prices were quite high compared to the value created by the products— suggesting that the forced
bundle of Part D might have allowed …rms to capture more value than their products created.
Keywords: pharmaceutical prices, health insurance access, liquidity constraints, complementary
monopoly
JEL classi…cation: I11, I13, L13

1

Introduction

The welfare economics of insurance traditionally involves a trade-o¤ between consumption smoothing and
moral hazard. The potential welfare e¤ects of these two features of health insurance have been extensively
studied (Pauly, 1968; Feldstein, 1973; Friedman, 1974; Feldman and Dowd, 1991; Manning and Marquis,
1989, 1996; Newhouse, 1993; Einav et al., 2013). Nyman (1999) identi…es the elimination of liquidity
constraints for the purchasing of costly medical services as a third feature of health insurance. While
eliminating liquidity constraints likely improves access to expensive medical products, little is known about
the welfare implications of this increased access.
On the one hand, Nyman (1999) proposes that the access bene…ts of health insurance result in a large
increase in consumer surplus in the following manner: “if insurance is the only way to gain access to expensive
health care, then the value of insurance for that care is the expected consumer surplus from the health care
services that would otherwise be inaccessible. This value may be large, especially if the procedures that
insurance made possible were life-saving.”
We would like to thank Dan Barron, Amitabh Chandra, Niko Matouschek, Fiona Scott Morton, Matthew Notodiwidgo,
and Michael Powell for their helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Rena Conti for her comments and for giving
us permission to use the data discussed in Section 6 of the paper. We would also like to acknowledge Matthew Schmidt for his
helpful research assistance in the early stages of this project.
y Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
z Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
x Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University and NBER

1

This proposed bene…t of health insurance has not been lost on policymakers. Two large and recent
federal expansions of social and private health insurance in the United States, the A¤ordable Care Act
(ACA) and the creation of Medicare Part D (which expanded coverage for pharmaceutical products for
Medicare bene…ciaries), were supported, in part, because they would allow patients to access treatments and
services that they otherwise would have been unable to a¤ord.1 In addition to providing access by breaking
liquidity constraints, these expansions also expanded and solidi…ed regulations regarding the set of products
and services that must be bundled together into a minimally acceptable insurance product.2
In this paper we examine the welfare implications of increased access to expensive medical services by
providing a demand model that incorporates two salient features of the United States pharmaceutical market:
(1) liquidity constrained customers and (2) …rms selling medical goods and services in both competitive and
monopoly markets that are covered by a single insurance bundle. We use this model to examine pricing and
consumer welfare in the pharmaceutical sector— a market that is characterized by many products with high
and rising prices that sometimes exceed the value directly created by the product. These unprecedented high
prices have recently received considerable attention from both policymakers and economists including calls
for both direct (e.g. explicit price controls) and indirect (e.g. increased bargaining rights for government
purchasers) policies to decrease prices. Given the potential negative e¤ects on innovation and access that
could come from such policies, it is important to understand the determinants of the market’s prices and
their e¤ect on welfare.
Broadly speaking, the expensive branded drugs attracting attention fall into two categories.3 The …rst
category includes speciality medications that o¤er treatments for life threatening and/or severely debilitating
conditions. These drugs carry hefty price tags but the prices are lower than estimates of the value of the
statistical lives saved by the products. Despite the positive bene…t/cost ratio, the pro…ts generated by these
new products have attracted a great deal of negative attention from policymakers and the general public.4
The poster children for this …rst category are Sovaldi and Harvoni, two drugs developed by Gilead for the
treatment of hepatitis C. These drugs o¤er a marked improvement over existing treatments and initially
were sold at a price of $80,000 for a 12 week course of treatment. Given their e¢ cacy and price, they have
attracted many customers and generated approximately $10 billion in pro…ts in 2014 (Slatko, 2015). Despite
these high prices, Sovaldi represents such a leap forward in the treatment of hepatitis C that it is estimated
to be cost e¤ective (Liu et al., 2015; Chhatwal et al., 2015; Najafzadeh et al., 2015).
The second category includes drugs that provide some bene…t to patients but are sold at prices that
appear to exceed the value that they create. This category includes many recently introduced oncology
products as well products that treat a wide number of other conditions. For example, when used to treat
1 For

example, a white paper prepared by Senate Democrats in support of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act opens by stating:
"The Patient Protection and A¤ordable Care Act will ensure that
all Americans have access to quality, a¤ordable health care." Responsible Reform for the Middle Class
www.dpc.senate.gov/healthreformbill/healthbill04.pdfdemocrats.senate.gov/reform (accessed 6/25/2015).
2 These regulations are both explicit and implicit. For Medicare Part D, the regulations cover what types of products must
be covered and many private insurance companies have adopted these standards. For the ACA, the legislation and subsequent
regulations established a set of services that must be covered for qualify as insurance for the purposes of the individual mandates
to purchase insurance.
3 In addition there have been recent increases in the prices for generic drugs serving small markets. This primariliy relates
to the minimum e¢ cient scale relative to the market size for these small patient populations and are generally beyond the scope
of this paper (except to note that the pro…t maximizing price for these generic medications is likely far lower for an uninsured
population).
4 For example, Gilead was forced to justify to Congress the high prices it charged for its hepatitis C cure and was subsequently
the target of an 18 month investigation by the Senate Finance committee (Pollack, 2014; Berkrot, 2015). This attention to
prices is driven, in part, by the belief that the total potential liability insurers face from specialty pharmaceutical products will
lead to higher premiums and reduced access in the private market, as well as create budget problems for public programs. Steve
Miller, the Chief Medical O¢ cer of the Pharmacy Bene…t Manager Express Scripts, said about Sovaldi, “What they [Gilead]
have done with this particular drug will break the country ... [i]t will make pharmacy bene…ts no longer sustainable. Companies
just aren’t going to be able to handle paying for this drug.”

2

metastatic colon cancer, the current price per quality adjusted life year for Stivarga is over $700,000 – far
more than the value suggested by most economic studies (Goldstein et al., 2015). Similarly, a price based
on e¢ cacy and the standard value of life years gained for the recently developed PCSK9 Inhibitors such as
Praluent and Repatha (which treat high cholesterol) would have been 75 percent lower than the list price
(Mangan, 2015).5
Our model helps explain both the high prices of recently developed valuable pharmaceuticals and the
puzzling ability of …rms to sell products at prices that exceed the value created by their products. We
also examine the welfare consequences of the access to expensive pharmaceuticals that insurance provides.
We begin by noting that the average uninsured customer appears to be liquidity constrained in the market
for expensive branded pharmaceuticals. In 2011, the median United States household had a net worth of
approximately $68,000, with nearly $50,000 of that wealth being home equity.6 In addition, survey evidence
reports that roughly 75 percent of people with incomes less than $50,000 and 67 percent of individuals with
incomes between $50,000 and $100,000 would have di¢ culty coming up with $1,000 to pay an unexpected
expense (Sweet and Swanson, 2016). Since most banks would not provide an unsecured loan for medical
services, uninsured individuals …nd themselves without the …nancial means to a¤ord a large fraction of these
new expensive treatments. It therefore seems probable that at current prices, many potential patients would
have to forego treatment with many of these new high priced drugs, were it not for insurance.
Given these facts, Nyman’s conclusion that insurance creates an access bene…t for enrollees seems to
be correct, especially for new high priced drugs.7 However, understanding the welfare implications of this
bene…t requires carefully considering the optimal pricing response of pharmaceutical …rms.8 These potential
pricing decisions can be quite meaningful and failing to consider the supply side response to health insurance
therefore can have important welfare implications. For example, it is di¢ cult to imagine that Gilead would
charge anywhere near $84,000 for Sovaldi were it not covered by insurance and therefore the existence of
insurance for this product has clear implications for access and pricing.
To illustrate this point we develop a simple demand model, where individuals may purchase insurance for a
"core" set of medical services (i.e. existing hospital and physician services as well as more competitively priced
pharmaceuticals) and a potentially life-saving innovative product (e.g. a new pharmaceutical treatment for
cancer). With this model we address …ve distinct questions that have heretofore been unaddressed by the
literature: (1) To what extent might the unprecedented high prices of new prescription drugs depend on
the liquidity bene…ts of insurance? (2) Would consumers be better o¤ if these drugs were not insured? (3)
How does bundling innovative products sold by patent-holding …rms and “core” medical services in a single
product a¤ect pricing and welfare? (4) How can innovating …rms sell products for prices that exceed their
value? (5) How does the growing fragmentation of the pharmaceutical marketplace a¤ect pricing?
While our model is too stylized to o¤er precise numerical predictions, a canonical example that broadly
…ts real world data con…rms some of the model’s surprising implications. First, we show that the pro…tmaximizing price for products is far greater in the presence of health insurance than it would be for an
uninsured population, and consumer surplus is lower. The decrease in consumer surplus is quite large and
exceeds the consumption smoothing bene…ts of health insurance for these products. We further show that
5 While list prices are not often paid by insurers, the nations largest pharmacy bene…t manager noted that they did not
receive the cost e¤ective price following their negotiations related to these drugs (Managan, 2015).
6 Data available at: http://www.census.gov/people/wealth/…les/Wealth_Tables_2011.xlsx
7 We also note that the fact that liquidity constraints may place the willingness to pay of customers below the social value of
a good is not limited to the area of health care or health insurance. Fuchs, Green, and Levine (2013) develop a model describing
the optimal subsidies for mosquito bednets in developing countries where liquidity constraints result in the willingness to pay
for these products to be below their social value.
8 Nyman’s model makes the strong assumption of …xed prices and this shortcoming drives the erroneous conclusion that the
access motive for insurance increases consumer surplus.

3

this negative e¤ect on consumer welfare grows as the number of innovative products increases. In fact,
as the number of innovative products covered by insurance increases, the high prices they charge for their
products eventually cause some consumers to not purchase insurance, resulting in a decrease in total surplus.
We note that these results do not rely on moral hazard in that it exists even when customers never buy
a product at a price that exceeds its value. Therefore, these results show that even in a situation where
insurers could eliminate moral hazard (either through well designed cost sharing or e¤ective managed care
organizations) there are still other channels through which insurance can reduce welfare.
In addition, our model provides an economic explanation for the common claim that …rms in the pharmaceutical sector are able to successfully set prices that far exceed the value created by their products
(Loftus, 2015; Walker, 2015). It is true that insured consumers don’t directly pay the cost of drugs, and this
might lead to moral hazard in their purchasing decisions. However, it is also true that if all manufacturers
priced above the value created, the resulting insurance premiums would push consumers out of the insurance
market. This e¤ect on insurance premiums means that even if insured customers exhibit moral hazard,
the monopoly providers’ pricing should be constrained by the value created by their products. However,
our model demonstrates that requiring insurers to provide a single bundle including existing basic medical
services and innovative treatments allows the monopoly manufacturers of innovative products to set prices
that capture some of the value created in the more competitive market for other health services, value that
was previously consumer surplus. This would explain recent examples of oncology and cardiovascular products that are covered by health insurance and have been found to not be cost e¤ective, but whose prices
are accepted by insurers (Johnson, 2015; Magnan, 2015). We note that the ability of …rms to capture more
value than they create solely results from regulations requiring an insurance bundle and that without these
regulations, even in the presence of moral hazard, a monopolist selling an innovative product would be
constrained by the e¤ect that its price would have on insurance premiums.
To empirically examine our model’s predictions we examine the pricing of oncology drugs following the
2003 passage of Medicare Part D. While the widespread adoption of insurance in the American market
makes …nding an ideal empirical setting for testing our model di¢ cult, there are many features of the
oncology market and Medicare Part D that are useful for this purpose. First, Part D required that oncology
products had to be covered which allows the producers of newly launched products in this category to exert
a large amount of market power when setting prices. Second, a number of oncology products were previously
covered by Medicare because those products were primarily administered in a physician’s o¢ ce or outpatient
setting (and thus are covered under Medicare’s Part B medical bene…t rather than the Part D pharmaceutical
bene…t).
We exploit this fact to identify the e¤ect of insurance on pharmaceutical pricing by …rst examining the
general trends occurring in the oncology market and then separately examining products based on insurance
coverage. While there are a relatively small number of oncology products, we show that prices were generally
stable until 2003 and then increased rapidly in the years following. This increase would be consistent with
both the greater share of the population with insurance and the bundling of new products under patent with
those that are sold in a more competitive market. To further examine these prices, we next compare the
change in prices for products based on whether they are covered under Part D and Part B. We …nd that
prior to 2003, drugs covered under Part B were far more expensive than those that would eventually be
covered under Part D. In general, the trends in pricing across these categories were ‡at and similar before
2003. However, after that year there was a far greater increase in prices for products covered under Part D.
As a result, in the years following 2003, products covered by both programs were sold at similar prices. In
addition, these prices were quite high compared to the value created by the products –suggesting that the

4

forced bundle of Part D might have allowed …rms to capture more value than their products created.
Finally, our model provides suggestive explanations for the recent increase in new high priced pharmaceutical products and the increases for existing products. We show that …rms must consider at least two
factors when setting the price of their pharmaceutical: (1) the value created by their product; (2) the externality of their price on the premiums for insurance and therefore the purchase of other pharmaceuticals. Our
results with multiple innovative products, sold by di¤erent …rms, suggest that as the number of innovators
increase there is a commensurate increase in prices and above a certain level a decrease in total surplus.
This result stems from the Cournot complementary monopolist problem where each innovator is pricing
without internalizing its e¤ect on the market. However, …rms marketing a portfolio of innovative products
must internalize this negative externality to a greater degree than …rms that are marketing a single product.
We document that the time period of recent price increases has been coincident with a marked reduction in
the concentration of sales in the pharmaceutical sector— providing an economic rationale for the recent price
increases. We note that this is not simply a conventional market structure-to-price relationship, as many of
the drugs in question held monopoly or near monopoly status over this time period. Rather, the reduction
in concentration encourages …rms to ignore the externality that their high prices impose on the rest of the
industry through their impact on insurance premiums.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents and analyzes a model of pricing a pharmaceutical product in the face of consumer liquidity constraints. We …rst consider the case in
which insurance does not cover the treatment, and then we consider what happens when the treatment is
covered. For both cases, we characterize consumers’ optimal purchase decisions and the implied demand
curve for the treatment; the pro…t-maximizing price of the treatment; and the resulting levels of consumer
and total surplus. Section 3 extends our model to encompass multiple innovators. Section 4 incorporates a
consumption-smoothing motive for insurance into our model and discusses how it a¤ects our results. Section
5 studies the impact of minimum insurance coverage standards. Section 6 contains the empirical analysis
of Medicare Part D and oncology products, and Section 7 applies the model to provide insight into the role
played by insurance in recent instances of high drug prices. Section 8 summarizes and concludes. Proofs of
all propositions and derivations of some key expressions are in the Appendix.

2

The model

The focus of our analysis is the pricing of a single innovative treatment for a serious but rare illness. In
Section 3, we extend the model to consider treatments for several di¤erent innovators. As in Nyman (1998,
1999), consumers are assumed to be risk neutral, and so the consumption-smoothing motive for insurance is
absent.9 Potential consumers of the innovative treatment (hereafter the treatment) di¤er only in the amount
ci . We assume that W
ci UNIFORM[W
c; W
c ], and we set W
c=W
c + 1.10
of their liquid wealth W
A consumer can be in one of three possible mutually exclusive states, s = f0; 1; 2g:
s = 0: The consumer is healthy and does not need medical services.
s = 1: The consumer experiences a medical condition for which a package of well-established “core”
medical services is required.
s = 2: The consumer experiences the illness for which an innovative treatment is required.
9 We

discuss consumption smoothing in Section 4.
choice of the uniform density allows us to compute exact formulas for prices, quantities, and surpluses. None of our
key intuitions depends on the uniform distribution.
1 0 The

5

The probability of state 1 is C 2 (0; 1); the probability of state 2 is I 2 (0; 1), and the probability of
state 0 is 1
C
I > 0. Think of state 1 as the occurrence of a medical condition (e.g., a heart attack) for
which procedures, protocols, and treatments are well understood. The cost of treating these conditions may
be high, but their bene…ts are likely to be higher, and because they are well established, these core medical
services would typically be covered under conventional health insurance plans. State 2, on the other hand, is
a serious but relatively rare illness for which an innovative, high value-added pharmaceutical treatment has
only recently emerged.11 Throughout the analysis, we will treat C as “somewhat small” and I as “very
small” (though we emphasize that none of our result depend on any particular ordering of C and I ).
In light of the above discussion, consumer utility is
8
>
< zi
Ui (xi ; yi ; zi ; s) =
Byi + zi
>
:
Vi xi + zi

F1
F2

s=0
s=1 ;
s=2

where zi 2 [0; 1) is the quantity of a numeraire consumption good; yi 2 f0; 1g denotes the decision to
purchase the package of core medical services (where yi = 1 constitutes buying the package); xi 2 f0; 1g
denotes the decision to purchase the treatment (where xi = 1 constitutes purchasing the treatment); B is
the value of core medical services (for simplicity, assumed to be the same for all consumers); Fs is a …xed
ci ) > 0 is the incremental value of the
utility loss if the individual needs medical services, and Vi = v(W
treatment. Note that the treatment has value only when the consumer develops the serious illness, and core
medical services only have value when the consumer develops the medical condition for which those services
are appropriate.12 The utility losses plays no essential role in our analysis, so we set Fs = 0.
The price of core medical services is assumed to be determined competitively and equals C 2 [0; B). By
contrast, the price P of the treatment is determined monopolistically by the innovator of the treatment. For
simplicity, the innovator’s marginal cost is assumed to be 0. This innovator’s price is endogenous, and its
determination is a key focus of our analysis.
Consumers have the opportunity to purchase health insurance. We consider two alternative forms of
health insurance: basic health insurance, which covers just core medical services but not the treatment and
expanded health insurance, which covers both core medical services and the treatment. Under the basic
health insurance plan, the individual pays a price of 0 for core medical services but the full price P for
the treatment. Under the expanded health insurance plan, the price for both core medical services and the
treatment is 0. A consumer who does not purchase health insurance pays the full price for both core medical
services and the treatment. When the treatment is included on the health plan’s formulary, we assume that
consumers cannot purchase a la carte. That is, a consumer cannot purchase coverage only for the treatment
or only for core medical services.13 This is consistent with rules of what constitutes insurance under the
A¤ordable Care Act.14
Health insurance is sold in a competitive market, so it has an actuarially fair premium. When the
treatment is not covered, that premium is C C. When the treatment is covered, the plan’s premium is
CC + IP .
1 1 Below

we extend the model to include multiple serious illnesses, each having its own innovative treatment.
would not be di¢ cult to extend our model so that B depended on wealth. However, our major insights and intuitions
would not change if we did so, and making B independent of wealth simpli…es the exposition of the model.
1 3 As we discuss below, the basic economics of the case when insurance for the treatment is decoupled from insurance can be
considerd by setting C = 0 in our analysis of treatment pricing.
1 4 Note that insurers play an entirely passive role in this model. For example, if the price of the treatment increases, this is
entirely translated into higher premiums. As an alternative to premium increases, insurers might instead increase cost sharing
requirements. While the qualitative implications for demand and pricing strategies are similar, the mechanism through which
a¤ects drug purchases is more complex. We therefore do not consider this alternative to premium increases
1 2 It

6

Figure 1: The timing of consumer choice and market activity.

A consumer’s choice problem proceeds in two stages. Before learning the state s, an individual chooses
whether to purchase a health insurance plan. Then, depending on the individual’s …rst-stage choice and the
realized state, the individual chooses xi ,yi , and zi . Figure 1 summarizes the timing of both consumer choice
and market activity.
Throughout the analysis, we make the following assumptions:
ci ) is increasing in wealth and is such that
Assumption 1 The incremental value of the treatment Vi = v(W
c ].
ci ) > W
ci for all W
ci 2 [W
c; W
v(W
c + 1 < C, i.e., no consumer can a¤ ord core medical services.
Assumption 2 W
c>
Assumption 3 W

C C,

i.e., every consumer can a¤ ord basic health insurance.

c + 1) < C (B C), i.e., the expected social value of the treatment is less than the
Assumption 4 I v(W
expected social value of core medical services.
Assumption 1 is consistent with evidence that the income elasticity of the value of life is positive (Viscusi
ci may seem less natural: after all, why would an
and Aldy, 2003).15 However, the assumption that Vi > W
individual value something at more than their own ability to pay for it inasmuch as standard economic theory
equates value with the willingness to pay. Following standard theory, we would conclude that someone who
has, say, only $1,000 in liquid assets and therefore does not purchase a $2,000 life-saving treatment must value
1 5 Assumption 1 is also in line with Becker’s (2007) model of health as human capital. Equation (1) in that article expresses
the statistical value of life as a function of wealth and expected survivorship, and it is assumed that the valuation of a given
improvement in survivorship— Vi in our model— is “rising in initial wealth.”

7

that treatment at less than $2,000. However, this revealed preference logic ignores the reality of liquidity
constraints. Assumption 1 is tantamount to saying that if people could borrow against future earnings to
save their lives, everyone would do so. We can put this another way: suppose that you encountered a
gunman who gave the choice of “your liquid assets or your life.”If the value of your life was capped by your
liquid assets, then you would necessarily be indi¤erent between these two choices. Yet you, and surely most
everyone, would strongly prefer keeping your life over keeping your liquid assets. Your life must be worth
more.
With respect to the other assumptions, Assumption 2 is plausible in a setting characterized by signi…cant
ci are inclusive
medical cost in‡ation, as in the U.S.16 A justi…cation for Assumption 3 is that wealth levels W
of subsidies for the purchase of health insurance, as under the A¤ordable Care Act. Assumptions 2 and
3 create a potential access motive to obtain basic health insurance in the spirit of Nyman (1998, 1999).17
Finally, Assumption 4 is plausible in light of the notion that the serious illness is rare, while the core medical
services cover an array of established treatments that have su¢ ciently high value B when needed. We
discuss the roles played by these assumptions below. Later in the paper we present numerical calculations
that illustrate that these assumptions can be satis…ed by empirically plausible parameter values.
In the Appendix we derive the expected utility of a consumer from not purchasing insurance, EUiN I , the
expected utility from purchasing the basic health insurance plan, EUiBI , and (when available) the expected
utility from purchasing expanded health insurance, EUiI :
ci +
EUiN I = W

ci +
EUiBI = W

C (B

ci +
EUiI = W

I

(Vi

C) +

I

C (B

ci
P ) 1(W

(Vi

C) +

ci
P ) 1[W
I

(Vi

P ):

(1)
CC

P ]:

P);

(2)
(3)

where in (1) and (2), 1(t) is the indicator function: 1(t) = 1 if t = T RU E, and 0 otherwise.

2.1
2.1.1

Case 1: Treatment is not covered by health insurance
Demand for the treatment under basic insurance

We begin by characterizing both consumer choice for the basic health insurance plan and consumer demand
for the treatment.
ci
Proposition 1 All consumers purchase basic health insurance. Only consumers for whom W
P
CC
purchase the treatment if they become ill. Thus, when health insurance does not cover the treatment, the
demand for the treatment is fully determined by consumer liquidity constraints.
The result that all consumers purchase basic health insurance is not just because of Nyman’s access
motive. For consumers whose wealth is in the interval [P; P + C C) not purchasing basic insurance would
free up wealth that breaks the liquidity constraint in the event that the consumer becomes ill. That is, the
possibility of the serious illness creates the potential for a “reverse Nyman e¤ect” wherein a consumer may
want to save money that would have been spent on basic insurance to free up resources to treat the serious
illness should it arise. Thus, it is conceivable not all consumers would opt for basic coverage.
1 6 Here and elsewhere, we implicitly ingnore the wealthiest tail of the wealth distribution. This would be problematic for us
if the innovator priced the treatment so that only the wealthy could a¤ord insurance to cover it. However, this does not appear
to be case in practice since it would entail prices of innovative treatments well above even the current very high levels.
1 7 And indeed, as we show below, all consumers will, in fact, opt to choose basic health insurance to gain access to services
that otherwise would be una¤odable.

8

However, in our model Assumption 4 ensures that this “reverse Nyman e¤ect” does not arise. Thus,
Proposition 1 arises in part because of Nyman’s access motive but also in part because core medical services
are su¢ ciently valuable that no consumer …nds it worthwhile to skimp on basic insurance in order to free
up wealth to a¤ord the treatment in the event that it is needed. Given the variety of valuable products
and services that are included in the package of basic medical services, we believe that this is as reasonable
assumption.
ci
Now, de…ne Wi W
C C to be the net-of-basic-insurance wealth of individual i (or simply, wealth)
c
and correspondingly, let W = W
UNIFORM[W ; W + 1]:
C C be the lower bound on wealth. Thus, Wi
Note that Assumption 3 implies that W > 0. Now, we make a further assumption:
Assumption 5 Vi = v(Wi ) = V + (Wi

W ), where

2 (0; 1), and V + z > W + z for all z 2 [0; 1]:

Given the distribution of Wi , it follows that Vi UNIFORM[V ; V + ]. The parameter captures the
extent to which the valuation of the treatment increases in wealth. Given Viscusi and Aldy’s (2003) …nding
that the income elasticity of the value of a statistical life is approximately 0.5 to 0.6, < 1 is a natural
assumption.18
In light of Proposition 1, the wealth distribution determines the demand curve for the treatment, which
in inverse form is
(4)
P0 (Q) = W + 1 Q; Q 2 [0; 1]:
In the absence of a liquidity constraint on out-of-pocket purchases of the treatment, a consumer would
purchase the treatment as long as Vi P . Thus, the (inverse) non-liquidity-constrained demand curve for
the treatment is
P1 (Q) = V +
Q; Q 2 [0; 1]:
(5)
Figure 2 illustrates that the liquidity constrained demand curve D0 lies everywhere to the left of the nonliquidity constrained schedule D1 .
2.1.2

Pricing the treatment: treatment is not covered by health insurance

The innovator’s pro…t-maximization problem is
max

Q2[0;1]

and its solution is
0

Q =

0

P =

0 (Q)

(

W +1
2

(

W +1
2

1

W

= P0 (Q)Q;

if W
if W

1
:
1

(6)

if W
if W

1
:
1

(7)

Under both basic and expanded insurance, ex ante total surplus when Q consumers obtain the treatment
(when needed) and Y consumers obtain core medical services (when needed) can be shown to equal
c+1+
W
2

C (B

C)Y +

I

h

(V + ) Q

2

i
Q2 :

(8)

1 8 However, as we demonstrate in the Online Appendix to this paper, our results on how insurance coverage of the treatment
a¤ects price and consumer welfare continue to hold if we allow
1.

9

Figure 2: Demand curves with (D0 ) and without (D1 ) liquidity constraints

In what follows it will be convenient to measure surplus using a linear transformation of the expression in
c+ 1
W
2
:
(8), constructed by dividing it by I and dropping the constant term
I

T S(Q; Y ) =

C (B

C)

Y + (V + ) Q

I

2

Q2 :

(9)

The expression in (9) is the increment to total surplus from the consumption of health care services, but
reweighted from the perspective of the state of the world in which a consumer becomes seriously ill. For
simplicity, we refer to this simply as total surplus. The corresponding expression for consumer surplus when
the price of the treatment is P is
CS(Q; Y; P ) =

C (B

C)

Y + (V +

P)Q

I

2

Q2 ;

(10)

where it is understood that Q is the quantity of the treatment demanded at price P .
The …rst-best outcome maximizes T S(Q; Y ) for Q 2 [0; 1] and Y 2 [0; 1] and is given by Y F = QF = 1.
From Proposition 1, all consumers purchase basic health insurance and thus Y 0 = 1. When the innovator
serves the entire market, Q0 = 1, the …rst-best social surplus is attained. By contrast, when Q0 < 1— which
arises when consumer wealth levels are su¢ ciently small— we have a deadweight loss (DWL) represented by
area ABCE in Figure 3.

2.2
2.2.1

Case 2: Treatment is covered by health insurance
Consumer choice and the demand for the treatment under expanded health insurance

Expanded health insurance covers a bundle consisting of core medical services and the treatment. Because
the price of the expanded plan, C C + I P , is actuarially fair and consumers are risk neutral, there is no
economic di¤erence between an insured consumer who pre-pays I P for the treatment portion of his health
10

Figure 3: When the innovator’s pro…t-maximization problem has an interior solution, the deadweight loss
under basic insurance is area ABCE.

insurance plan, which only delivers a bene…t when he becomes ill, and an uninsured consumer who pays P
out-of-pocket only when he becomes ill.19 Thus, we will talk as if P is the price of the treatment paid by
insured consumers.20
In the Appendix we derive the demand curve for the treatment. One component of treatment demand,
which we label Du (P ), captures the demand from individuals who cannot a¤ord insurance but could a¤ord
C I
the treatment, i.e., P
C C < Wi < I P . In the Appendix we show that if W
1 I C, there can be no
uninsured buyers of the treatment at any price, i.e., Du (P ) = 0 for all P . In other words, demand for the
treatment and demand for expanded insurance are one in the same. Given that 1C I < 1, this is a weak
I
condition and, indeed as I ! 0 it reduces to our earlier assumption that W
0. For now we assume that
21
C I
W
1 I C and we ignore this component in what follows.
The main component of treatment demand, which we label D (P ), is the demand for the treatment that
comes from consumers who purchase expanded insurance. This component is made up of two parts which
are depicted in Figure 4. The …rst part, labeled DL in panel A of Figure 4, represents the demand for
insurance if the treatment had in…nite value, so that the only factor limiting insurance demand is liquidity.
We call this the liquidity constraint schedule. Along this schedule, consumers purchase insurance (and thus
the treatment) only if P < Wi , and thus DL has the equation (in inverse demand form)
I

W +1

Q

.

I

The second part, labeled DI in panel B of Figure 4, represents the demand for the insurance if there were no
1 9 Of

course— and this a key point of our analysis— liquidity constraints may a¤ect the feasibility of either of these choices.
economic equivalence between pre-paying P for the treatment and paying P out-of-pocket for it only in the state of
the world when it is needed implies that in our welfare analysis below we can compute the consumer surplus from purchasing
the treatment exactly as we did when the treatment is not covered, i.e., using (10).
2 1 In the Online Appendix, we discuss what happens when W < C I C and thus D (P ) > 0 for some P . Using numerical
u
1
I
analysis, we …nd that for these parameterizations, the main results reported below continue to hold.
2 0 This

11

Figure 4: The demand curve for treatment under expanded insurance has two parts. The …rst part, in panel
A, is the liquidity constraint. The second part, in panel B, is the value constraint.

liquidity constraint, so that the only limiting factor is the value of the bundle covered by insurance. We call
this the value constraint schedule. This schedule traces out consumers’inclusive valuations of the insurance
bundle, Vi + C (B C) . Along this schedule, consumers purchase insurance (and thus the treatment) only if
I
the treatment price P is less than this inclusive value, and thus DI is given by
V0+

Q;

where

C (B

V0 =V +

C)

:

I

Figure 5 depicts the three potential resulting demand curves for the treatment. In panel A, DL lies
everywhere below DI on the quantity interval between 0 and 1, and therefore D (P ) = DL . In panel B, DI
lies everywhere below DL and therefore D (P ) = DI . In panel C, DL intersects DI at a quantity strictly
between 0 and 1.22 Because consumers will purchase the insurance they use to obtain the treatment only if
they can both a¤ord insurance and think it is worth it, D (P ) represents the lower envelope of DL and DI .
Expressing D (P ) in inverse form, the demand curve in panel C is given by:23
P (Q) = min

W +1

Q

;V 0 +

I

Q ; Q 2 [0; 1];

2 2 Expressions for the price P
K and quantity QK corresponding to the kink in D are derived in the Appendix. Note that
panel C of Figure 5 depicts the case in which D (P ) consists of DL for low prices and DI for high prices. It is straightforward
to establish that given
< 1 this must be the case. If, by contrast,
1 (the case we consider in the Online Appendix),
D (P ) could consist of DL for high prices and DI for low prices. However, this case would arise only if I > 1 , which would
require that is very large (which seems empirically implausible) or that I is large (which is at odds with the focus in this
paper on treatments of fairly rare medical conditions).
2 3 In the Appendix, we present the non-inverse formula for D (P ).

12

Figure 5: The demand curve for the treatment could be DL , DI , or a kinked demand curve given by the
lower envelope of DL and DI .

In general, we cannot rule out any of the cases depicted in Figure 5. However, our model is intended
to be empirically relevant for treatments for life threatening but relatively rare medical conditions, such as
Hepatitis C, and we now argue that in such cases the most plausible scenario is that the demand curve for
the treatment coincides with the value constraint.24 Speci…cally, note that the vertical distance between the
liquidity constraint and the value constraint is
W +1

V +

C (B

I

C)

+

1

+

I

I

Q; Q 2 [0; 1]:

Because < 1 < 1 , this di¤erence is strictly decreasing in Q, and thus it is strictly positive for all Q 2 [0; 1]
I
if and only if it is positive at Q = 1, or equivalently,
0<

I

<

W

C (B

V

C)

:

(11)

Thus, when the illness requiring the treatment is su¢ ciently rare and wealth is su¢ ciently large (so that
W
C) > 0 and thus (11) is not vacuous), consumer liquidity constraints will not limit the purchase
C (B
of expanded insurance.25 This in turn implies that, in contrast to the case of basic insurance, consumer
liquidity constraints will not limit the purchase of the treatment either, i.e., inclusion of the treatment in
2 4 The incidence of Hepatitis C virus (HCV) in the U.S. population is quite low, with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimating that 29,713 new cases occurred in 2013, with 2.7 million Americans su¤ering from chronic HCV in‡ection. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Hepatitis C FAQs for Health Professionals,” http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/hcvfaq.htm (accessed July 7, 2015). As another example, the incidence
of lung cancer, though about 7 times larger than HCV, is also quite low, with 207,339 diagnosed with lung cancer
in 2011, an incidence of about 0.006 percent. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Lung Cancer Statistics,"
http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/lung/statistics/ (accessed July 7, 2015).
2 5 As we will see in the numerical example below, the condition W
C) > 0— which requires that consumer liquid
C (B
wealth be su¢ ciently large or the likelihood of requiring core medical services not be “too high”— does not contradict either
Assumption 2 or Assumption 4, Moreover, if it holds then Assumption 3 holds as well.

13

the health insurance plan “breaks” consumer liquidity constraints. In e¤ect, we are focusing on a setting in
which liquidity does not constrain the payment of insurance premiums (either basic or expanded), but it
would constrain out-of-pocket payments for the treatment when the treatment is not covered. Though this
is not the only scenario of potential interest, it is one that is both empirically plausible and (importantly for
the focus of this paper) consistent with Nyman’s (1999) model of health insurance.26
2.2.2

Pricing the treatment under expanded health insurance

The innovator’s pricing problem is
max

Q2[0;1]

(Q) = V 0 +

Q Q:

(12)

In the Appendix we establish that, given Assumptions 1, 4, and 5, the solution to this problem— denoted by
Q — is a corner solution in which the treatment is sold to all consumers, i.e., Q = 1. The corresponding
pro…t-maximizing price in this case is thus P = V 0 . Because there are no uninsured consumers of the
treatment, the innovator’s pro…t-maximization solution implies that all consumers purchase insurance and
thus all consumers obtain core medical services when needed, i.e., Y = 1.
Why, given our parameter assumptions, does the innovator price the treatment so as to serve the entire
market? To answer this question, let’s contrast the innovator’s problem under expanded insurance to that
under basic insurance. When the treatment is covered, its demand curve P (Q) lies everywhere to the right
of the demand curve P0 (Q) when the treatment is not covered. (Formally, this is implied by Assumption 1).
That, coupled with < 1 (via Assumption 5), ensures that P (Q) is more price elastic than P0 (Q) for any
Q 2 [0; 1]. Thus, in general, coverage of the treatment must result in a higher pro…t-maximizing quantity
of the treatment than if it is not covered. Whenever the pro…t-maximizing solution in the latter case is
to serve the entire market, the same will necessarily be true when the treatment is covered. Beyond this,
though, Assumption 4— which played a critical role in driving the result of full insurance coverage under
basic insurance (i.e., Proposition 1)— ensures that the inclusive value of the insurance bundle for a consumer
with even the lowest level of wealth is fairly “large.”The upshot is that the coverage of the treatment shifts
its demand curve su¢ ciently rightward that it makes sense for the innovator to serve the entire market even
in circumstances in which it would not have had the treatment not been covered.
Because V 0 equals the value of the treatment for the lowest wealth individual plus C (B C) , the innovator
I
captures the (appropriately reweighted) expected social value of the core medical services. The comparative
statics implication of this is that the treatment’s price under expanded insurance is higher the rarer the
illness for which the treatment is needed and the more valuable are the core medical services covered by the
insurance plan. But an even more fundamental implication is that the innovator’s pro…t-maximizing price
re‡ects the inclusive value of the insurance bundle, not just the stand-alone value of the treatment. Indeed,
we can show that, despite pricing to serve the entire market, the innovator’s optimal price is strictly greater
than the treatment’s value for all consumers.
Proposition 2 Suppose (11) holds so that inclusion of the treatment in the health insurance plan breaks
consumers’liquidity constraints. The pro…t-maximizing price of the treatment P is strictly greater than the
ci ) for all W
ci 2 [W
c; W
c + 1].
valuation of the treatment for each consumer in the population, i.e., P > v(W

2 6 In the Online Appendix, we consider the case in which D = D for all Q 2 [0; 1], as well as the more general case in
L
which the kink in the demand curve becomes potentially relevant. We demonstrate that our results on how insurance coverage
of the treatment a¤ects consumer welfare continue to hold in these cases (both with < 1 and
1 but su¢ ciently small so
that < 1 ).
I

14

Basic insurance Expanded insurance % di¤erence
($ 00,000)
($ 00,000)
Price of treatment
0:66
3:28
396%
Quantity of treatment 0:66
1:00
52%
Insurance premium
0:09
0:16
73%
Consumer surplus
2:88
0:44
85%
Producer pro…t
0:44
3:26
652%
Total surplus
3:32
3:72
12%
Table 1: Comparison of outcomes under basic and expanded insurance
Proposition 2 provides an economic rationale for the common claim that …rms in the pharmaceutical
sector set prices that exceed the value created by their products (Loftus, 2015; Walker, 2015). In Section 6
we present empirical evidence consistent with the implication of Proposition 2.
To illustrate the innovator’s pro…t-maximizing price— and to demonstrate that our assumptions do not restrict the model’s parameters in unrealistic ways— we present a “back-of-the-envelope”numerical illustration
of our model. All monetary units are in hundreds of thousand of dollars:
C = 1:50 (This is roughly the midpoint of estimates of the cost of coronary artery bypass surgery in
the U.S. in the early 2010s.)27
B = 2:25 (This implies a bene…t-cost ratio for core medical services of 1.5 to 1.)
c = 0:41 (This equals $33,000— 138 percent of the poverty line income for a family four in the U.S. in
W
2014, which is the point at which Medicaid eligibility phases out and ACA subsidy eligibility begins—
plus $8,000, the approximate value of ACA insurance subsidies for families at this income level.)
c + 1 = 1:41 (This is roughly the 90th percentile for household income in the U.S. in the 2010s.28 )
W

V = 1:025 (This assumes that the value of the treatment for the highest-income household is 2.5 times
as large as that household’s wealth.)
C = 0:06 and I = 0:02: (The ratio of these probabilities is roughly equal to the relative incidence of
heart attacks per year in the U.S.— 735,000— and cases of lung cancer in the U.S. each year— 210,828.)29

= 0:89 (In line with the Viscusi and Aldy (2003) evidence on the income elasticity of the value of
ci ) W
ci
W
life referenced above, is chosen to make dv(c
ci ) equal to 0.55 when evaluated at the mid-point
dW i v(W
of the wealth distribution, i.e., about $92,000).
C I
These parameter values satisfy Assumptions 1-4. They also satisfy W
1 I C (so there are no uninsured
buyers of the treatment) and condition (11) (so demand for health insurance is value constrained).
Table 1 summarizes the outcomes under basic and expanded insurance for this example. Coverage of
the treatment induces a large increase in its price (from $66; 000 to about $328; 000) and a correspondingly
large decrease in consumer surplus. The reduction in consumer surplus is more than o¤set by an increase
in the pro…ts of the innovator, and as a result total surplus goes up. We note that the highest valuation of
the treatment (i.e., V + ) is $191; 500, so the pro…t-maximizing price is more than 70 percent higher than

2 7 Coronary Artery Bypass Patient Education, Frequently Asked Questions, http://cabggroupproject.web.unc.edu/frequentlyasked-questions/ (accessed August 25, 2015).
2 8 Capping the income data in this way implicity rules out a situation where an innovator sets an implausibly high price that
would put insurance beyond the means of all but a few consumers in the top several percentiles of the income distribution.
2 9 In our model, the levels of these probabilities is more di¢ cult to pin down through back-of-the-envelope calculations since
the states in our model could encompass several di¤erent medical conditions.

15

the stand-alone value of the highest willingness-to-pay consumers and more than three times as large as the
stand-alone value of the lowest-valuation consumers.
As the next proposition shows, the property in this example that coverage of the treatment causes its
price to go up holds more generally.
Proposition 3 Suppose (11) holds so that inclusion of the treatment in the health insurance plan breaks
consumers’ liquidity constraints. Then P > P 0 i.e., the price of the treatment when it is covered by
insurance is greater than the price when it is not covered. When W 1, Q = Q0 , and when W < 1, Q >
Q0 , i.e., the quantity of the treatment when it is covered by insurance is at least as large as it is when the
treatment is not covered and it is strictly larger under when consumer wealth is su¢ ciently low.
As noted above, under expanded insurance all consumers receive the treatment and core medical services
when needed. For this reason, total surplus T S under expanded insurance must be at least as large as total
surplus T S 0 under basic insurance:
TS

T S0

T S(Q0 ; Y 0 )

= T S(Q ; Y )
= T S(1; 1)

T S(Q0 ; 1)

0;

)
since Q0 Q = 1; and @T S(Q;Y
=V +
Q > 0:
@Q
However, the impact of expanded insurance on consumer welfare is less obvious: while the quantity of
the treatment is at least as large under expanded insurance as it is under basic insurance, the price of
the treatment is strictly higher. Substituting (6) and (7) into (10) yields the consumer surplus when the
treatment is not covered:

CS 0

= CS(Q0 ; Y 0 ; P 0 )
8
>
C) <
C (B
+
=
>
I
:

V +
W +1
2

W

2

V +
W
4

3
4
W
2

1
2

! W
W

1
1

;

(13)

By contrast, consumer surplus when the treatment is covered is
CS = CS(1; 1; V 0 ) =

2

:

(14)

We can establish that consumers fare worse under expanded insurance than under basic insurance:
Proposition 4 Suppose (11) holds so that inclusion of the treatment in the health insurance plan breaks
consumers’ liquidity constraints. Then CS < CS 0 , i.e., consumer surplus is lower when the treatment is
covered by insurance than when it is not.
Table 2 summarizes the welfare e¤ects of expanded insurance compared to basic insurance. When W < 1
the quantity of the treatment purchased is higher under expanded insurance, but this o¤set by the negative
e¤ect on consumers of a higher price. As we see from Table 1 this impact can be quite large: consumer
surplus falls by 85 percent under expanded insurance, driven by a 396 percent increase in the price of the
treatment.
Just because aggregate consumer surplus falls does not mean that all consumers are worse o¤. When
W < 1, there will be consumers who do not purchase the treatment were it not covered. These consumers get
health insurance in both cases, so they obtain core medical services when needed, and when the treatment
16

Quantity of
Quantity of
treatment, Q Price, P core medical service, Y Total surplus, T S Consumer surplus, CS
W 1 Q0 = Q = 1
Higher
Same
Same
Lower
W < 1 Q0 < Q = 1
Higher
Same
Higher
Lower
Table 2: Comparison of price, quantity of treatment, quantity of basic medical services, consumer surplus,
and total surplus under basic and expanded insurance

Figure 6: Consumers with inclusive valuations located along line segment GB are better o¤ when the
treatment is covered by insurance, even though consumers are worse o¤ overall.

is covered, they also obtain the treatment when needed. Figure 6 illustrates this. Consumers with inclusive
valuations on line segment GB would not have bought the treatment were it not insured, but when the
treatment is insured they can a¤ord to purchase health insurance and accordingly obtain the treatment
when needed. The additional consumer surplus to these consumers is area KGB. However, this gain is more
than o¤set by the loss of surplus IJKH by consumers who would have purchased the treatment out-of-pocket
if it was not insured. Still, it is possible that coverage of the treatment could make all consumers worse o¤.
As noted in Proposition 3, when W 1 the number of consumers obtaining the treatment is the same as it
is when the treatment is not covered, but each consumer pays a higher price.
This discussion brings into sharp focus the distributional consequences of covering the treatment: it
transfers surplus from consumers with the highest valuations of the treatment— i.e., those with the highest
wealth— to the innovator, and potentially— when consumer wealth is su¢ ciently low— to consumers with
lowest valuations of the treatment and the lowest wealth.

3

Multiple innovators

Health insurance typically covers a host of services, including many innovative pharmaceutical products. In
this section, we consider the implications of multiple innovators, and we show that our analysis assuming
a single innovator puts a lower bound on the increase in price and decrease in consumer surplus due to

17

expansion of insurance coverage. We also show, in contrast to the single-innovator case, expanded insurance
covering multiple innovative treatments can result in lower total surplus than basic insurance.
Speci…cally, suppose that there are N distinct states in which a consumer can experience a di¤erent serious
illness, with each state having a probability NI . For each of these possible illnesses, there is a treatment that
provides an (identical) value Vi to consumer i should that state occur (and no value should any other state
occur). Given this speci…cation, the case of N = 1 reduces to the model above. The assumption that the
treatment provides consumer i the same value in each state is not terribly restrictive if we imagine that each
of the N possible illnesses would, if not treated, result in death. In this case, Vi is the value to consumer i
of prolonging his or her life.
Suppose the basic insurance plan covers none of the N treatments. In that case, the consumer liquidity
constraint determines the demand for each treatment in the state in which a treatment is needed. The
demand curve for each of the N treatments is thus identical to the demand curve for the single-innovator
case studied in the previous section, and as a result, under the basic insurance plan, each treatment’s
innovator sets the same price P 0 that a single innovator would set.
If, on the other hand, expanded insurance covers each of the N treatments, then given actuarially fair
insurance pricing, the net value of purchasing expanded insurance for consumer i is

PN

P

ci +
EUiI = W

C (B

C) +

I

(Vi

PA ) ;

PN

P

i
i
where PA = i=1
is the average price of all treatments, PA = i=1
. Continuing to assume that there
N
N
are no uninsured buyers of treatments, the demand curve for each individual treatment is D (PA ), which is,
as above, the lower envelope of the liquidity constraint and the value constraint. Throughout this section, we
continue to focus on the case in which (11) holds, and thus the demand curve for each individual treatment
is the value constraint.
Consider now the (symmetric) Nash equilibrium treatment price PN under expanded insurance when all
innovators set their prices simultaneously, and hereafter, let P1 denote the equilibrium price of the treatment
in the single-innovator case. (Recall P1 = V 0 .) We can show that this equilibrium price is no less than— and
for su¢ ciently large N , strictly greater than— P1 , and thus with N innovators, coverage of the treatment
results in higher treatment prices than would be the case if none of the treatments were covered.30

Proposition 5 Suppose (11) holds so that inclusion of the treatment in the health insurance plan breaks
consumers’liquidity constraints. There exists a critical number of innovators N > 1 such that for N N ,
> P1 > P 0 , i.e., when expanded insurance covers
PN = P1 > P 0 , and for N > N , PN = NN+1 V 0 +
multiple treatments, each treatment’s price is at least as high as it is in the single-innovator case and with
enough innovators, strictly higher. Moreover, the price of each treatment when they are covered by insurance
is greater than the price when they are not covered.
When N N , the quantity of each treatment demanded is no di¤erent than it is in the single-innovator
case, i.e., QN = 1. However, when N > N , the corresponding quantity is
QN = D (PN ) =

1 V0+
< 1;
N +1

3 0 As just noted, this proposition pertains to the case in which the demand curve for the treatment coincides with the value
constraint. In the Online Appendix, we show that this result extends more generally: it holds when the demand curve for the
treatment is the liquidity constraint, and it holds when the equilibrium with a single innovator occurs at the kink in the demand
curve.

18

i.e., not all consumers purchase expanded insurance and receive the treatments when needed. (Recall that in
the scenario under consideration— no uninsured purchases of treatments— the demand for expanded insurance
and the demand for the treatments are one in the same.) As N increases above N , the price of each treatment
rises and the quantity of each treatment goes down. In the limit, as N ! 1, each innovator sets a price
that approaches the inclusive value of the entire insurance bundle, but since the quantity of the treatments
goes to zero in this case, innovators end up realizing just a tiny fraction of this value.
The insurance bundle in this case has essentially given rise to Cournot’s complementary monopoly problem (Cournot 1927, Chapter IX). Though the model just sketched is special, the intuition is broader. Each
innovator, when considering raising the price of its treatment, raises the price of (actuarially fair) insurance
by just a fraction of the increment to the treatment price, but it decreases the demand not just for its own
treatment for all other services that the insurance bundle comprises. Thus, each innovator perceives itself
facing signi…cant “pricing room,” and the bigger the insurance bundle the more “room” it perceives. By
raising price, each innovator imposes a negative pecuniary externality on all other innovators. As a result,
each ends up setting a higher price than a single innovator would have.
Because the multiple innovator case entails at least as high a price as in the single-innovator case, it
is straightforward to show that consumer surplus in the multiple-innovator case is no greater than (and
sometimes lower) than it is in the single-innovator case.31 Consequently, in light of Proposition 4, expanded
insurance covering N treatments results in a lower consumer surplus than basic insurance.
Proposition 6 Suppose (11) holds so that inclusion of the treatment in the health insurance plan breaks
consumers’ liquidity constraints. Then CSN < CS 0 , i.e., consumer surplus under expanded insurance that
covers multiple treatments is less than consumer surplus under basic insurance.
Propositions 5 and 6 imply that our main results in the single-innovator case— higher price and lower
consumer surplus under expanded insurance than under basic insurance— hold with even more force when
we adapt of our model to the case of multiple innovators. It seems fair to say that our analysis with a single
innovator provides a best-case scenario for the impact of expanding insurance. In addition, these results
suggest that as the concentration of …rms in the innovative portion of the pharmaceutical market changes
this should directly a¤ect the prices charged for these products, with a lower concentration resulting in higher
prices.
There is, however, one important di¤erence between the multiple-innovator case and the single-innovator
case. In the single-innovator case, the innovator priced the product so that the entire market was served,
and as a result, it generated at least as much social surplus as was generated under basic insurance. This
does not necessarily hold when there are multiple treatments.
Proposition 7 Suppose (11) holds so that inclusion of the treatment in the health insurance plan breaks
b > 1, such that if N > N
b , T S < T S 0 , i.e., when the number
consumers’liquidity constraints. There exists N
N
of treatments is su¢ ciently large, total surplus under expanded insurance that covers multiple treatments is
less than total surplus under basic insurance.
In the single-innovator case, when Q0 < 1 under basic insurance, expanded insurance increases total
surplus by enlarging the set of consumers who have access to the treatment. It is true that consumers
pay a high price, but this is just a transfer between consumers and producers. However, the complementary
monopoly problem that arises with multiple innovators works against increasing access: each innovator raises
the price of its treatment by so much that (for N large enough) some individuals decide to forego expanded
3 1 This

is formally demonstrated in the proof of Proposition 6.

19

insurance coverage altogether. This results in fewer consumers receiving the treatments than would be the
case when the treatments are not covered, which in turn decreases total surplus.

4

Do the consumption smoothing bene…ts of insurance outweigh
the drop in consumer surplus under expanded insurance?

We have shown that consumer surplus under expanded insurance is less than consumer surplus under basic
insurance. But so far we have neglected the consumption smoothing bene…ts of insurance. Perhaps the ability
to better smooth consumption o¤sets the higher price that consumers e¤ectively pay for the treatment under
expanded insurance.
To explore this issue, we return to the single-innovator model and consider a simple speci…cation in
which the bene…t of consumption smoothing is given by the extent to which insurance reduces the variance
ci ). Under expanded insurance, the variance of consumption spending for
in consumption spending zi = z(W
ci
an individual consumer is zero: either a consumer obtains insurance and has a consumption level of W
P
32
c
in each state or does not obtain insurance and has consumption spending Wi in each state. By contrast,
under basic insurance it is straightforward to show
V ar(zi ) =

(

0
(1

I) I

xi = 0
P

0 2

xi = 1

:

That is, those who do not purchase the treatment have no variation in consumption spending (it is Wi
C C in all states), but for those that do purchase the treatment, the variance in consumption spending is
0 2
(1
. Aggregating across all consumers, we have
I) I P
Z

c ))dW
c = (1
V ar(zi (W

I) I

P0

2

Q0 :

Letting denote a coe¢ cient of risk aversion, the consumption smoothing bene…t of expanded insurance is
0 2 0
thus (1
Q .
I) I P
Using the numerical example in Table 1 as an illustrative example, the consumption smoothing bene…t
of expanded insurance is 0:0056 , while the reduction in consumer surplus is approximately 2:44. This
implies that coe¢ cient of risk aversion would need to be about 436 for the consumption-smoothing bene…ts
of expanded insurance to outweigh the reduction in consumer surplus, well outside the range of empirical
estimates of coe¢ cients of risk aversion.
Though the example is speci…c, the intuition is robust. The reduction in consumer surplus under expanded
insurance tends to be greatest when the probability I of the serious illness is smallest, for it is under these
conditions that the innovator enjoys the greatest degree of pricing power. But extending insurance to a rare
event smooths consumption only a little. This can seen explicitly in the calculations above, but the insight
would hold for a more general concave utility function.33
3 2 Recall in our model the implication of not having insurance in our model is the loss of a bene…t B in state 1 and V in
i
state 2. These can be thought of as avoided losses of income, and they are already counted as part of our consumer surplus
calculation.
3 3 A more complete analysis would take into account that the risk aversion of consumers would alter the pro…t-maximizing
price of insurance. But including that e¤ect in our analysis would almost certainly strengthen the claim because risk aversion
would strengthen the demand for expanded insurance, thus tending to increase P without changing P 0 , which would still be
determined by liquidity constraints..

20

5

Minimum coverage standards for health insurance

In the preceding analysis, we showed that coverage of the innovative treatment increases price and reduces
consumer surplus relative to the case in which the treatment is not covered. We can think of this analysis
as pertaining to a setting in which a treatment has recently been discovered. Our analysis sheds light on
whether the inclusion of a newly discovered treatment in health insurance formularies makes consumers
better o¤ when the innovator can exercise market power in the pricing of the treatment.
But we can use our model to study an additional issue. Suppose that coverage of the treatment arises
because insurers are mandated to do so through a minimum coverage standard (MCS). To study the impact
of these standards on consumers, the appropriate benchmark is not the case in which the treatment is not
covered by insurance. Rather, it is a setting in which consumers have the choice between a basic insurance
plan that does not cover the treatment or an expanded plan that does. A minimum coverage standard that
requires coverage of the treatment would rule out the choice of the basic plan, which means that insurance
bundles together the treatment and core medical services. By contrast, in the absence of a minimum standard,
the treatment and core medical services are unbundled.
Having already studied pricing of the treatment under expanded insurance, we now consider pricing of
the treatment when consumers can choose between the basic health insurance plan, the expanded health
insurance plan, or no insurance at all. Throughout we assume that the innovator sets a uniform price P — i.e.,
it does not discriminate between the price it charges a basic plan or an expanded plan, and the innovator is
assumed to set that price before consumers make their plan choice. We also focus on the single-innovator
case and maintain Assumptions 1-5.
Recall that in Proposition 1, we showed that when faced with a choice between the basic health insurance
plan and no insurance, all consumer choose the basic health insurance plan. Thus, the choice between the
basic health insurance plan, the expanded health insurance plan, or no insurance boils down to a choice
between the …rst two. For any given price P of the treatment, a consumer will choose the expanded plan if
EUiI EUiBI , where EUiBI and EUiI are given in (2) and (3).34 Since
EUiI

EUiBI

=

(

0
Vi

P

Wi P
;
Wi < P

(15)

consumers who could have a¤orded the treatment with just basic insurance are indi¤erent between basic
and expanded insurance, and consumers who could not have a¤orded the treatment when covered by basic
insurance but who value it strictly prefer expanded insurance to basic insurance. Demand for expanded
insurance will come from these groups of consumers provided that they can a¤ord it. That is, demand for
expanded health insurance comes from consumers whose (Wi ; Vi ) is such that
Wi

P or fWi < P and Vi

P

0g

P

0g

and
Wi

I P:

Because Vi > Wi , the set of consumers for whom
Wi

P or fWi < P and Vi

3 4 For simplicity, we assume that if a consumer is indi¤erent between the two options, it chooses expanded insurance. This
is actually without loss of generality. The demand for the treatment ends up being the same if indi¤erent consumers purchase
basic rather than expanded insurance.

21

is merely the set of consumers for whom Vi P
0.35 Thus, the demand for expanded insurance comes
from those for whom
Vi P 0 and Wi
(16)
IP .
The demand for the treatment in this case must be the same as the demand for expanded insurance. This
is because a consumer does not purchase expanded insurance because either Vi < P — the consumer does
not value the treatment— or because Wi < I P — the consumer cannot a¤ord expanded insurance, which in
turn implies that Wi < P , so the consumer cannot a¤ord the treatment given that basic insurance has been
purchased.
The demand curve for the treatment is thus the set of consumers for whom (16) holds. This is just the
lower envelope of the liquidity constraint DL schedule and the value constraint DI schedule but with the
latter evaluated at C = 0 (or, in other words, the demand curve D1 de…ned in (5) in Section 2.1.2). In
inverse form, the demand curve for the treatment is given by
Pb(Q) = min

W +1

Q

;V +

Q ; Q 2 [0; 1]:

I

The treatment demand curve has the same form as it does when the consumers only had the choice between
expanded insurance and no insurance, except that the “piece”corresponding to the value constraint contains
re‡ects just the incremental value of the treatment as opposed to the inclusive value of the expanded insurance bundle. This makes sense: when we unbundle insurance, the demand for the treatment is e¤ectively
determined at the margin, i.e., by its own incremental value.
The analysis of treatment pricing when minimum coverage standards are absent is identical to our earlier
analysis, but with C = 0. Reducing C in our earlier analysis has the e¤ect of shifting the value constraint
DI downward, which in turn makes it more likely that treatment pricing is value constrained rather than
liquidity constrained. This enables us to prove:
Proposition 8 Let Pb be the pro…t-maximizing price of the treatment when consumers can choose from a
basic health insurance plan and an expanded health insurance plan, and let P be the pro…t-maximizing
price of the treatment under MCS when consumers’ only insurance option is the expanded plan. Finally,
suppose (as above), I < 1 . Then Pb P , with the inequality holding strictly if under the MCS the pro…tmaximizing price occurs along the value constraint. That is, a MCS mandating that the treatment be covered
cannot decrease the price of the treatment and may increase it.
Because consumer choice is more limited under MCS and because the price of the treatment cannot go
down (and may go up), an immediate implication is that these features of an MCS reduces consumer welfare.
That being said, attempting to sell unbundled insurance products that each cover particular conditions or
sets of conditions may lead to a series of adversely selected risk pools. Therefore, when considering the
welfare e¤ects of an MCS we must weigh the potential e¢ ciency losses from this adverse selection against
the lost consumer welfare and higher treatment prices that exist in the bundled market. To our knowledge,
our paper is the …rst highlight a mechanism for consumer surplus losses from these coverage standards.
3 5 The

proof is as follows. If (Wi ; Vi ) is such that
Wi

P or fWi < P and Vi

P

0g ;

then it follows that Vi P
0. Conversely, if Vi P
0, then there are one of two possibilities: either Wi
the latter holds then for that set of consumers we have fWi < P and Vi P
0g.

22

P or Wi < P . If

6

The Role of Expanded Insurance on Drug Prices: Evidence from
Medicare Part D

Two important predictions of our model are that the existence of health insurance increases the pro…tmaximizing price and that the bundling of products into a single insurance bundle allows the monopoly
producer of an innovative product to capture more value than its product creates. Due to the widespread
adoption of health insurance, empirically documenting these e¤ects is di¢ cult. We attempt to overcome
these di¢ culties by focusing on the creation of Medicare Part D, which was the …rst widespread social
pharmaceutical insurance program for the elderly in the United States. Prior to this program, the only
social insurance for pharmaceuticals for seniors covered products administered in a medical setting such as a
physician’s o¢ ce or outpatient facility. These drugs were covered under Medicare Part B and included many
intravenous products.
To examine the implications of our model, we estimate the e¤ect of Medicare Part D on the launch prices
of oncology products— a category that has seen a relatively large number of innovative products released in
the years before and after the creation of Part D. In addition, oncology is a category that contains many
intravenous products covered by Part B prior to the creation of Part D. The enabling legislation for the
creation of Medicare Part D was passed in late 2003 and seniors were …rst able to sign up for coverage as
of 2006. Unlike the traditional Medicare program, coverage under Part D was provided by private insurers
whose expenses were subsidized. Given that private insurers can make determinations about which drugs will
be included on their formularies, the program contains a number of regulations regarding what drugs and drug
classes must be covered by a plan. For example, Part D plans must provide coverage for all diseases for which
there are existing treatments. In addition, for each drug class, an insurer must provide at least two options
that are chemically distinct (unless there is only one existing option a class). For six particular protected
classes (immunosuppressant, antidepressant, antipsychotic, anticonvulsant, antiretroviral, and antineoplastic
products) the insurer must cover “all or substantially all” drugs in the class. In addition, they may not use
any step therapy or prior authorization measures for patients that are already taking the drug with the
burden of proof being on the insurer to show a patient was not previously taking the drug (Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2014). Finally, products that were covered under Part B were intended to
be broadly una¤ected by the new coverage o¤ered under Part D.
Several features of Part D provide an opportunity for empirically examining the implications of our model
with respect to oncology (i.e. antineoplastic) products. First, the expansion increased the share of elderly
Americans with drug coverage by 10 percentage points (Engelhart and Gruber, 2010). For these newly
insured individuals, Part D broke the liquidity constraint for expensive drugs such as oncology products.
Second, the creation of protected classes guaranteed that all new oncology products would be included in a
bundle with products that are sold in more competitive markets. This is explicitly true for enrollees in Part
D, but these new regulations also likely in‡uenced coverage decisions in the private market where insurers
often follow Medicare’s policies because of a variety of factors such as litigation risk (Bagley, Chandra, and
Frakt, 2015).36 This forced bundle allows us to examine the prediction that a …rm producing an innovative
product that is bundled with more competitively priced products can capture more than the valued created
by its product.
Duggan and Scott Morton (2010) examined the e¤ect of Medicare Part D on all drug prices and found that
the newly insured paid lower prices for all medications. The mechanism underlying this result is that private
3 6 For

example, in May 2015 Anthem Blue Cross-Blue Shield was sued for denying a claim for an expensive hepatitisC treatment that it deemed was not medically necessary given the sickness of the patient (Pfei¤er, 2015). Similarly, state
Medicaid system in several states face legal liability for their e¤orts to limit access to the same treatment (Kardish, 2014).

23

insurers could negotiate price discounts that the uninsured were unable to previously obtain. However, this
price e¤ect was quite heterogeneous and, consistent with the predictions of our model, in situations where
insurers were either required (because of the protected class regulations) or e¤ectively required (because of
a small number of products in the class) to cover all products, the passage of Part D was estimated to either
increase or have no e¤ect on the average prices paid by newly insured consumers. We focus our analysis on
the launch prices charged in one of these protected classes and implement a di¤erent identi…cation strategy
that exploits the fact that many oncology products previously had insurance coverage under Medicare’s Part
B medical bene…t. In contrast to previous work we also consider the survival-adjusted price of products
which serves as an indicator of the amount of value captured by producers.
Given our interest in how the presence and structure of insurance programs impacts the prices charged by
innovators (i.e. those products for which there are limited opportunities for consumer or insurer substitution)
we focus our attention on oncology products that were required to be covered under Part D. In accordance
with our model, we expect that the passage of Part D should have two e¤ects on this market. First, there
should be an increase in prices for products, such as oncology, that are used by individuals that are covered
by Part D. Second, because of the forced bundling and protected class status the producers of oncology
products should be better able to sell their products for more than the value that they create.
We begin by noting that prices have been rising in oncology in general over the last two decades. For
example, Howard et al. (2015) documents that the in‡ation and survival-adjusted prices for newly released
oncology products increased by 10 percent per year from 1995 –2013. Using the same data from this study,
we examine the relationship between the passage of Medicare Part D and rising survival-adjusted oncology
prices.37 These data contain the launch prices for 58 oncology products that were approved for sale by
the FDA between 1995 and 2013 that were initially approved for cancer treatment and were intended for
a¤ecting survival rather than alleviating symptoms. In addition, drugs are only included in these data if
there are clear estimates of their survival bene…t –which is important for determining the value created by
the product as well as a quality adjusted measure of prices. The launch price is “episode treatment price”
which is the monthly price paid by Medicare multiplied by the typical treatment duration. More detail on
these pricing data are available in Howard et al. (2015).
Figure 7 contains the resulting scatter plot and …tted curve from a locally weighted regression of price
on the year of FDA approval for the oncology products in our sample. This shows that the price increase
over the entire sample identi…ed in Howard et al. (2015) is composed of relatively ‡at and stable trend from
1995 –2003 and rapidly increasing price increases in the years following.
This pattern is consistent with our model’s prediction that pro…t-maximizing prices are higher when a
greater share of potential customers have insurance. To further examine this relationship, we exploit the
fact that not all oncology products were covered by the passage of Part D. Unlike other pharmaceutical
categories, many oncology products are administered in a physician’s o¢ ce or hospital setting. As a result,
these products are covered (and have always been covered) under Medicare Part B.38 Figure 8 contains the
average launch price per year for oncology products based on whether they were covered by either Medicare
Part B or Part D. The solid line represents the log of the average price for products that were covered (or
eventually covered) by Part D. Between 1995 and the passage of Part D in 2003, there were 8 oncology
products that were generally not covered under Part B but would eventually be covered under Part D.
3 7 We

are grateful to Rena Conti for granting us permission to use these data.
work has used the share spending for the disease category that is eligible for Medicare coverage. For most drugs,
this is a good approximation of the e¤ect of expanded Part D coverage. However, a disproportionately large fraction of oncology
products are eligible for coverage under Part B. One strategy would be to estimate a triple di¤erence model that exploits both
the share of patients over 65 and the Part B coverage status. Given that that there are only 58 oncology products released
over the 18 year period in our sample, splitting the data along both of these dimensions is too demanding.
3 8 Previous

24

Figure 7: Prices of new oncology products, 1995-2015.

Overall, the prices for these products were far below the average prices of drugs of the 12 products released
over this time that were covered by Part B— represented by the dashed line. In addition, prior to the passage
of Part D the trend in prices is generally ‡at and similar across the two groups of drugs. The only exception
to this pattern is 2001, the year in which Gleevec received FDA approval. Following the passage of Part D,
there is an immediate sudden increase in the average launch price of Part D oncology products. As a result,
after the 2006 implementation of Part D the two sets of products had very similar prices.
There could be a concern that the higher prices for products that were released after the passage of Part
D simply re‡ect a technological shift in which oral chemotherapy products became more e¤ective and thus
the higher prices were a refection of this greater value. Figure 9 contains the average prices per life year
gained by Part D coverage status and year. Prior to 2003, the Part D products had an average (median)
price per life year gained of approximately $52,500 ($11,000). In comparison, the intravenous oncology
products covered by Part B that were released prior to 2004 had an average (median) life year gained of
$100,000 ($70,700). Following the passage of Part D there was a marked increase in the prices for both sets
of products. However, this increase was far greater for products that were covered by Part D and resulting
in near parity in their survival adjusted launch prices. After 2004 the average (median) price per life year
gained for Part D products was $176,000 ($153,000), and for Part B products it was $172,000 ($147,000).
These …gures suggests two reactions to the passage of Medicare Part D. First, the manufacturers of oral
chemotherapy products increased their prices. Second, these manufacturers were now able to command
prices that exceeded many estimates of the value that they create. To more systematically examine these
outcomes, we estimate the following di¤erence-in-di¤erences regression model:
yit =

+

t

+

Xi +

1

IfP art Dgi +

2

IfP art Di g IfP ostP artDgt + "it ;

where yit are a set of di¤erent measures of launch prices, t are a series of year …xed e¤ects, Xi are a series of
product speci…c market characteristics, IfP artDgi is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 if the oncology

25

Log of the Average Price

6

4

2

0
1995

2000

2005
Launch Year
Part D

2010

2015

Part B

Figure 8: Average Launch Prices for Oncology Products by Medicare Coverage Status and Year, 1995-2013

Price Per Life Year Gained (000)

400

300

200

100

0
1995

2000

2005
Launch Year
Part D

2010

2015

Part B

Figure 9: Average Launch Price Per Life Year Gained for Oncology Products by Medicare Coverage Status
and Year, 1995-2013

26

product is covered by Part D, IfP ost P art Dgt is an indicator variable equal to 1 for years after 2003, and
"it is an idiosyncratic error term. The coe¢ cient of interest is 2 which represents the change in the average
prices for oncology products covered by Part D after the passage of the insurance expansion compared to
oncology products covered by Part B.
Table 3 contains the estimates for a variety of spending outcomes. For each outcome we present the
results from a model without any covariates, those from a model with product characteristics, and …nally
one with both product characteristics and disease …xed e¤ects. The …rst three columns of Table 3 contain
the estimates for the outcome of the log of the average price. Across all three speci…cations, the passage
of Part D is associated with a large increase in the average launch price of oncology products that were
covered by that program compared to drugs that were covered under Part B. For example, the coe¢ cient in
column (3) implies that the passage of Part D is associated with an approximately 420 percent increase in
the average launch price of a¤ected oncology products.
The coe¢ cients in columns (4)-(6) of Table 3 estimate the change in price per life year gained in the years
following the passage of Part D. The estimate in column (4) without any product or market covariates is
roughly similar in magnitude to the estimate for the change in the log price in column (3). The coe¢ cient in
column (6) suggests that the passage of Part D was responsible for a 175 percent increase (p-value = 0.062)
in the price per life year gained for covered products compare to products that were covered under Medicare
Part B. While the estimated changes in both the average price and average price per life year gained are
large, note that they are broadly in line with the estimate in our canonical example in Table 1.
We next examine the question of whether the Passage of Part D allowed manufacturers to capture more
value than their products create. Conducting such an analysis requires de…ning the value created by these
products. During the debate about the passage of Part D there was considerable discussion about the cost
of the program and many suggested that the government should implement a cost e¤ectiveness measure.
At the time, a commonly discussed threshold was between $50,000 and $100,000 per quality adjusted life
year, with this number based on treatments that were currently being provided to dialysis patients (Millick,
2004). More recent work has estimated that dialysis treatment is valued at approximately $129,000 per
quality adjusted life year and $62,000 per life year (Lee, Chertow, and Zenios, 2009). The estimates in Table
4 examine the change in the share of products that are above these two thresholds. The estimates related
to the threshold of $50,000 per life year suggest a large increase in the share of products over this threshold
for those products covered by Part D compared to oncology products covered under Part B. The estimated
e¤ect ranges from an approximately 64 percent increase (p-value = 0.004) in the model with no covariates
to an increase of approximately 43 percent (p-value = 0.128) in the model with both controls for product
characteristics and disease …xed e¤ects. The estimates related to the share of products over $100,000 are
large in magnitude but statistically insigni…cant across all three speci…cations.
While these estimated e¤ects are for only one product class and change in coverage, they provide strong
suggestive evidence of the e¤ects predicted by our model. Following the insurance expansion and the forced
bundle, the monopoly producers of oncology products were able to increase prices and capture far more value
than they could when facing a market with less insurance and more ‡exibility regarding the composition of
the insurance bundle.

7

The Role of Insurance in Recent High Drug Prices

While our results regarding the prices of oncology products following the passage of Part D show a sharp
increase in those prices following 2003, a second clear pattern is the rising prices of all oncology products in

27

28
0:732
58

1:966
(0:462)
2:07
(0:6)

0:744
58

Log Price
1:691
(0:587)
1:883
(0:69)
0:0004
(0:004)
0:407
(0:436)
0:023
(0:288)
0:27
(0:57)
0:017
(0:028)
0:008
(0:418)
0:084
(0:278)
0:941
58

1:988
(0:452)
1:663
(0:559)
0:008
(0:006)
0:855
(0:507)
0:027
(0:436)
0:097
(0:558)
0:01
(0:121)
0:057
(0:301)
0:013
(0:39)
0:811
58

1:746
(0:332)
1:638
(0:383)

0:863
58

0:93
58

1:232
(0:44)
1:009
(0:505)
0:002
(0:006)
0:794
(0:454)
0:449
(0:315)
0:273
(0:488)
0:174
(0:136)
0:015
(0:295)
0:0392
(0:329)

Disease FE?
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
Table 3: Di¤erence-in-Di¤erences Estimates of the Change in Prices of Oncology Products After the Passage of Medicare Part D. p-value < 0.1,
< 0.05,
p-value < 0.001.

r2
N

Biologic

Priority

No. of competitors

Orphan

Line

I{Combination Regimen}

Deaths

I{Part D}*I{Year > 2003}

I{Part D}

Log Price
per Life Year
Gained
1:605
(0:386)
1:59
(0:407)
0:003
(0:002)
0:594
(0:261)
0:238
(0:174)
0:133
(0:23)
0:037
(0:011)
0:117
(0:306)
0:075
(0:254)

p-value

29
0:835
58

0:643
(0:209)
0:643
(0:209)

0:895
58

0:918
58

0:274
(0:284)
0:433
(0:27)
:002
(0:003)
0:361
(0:253)
0:043
(0:111)
0:12
(0:171)
0:05
(0:06)
0:176
(0:119)
0:146
(0:133)
0:666
58

0:143
(0:162)
0:22
(0:21)

0:747
58

Price
over $100k
per Life Year
0:013
(0:134)
0:254
(0:187)
0:0005
(0:001)
0:48
(0:175)
0:082
(0:137)
0:06
(0:133)
0:005
(0:008)
0:057
(0:112)
0:062
(0:117)
0:899
58

0:05
(0:148)
0:183
(0:2)
0:0008
(0:003)
0:281
(0:325)
0:072
(0:306)
0:226
(0:301)
0:08
0:061
0:108
(0:145)
0:144
(0:178)

Disease FE?
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
Table 4: Di¤erence-in-Di¤erences Estimates of the Change in Share of Oncology Products Above Price Thresholds After the Passage of Medicare Part
D. p-value < 0.1, p-value < 0.05,
p-value < 0.001.

r2
N

Biologic

Priority

No. of competitors

Orphan

Line

I{Combination Regimen}

Deaths

I{Part D}*I{Year > 2003}

I{Part D}

Price
over $50k
per Life Year
0:446
(0:195)
0:564
(0:194)
0:0004
(0:0007)
0:29
(0:127)
0:019
(0:053)
0:145
(0:071)
0:008
(0:005)
0:125
(0:068)
0:042
(0:061)

recent years. An open question is why has there been such a large increase in recent years for products covered
by Part B. In addition, we note that these high prices have not been limited to oncology products. Over the
last decade there has been increased attention on the high prices charged for new pharmaceuticals, peaking
with the release of Sovaldi, Gilead’s cure for hepatitis C. Sovaldi was initially priced at approximately $84,000
per course of treatment and was part of a wave of new specialty pharmaceutical products that cost upwards
and in excess of $100,000 per course of treatment. In addition to these highly priced new drugs, several small
companies have recently acquired generic drugs and dramatically increased their prices. Perhaps the most
highly discussed of these is Turing Pharmaceuticals, which bought the production facilities for Daraprim in
August, 2015 and immediately raised the price from $13.50 to $750 per pill (Pollack, 2015). This strategy
of price increases following the acquisition of existing products has also been seen for other companies such
as Valeant Pharmaceuticals and Mallinckrodt Plc (Rocko¤ and Silverman, 2015).
It is di¢ cult to …nd a simple explanation for these unprecedented prices and recent price increases.
For example, one might attribute price increases to Part D, but the price data on oncology products show
recent high prices for drugs covered by Part B. And while the A¤ordable Care Act was passed in 2009 and
implemented fully in 2014, many of these high prices preceded this insurance expansion. Therefore, it seems
unlikely that these insurance expansions, on their own, could explain the recent rise in drug prices.
During this same time period there have also been changes in market structure that, in combination with
the changes in insurance programs, provide a possible explanation for these price increases. As recently as
a decade ago, a large fraction of the highest grossing drug products in the United States was marketed by
a relatively small number of large …rms. This has changed dramatically over the last decade. Today, many
…rms, including several relative newcomers, sell just a handful of drugs. Figure 10 contains the HHI based
on worldwide sales for the top 200 pharmaceuticals in every …ve years from 1998-2013. From 1998 to 2003,
the market concentration among these products remains markedly similar. However, over the next …ve years
there is a steep drop in the HHI which remains approximately the same through 2013. A similar pattern
can be seen in Figure 11, which contains the percentage of worldwide sales in the top 200 for the average
…rm with a product that is among the top 10 grossing worldwide.
This shift has been driven both by expiring patents for high-selling drugs from large manufacturers and
the introduction of new drugs by …rms with a far smaller portfolio of products. Consider that in 1998, P…zer
had the 4th, 7th, and 8th highest grossing drugs while Merck had the 2nd and 5th. In that year Merck
accounted for 11.8 percent of top 200 sales, P…zer accounted for 9.7 percent, and the average market share
for a …rm with a top 10 grossing pharmaceutical was 6.7 percent. By 2013, each of these …rms had only one
top 10 drug and only Roche had more than one drug in the top 10. As a result, in 2013 the top 200 market
share of these …rms had fallen to less than 6 percent, Roche had the highest share of the top 200 that year
accounted at 6.2 percent, and the average market share of a …rm with a top 10 grossing drug was only 4.6
percent. As large …rms left the top 10, they were often replaced by far smaller competitors.
These data document the increased fragmentation of drug sales. In addition, a shift in the research
and development strategy of pharmaceutical …rms has increasingly meant that drugs under production at
the largest pharmaceutical …rms began their life at smaller companies. Rocko¤ (2014) notes that from
2002-2012, the percentage of drugs under development by the top 10 pharmaceutical …rms that began at
another company increased from 16 percent to 33 percent. Smaller companies that receive royalties from
their discoveries would be unlikely to worry about any negative externalities from high prices. This e¤ectively
further fragments the industry.
Our model of pharmaceutical pricing for an insured population suggests that the simultaneous occurrence
of these two phenomena— higher prices and smaller …rms— is no mere coincidence. Nor is the timing of the

30

Figure 10: HHI for the top 200 highest selling drugs. Note: drug pricing data are taken from the MedAd
News annual list of top 200 selling pharmaceuticals. Sales data are included for the …rm with marketing
rights (either sole or partnership) in the United States.

Figure 11: Average market share of the top 200 for a …rm with a top 10 drug. Note: drug pricing data are
taken from the MedAd News annual list of top 200 selling pharmaceuticals. Sales data are included for the
…rm with marketing rights (either sole or partnership) in the United States.

31

price spikes, coming shortly after the implementation of Medicare Part D. Recall that our model identi…es
two demand constraints on drug pricing. First, drug makers must consider the value that is created by
their new drug. Second, they must consider the degree to which their price will make the bundled insurance
product too expensive for some customers. This second constraint suggests that high prices charged by one
…rm can generate a negative externality on the sales of other drugs. This occurs through a decrease in the
potential market of insured customers who, in the absence of insurance, would be liquidity constrained with
respect to their purchases of high value drugs. As we note in Section 3, when multiple innovative products
are sold by di¤erent …rms, as is the case in the current market for speciality pharmaceuticals, prices will be
weakly higher and if there are enough products total surplus will decrease as consumers decline to purchase
the insurance bundle. This results from …rms failing to internalize the e¤ect of their price on the demand
for the insurance bundle. As a result, drug makers acting in their own self-interest may set individual prices
that exceed the prices that maximize industry pro…ts. However, our model suggests that a market dominated
by a few large …rms with extensive product portfolios should have internalized more of the e¤ect of their
pricing decision for new products on the a¤ordability of the insurance bundle and/or perhaps even behaved
in an implicitly collusive fashion to hold the line on large price increases (Ellison and Wolfram, 2006).39 In
contrast, the increased fragmentation of the drug market should result in higher prices, even if we hold the
size of the insured population constant.
Consistent with this model, note that Gilead, the marketer of Sovaldi, had only 3.6 percent of top 200
sales in 2014 (compared to a mean for a top 10 grossing …rm of approximately 4.6 percent). Most of these
sales were for Sovaldi, and the …rm averaged approximately 1 percent of top 200 sales per year in preceding
…ve years. Similarly, Turing Pharmaceuticals, the …rm that acquired and raised the price of Daraprim has
only been in existence for one year and has only two FDA approved products in its portfolio.
The expansions in insurance coverage resulting from Medicare Part D and the ACA would only exacerbate
the incentive for price increases resulting from a fragmented pharmaceutical market. This is both because
of the increase in the size of the insurance population and the increased bundling of drugs under a single
insurance product further encourages higher pricing. For example, Medicare Part D requires coverage of all
new cancer drugs as well as drugs in several other classes. Private insurers often follow Medicare’s lead, for
reasons that are not clear. The combination of a fragmented market and bundled coverage may have created
a perfect storm of incentives for sky high prices. While further empirical work would be required to establish
causality and magnitudes of these e¤ects, they are quite suggestive of an unexplored channel to explain the
recent rise in drug prices.

8

Conclusions

While health insurance bears many similarities to more traditional …nancial insurance products, it also conveys the important bene…t of breaking the liquidity constraint that many consumers face when attempting to
purchase costly but valuable medical goods and services, including high priced pharmaceutical treatments.
Previous work has asserted that this increase in access represents a bene…t for consumers. However, our
results, which endogenize the prices charged by the monopoly manufacturers of high value products, demonstrate that consumers may actually enjoy less consumer surplus, even in the absence of moral hazard. This
occurs because insurance allows …rms to more fully price out the expected bene…ts that their drugs generate
for consumers, charging prices that may be far higher than what they would select if patients had to pay the
3 9 Note

that this economic externality e¤ect is distinct from, but has the same implications as, the oft heard claim that drug
makers keep prices low simply to avoid the prospects of price regulation.

32

entire price of their drugs out of pocket. This not only reduces consumer surplus, it may also reduce total
surplus if some consumers are liquidity constrained from purchasing insurance. Thus, regulations requiring
insurers to provide coverage for all new high-value products, such as the minimum insurance de…nition of
the ACA, can decrease consumer surplus and, potentially, decrease total surplus.
We also explore the traditional bundling of pharmaceutical insurance with insurance for other medical
services, and …nd that bundling allows monopolist drug makers to charge prices that exceed the value created
by their products. The manufacturers of innovative products must still price according to a downward sloping
demand curve; however, they make their pricing decision with the knowledge that they will be bundled with
products that provide a large amount of consumer surplus. Bundling allows the innovators to capture value
that is created by more competitively priced products and services. This may explain why some the prices
of some drugs seem to exceed their expected value without relying on consumer inattention, asymmetric
information, or moral hazard. While regulations establishing minimum quality standards for insurance and
stipulations about what pharmaceutical products must be included on a formulary can plausibly create
consumer surplus gains, our results show that these must be weighed against losses that come from these
pricing dynamics.
It is important to note that drug makers only bene…t from the access motive while their drug is under
patent. While our model considers only this time period, it is clear that following the expiration of a patent
the decrease in prices resulting from the entry of generic competitors would transfer surplus from producers
to consumers. This reminds us that the vast majority of a drug maker’s pro…ts accrue in the period before
patent expiration. Any policy that would address the pricing dynamics that we discuss, such as policies to
unbundle drug coverage, could therefore have a dramatic impact on pro…ts, and this, in turn, might have
unintended consequences for innovative activity. Previous research has shown that pharmaceutical research
and development e¤orts are correlated with expected pro…ts (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004; Finkelstein, 2004;
Blume-Kohut and Sood, 2012; Dranove, Garthwaite, and Hermasillo, 2014). To fully understand the welfare
dynamics of the access motive of insurance, future work should consider whether increased pro…ts (and
lost consumer surplus) while the drug is manufactured by a monopoly producer provide the appropriate
incentives for products that could have large welfare bene…ts after patent expiration. This would involve
understanding both the innovators response to pro…ts and the longevity of the welfare bene…ts of new
products in comparison the e¤ective patent period. In addition, while there may be worries that attempts at
price controls in pharmaceuticals will be welfare reducing through reduced innovation, our results suggest that
some existing regulations may provide incentives for innovation that are themselves not welfare maximizing
because they are based on prices that exceed value.

9

Appendix

Derivation of expected utilities from purchasing insurance:
To determine the expected utility from purchasing and not purchasing insurance, we work backwards.
Let’s …rst consider someone who does not purchase health insurance (of either kind, basic or expanded).
If this individual does not become ill and does not need core medical services, the consumer problem
ci , resulting in utility uN I (s = 0) = W
ci .
is trivial: the individual sets xi = yi = 0 and zi = W
i

If the individual does not become ill but needs core medical services, the individual’s problem is:
max Byi + zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:

P xi + Cyi + zi
33

ci :
W

ci W
c +1 < C, so the individual is liquidity constrained
Clearly, xi = 0: Moreover, by Assumption 2, W
I
from buying core medical services, and the individual must set yi = 0, resulting in utility level uN
i (s =
ci :
1) = W
If this individual does become ill, the individuals’s utility maximization problem is:
max Vi xi + zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:

ci :
W

P xi + Cyi + zi

ci < P , the individual is liquidity constrained from purchasing the treatment.
Clearly, yi = 0. Now, if W
ci , and the individual’s utility is W
ci : If W
ci P , the individual
In this case, xi = 0, yi = 0, and zi = W
is not liquidity constrained from purchasing the treatment, and thus the individual could potentially
ci , so W
ci
purchase the treatment. By Assumption 1, Vi > W
P implies that Vi P > 0, so the
ci P , and utility W
ci +Vi P .
individual will, in fact, purchase the treatment, resulting in xi = 1, zi = W
Thus, when the individual does become ill, his utility is
I
c
uN
i (s = 2) = Wi + (Vi

Thus expected utility from not purchasing insurance is
EU N I

=

(1
ci +
= W

P ):

NI
I )ui (s

C
I

ci
P ) 1(W

I
= 0) + C uN
i (s = 1) +
ci P ):
P ) 1(W

(Vi

NI
I ui (s

= 2)

which is the expression in (1).
Next, consider the problem of someone who purchased the basic health insurance plan at premium
We note that given Assumption 3, this option is available to all consumers.

C C.

If the individual does not become ill and does not need core medical services, the individual’s utility
maximization problem is:
max zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:
ci
Clearly, xi = 0, yi = 0, zi = W

C C,

P xi + zi

ci
W

c
so uBI
i (s = 0) = Wi

C C:
C C.

If the individual does not become ill but needs core medical services, the individual’s utility maximization
problem is:
max Byi + zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:
ci
In this case, xi = 0, yi = 1, zi = W

C C,

P xi + zi

ci
W

C C:

c
so uBI
i (s = 0) = Wi + B

C C.

If the individual does become ill, the individual’s problem is:

max Vi xi + zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:

P xi + zi

ci
W

C C:

ci
In this contingency, we must distinguish between two cases: If W
C C < P , the individual will be
liquidity constrained and will not be able to purchase the treatment. For such an individual, xi = 0 and
ci
c
c
zi = W
P , the
C C, and that individual gets utility Wi
C C. On the other hand, if Wi
CC
individual can a¤ord to purchase the treatment. The individual will purchase the treatment provided
ci
ci
Vi P > 0. Now, note that W
P implies W
CC
C C + P > P , and since by Assumption
c
c
1, Vi > Wi , it follows that Wi
P implies that Vi P > 0, so the individual will, in fact, purchase
34

ci
the treatment. This results in zi = W
individual does become ill, his utility is

ci
P , and utility W

CC

c
uBI
i (s = 2) = Wi

CC

+ (Vi

CC

ci
P ) 1(W

CC

BI
C ui (s

= 1) +

+ Vi

P . Thus, when the

P ):

Thus, expected utility from purchasing the basic health insurance plan is
EU BI

=

(1
ci +
= W

BI
I )ui (s

C
C (B

= 0) +

C) + (Vi

ci
P ) 1(W

CC

BI(
(s
I ui

= 2)

P ):

Finally, let’s consider the utility maximization problem of someone who has purchased the expanded
insurance plan that covers the treatment and whose premium is C C + I P . We note that for this to be
ci
feasible given the consumer’s budget constraint, it must be the case that that W
CC + IP .
If the individual does not become ill and does not need core medical services, the individual’s utility
maximization problem is
max zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:
ci
Clearly, xi = 0, yi = 0, zi = W
ci
W
CC
IP .

CC

zi
IP ,

ci
W

CC

I P:

and this gives the individual a utility level uIi (s = 0) =

If the individual does not become ill but needs core medical services, the individual’s utility maximization problem is
max Byi + zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:

zi

ci
W

CC

I P:

ci
Clearly, xi = 0, yi = 1, zi = W
CC
I P : the individual consumes the core medical services he is
insured for and does not purchase the (unneeded) treatment. This gives the individual a utility level
ci + B
uIi (s = 1) = W
CC
IP .
If the individual does become ill, the individual’s problem is

max Vi xi + zi

xi ;yi ;zi

subject to:

zi

ci
W

CC

ci
Clearly, xi = 1, yi = 0, zi = W
CC
I P : the individual obtains the treatment for free and
does not purchase the (unneeded) core medical services. This gives the individual a utility level
ci + Vi
uIi (s = 2) = W
CC
IP .

Thus, if the purchases the health insurance plan at premium
by

I P:

EUiI

=

(1
ci +
W

C
C (B

I
I )ui (s

= 0) +

C) +

I

(Vi

I
C ui (s

CC

+

= 1) +

IP ,

expected utility EUiI is given

I(
I ui (s

= 2)

P):

Note that all individuals who purchase expanded insurance purchase the treatment if they become ill.
Proof of Proposition 1:
There are three relevant cases to consider:
ci
W
ci +
W

CC
C (B

ci
P , or equivalently, W
P +
ci + I (Vi
C) + I (Vi P ) > W

> P . For a consumer in this situation, EUiBI =
P ) = EUiN I . The consumer would buy basic health

CC

35

insurance. (Note: by Assumption 3, the basic plan is a¤ordable to this set of consumers and indeed all
consumers). Moreover, the consumer can a¤ord to purchase the treatment if he becomes ill (because
ci
ci > P implies Vi > P ). Note that the consumer is
W
P ) and will do so (because W
CC
strictly better o¤ purchasing basic health insurance than not. This is, ultimately, due to the fact that
basic insurance breaks the liquidity constraint on purchases of core medical services, a consequence of
Assumptions 2 and 3.
ci < P . For a consumer in this situation EU BI = W
ci + C (B C) > W
ci = EU N I . The consumer
W
i
i
ci < P < P + C C, and thus W
ci
would buy basic health insurance. However, because W
C C < P , the
consumer would be unable to a¤ord to purchase the treatment if he becomes ill and thus will not do.
(Note: this would also have been the case if the consumer had not purchased basic health insurance.)
ci < P + C C. For a consumer in this situation, EU BI = W
ci + C (B C) and EU N I =
P
W
i
i
ci + I (Vi P ): A consumer in this situation who purchases basic insurance can a¤ord core medical
W
services if he needs them, but he cannot a¤ord the treatment if he becomes ill. On the other hand,
if the consumers does not purchase basic insurance, he cannot a¤ord core medical services if he needs
them, but he can a¤ord to purchase the treatment if he becomes ill. To determine consumer choice in
this case note that
EUiBI

EUiN I

=
>

C (B

C)
C)

C (B

>
C (B
> 0;

C)

I (Vi

P)

Vi
c + 1)
v(W

where the last inequality follows from Assumption 4. Thus, a consumer in this situation purchases
basic health insurance, but if he becomes ill, he will be unable to a¤ord to purchase the treatment.
Derivation of the demand curve for the treatment under expanded health insurance:
From (3) a consumer’s expected utility if he purchases expanded health insurance that covers the treatment is
ci + C (B C) + I (Vi P ) ;
EUiI = W
(17)
while his expected utility if he does not purchase health insurance is:
ci +
EUiN I = W

I

(Vi

ci
P ) 1(W

P ):

(18)

ci
We …rst show that individuals who can a¤ ord to purchase expanded insurance— W
C C + I P , or
C
(B
C).
equivalently, Wi
P
—
do
indeed
purchase
if
and
only
if
V
P
i
I
I
C
Proof that if Vi P
(B C), then individuals who can a¤ ord expanded insurance purchase it:
I
Individuals who can a¤ord to purchase expanded insurance make their decision by evaluating EUiI
C
C
EUiN I . If Vi P
(B C), there are two possibilities: either Vi P or P > Vi P
(B C). When
I
I
Vi P;
ci P )] > 0;
EUiI EUiN I = C (B C) + I (Vi P ) [1 1(W
h
i
C
ci P )
because C (B C) > 0; 1 1(W
0; and by assumption Vi P 0: If P > Vi P
(B C),
I
N
I
ci , and thus EU
ci and
then we also have P > Vi > W
=W
i

EUiI

EUiN I =

C (B

C) +

I

(Vi

P)

0;

C
where the inequality follows because Vi P
(B C).
I
C
Proof that if individuals who can a¤ ord expanded insurance purchase it, then Vi P
(B C):
I
Suppose, to the contrary, that individuals who can a¤ord to insurance do purchase it, but Vi < P
C
ci < P , since W
ci < Vi . Using (17) and (18) we then
(B C). This implies Vi < P , which in turn implies W
I
have
EUiI EUiN I = C (B C) + I (Vi P ) < 0;

36

C
where the inequality follows from the contrapositive assumption Vi < P
(B C). But this contradicts
I
our premise that individuals who can a¤ord insurance purchase it.
ci
Now consider consumers for whom expanded insurance is not a¤ordable: W
C C+ I P , or equivalently,
Wi
P
.
However,
if
the
individual
becomes
ill,
the
individual
might
still
purchase
the treatment. The
I
c
individual would be able to a¤ord to do so if Wi > P (or equivalently Wi > P
C C), and if that is the
case, then Vi P (since Vi > Wi ) and thus the person would obtain the treatment.
Thus, summing up, the demand for the treatment comes from two groups of consumers:
C
ci
(B C). These
(1) Consumers for whom W
P
C C + I P (or equivalently, Wi
I P ) and Vi
I
are consumers can a¤ord to purchase insurance and they do so, thus generating demand for the treatment
when they fall ill;
ci < C C + I P (or equivalently, Wi < I P ) cannot a¤ord to purchase
(2) Consumers for whom W
ci
insurance and will not do so. However, a subset of these consumers for whom W
P , or equivalently
ci > P .
Wi > P
C,
can
a¤ord
to
purchase
insurance
if
they
fall
ill,
and
they
will
do
so
since
Vi > W
C
These are consumers who cannot a¤ord to purchase insurance but would purchase the treatment if the price
P was su¢ ciently low.
In light of this, the demand for the treatment is by the measure of consumers such that
o 3
2 n
Wi
C
P and Vi P
(B C)
I
I
o 5
n
4
and Wi < P and Wi P
CC
I

Using Assumption 5 that Vi = V +

[Wi

W ], the demand D(P ) for the treatment is given by

D(P ) = D (P ) + Du (P )
where
D (P )

=

Z

=

Z

I P;

C (B
I

P
I P;

C)

+W g

+W g

Z

1[P <

C
I

(B

C
I

C)

V

+ Wg
maxf I P;

(B C) V

+ Wg W

maxf I P;
maxf I P;

P

C
I

P

(B C) V

C
I

P
C
I

(B C) V

(B C) V

+ Wg
+ Wg

+ Wg

W
W +1 :
W +1

dWi

fWi 2[W ;W +1]jP

=

dWi

V

dWi

V

P
= W + 1 maxf I P;
8
>
1
>
<
P
=
W + 1 minf I P;
>
>
:
0
=

C)

W +1

maxf

Du (P )

C (B
I

P

fW i2[W ;W +1]jWi >maxf

C

1

C]
I

C C<Wi < I P g

8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:

1
CC

(1

W +1+
IP

I )P
CC

W

P

W +1

; P < W + CC
hI
i
P 2 W + C C; W +1
I
n
o
max W +1 ; W + C C
P W + CC :
I
n
o
W
P min W +1 ; W + C C
P >

I

0

I

P <

W
I

C I
We now prove that Du (P ) = 0 when W
1 I C. We …rst note that a necessary condition for Du (P ) > 0
0
for some price P is that at that price the treatment is less expensive than health insurance, i.e., P 0 <
0
I P + C C. Otherwise, all consumers could a¤ord health insurance and would be “located” on demand
curve D (P ). This can be rewritten as P 0 < 1 C C, where 1 C < 1 (because 1
I
C > 0). A second
I
I
necessary condition is that there be at least some consumers who could not a¤ord health insurance when

37

the treatment price is P 0 , i.e., W < I P 0 : Otherwise, all consumers would be “located” on D (P ): This can
be rewritten as P 0 > W . These two necessary conditions imply W < 1 C C, or equivalently W < 1C I C.
I
I
I
I
C I
Without this condition, i.e., W
1 I C, there can be no prices that at which consumers would be unable
to a¤ord insurance but could a¤ord the treatment if they became ill.
To illustrate D (P ) graphically and at the same time, to derive the expression for its inverse P (Q), pick
an arbitrary price P 0 and substitute it into
Q=W +1
and

"

Q=W +1

P

C
I

IP

(B

C)

#

V

+W :

This yields
Q01

= W +1

Q02

= W +1

P0 (Q01 )
0
0
P
which
implies
P
=
I
#I
" 0
C
P
(B C) V
I
+ W which implies P 0 = P1 (Q02 ) +

where recall P1 (Q) = V +

P0 =

W +1
I

P0 (Q01 )

=

I

(B

C);

I

Q. There are two possibilities. First, suppose that
(
)
C
P0
(B C) V
0
I
max I P ;
+ W = I P 0;

which implies Q01 < Q02 . Because
Q01

C

and so

that P1 (Q01 ) > P1 (Q02 ) = P 0 =

0
IP =
(Q01 ; P 0 )
P0 (Q01 )
I

maxf I P 0 ; P

0

V

is a point along

+ W g, (Q01 ; P 0 ) is a point along D (P ). Moreover,

P0 (Q)
I

as well. Moreover, since Q01 < Q02 it follows

. Thus, in the range where the inverse of D (P ) =

P0 (Q)
I

, we have

P0 (Q)

P1 (Q) +
(B C) >
, i.e., the inverse demand curve with no liquidity constraints lies above the
I
I
“grossed up” liquidity constrained inverse demand curve.
Next, suppose that
)
(
C
C
P0
P0
(B C) V
(B C) V
0
I
I
+W =
+ W;
max I P ;
C

P0

C

P0

(B C) V

C

(B C) V

I
+ W = maxf I P 0 ;
0
0
C
Q2 + (B C) = P1 (Q2 ) +

I
which implies that Q01 > Q02 . Because
0
is a point along D (P ). Moreover, P = V +

I

C
I

(B

Q02

Q01

+ W g, (Q02 ; P 0 )
C), so (Q02 ; P 0 )

P (Q0 )

P (Q0 )

>
it follows that 0 2 > 0 1 =
is a point along P1 (Q) + (B C) as well. Moreover, since
I
I
I
P 0 = P1 (Q02 ) + C (B C). Thus, in the range where the inverse of D (P ) = P1 (Q) + C (B C), we have
C

I

I

P0 (Q)

> P1 (Q) + C (B C), i.e., the “grossed up” liquidity constrained inverse demand curve lies above
I
I
the inverse demand curve with no liquidity constraints plus C (B C): From all of this it follows that when
I

W C, the demand curve for the treatment is the lower envelope of
thus write that demand curve in inverse form as
P (Q)

=

min

P0 (Q)

; P1 (Q) +

C (B

I

=

min

I

and P1 (Q) +

C)
I

W +1

Q

;V 0 +

Q ; Q 2 [0; 1];

I

where
V0

P0 (Q)

V +

C (B

C)
I

38

:

C
I

(B

C): We can

Finally, we illustrate that this demand curve can have kinks, and we show where the kinks are located.
First, let QK be such that
(B C)
P0 (QK )
= P1 (QK ) + C
;
I

I

which implies
QK =

W +1
1

If
W +1
1

V0+

I

V0+

I

:

C

2 (0; 1)

C

the demand curve for the treatment has a kink at QK ;which corresponds to a price of PK
V0
1

PK =

W

:

C

The point (QK ; PK ) corresponds to point B in Panel C of Figure 5: the point at which we switch from
treatment demand being determined by a¤ordability of insurance to it being determined by the value of
insurance. There is also a kink at point A that corresponds to the price
W

P (1) = min

;V 0 :

I

Proof that innovator’s pro…t-maximization problem under expanded insurance has a corner
solution:
The general solution to the optimization problem in (12) is
Q =

P =

1
0

V +
2

V0
V 0+
2

V0
V0

:

(19)

V0
V0

:

(20)

We now show that Assumptions 1, 4, and 5 imply that V 0 > 1, which in turn (from (19) and (20)) imply
that Q = 1 and P = V 0 .
By de…nition
V 0 = V + C (B C):
I

By Assumption 1, V +

Now, by Assumption 4,

c + 1; so
>W
C
I

(B

c 0.
since V > W
Proof of Proposition 2:
Note that

c+1
V0 >W

C

+

(B

C):

(21)

I

C) > V + , or equivalently,

C
I

(B

C)

> V , which from (21) implies

c + V + 1 > 1;
V0 >W
P =V0 =V +

C

(B

C):

I

Given Assumption 4, we have
C

(B

C) > V +

I

39

> ;

(22)

which in conjunction with (22) implies
P

> V +
> Vi = v(Wi ) for all Wi 2 [W ; W + 1];

where the second inequality follows because
Proof of Proposition 3:
We have two possibilities:

> 0, and V +

is the highest possible consumer valuation.

If W 1 we have corner solutions when the treatment is not covered by health insurance and when it
is covered: P 0 = W , P = V 0 ; Q0 = Q = 1: Thus, the quantity of the treatment is the same in either
case, but because V 0 > V > W , the price is higher when the treatment is covered by insurance than
when it is not.
If W < 1 we have a corner solution when the treatment is covered by insurance but an interior solution
when it is covered: Q0 = W2+1 < 1 = Q i.e., the quantity of the treatment is greater when insurance
covers the treatment. Comparing the prices we have,
W +1
2

P0 = V 0

P

Because V 0 > V and (from Assumption 5), V +

:

(23)

> W + 1, it follows that

V0 >W +1

:

(24)

Now, as part of the proof that the innovator’s pro…t-maximization problem under expanded insurance
has a corner solution, we established that V 0 > 1, and since < 1, it follows that
V0 > :

(25)

Together (24) and (25) imply 2V 0 > W + 1, which given (23) implies that P

P 0 > 0.

Proof of Proposition 4:
First, consider the case in which W 1, so Q0 = Q = 1. In this case, coverage of the treatment leaves
the quantity of the treatment purchased unchanged. Moreover, it also does not reduce health insurance
coverage, so consumption of core medical services is unchanged. However, recall from Proposition 3 that the
price of the treatment is higher when it is covered by insurance. Note that the expression for the consumer
surplus function CS(Q; Y; P ) in (10) implies that @CS
Q < 0, so it follows that when W 1,
@P =
CS 0 = CS(1; 1; P 0 ) > CS(1; 1; P ) = CS :
Next, consider the case in which W < 1, so Q0 =
di¤erence in consumer surplus as
CS 0

CS =

C (B

C)
I

+

W +1
2

W +1
2

< Q = 1. Using (13) and (14), we can write the

V +

3
4

W
4

W
2

1
2

2

:

(26)

We now show that this expression is positive. To do so, we note that
@ CS 0
@

CS

=
=

W +1
3 W
2
4
4
1
2
(W 1) < 0:
8

1
2

Thus to establish that CS 0 CS > 0 it su¢ ces to show that CS 0 CS =V 0 > 0. This is because
< 1 < V 0 — recall that we established the latter inequality as part of the proof that Q = 1— and thus if
CS 0 CS =V
0, it follows that CS 0 CS > 0 for all < 1.

40

Substituting V 0 for
CS 0

in (26) gives us

CS

=V

C (B

=

C)

+

I

W +1
2

Because

V +

C (B

V =V0

3V 0
4

C)

WV 0
4

V0
2

1
2

W
2

(27)

;

I

we can write the second term on the right-hand side of (27) as
W +1
2

V0

C (B

C)

+

I

3V 0
4

WV 0
4

W
2

1
2

1
2

V0

V0+

3V 0
4

C (B

C)

:

I

Substituting this into (27) and rearranging terms gives us
CS 0

CS

=V

=

C (B

3
2

C)
I

W +1
2

+

W +1
2

WV 0
4

W
2

1
2

V0
:
2

Now recall that we are considering the case in which we have an interior solution under basic insurance, i.e.,
Q0 =
Thus

W +1
2

3
2

W +1
< 1:
2

> 0, and so
CS 0

CS

=V

>
=

=

=

W +1
2

V0+

3V 0
4

WV 0
4

3W V 0
W 2V 0
W2
4
8
4
3W V 0
WV 0
W
4
8
4
3W
3V 0
5W V 0
+
8
4
8
3W
3 1
5W
+
8
4
8 4
(W 1)
> 0:
8

W
2

1
2

V0
2

W
3V 0
1
+
2
8
4
W
3V 0
1
+
2
8
4
1
4

The …rst and …nal inequalities follows because W < 1 and thus W 2 < W . The second inequality follows
because, as we showed as part of the proof that Q = 1, Assumptions 1, 4, and 5 imply V 0 > 1. Thus,
CS 0 CS > 0.
Proof of Proposition 5:
When the demand curve for the treatment is the value constraint,
8
P V0+
< 0 0
V +
P
D (P ) =
(28)
P 2 [V 0 ; V 0 + ] :
:
1
P V0

We have seen that with a single innovator we have a corner solution in which the innovator serves the entire
market, i.e., Q = D (P ) = D (V 0 ) = 1. A necessary condition for pro…t maximization in this case is that
the innovator could not increase pro…ts by raising price, i.e.,
D (P ) + P
or 1

V0

dD (P )
dP

0, which we know holds because V 0 > 1 > .

41

0;

Now consider the pro…t (P1 ; : : : ; PN ) of one of N > 1 innovators:
(P1 ; : : : ; PN ) = Pk D (PA ):
Thus,
d
dPk

=
=

V0+

PA

V0+

P

i6=k

Pk
N
Pi

2Pk
:
N

N

Suppose, now, all innovators but k set a price V 0 . Innovator k has no incentive to set a lower price than V 0
since the quantity demanded when it sets V 0 equals 1, and it would continue to be 1 if innovator k’s price
was lower than V 0 . Would innovator k set a higher price than V 0 ? If not, then the Nash equilibrium price
d
is V 0 . Now note that dP
decreases in Pk , so if this expression is non-positive at Pk = V 0 it will be negative
k
for all Pk > V 0 . Thus, it su¢ ces to evaluate
d
dPk

=1
P1 =:::=PN =V

Since V 0 > 1 > , this expression will be non-positive for N
equilibrium price PN = V 0 . However, for N > N ,
1

V0
:
N
V0

N

. For such N , the symmetric Nash

V0 1
> 0:
N

In this case, the corner solution price that was optimal for a single innovator would no longer be an equilibrium
for a group of innovators because each one would have an incentive to raise price. In this case, we have an
interior equilibrium given by
d
= 0;
dPk P1 =:::=PN =P
N

or
PN =

N
V0+
N +1

>V0 =P ;

0

where the inequality follows because N > V .
Proof of Proposition 6:
0
If N < V , we have a corner solution in which QN = 1 and PN = V 0 , just as in the single-…rm case.
Thus, CSN = CS1 < CS 0 , as proven in Proposition 4.
V0
If N
; we have an interior solution with N innovators, and
PN =

N
V0+
N +1

> V 0 = P1 :

Having already proved that CS 0 > CS1 , if we can prove that CS1 > CSN , we will establish the result.
Given that (by assumption) there are no uninsured buyers of the treatment and given (10) then under
expanded insurance
CSN

=

C

(B

C)D (PN ) + (V +

PN )D (PN )

I

=

(V 0 +

PN )D (PN )

2

2

D (PN )2

D (PN )2 :

Since we are in the case in which the demand curve for the treatment is the value constraint, D (P ) is given
by (28) above. Thus for P 2 (V 0 ; V 0 + ) consider the consumer surplus function
CS (P ) = (V +

P )D (P )
42

2

D (P )2 :

V 0+

Di¤erentiating with respect to P and noting that D (P ) =
dCS (P )
=
dP
Since P1 < PN when N

V0

for P 2 (V 0 ; V 0 + ) implies that

P

D (P ) < 0; P 2 (V 0 ; V 0 + ):

(29)

, we have, light of (29),
CS1 = CS (P1 ) > CS (PN ) = CSN :

Thus,
CS 0 > CSN :
Proof of Proposition 7:
b we refer to in the statement of the proposition is
The N

0
b = max N ; 2 V +
N
W +1

0

where, recall, N = V .
Using (9), let T S (Q) = T S(Q; Q) = V 0 +
T S 0 = T S(Q0 ; 1)

1 ;

2

Q

2

(Q) . Thus

T S(Q0 ; Q0 ) = T S (Q0 ) = V 0 +

Q0

and
T SN = T S (QN ) = V 0 +

2

Q0

2

;

2

QN

2

(QN ) :

Now,
dT S
=V0+
dQ

Q > 0;

i.e., T S (Q) increases in Q over the relevant range Q 2 [0; 1].
If W 1; Q0 = 1, and as we saw in the proof of Proposition 5, if N
b , then N > N , so indeed, Q < Q0 = 1, and thus,
assumption, N > N
N

N =

V0

, then QN < 1. Since, by

T SN = T S (QN ) < T S (Q0 ) = T S 0 :

W +1
2 . Since N >
W +1
= Q0 , and thus
2

If W < 1; Q0 =
QN =

0
1 V +
N +1

<

b , then N > N
N

and N >

0
2 V +
W +1

1. Together, these imply

T SN = T S (QN ) < T S (Q0 ) < T S 0 :
Proof of Proposition 8:
Preliminaries: Consider the optimization problem

s.t. P

max P Q
W +1 Q

(30)

I

P
Q
Q

+
1
0

Q

(31)
(32)

When = V , we have the innovator’s pro…t-maximization problem when consumers have a choice of health
plans, and when = V 0 = V + C (B C) , we have the innovator’s pro…t-maximization problem when the
I
only health insurance plan o¤ered is the expanded plan. Thus, the two problems di¤er only in the level of
43

b ) and Pb( ) be the solution to this problem. The approach of the proof is to show that Pb( ) is
: Let Q(
non-decreasing in , and since V 0 V , it would follow that the price of the treatment under a MCS is at
least as high as without MCS.
To characterize that solution to the pro…t-maximization problem, de…ne the quantity QK ( ) to be the
solution for Q to
W +1 Q
= +
Q;
I

which implies
W +1

( + )

I

QK ( ) =

1

;

I

and thus (recalling I < 1 <
be the corresponding price:

1

), QK ( ) strictly decreases in . Let PK ( ) =
W

PK ( ) =

1

W +1 QK ( )
I

=

+

QK ( )

:

I

Characterizing the solution to the pro…t-maximization problem: In the pro…t-maximization problem, we can
ignore the constraint Q
0 as it will end up being satis…ed for all > 0. Letting 1 , 2 , and be the
Lagrange multipliers for (30), (31), and (32), respectively and letting
L = PQ

1

W +1

P

Q
2

[P

( +

Q)]

[Q

1] :

I

be the Lagrangian, the, Kuhn-Tucker conditions are
@L
@P
@L
@Q
1

=

0)Q=

=

0)P =

1
1

+

2:

+

2

W +1

0; P

+ :

I

Q

;

W +1

P

1

I
2

Now, let

1

and

2

0; P
0; Q

be the values

Q

= 0:

I

+
1; [Q

Q; 2 = 0; [P
1] = 0:

( +

Q)] = 0:

that solve
+
2

QK ( ) =
and
QK ( ) =

W +1
;
2

respectively. This gives us
W +1
1

2

=

=

I

1
2

1
I

W +1
+
2 I

:
+1
W

1
2

:

Straightforward analysis of the Kuhn-Tucker conditions implies that six possible con…gurations of the solution
depending on whether the solution occurs along the liquidity constraint, the value constraint, or at the kink
where they intersect, and whether we have an interior or corner solution for Q. These con…gurations depend
on :

44

Case 1 :

2

and W < 1:
b )
Q(

Pb( )

W +1
= Q0 < 1:
2
W +1
P0
=
:
2 I
I

=
=

In this case, we have an interior solution to the pro…t-maximization problem that occurs on the liquidity
constraint. The value constraint does not bind. We get the same quantity we got under basic insurance,
with the price grossed up by 1 relative to that case, assuming that that quantity is interior.
Case 2 :

W
I

I

1:

and W

b )
Q(

= Q0 = 1:
W
P0
=
=
:

Pb( )

I

I

Here we have a corner solution to the pro…t-maximization problem that occurs on the liquidity constraint.
W
:
Case 3 : 2 [ 1 ; 2 ] and
I

b ) = Q
b K ( ) < 1:
Q(
Pb( ) = PbK ( ):

In this case, pro…t-maximization occurs at the kink at which the liquidity constraint and value constraint
cross, and the corresponding quantity is interior.
Case 4 : = W :
I

b )
Q(
Pb( )

bK ( ) = 1
= Q
= PbK ( ):

This is the same as the previous case, but with the intersection of the value and liquidity constraints occurring
at Q = 1. (In other words, the corner solution occurs at the kink.)
Case 5 :
< :
1 and
b )
Q(

Pb( )

+
:
2
+
:
2

=
=

In this case, we have an interior solution to the pro…t-maximization problem that occurs on the value
constraint. The liquidity constraint does not bind.
Case 6 :
and < W :
I

b )
Q(
Pb( )

=

1:

=

:

Here we have a corner solution to the pro…t-maximization problem that occurs on the value constraint.
Lemmas to help characterize the solution to the pro…t maximization problem: We now prove …ve results that,
together, will help pin down how we “move” through these cases as increases or decreases.
Lemma A: If W < 1, then W < 2 .
I
Proof :
b K ( 2 ) = W +1 < 1, when W < 1. Moreover,
Note that Q
2
bK ( W ) =
Q
I

W +1

(W + )

I

I

1
I

45

= 1.

bK ( W ) > Q
b K ( 2 ) and Q
b K ( ) strictly decreases in , it follows that
Because Q
I
Lemma B: 1 < 2 .
Proof : To establish this, suppose to the contrary that 1
2 : Then
+
2

=

+
2

2

= QK (
=

QK (

2)

<

2.

1 ):

2)

1

W +1
:
2

=

W +1
2 ;or

2+
2

Together, these inequalities imply

1)

I

1

But also, since QK ( ) is strictly decreasing in , we have (given
QK (

W

W:

2

But note that
2

W
W
1 1
+
+
2 I
2
2
I
W
W
+
= W,
2
2

=
>

where the inequality follows because 1 > 1 >
I
contradiction, which implies 1 < 2 .
Lemma C: > 1 if and only if W < 1 .
Proof : We …rst prove

>

1

)

W
I

. The contrapositive assumption that

1

2

yields a

I

<

1.

By de…nition of
+
2

and QK ( )

1

= QK (
=

1 ):

1

Moreover, we have
+
2
Since

>

1

and

+
2

= 1 = QK (

W

):

I

=

increases in ;it follows that
QK (

W

) > QK (

1 ),

I

and since QK ( ) is strictly decreasing in ,
steps of logic.
Lemma D: If = 1 then W = 1 .
I
Proof : If = 1 then
QK (
Lemma E: If W > 1, then W >
I
Proof : The result follows because

1)

=

W
I

<

+
2

1

=

1.

The converse implication is proven through the same

+
2

= 1 = QK (

W

):

I

=

2.

1 = QK (

W
I

)<

W +1
= QK (
2

2 );

and QK ( ) is monotone decreasing.
Characterizing the pro…t-maximizing price: Taken together, these results restrict the ordering of 1 , 2 , W ,
I
and that determine which of the above cases we “transition through” as we vary , which in turn can

46

allow us to characterize the pro…t-maximizing price. First, suppose that W < 1. The following parameter
orderings are possible:
W
I

W
I

1

<

1

<

2

and

1

< :

=

1

<

2

and

1

= :

<

2

and

1

> :

<

W
I

Consider increasing from 0. With the …rst and second orderings, we move from Case 5 (an interior
solution along the value constraint) to Case 3 (an interior solution at the kink of the value and liquidity
constraints) and (since W < 1) to Case 1 (an interior solution along the liquidity constraint). In this case,
the pro…t-maximizing price can be summarized as
8
W +1
>
v
2
< 2 I
b
bK ( )
P( ) =
:
P
2
[
;
1
2]
>
:
+
1

2

This function is continuous and non-decreasing in .
With the third ordering, as increases from 0 we move from Case 5 to Case 6 (a corner solution along the
value constraint) to Case 4 (a corner solution coinciding with the kink of the value and liquidity constraints)
to Case 3 to Case 1. In this case, we have
8 W +1
v
>
2
2
>
>
< b I
W
;
P
(
)
2
[
2]
K
I
:
Pb( ) =
W
>
2[ ; )
>
>
I
:
+
2

This function is also continuous and non-decreasing in .
Now, let’s turn to the case in which W 1. Given Lemmas E, B, and C, we have the following ordering:
1

<

2

<

W

:

I

In this case there is just one possible solution con…guration, which can be most easily seen by decreasing
W
from a high level, speci…cally
. We thus start (working backward) in Case 2, where the pro…tI
maximization problem has a corner solution along the liquidity constraint. Since quantity Q cannot go
above 1, we remain at a corner solution until reaching the range of v at which Case 6 obtains, where we
have a corner solution along the value constraint. We continue in this case until becomes su¢ ciently small
for Case 5 to arise, where we have an interior solution along the liquidity constraint. In this case, then, the
pro…t-maximizing price is
8 W
>
v W
< I
I
Pb( ) =
2 [W ; ] :
I
>
: +
2

This function is continuous and non-decreasing in . Thus, for all parameter combinations that are independent of , the pro…t-maximizing price Pb( ) is non-decreasing in . It then follows that
Finally, we note that when V 0

1

Pb = Pb(V )

and V 0

V +
Pb =
2

P (V 0 ) = P :

(and so V <
V0+
2

1

and V <

), we have

=P ;

establishing that the price of the treatment is strictly higher under a MCS when, in that case, price is
determined by the value constraint.
47

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Linn (2004). “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the
Pharmaceutical Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 3, pp. 1049-1090
[2] Bagley, Nicholas, Amitabh Chandra and Austin Frakt (2015). “Correcting Signals for Innovation in
Health Care,” Hamilton Project Discussion Paper #2015-09.
[3] Becker, Gary (2007). “Health as Human Capital: Synthesis and Extensions,”Oxford Economic Papers,
Vol. 59, No. 3, pp. 379-410.
[4] Berkrot, Bill (2015). “Gilead Put Pro…t Ahead of Hepatitis C Patients: U.S. Senate report,” Reuters,
(December 1).
[5] Blume-Kohout, Margaret and Neeraj Sood, Neeraj (2013). “Market Size and Innovation: E¤ects of
Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical Research and Development,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol.
97, pp. 327-336.
[6] Chhatwal, Jagpreet, Fasiha Kanwal, Mark S. Roberts, and Michael A. Dunn (2015). “Cost-E¤ectiveness
and Budget Impact of Hepatitis C Virus Treatment With Sofosbuvir and Ledipasvir in the United
States,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 162, No. 6, pp. 397-406.
[7] Cournot, Augustin (1927) Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth, translated by Nathaniel T. Bacon (New York: Macmillan).
[8] Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite and Manuel Hermasillo (2014), “Pharmaceutical Pro…ts and the
Social Value of Innovation,” NBER Working Paper #20212.
[9] Duggan, Mark and Fiona Scott-Morton (2010), “The E¤ect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
Prices and Utilization,” American Economic Review , Vol. 100, No. 1, pp. 590-607.
[10] Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen (2013). “Selection
on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance,” American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No. 1, pp. 178-219.
[11] Ellison, Sara and Catherine Wolfram (2006) “Coordinating on Lower Prices: Pharmaceutical Pricing
under Political Pressure.” The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 324-340.
[12] Engelhardt, Gary V. and Jonathan Gruber (2011). “Medicare Part D and the Financial Protection of
the Elderly,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 77-102.
[13] Feldman, Roger and Bryan Dowd (1991). “A New Estimate of the Welfare Loss of Excess Health
Insurance,” American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 1, pp. 531–537.
[14] Feldstein, Martin (1973). “The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance,”Journal of Political Economy,
Vol 61, pp. 251–280.
[15] Finkelstein, Amy (2004). “Static and Dynamic E¤ects of Health Policy: Evidence from the Vaccine
Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 2, pp. 527-564.

48

[16] Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo Luttmer and Nathan Hendren (2015), “The Value of Medicaid: Interpreting
Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment,” NBER Working Paper #21308.
[17] Friedman, Bernad (1974) "Risk Aversion and the Consumer Choice of Health Insurance Option,”Review
of Economics and Statistics, Vol 56, No. 2, pp. 209-214.
[18] Fuchs, Willi, Brett Green and David Levine. 2013. “Optimal Arrangements for Distribution in Developing Markets,” working paper, http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/bgreen/…les/FGL_13.pdf (accessed
January 16, 2016).
[19] Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew Notodiwidgo (2015), “Hospitals as Insurers of Last Resort,”
NBER Working Paper #21290.
[20] Hirsch, Barry, Suresh Balu, and Kevin Shulman (2014). “The Impact Of Specialty Pharmaceuticals As
Drivers Of Health Care Costs,” Health A¤ airs, Vol 33. No. 10, pp. 1714-1720.
[21] Howard, David H., Peter B. Bach, Ernst R. Berndt, and Rena M. Conti (2015). “Pricing in the Market
for Anticancer Drugs,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 139-162.
[22] Kardish, Chris (2014). “The Risky Business of Limiting Medicaid Access to Sovaldi,” Governing.com, http://www.governing.com/topics/health-human-services/gov-hepatitis-coverage-solvaldilawsuits.html (accessed December 22, 2015).
[23] Kaczmarek,
Stephen
J.
(2014)
“The
Impact
of
New
tis
C
Drug
Therapy
on
Individual
Medicare
Part
D
http://www.pcmanet.org/images/stories/uploads/2014/partdpremiumstudymilliman.pdf
July 9, 2015).

HepatiSpending,”
(accessed

[24] Liu, Shan, Daena Watcha, Mark Holodniy, and Jeremy Goldhaber-Fiebert (2015). “Sofosbuvir-Based
Treatment Regimens for Chronic, Genotype 1 Hepatitis C Virus Infection in U.S. Incarcerated Populations: A Cost-E¤ectiveness Analysis," Annals of Internal Medicine Vol. 161, No 8, pp. 546-553.
[25] Loftus, Peter (2015). “How Much Should Cancer Drugs Cost,” Wall Street Journal (June 18).
[26] Mahoney, Neale (2015). “Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance,” American Economic Review, Vol.
105, No. 2, pp. 710-746.
[27] Managan, Dan (2015). “Pricey New Cholesterol Rx Covered by Big Drug Plan, but...,” CNBC.com,
http://www.cnbc.com/2015/10/06/pricey-new-cholesterol-rx-covered-by-big-drug-plan-but.html (accessed April 4, 2016).
[28] Manning, Will and M. Susan Marquis, (1996). “Health Insurance: the Tradeo¤ Between Risk Pooling
and Moral Hazard,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 15, No. 5, pp. 609-640.
[29] Najafzadeh, Mehdi, Karin Andersson, William H. Shrank, Alexis A. Krumme, Olga S. Matlin, Troyen
Brennan, Jerry Avorn, MD, and Niteesh K. Choudhry (2015). “Cost-E¤ectiveness of Novel Regimens
for the Treatment of Hepatitis C Virus,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 162, No. 6, pp.407-419.
[30] Newhouse, Joseph (1993). Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).

49

[31] Nyman, John A. (1998). “Theory of Health Insurance,” Journal of Health Administration Education,
Vol. 16, No. 1, pp.41-66.
[32] Nyman, John A. (1999). “Health Insurance: the Access Motive,”Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 18,
No. 2, pp.141-52.
[33] Pauly, Mark (1968). “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment,” American Economic Review, Vol.
58, No. 3, pp. 531–537.
[34] Pfei¤er, Stuart (2015). “Woman Sues Anthem Blue Cross for Refusing to Cover Hepatitis C Drug,” Los
Angeles Times (May 18).
[35] Pollack, Andrew (2014). “Gilead’s Hepatitis C Drug, Sovaldi, Is on Pace to Become a Blockbuster,"
New York Times (July 23).
[36] Pollack, Andrew (2015). “Drug Goes from $13.50 a Table to $750, Overnight,” New York Times (September 20).
[37] Rocko¤, Jonathan and Ed Silverman (2015). “Pharmaceutical Companies Buy Rivals’Drugs, Then Jack
Up the Prices,” Wall Street Journal (April 26).
[38] Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy (2003) “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market
Estimates Throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 27, No. 1, pp 5-76.
[39] Walker, Joseph (2015). “High Prices for Drugs Attacked at Meeting,” Wall Street Journal (June 1).

50

