                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF THE ZERO LOWER BOUND POLICY

                                     Marco Di Maggio
                                     Marcin Kacperczyk

                                     Working Paper 22351
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22351


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2016




We acknowledge financial support from Inquire Europe. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marco Di Maggio and Marcin Kacperczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Unintended Consequences of the Zero Lower Bound Policy
Marco Di Maggio and Marcin Kacperczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 22351
June 2016
JEL No. E52,G23,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the impact of the zero lower bound interest rate policy on the industrial organization of
the U.S. money fund industry. We find that in response to policies that maintain low interest
rates, money funds: change their product offerings by investing in riskier asset classes; are more
likely to exit the market; and reduce the fees they charge their investors. The consequence of fund
closures resulting from interest rate policy is the relocation of resources in affected fund families
and in the asset management industry in general, as well as decline in capital of issuers borrowing
from money funds.


Marco Di Maggio
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, uris Hall 819
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mdimaggio@columbia.edu

Marcin Kacperczyk
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22351
1. Introduction

In the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007-2008, the Federal Reserve took an unprecedented

decision to lower short-term nominal interest rates to zero, a policy commonly known as zero lower

bound policy. This initial action was followed by a sequence of announcements providing guidance

that the short-term rate would stay near zero for a longer period. While several economists have

argued that the Fed’s policy exerted a positive impact on the U.S. economy by stimulating a sluggish

economic growth and boosting employment, some critics pointed out that the policy might have

also produced undesired consequences, for example, inflation in asset prices, or ill-suited incentives

to chase higher yields. In this paper, we show that the policy created a shock to an important part of

the shadow banking system, money funds, which resulted in significant dislocations in terms of their

market participation and product offerings.

       By regulation, money market funds (henceforth MMFs) are obliged to invest in safe short-

term assets with rates of return that are typically close to the Fed funds rate. The monetary policy

shock has thus driven the funds’ gross profit margins nearly to zero and has seen many fund

investors face investment opportunities with negative (net of fees) expected returns. The

deteriorating investment environment, in turn, has triggered significant responses of MMFs and

broader asset management industry in terms of their product offerings, pricing policy, and

organizational structure. We study empirically these adjustments using detailed micro-level data.

       Traditionally, MMFs used to offer relatively low returns for the provision of safety. While

this idea has been somewhat shattered with the collapse of the Reserve Primary Fund and the run on

MMFs in September 2008 [e.g., Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2013), Chernenko and Sunderam (2014),

Strahan and Tanyeri (2015)], until then, MMFs provided investors positive returns, even after paying

fees. The consequence of the unprecedented change in interest rates to levels close to zero has been



                                                  1
that returns on traditional money market instruments, such as Treasuries, repos, or deposits declined

to similarly low levels. Therefore, any fund investing in these assets was likely to produce negative

net-of-fees nominal returns to their investors. It has thus become obvious that such business model

cannot be sustained for too long, as money would flow out of funds with negative returns. 1

         Such a dire situation has posed a dilemma for money funds. On the one hand, they could

accept the situation and keep their risk profiles unchanged. This, however, would force them to first

reduce or even waive their fees, and in the end, if the low rates persisted, to exit the market. On the

other hand, funds could change their product offerings by shifting their risk into securities with

higher interest rates, thus accepting higher risk in their portfolios, an idea coined as reaching for

yield. Increasing fund risk would boost returns and investor flows [e.g., Christoffersen (2001)], and

would likely prevent funds from exiting the market. The cost of increasing risk would be a higher

chance of being run on in the event of distress in the money market industry. The consequence of

such runs would be distress of individual funds themselves, which could generate high costs either in

terms of the necessity to bail out the fund or through a significant loss of reputation for the fund

organization and other related business of a fund sponsor.

         In this paper, we assess empirically the equilibrium response of MMFs to the low interest

rate environment using weekly data on the universe of U.S. prime funds. We exploit both a time-

series and cross-sectional variation in the data to identify the causal effect of the unconventional

monetary policy on MMFs' strategies. Our main empirical identification comes from an event study

analysis of five FOMC announcements, which signaled that interest rates would be kept near zero

into the future. These decisions were plausibly exogenous with respect to the funds’ behavior; hence,



1A  standard portfolio theory suggests that investors should look at fund spread, returns net of Treasury bill, rather than
fund returns as a way of assessing their decisions. But in times of zero interest rates both returns and spreads are
virtually the same. In addition, our regression estimates account for any business-cycle variation in the data.



                                                            2
they constitute a useful shock. The access to high-frequency fund data allows us to measure

empirical effects within short event windows. Specifically, we compare MMFs' choices of risky

product offerings, exit, and expense policy in the fund data.

       In the time series, we document an increase in the probability of exit from the MMF

industry, higher risk taking, lower expenses charged by MMFs, and higher fund subsidies in the

period of three to six months after the announcements. Our results are economically and statistically

significant. Notably, while we do not find any variation in expenses incurred by these funds over time,

the fees charged are significantly reduced during a zero interest rate period, which suggests that MMFs

were actively maintaining their fees as a way of keeping their business alive and did not simply go

through a period of lower operating costs.

       In the cross section, we find that reaching for yield is particularly strong for independent

funds, that is, funds whose sponsors are not affiliated with insurance company, commercial, or

investment bank. In contrast, rather than taking more risk, affiliated funds exit the market. We do

not find significant differences across fund types in terms of their expense policies. We further

enhance these findings by exploiting a variation in family-level percentage of assets managed by

MMFs within a group of independent sponsors. We find that funds whose families invest a greater

percentage of their assets in MMFs are less likely to exit and more likely to take more risk. The

results are consistent with a hypothesis that reputational concerns shape MMFs’ strategic decisions.

In sum, to the extent that any macroeconomic (time-series) shock would likely affect all types of

funds in a similar way, the results suggest that ours is a leading mechanism explaining the data.

       We conduct a number of tests to improve our identification and alleviate any empirical

concerns. Our first concern is identification of the results on risk taking. To the extent that safer

funds are more likely to exit, our risk results could be driven by survival of the more risky funds.



                                                   3
The question is whether strategic behavior of individual funds also contributes to risk changes over

and above the negative selection channel. To address this concern we redo all our tests by removing

funds that exit the sample after the shock. Our results remain qualitatively similar, which suggests

that the negative selection and strategic fund behavior are both responsible for changes in risk.

       Our second concern is that our results are not specifically about the role of zero-rate policy

but rather are a generic response to changes in interest rates, independent of their levels. We

address this concern by estimating our basic models separately for two sub-periods: a period with

rates higher than 1% (control group) and a period with rates of at most 1% (treatment group).

We find a strong discontinuity in the way MMFs respond to changes in Fed funds rate. While we

observe no visible effect on exit, risk, and fees when the rate is above 1%, we observe a similar

quality of results as our main findings in periods when interest rates equal at most 1%.

       Third, we include monetary policy surprises rather than the Fed funds rates changes in our

regressions and confirm our results on fund exit and risk taking, which alleviates any concern that

our results are driven by changes in economic conditions proxied by the Fed funds rate, rather than

changes in monetary policy. Fourth, we posit a stronger reaction of MMFs as they expect low

interest rates to last longer. We back out the date the market expects the Fed Fund rate to increase

from the Fed funds futures data and find that funds reach for yield more the longer the market

expects interest rates to remain below 1%. Finally, we use evidence from detailed portfolio holdings

for a shorter sample of 2010-2013 and show that, as a result of a shock, MMFs tend to acquire assets

whose yields are distinctly higher than those of the assets that were acquired a month before.

A similar analysis for a placebo sample (periods without a policy change) gives opposite results.

In sum, our results suggest that the zero-bound policy may drive changes in MMFs’ strategies.




                                                   4
        Next, we show that the disruptions in the MMF industry have real effects. On the one hand,

in the absence of search frictions we would not expect any effect on the availability of credit to firms

as they could easily substitute one fund with another. On the other hand, firms might find it difficult

to borrow from different institutions with which they do not have prior relationship. To test this

hypothesis, we collect information on the leverage of nonfinancial firms borrowing from MMFs.

We show that within a six-month period after the closure of a given fund, leverage of firms

borrowing from the fund is significantly reduced compared to that of firms borrowing from funds

that remain active. This effect, however, is short lived, as it disappears a year after the fund closure.

        In our final set of results, we show that the strategic adjustment in the MMF industry has

broader industry organization implications for the entire mutual fund sector. We investigate whether

the fund families that decide to close their MMFs in response to monetary shock open new funds in

a different asset class, possibly less stressed by low interest rates. Empirically, we compare fund

closures and fund creations of fund families that have closed their MMFs with those that did not.

We find that the former ones are significantly more likely to open new bond funds, but not equity or

balanced funds. We also show active reallocation of managerial talent either to other MMFs or to

bond funds. The above results suggest that the prolonged period of low interest rates leads to the

reallocation of resources across largely similar asset classes.

        Overall, our results highlight an important channel for transmission of monetary policy that

has been completely overlooked by the academic literature, but one that is extremely relevant for

practitioners and policy makers. This message resonates well with the August 2009 Fitch report

about U.S. MMFs that states: "Over the longer term, more conservative portfolio composition,




                                                     5
combined with the current low interest rate environment, may result in fund closures, fund

consolidation, and/or a resurgent appetite for credit and liquidity risk.” 2

         The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related literature.

Section 3 provides further details about the institutional setting of money funds. Empirical design,

the data, and empirical results are discussed in Section 4 and Section 5. In Section 6, we discuss

broad implications for the industry organization of the mutual fund sector. Section 7 concludes. In

the Online Appendix, we report few additional results showing the robustness of our main findings.


2. Related Literature

Various papers have studied the role of money funds. 3 To the best of our knowledge our paper is

the first to examine the impact of monetary policy on industrial organization of money funds—the

change in product offerings (risk taking) and in market structure (exit)—and its implications for

capital supply to fund borrowers and the allocation of resources within the industry. In this regard,

the closest studies to ours are Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2013), Strahan and Tanyeri (2015), and Di

Maggio (2013), which analyze risk taking of MMFs before and after the collapse of Lehman

Brothers, and during the European debt crisis, respectively. The key novelty of our paper is a new

mechanism that explains risk taking. While in Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2013) the key friction is the

increase in yields dispersion of the different investable asset classes; the friction we emphasize here

is the zero lower bound policy. Moreover, we focus on funds’ strategic decisions to alter their

expense policy and moderate their entry and exit, and quantify the value of subsidies provided by




2"U.S. Prime Money Market Funds: Managing Portfolio Composition to Address Credit & Liquidity Risks" is available
on Fitch's web site at www.fitchratings.com.
3 Notable examples of recent contributions on money funds include Christoffersen (2001), Christoffersen and Musto

(2002), Baba et al. (2009), McCabe (2010), Di Maggio (2013), Duygan-Bump et al. (2013), Kacperczyk and Schnabl
(2013), Chernenko and Sunderam (2014), and Strahan and Tanyeri (2015).



                                                       6
sponsors to their funds. The last result allows us to assess the costs of the monetary policy from the

perspective of these intermediaries.

         Several papers studied the importance of conducting monetary policy at the zero bound.

These papers primarily focus on aggregate macro quantities. 4 Our paper, in turn, is one of the first

to provide micro-level evidence on the reaction of financial institutions to low interest rates. 5 The

benefit of using micro-level data is better identification of the underlying economic mechanism. In

this vein, Maddaloni and Peydró (2011) find that low short-term rates soften lending standards for

retail and corporate loans. Jimenez et al. (2014) show that lowering overnight interest rate induces

less-capitalized banks to lend to riskier firms. These studies, however, do not explicitly study the role

of the zero bound policy and their response variables and contexts are different than ours.

         Also related is a study by Chodorow-Reich (2014) who considers high-frequency event

studies to analyze the effects of the unconventional monetary policy on banks and life insurance

companies. He shows that such institutions benefit from low interest rates. Incidentally, though

not his main focus, he also examines a time-series variation in risk taking of MMFs. He documents

evidence of a significant reaching-for-yield behavior, especially in the period 2008-2012. While he

analyzes annual trends in funds’ risk taking, we consider narrow monetary policy event windows to

isolate a specific effect of interest rate policy changes on industrial organization of the entire money

fund sector. Further, a large and novel portion of our paper discusses: (i) a cross-sectional variation

in fund strategies, (ii) the tradeoff between risk taking and exit, (iii) evidence on sponsors’ subsidies,

(iv) real effects in the corporate sector, and (v) broader asset management implications on the labor




4
  Related literature on conducting the zero interest rate monetary policy at the macro level includes Woodford (2003)
and Bernanke et al. (2004).
5
  One exception is Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2015) who consider the effects of quantitative easing on the
allocation of credit in the mortgage market.



                                                         7
and assets fronts. Finally, we show a distinct asymmetry in fund strategies conditional on the level

of Fed funds rate.

        More broadly, our paper sheds new light on the incentives of asset managers to reach for

yield—one of the core factors contributing to the buildup of credit that preceded the financial crisis

[Rajan (2010), Yellen (2011), and Stein (2013)]. Popular explanations include competition among

fund managers, different preferences for risk, or desire to offset constraints imposed by regulation.

We provide a setting in which the incentives to reach for yield on one hand are limited by strict

regulation, on the other hand they are significantly affected by changes in interest rates and

expectations about their future changes.



3. The Institutional Setting: Money Market Funds

Money funds are important intermediaries between investors who want low-risk liquid investments

and banks and corporations that have short-term borrowing needs. The funds are key buyers of

short-term debt issued by banks and corporations: commercial paper, bank certificates, and

repurchase agreements, with an aggregate volume of $1.8 trillion. Given the importance of short-

term credit markets to both investors and businesses, any disruption in this sector would represent a

potential threat to financial stability.

        In the United States, MMFs' holdings are regulated by Rule 2a-7 of the Investment

Company Act of 1940.          The funds are prohibited from purchasing long-term assets such as

mortgage-backed securities, corporate bonds, or equity and can only hold short-term assets; and

even these must be of high quality. As an additional requirement, to enhance diversification, the

funds cannot hold more than 5% of their assets in the securities of any individual issuer with the

highest rating and not more than 1% in the securities of any other issuer.



                                                  8
       In January 2009, after a tumultuous year for MMFs, the SEC voted to amend the 2a-7 rules

to strengthen MMFs. The new rules seek to limit the risk and improve on fund disclosure. For

instance, funds are now required to have enhanced reserves of cash and readily liquidated securities

to meet redemption requests and they can invest only 3 percent (down from 5 percent) of total

assets in tier-2 securities, the term on which is limited to a maximum maturity of 45 days. Under the

new rules, starting in November 2010 MMFs have to make monthly disclosure of detailed data,

including each fund's holdings and shadow net asset value (NAV). This information becomes

available to the public after 60 days. The new N-MFP form on which it is filed constitutes one of

the sources of data for the present study.


4. Research Design and Data

4.1. Empirical Design

In our empirical tests, we want to identify the impact of interest rate policy on MMFs’ behavior.

Our main focus is on the effects due the zero lower bound policy, introduced in December 2008.

Since the policy set the short-term rate to zero, any identification due to interest rate changes would

be difficult. To this end, we explore the importance of additional communication from the Federal

Reserve regarding the duration of the zero-rate policy—forward guidance policy. In our context,

the duration of the zero-rate policy is crucial as it directly determines how long the MMF business is

subject to profit stress. In particular, one could imagine that short-lasting policy would have

different equilibrium implications as MMFs could withstand temporary headwinds by taking short-

term losses. The situation, in turn, would differ if the pressure were maintained for longer time.

       In our analysis, we focus on the MMFs’ behavior around events related to FOMC meetings

during which at least one of the following outcomes occurred: (1) a change in the interest rates, (2)

forward guidance announcement. Table 1 provides a short description of the events in chronological



                                                  9
order. The first event date is December 16, 2008, which is the date of the meeting at which the Fed

funds rate was cut to 0-0.25%, and the other four event dates capture the meetings at which the Fed

outlined its forward guidance regarding the duration of the zero-rate regime. Specifically, on March

18, 2009, the Fed announced that it would keep rates at zero for “an extended period of time”, while

on August 9, 2011, January 25, 2012, and September 13, 2012 the Fed stated that the rates would

remain at zero until 2013, 2014, and 2015, respectively.

       Notably, during our period of analysis there have been other policy-related events that might

have affected financial markets, an important one being the quantitative easing (QE) interventions.

We do not consider QE events for two reasons. First, the QE interventions mainly targeted the

long-term part of the yield curve, but the opportunity set of MMFs only spans short-term assets.

Second, QE primarily entails the purchase of mortgage-backed securities, and these securities cannot

be held by MMFs due to regulatory constraints.

       Our event-study analysis requires constructing reasonable windows around the event dates.

Given that various MMFs’ strategies can be adopted with different speed we consider two horizons:

a short horizon of three months, and a long horizon of six months after the event. In both cases,

the pre-event window is set at one month to ensure that no pre-event trends drive the patterns in

the data. Our empirical strategy is to compare the average fund behavior around the event dates.

       In our empirical tests, we also exploit cross-sectional differences across MMFs. In particular,

we distinguish between funds whose sponsors are affiliated with a large financial institution, such as

commercial bank, investment bank, or insurance company, and funds whose sponsors are affiliated

with an independent asset manager. We believe the two groups exhibit distinct responses to the

events of interest rate changes. For example, the bank-affiliated funds exhibit weaker incentives to

reach for yield than independent funds so as to limit the probability of the bad outcome in which



                                                  10
the bank would be forced to invest resources to save the fund. Independent funds, in turn, have

stronger incentives to reach for yield in order to provide investors with higher returns, compensating

investors for giving up the implicit insurance of the bank. Moreover, bank-affiliated funds might

have reputation at stake in which case they might prefer to exit the less risky yet unprofitable fund

industry rather than improve its profitability by ramping up risk.


4.2. Data

Our sample of funds includes the universe of U.S. taxable prime funds. We collect data for our tests

from several sources. First, the data on MMFs come from iMoneyNet and cover the period from

January 2005 to December 2013 including weekly fund-level data on yields, expense ratios (charged

and incurred), average maturity, holdings by instrument type, and fund sponsor. Second, we

complement the data with information from CRSP Mutual Fund Database, especially assets under

management and entry/exit of other funds. Third, we use COMPUSTAT and companies' websites

for information on sponsor characteristics. Fourth, we collect data on fund managers from Investor

Observer, LinkedIn, Morningstar, Zabasearch, and Zoominfo. Finally, information about Fed funds

rate changes and the forward guidance policy comes from the Federal Reserve Board website.

            We conduct most of our analyses at the fund portfolio level. We aggregate all share classes

by fund and investor type. We compute fund characteristics (e.g., expense ratio) as weighted

averages using share class assets as weights. Some funds offer both retail and institutional share

classes. Institutional shares are generally larger; hence, we classify a fund as institutional if it offers at

least one institutional class, and as retail if it does not offer institutional share classes. 6

            Table A.1 in the Online Appendix provides summary statistics of the data. Our sample

includes 349 different fund portfolios. The average fund size in our sample equals approximately


6   Following earlier studies, we also analyzed the data with institutional funds only. The results are qualitatively similar.



                                                                11
$8.3 billion. The average portfolio maturity is 40 days and the average fund age equals 15.8 years.

The average Fed funds rate in our sample equals 183 basis points while the average gross fund

return equals 231 basis points. Hence, out of the abnormal profit of 47 basis points 38 basis points

account for expenses, which leaves about 10 basis points accruing to fund investors. Our sample is

fairly balanced with respect to sponsor type as 59% of funds have bank-affiliated sponsors and 41%

have independent asset management companies as sponsors.

       We compare our sample properties in the high and low interest-rate regimes. This sample

split is based on the interest rate level of 1% and reflects our view of what we consider a period of

profit stress. A number of interesting patterns emerge. First, the spread during the low-rate period

is 25% lower than that in the high-rate period; also, the nominal gross return is almost ten times

larger in the high-rate period. This suggests that MMFs face greater challenges in obtaining high

returns in a low interest rate environment. Second, if we look at expenses charged they are

significantly lower in the low-rate period, with a drop from 50 to 28 basis points, while expenses

incurred remain almost the same. This suggests that while the costs are not affected by the

monetary policy, the stress imposed on the profit margin reduces the possibility for a fund to charge

fees to investors. In other words, funds are more likely to offer subsidies to their fund investors.

Third, while fund flows are positive during the earlier period, they become negative in the low

interest rate environment. This is consistent with the idea that investors have become less willing to

make investments in MMFs as their returns became less attractive. Finally, we observe a significant

decline of more than 50 in the number of funds over the two periods: from 326 to 274 funds in the

second period, which constitutes a significant exit from the sector.

       Finally, we focus on the period of low interest rates and report separate summary statistics

for two major groups of funds: bank affiliated and independent. Bank-affiliated funds are on average




                                                  12
smaller with the difference of about $3 billion. They are also less risky as their spreads are lower;

they invest in shorter-maturity assets and in safer assets such as repos or Treasuries. They charge

slightly lower fees and face higher outflows, consistent with the flow-performance relationship

observed in other studies (Chevalier and Ellison (1997), and Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2013)).



5. Empirical Results

In this section, we present our main results. First, we show the importance of interest rates in

generating fund returns and establish the link between fund returns and subsequent fund flows.

Next, we look at the effects of the forward guidance policy on risk product offerings, fund exit, and

expenses in the time series and in the cross section. Finally, we provide a series of robustness tests

that are meant to strengthen the identification of our mechanism.


5.1. Asset Returns and Fund Flows

The basic premise of our mechanism is that yields on assets in which money funds can invest, and

consequently their portfolio returns, depend on the level of Fed funds rate. We begin our analysis

by identifying such link in the data. To this end, we estimate the regression model of fund gross

returns (Fund Return) on the Fed funds rate (Fed Rate) over our sample period. 7

                                   Fund Returnit = a0 + a1 Fed Ratet + bXit-1 + εit                         (1)

         In the regression, we control for other determinants of fund returns possibly correlated with

the level of interest rates (subsumed by vector X), such as the natural logarithm of fund size

(Log(Fund Size)), the natural logarithm of fund family size (Log(Family Size)), the level of expenses

charged by funds (Expenses), fund age (Age), the percentage change in fund assets accounted for

7 Alternatively, we could consider returns net of inflation, as in this period inflation is very low. This dimension of
variation in the data is captured by time-fixed effects.



                                                          13
capital appreciation (Fund Flow), the standard deviation of fund flows (Fund Flow Volatility), and an

indicator variable for the fund that is marketed to institutional investors (Institutional). Further, we

account for any time-invariant fund and sponsor characteristics by introducing fund and sponsor-

fixed effects. To address a potential concern that interest rates might proxy for general macro trends

in the data we include year-fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at the year/week dimension to

account for any cross-sectional dependence of residuals due to the commonality of interest rates

across fund observations. We report the results in Table 2.

       Our results show that fund performance improves in periods of high interest rates. The

effect is statistically and economically highly significant. Consistent with our hypothesis that assets

held by MMFs are highly correlated with the level of short-term rates, we find that fund returns

respond almost one to one to changes in interest rates, as can be observed in columns (1) and (2). In

sum, the results underscore the importance of interest rates for generating fund performance. More

important, they highlight why the MMF industry is a great setting to study the consequences of the

prolonged period of low interest rates. In fact, there is no other large industry whose performance

would depend so heavily on the Fed funds rate. This is one of the reasons why we think our paper

can provide novel insights regarding the consequences of the zero interest rate policy.

       In the next test, we show that fund returns matter in that generating superior performance

has important implications for fund flows and thus for managers’ compensation. To show this

formally, we first use aggregate evidence. In Figure 1, we plot the value of assets under management

for the universe of prime funds for the period 2005-2013. The figure shows a significant decline in

assets from more than $2 trillion in 2007 to less than $1.5 trillion in 2013. This sharp decline

coincides with the period of declining interest rates and hence the declining aggregate fund

performance. Moreover, it seems that at least the first two forward guidance policy announcements




                                                  14
on March 18, 2009 and August 9, 2011 preceded a significant drop in assets invested in funds. This

result is consistent with the hypothesis that given the expectation of an extended period of low

interest rates, fund investors might have pulled out of these funds to find more profitable

investment opportunities and/or the fund companies decided to close down their operations.

        Next, we provide micro-level evidence of this effect and estimate the flow-performance

relationship at the individual fund level. Investors’ portfolio choice problem is quite straightforward:

They might respond to a significant decrease in MMFs’ profitability by migrating from MMF

accounts to bank deposits, if they look to park their money and save on fees, or by investing in other

low-risk investment opportunities, such as blue chips or high-rated corporate bonds, which pay

higher returns than MMFs. In all these cases, MMFs should experience outflows as interest rates

decrease. Formally, we estimate the following regression model:

                                 Fund Flowit = a0 + a1Fund Returnit-1 + bXit-1 + εit                (2)

        Table 3 reports the results, where our set of controls mimics that from Table 2. In all

regressions, we include sponsor-fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the sponsor level. In

column (1), we report the results for the full sample of MMFs without time-fixed effects. We

confirm the findings from earlier studies that investors exhibit strong sensitivity to fund past returns.

The coefficient of Fund Return is positive and highly statistically significant. It is also economically

significant: A one-standard-deviation increase in Fund Return results in a fund flow of about 2.08%

per week, which is approximately 40% of the standard deviation of fund flows in the data. In terms

of fund size, it means that, in one year, a fund with a one-standard-deviation higher return than the

average would almost double its size relative to the average fund. In column (2), we additionally

account for the fine week-level variation by introducing week-fixed effects and find that the effect

remains statistically and economically strong.



                                                   15
        In the next set of results, we aim to understand if there is any nonlinearity in the flow-

performance relationship as the Fed funds rate approaches the zero lower bound. In particular, we

define an indicator variable Low Rate that is equal to one in times when Fed funds rate is at most 1%,

and zero otherwise. Subsequently, we estimate the regression model in (2) with an additional

interaction effect Fund Return×Low Rate. The results are presented in columns (3) and (4) for the

models without and with week-fixed effects.

        The flow-performance relationship is stronger in periods of low interest rates as the

coefficient of the interaction term is positive and highly significant. We conclude that the changes in

interest rates towards zero bound alter considerably the payoff per unit of extra performance:

Investors are about twice as sensitive to changes in fund performance as they are in normal times.

This further underscores the need for funds to adjust their operating strategies along various

dimensions, such as exit, risk taking, and cost policy. We turn to these results in the next section.


5.2. Fund Strategies around the Zero Interest Rate Policy Events

In this section, we evaluate MMFs’ behavior around the forward-guidance policy announcements

using an event-study methodology. We first analyze changes in fund behavior in the time series—

before and after FOMC events. Subsequently, we explore the cross-section of MMFs with respect

to their sponsor types.


5.2.1. Time-Series Evidence

        In our analysis, we consider two post-event windows: a short one of three months and a

long one of six months. We analyze these two types of windows because there are strategies that

funds can immediately alter, such as the riskiness of their portfolios or expense policy, but also other

strategies for which we might not observe any effect for an extended period of time, such as the exit




                                                   16
from the market. In both cases, the pre-event window is short one month to avoid any

contamination with other events. Formally, we estimate the following regression model:

                                       Fund Strategyit = a0 + a1Eventt + bXi2006 + εit                        (3)

           We use a generic dependent variable, Fund Strategy, to measure three dimensions of fund

adjustments: exit, risk taking, and expense policy. Our independent variable of interest in all tests is

Event, an indicator variable equal to one for the period after the event date (short or long), and zero

beforehand. We also include a set of controls from models (1) and (2). These are measured as of

January 2006 to account for any endogenous movement in observables due to monetary shocks. 8

           We begin with the analysis of the exit strategy. We provide more evidence on the industry’s

evolution, investigating the changes in the number of active funds, and more micro evidence on the

fund’s probability of exiting the market. Our dependent variables are # Funds, defined as the number

of MMFs available in week t, and Exit, defined as an indicator variable equal to one if the fund

sponsor closes its fund in week t, and zero otherwise. For the first specification, we aggregate all

controls at time t by taking the value-weighted average across funds, with the weight proportional to

each fund’s assets under management. Panel A of Table 4 reports the results. In columns (1) and (2),

we present the results for the 3-month window, and in columns (3) and (4) for the 6-month window.

           We find that, on average, five and nine funds drop after the policy event within the shorter

and longer horizons, respectively. This is an economically large effect that, if cumulated over five

events, brings the total to more than 25 and 45 of lost funds. The funds leaving the market are

often large funds, which corroborates our findings in Figure 1 of declining aggregated assets under

management. Similarly, we find that the probability of exiting the fund industry increases

significantly in both horizons following the event. Though we report our results jointly for all the

8   We also entertained the models with simple one-week or one-month lags and the results are very similar.



                                                            17
events, we also find consistent results when looking at each event separately. We also find that later

events are more important than early ones, perhaps because extending the forward guidance policy

into a longer future imposed more stress on the fund industry.

        In our next test, we turn to measuring funds’ incentives to take risk. We use four different

risk measures. Spread is the difference between Fund Return and the T-bill rate; Holdings Risk is a

difference in fund weights in the riskiest asset class (bank obligations) and the safest asset class

(Repos and U.S. Treasuries and Agency assets); Maturity Risk is the weighted average maturity of the

fund; Concentration is a Herfindahl index of the portfolio holdings in risky assets, such as commercial

paper, asset-backed commercial paper, floating-rate notes, and bank obligations. Higher values of

each measure indicate a greater degree of risk taking. The results are reported in Panel B of Table 4.

        We find that as a result of the policy announcements, three out of four measures of fund risk

increase for both investment horizons. The only risk measure that goes down is Maturity Risk. This

difference is likely driven by the provision in the Dodd-Frank Act, which implemented a

significantly higher lower bound for the fraction of assets maturing within the next seven days that

MMFs need to hold. Comparing the results in columns (1)-(4) to those in (5)-(8) suggests that the

risk profile of MMF industry depends on the policy announcements, and much of the risk

adjustment happens quickly.

        The last dimension of adjustment we consider is the expense policy. It is apparent that in

the wake of low interest rates and low fund returns fund companies would want to maintain their

client relationship by reducing the fees they charge, thus effectively increasing these investors’ net of

fees returns. At the same time, there is no reason to believe that expenses truly incurred by funds

would change. Consequently, by lowering their fees to investors, fund companies would offer




                                                   18
subsidies to their investors. In the paper, we measure the degree of such subsidies by taking the

difference between incurred and charged expenses.

        We evaluate this strategic behavior by estimating the regression model in (3) with Charged

Expenses, Incurred Expenses, and Subsidy (defined as the difference between incurred and charged

expenses) as our dependent variables and Event as our main independent variable. All other controls

are the same as before. In contrast to previous regressions, we cluster standard errors at the sponsor

level since fund expenses are persistent over time and thus this dimension of dependence produces

more conservative standard errors. Panel C of Table 4 reports the results from the estimation,

separately for the 3-month and 6-month post-event window.

        We find a significant reduction (increase) in expenses charged (fund subsidies) in response to

FOMC announcements. These effects are particularly strong for the longer, six-month window,

which might reflect some sluggishness with which fund companies respond in terms of their pricing

policies. We find no differences in incurred fund expenses in response to the announced policies.


5.2.2. Cross-Sectional Evidence

        In this section, we shed more light on our economic mechanism by exploiting a sponsor-

level variation in incentives to respond to profit margin squeeze. We hypothesize that fund sponsors

with greater reputation concerns might want to internalize the negative spillovers by either offering

funds with less risk or leaving the fund industry altogether. They might also entertain different

pricing strategies. We argue that one way to measure reputation concerns is whether a fund is

sponsored by a financial institution (large reputation concerns) or is sponsored by an independent

asset management company (less reputation concerns).               Formally, we estimate the following

regression model:

Fund Strategyit = a0 + a1Eventt + a2Independent Sponsori + a3Eventt×Independent Sponsori + bXi2006 + εit   (4)



                                                     19
        In this model, Independent Sponsor is an indicator variable equal to one if the sponsor is an

independent management company and zero if it is an affiliated company. Fund Strategy and X are

defined as in model (3). The incremental effect of change with respect to sponsor type is measured

by the coefficient of the interaction term Event×Independent Sponsor. We present the results in Table 5.

        In Panel A, we report the results for # Funds and Exit for three-month (columns (1) and (2))

and six-month event window. We find that funds sponsored by independent companies are more

likely to stay following the policy announcement. This result is particularly strong for the six-month

window, which could be due to the fact that adjustments, such as exit take longer to materialize.

        In Panel B, we consider various measures of fund risk. The results generally paint a picture

that funds sponsored by independent asset management companies take on more risk following the

change in the interest rate policy. This result holds for three out of four measures or risk. The risk

adjustment already takes place within the shorter three-month period.

        The results on exit and risk taking are consistent with our hypothesis that reputation

concerns are driving strategic adjustments of MMFs. Moreover, a combination of the two results

implies an additional industry effect. Given that safer, affiliated funds are more likely to leave and

more risky, independent funds are more likely to stay, this mechanism leads to a negative selection

of funds that stay after the policy events. This, in turn, makes the entire MMF industry less stable.

        Finally, we investigate changes in the expense policy. The results are reported in Panel C.

We find no differences across fund types in terms of the policies, perhaps because this simple way

of adjustment could be used by all funds independent of their reputation concerns.

        In our cross-sectional tests, we assume that reputational concerns can be measured by a fund

sponsor’s affiliation with a financial conglomerate. However, it is possible that this cross-sectional




                                                   20
variation might capture features other than reputational concerns. For example, affiliated sponsors

might have different financial capacity to bail out their funds. To isolate the pure reputation effect,

we turn to an alternative specification in which we solely focus on funds that are not affiliated with

financial conglomerates, that is, funds whose sponsors have no bailout capacity. We argue that

sponsors with significant non-money fund components might be more concerned with their

reputation loss in the event of the run on MMFs, due to potential spillovers to their much larger

business. We measure the degree of such concern using Business Risk, the fraction of family assets

that is held in non-money fund business. Formally, we estimate the following regression model:

    Fund Strategyit = a0 + a1Eventt + a2Business Riski2006 + a3Eventt×Business Riski2006 + bXi2006 + εit   (5)

        Our empirical design follows that in model (4). Our coefficient of interest is a3. We present

the results in Table 6. In Panel A, we show the results for all adjustments for a three-month event

window, while in Panel B we focus on a six-month window. Our results are qualitatively similar to

our earlier findings: Funds with greater reputation concerns, indicated by higher Business Risk, are

less likely to take more risk, for both event horizons. In turn, they are more likely to subsidize their

MMFs. We find no strong evidence for the decision to exit the market.


5.3. Robustness Checks

In this section, we provide additional evidence on the validity of our identification strategy. First, we

examine the robustness of our results for a sample of funds that survive the effect of monetary

policy. Second, we compare the results of interest rate changes conditional on the level of short-

term rates. Third, we evaluate our results using the continuous measure of distress, defined as a

distance in time to the expected increase of rates above the threshold of 1%. Fourth, we consider

monetary policy surprises. Finally, we provide empirical evidence from the security-level data.




                                                      21
5.3.1. Survivorship

        Our results in Table 4 suggest that fund risk goes up as a result of policy announcements.

To understand these findings, it is important to isolate their driving forces. In particular, the average

yields in the MMF sample can increase for two reasons: (1) Average fund yields go up because of

negative selection that retains more risky funds in the data; (2) MMFs strategically adjust their risk in

response to policies. Our results so far, suggest the first channel is partially operating given that

riskier funds are more likely to stay. In this section, we check to what extent the second channel

also contributes to our average results.

        We address this issue using a subset of funds that are present in both periods of the event

study. Conditioning on surviving funds makes the selection issue obsolete. Formally, we estimate

the regression models in (3) and (4). In the Online Appendix, we report the results from the two

models. They are qualitatively similar to those reported in Tables 4 and 5. Hence, both economic

mechanisms might be jointly responsible for the average risk effects in the data.


5.3.2. Interest Rate Regimes

        So far, we interpreted our empirical results as being explained by unconventional monetary

policy. An alternative explanation could be that any change in interest rates might cause similar

effects in the data. While we have no reason to believe that such unconditional result holds, largely

because the argument about negative investors’ returns only applies to periods with very low interest

rates, we check whether the data indeed show the expected asymmetry.

        In our first test, we examine general consequences of changes in the Fed funds rate over the

longer period 2005-2013. The period of January 2005–December 2013 is an attractive testing ground

because it includes two distinct interest rate regimes: A regime in which the rate is higher than zero

percent (2005-2008) and a regime with zero interest rates (2009-2013). As Figure 2 indicates, in the



                                                   22
first regime, the rate had been gradually going up from 2% at the beginning of 2005 to 5.25% in the

middle of 2007 and then subsequently going down to 0-0.25% by the end of 2008. The second

regime has been manifested by a continuous zero interest rate policy (the rate has been cut to zero

on December 16, 2008).

       Our identification comes from the various changes in interest rates over the sample period.

In particular, we are interested to learn whether approaching zero-lower bound alters fund

incentives in a significant way relative to other periods. To this end, we study fund responses

separately in periods with interest rates higher than 1% and in periods with rates equal to or less

than 1%. In all specifications, we measure variables at the weekly level and then include year-by-

month or year fixed effects, thereby isolating within-month or within-year variation, which helps us

control for any other macroeconomic shocks concurrent with the monetary policy changes that

might affect MMFs’ behavior. Formally, we estimate the following model:

 Fund Strategyit = a0 + a1Fed Rateit + a2Low Ratei + a3Fed Rateit×Low Rateit + bXi2006 + εit    (6)

where Fund Strategy, Fed Rate, and X are defined as before. Low Rate is an indicator variable equal

one for periods with Fed Rate of maximum 1% and zero in periods with Fed Rate higher than 1%.

       We begin by analyzing the effect of Fed funds rate on the number of active funds and on the

probability of exit. To this end, we estimate the regression model for the two dependent variables

on the level of Fed Rate using a full sample of funds and conditional on the level of interest rates.

Apart from the standard controls we use in Table 4, the regressions for exit, in columns (3)-(4),

additionally include year/month-fixed effects and sponsor-fixed effects. We cluster standard errors

at the week level. Panel A of Table 7 reports the results.




                                                    23
        Column (1) shows the relation between Fed Rate and the number of active funds. We

observe a generally negative relationship between the two. The effect, though statistically significant,

is economically quite small. However, once we distinguish between the high and the low interest

rate period in column (2), we find that a lower interest rate during a low interest rate environment

significantly reduces the number of active funds, with a loss of about 17 funds in total. In a similar

spirit, we analyze the probability of exiting the market, controlling for funds’ characteristics,

sponsor-fixed effects as well as month-fixed effects. While we again find little effect of interest rate

changes on exit strategies in the high-rate regime (column 3), we find that changes in interest rates

from 1% towards zero have important implications for the number of funds and fund exit, as

demonstrated in column (4). In particular, following the reduction in Fed funds rate from 1% to

0%, the probability of an exit from the fund industry increases by 7.2 percentage points. These

effects are highly significant both statistically and economically.

        We next turn to results on risk taking. We estimate the regression model in which the

dependent variables are various risk measures and the main independent variable is Fed Rate. All

regressions include year/month-fixed effects and sponsor-fixed effects, and standard errors are

clustered at the week level. We report the results in Panel B. We find a statistically significant effect

of reducing Fed Rate on the increase in risk for all risk measures during period of low rates. In terms

of economic values, a reduction in the Fed Rate from 1% to 0% increases Spread by almost 57 basis

points, Holdings Risk by 5.9 percentage points, Maturity Risk by 1.7 days, and Concentration by 2.8

percentage points. These are sizable effects, especially for MMFs with returns close to zero. Such

effects are absent in periods of high interest rates.

        Finally, we evaluate the conditional effect of interest rates on fund expense policy. Charged

Expenses, Incurred Expenses, and Subsidy are our dependent variables. All other controls are the same




                                                    24
as before. In contrast to previous regressions, we cluster standard errors at the sponsor level since

fund expenses are persistent over time and thus this dimension of dependence produces more

conservative standard errors. Panel C reports the results.

        The results, in columns (1), (3), and (5) indicate an overall negative effect of interest rates on

fund expenses, both charged and incurred, and a positive effect on fund subsidies. The opposite is

true when interest rates approach zero bound: Lower rates coincide with a reduction of expenses

charged by funds. As Fed Rate goes down from 1% to 0% funds charge 8 basis points less for their

service, as presented in column (2). This reduction occurs despite the fact that incurred expenses

are generally unaffected by the interest rate change, as demonstrated in column (4). The implication

of these two facts is an increase in fund subsidies. As presented in column (6), a decrease in Fed Rate

from 1% to 0% increases fund subsidy by an economically large 7.9 basis points. This effect is

statistically and economically highly significant. Overall, the asymmetric response of expenses

suggests a strategic fund behavior in terms of their pricing policy.

        We also analyze the asymmetric behavior in the cross-section of funds. In particular, we

compare exit, risk-taking, and pricing strategies for funds with different sponsor type across

different interest rate regimes. The results from these tests confirm our prior findings in Table 6 on

the differential response of funds with different sponsors.


5.3.3. Longevity Risk

        In this section, we show that MMFs’ reaction to the low interest regime becomes even more

significant as the funds expect this regime to last longer. Intuitively, the longer the funds expect the

low interest rate regime to last, the greater incentives the funds should have to pursue other

strategies that would keep them afloat. We define the threshold level for low interest rates as 1%.

Subsequently, we back out the date the market expects the Fed funds rate to exceed 1% from the



                                                   25
Fed funds rates futures data.      Specifically, we define a new variable, Longevity, as the natural

logarithm of 1 + the number of days that would take for the 30-day interest rates to exceed 1%.

The values are interpolated off the futures yield curve.

        We estimate this regression model using both the unconditional sample (in the Online

Appendix) and the sample for which the interest rate is below 1% (Table 8). Whereas we do not

find a significant effect for the fund exit, we do find that higher values of Longevity predict a

significantly higher Spread, Holdings Risk, Concentration, and Subsidy. Thus, when fund managers

expect a longer time for the interest rate to increase, they are more likely to increase the riskiness of

their portfolios. They are also more likely to receive subsidies from their fund families. Our results

are broadly consistent across unconditional and conditional samples, but we find a stronger

economic significance for the sample from the low interest rate regime.


5.3.4. Monetary Policy Surprises

        In the previous sections, we utilized changes in short-term interest rates near the zero-lower

bound and the forward guidance announcements as proxies for monetary policy shocks. The

concern might be that such changes in monetary policy might be anticipated by financial markets as

they reflect a systematic response to macro-economic environment. So far we have addressed this

issue by including time-fixed effects at high frequencies. Here, we consider an alternative approach

of using the unanticipated component of policy announcements to predict MMFs’ behavior. The

use of announcements is potentially valuable because it allows us to identify shocks to the

information set of agents and understand the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy.

A classic study that attempts to disentangle the expected and unexpected components of monetary




                                                   26
policy from Fed funds futures and studies if the latter can account for the daily variation of bond

yields around FOMC announcements is Kuttner (2001). 9

         However, there are two problems with this approach. First, the data constructed by Kuttner

(2001) show that in the last few years the unanticipated component is extremely small, at the order

of two basis points. This means that most of the information about changes in interest rates is

anticipated by financial markets. Second, data on short-term target changes are likely to

underestimate the extent of exogenous variation in monetary policy, because even when market

participants fully foresee target rate changes, statements of the policy committee members can still

provide valuable information about the path of future policy.

         In our study, we employ the methodology of Buraschi et al. (2014) in which they employ

individual agents forecasts of Fed funds rate, GDP, and inflation to construct an empirical proxy for

policy shocks from the residuals of Taylor rule regressions, and show that path shocks account for a

significant fraction of the variance of one-year expected excess returns on 2-5 years bonds and are

also priced in the cross-section of equity returns. Following a similar approach, we construct the

monetary shocks by collecting data on all FOMC meetings. For each FOMC meeting, we compute

the change in yield for Treasury bonds with maturities 1, 3, 5, 7, and 10 years from the closing price

the day before the meeting until the morning after the meeting. If there is a two-day meeting, we

use the difference over two days. From these shocks, we extract the first principal component and

observe that the loadings on eigenvectors are similar across all maturities, which suggests that the

first principal component explains the maximum amount of variance of the series.




9Other papers that construct a factor which proxies for news about the future path of policy are Gurkaynak, Sack, and
Swanson (2005) for the U.S. and Andersson (2010) for the Euro-zone area.



                                                         27
          In the Online Appendix, we report the relationship between the measure of monetary policy

shocks and the MMFs’ exit, risk-taking, and price-setting behavior. We show that an unexpected

decrease in interest rates increases the likelihood for these funds to exit the market. This result is

significant only in the low interest rate regime. Further, we provide evidence corroborating our

previous findings about the higher risk-taking incentives for the funds during periods of low interest

rates. Both the weekly annualized spread and the fraction of assets held in risky assets significantly

increase when the funds witness an unexpected decrease in interest rates. These results mirror the

ones presented in Table 7. Finally, we analyze the effect on expenses for the universe of MMFs and

the relationship with changes in monetary policy. In this case, the unexpected component of these

changes has no significant effect on their expenses, both charged and incurred, and on the subsidy

paid by the sponsors. For all the previous results, the magnitude is lower than previously shown, but

this is expected as these monetary policy shocks only capture the unforeseen portion of the rate

change.


5.3.5. Evidence from Portfolio Holdings

          In this section, we use data on fund holdings to argue that our results are driven by active

portfolio decisions rather than by ex ante matching of funds and their holdings. We also show that

the policy effects have nontrivial role in issuers’ borrowing and capital structure decisions.

Composition Effects

We provide further evidence on the “reaching-for-yield” behavior using detailed information on

their holdings. We collect the data on the yields of the individual securities held by the funds from

the N-MFP form. These data became available in November 2010 as a consequence of the Dodd-

Frank Act and contain all the information related to the portfolio holdings of U.S. MMFs, such as

the issuer name, the security yields, the transaction date as well as a description of the security type



                                                   28
at a monthly frequency. We examine if the new securities added to a fund’s portfolio after the ZIRP

shocks feature a higher yield than the ones added before the shocks. Given the sample period, we

are able to analyze only three of the events in Table 1. Figure 3 presents the results, with each panel

considering two empirical distributions: one for the month before, and another one for three

months after each policy event. The results indicate a rightward shift in the distribution of yields

after the monetary policy announcements, that is, fund portfolios on average hold assets with higher

yields. The results from the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests confirm that the differences between the

respective two distributions are statistically significant.

        In an additional test, we examine whether the increase in yields is a function of new

additions made by funds to their portfolios after the policy announcement or is a legacy effect of the

portfolios formed before the announcement. To this end, we compare the average yields of the

securities added to the portfolio right before with those added right after the events. Formally, we

estimate the following regression model.


                                  Mean Yieldit = a0 + a1Eventit + bXi2006 + εit                     (7)

where Mean Yield is the average yield of all securities of a given fund at time t, and Event is an

indicator variable equal to one for the period after the ZIRP shocks and zero for the period before

the ZIRP shocks. All other controls mimic those in model (3). The coefficient of our main interest

is a1. Table 9 presents the results.

        Columns (1)-(3) present estimates for the three different events, controlling for year-month

and fund-fixed effects. The coefficient of Event is positive and statistically significant for all three

events, which means that the new securities feature significantly higher yields in the post period

relative to the pre period. We further assess whether these results are due to monetary policy effects

or are a reflection of general macro trends in the data. To this end, we design a placebo test in


                                                     29
which we estimate a similar regression model for two random event windows, one (January 2011)

picked for the period before the first event and one (March 2013) picked for the period after the last

event. The results, in columns (4) and (5), indicate that the average yields on the new securities, if

anything, decrease over time when considering these different dates. Hence, it is unlikely that our

results are a consequence of a general macro trend.

Leverage Effects

To further show that changes in MMF industry actually affect the firms that raise capital from

MMFs, we collect information on the outstanding debt that is provided by MMFs for each issuer in

our sample. We then estimate the following regression model:


                       Outstanding Debti,t = α + βPost Fund Closurei,,t + δi + γt +εi,t,            (8)


where Post Fund Closure is an indicator variable equal to one after the fund has been closed; issuer

and month-fixed effects capture persistent differences across issuers and common shocks. Panel B

of Table 9 shows that the firms borrowing from MMFs that close see their outstanding debt decline

by at least 15%. Together with the previous evidence this result suggests that the closure of MMFs

make borrowing firms delever.

        A potential concern with this analysis is that some combination of regulation and

quantitative easing could make it attractive for banks to term out their funding or make it more

attractive for risky firms to increase their demand for funding. If MMFs with less reputational

capital were already lending to riskier firms, it would be natural for them to increase their lending to

the same firms even after the various policy announcements.

        To address this concern, we show that the composition of issuers that are borrowing from a

given MMF is actually changing around the policy event. To this end, we compute the number of



                                                    30
issuers that borrow from each MMF at a given time. Panel C of Table 9 shows that this number

decreases significantly after the events, thus suggesting that MMFs are not merely lending to the

same firms. Moreover, we argue that the affected funds are not simply responding to changes in

their existing issuers’ credit demand but also actively change the holdings of their portfolios. First,

we show that after the monetary policy event the distribution of yields of fund holdings shifts to the

right, which suggests that the borrowing firms become riskier. Second, we show that the average

riskiness of the newly added securities, measured by their yields, increases as well. Third, we show

that the outstanding debt of the issuers that were borrowing from a MMF that closed after the event

significantly decreases relative to the outstanding debt of issuers borrowing from other MMFs. If

this were an increasing credit demand story, it would be hard to argue that this should apply only to

the issuers that were connected to MMFs that closed.

       Finally, we provide evidence on the link between reduction in available capital coming from

our monetary shock and the capital structure decisions for nonfinancial firms. Specifically, we match

the information about nonfinancial issuers from the MMF portfolio holdings data to their leverage

data from Compustat. This allows us to test whether leverage of the corporations that borrow from

MMFs that close down due to low interest rates is significantly different than leverage of the

unaffected borrowers. We uniquely identify about 80 firms in the data for which we can match

information from Compustat. We estimate the following regression model:

                         Leveragei,t = α + β1Post ×Closurei,,t + β2Closurei,,t+ β3Posti,,t+δi + γt +εi,t   (9)

where we restrict our attention to the two quarters before and after a fund’s closure. This narrow

window is important to ensure that changes in leverage are not driven by other confounding effects.

Leverage is book leverage, defined as the ratio of total debt outstanding and the book value of assets.

Fund Closure identifies the treatment group, that is, the corporations that borrow from MMFs that



                                                     31
close during our sample period. Post is an indicator variable equal to one for the quarters after the

funds’ closure. The results are presented in Panel D of Table 9.

         In column (1), we include time-fixed effects, while in column (2) we add issuer-fixed effects

to capture any time-invariant heterogeneity across issuers that might influence their leverage choices,

e.g., differences in their growth rates. Column (3) reports the results for the average leverage in the

pre and post periods. This specification has the advantage of being less susceptible to the criticism

that leverage is a very persistent variable, which might bias our results due to autocorrelated

residuals. In the most restrictive specification, we find that corporations reduce their leverage on

average by 1 percentage point. Next, we investigate the persistence of this effect. Column (4)

reports the results for the one-year window around the fund closure. While the sign of the

coefficient is the same, the results are not statistically significant. This finding suggests that the

repercussion of closing down a MMF for the firms might be significant but temporary, because

firms might be able to borrow from other MMFs or other institutions in the longer term. At the

same time, the real effects of such temporary liquidity constraints might be more significant,

especially if issuers rely on MMFs to roll over their existing debt. Overall, our results indicate that

shocks hitting the MMFs industry might have important consequences for firms’ credit availability. 10



6. Industry Effects

Our results so far indicate three margins of adjustment for money funds: risk taking, exit, and fee

waivers. In this section, we examine the consequences of the exit from the MMF industry for
10
   We also perform another test in which we investigate whether companies borrowing from riskier funds increase their
leverage following the monetary shock. Specifically, we divide funds into two categories: risky and safe. The former are
the ones for which risk measures (spread, concentration, and holdings risk) are above the median value in the data or
those affiliated with an independent sponsor. We focus our attention on three policy events that occurred after 2010. We
then analyze the leverage of corporations that increased their borrowing from risky MMFs, relative to companies that
did not increase such borrowing, to see if this led to an increase in their total leverage right after the policy events
compared to the quarter before the policy event. We do not find support for such an effect in the data. This suggests
that companies increasing their borrowing from riskier MMFs might do so as a substitute to other forms of credit.



                                                          32
resource reallocation in the entire mutual fund industry. To the extent that exiting money fund

business frees up management resources and investor clientele, fund families might want to

accommodate such space by opening new funds specializing in different asset classes. A suggestive

evidence of this fact is Figure 4, in which we report a time-series evolution of assets under

management for MMFs and bond funds. It is clear from the graph that the correlation between the

two series is negative. This section explores this effect in more details.

        To this end, we collect detailed information from CRSP on mutual fund families’ closures

and creations of new funds. We expect the fund families that decide to close their MMFs to be

more likely to open a new fund as a way to redistribute their unused resources. We further sharpen

our hypothesis by differentiating across fund strategies. For example, fund managers might be easier

to employ in fixed income rather than equity funds. Similarly, investors in MMFs might find bond

funds to be closer investment substitutes. Formally, we estimate the following regression:


            Number of Fundsit = a0 + a1Aftert + a2Treatedit + a3Aftert×Treatedit + bXi2006 + εit,   (10)


where the dependent variable Number of Funds is the number of funds of a given style (money, bond,

balance, and equity) at month t within a fund family i. After is an indicator variable equal to one for

the month following the closure of the money fund, and zero for the month before the closure.

Treated is an indicator variable equal to one for the families experiencing MMF closures in month t

(treated group), and zero for the families that do not close their money funds in month t (control

group). Our coefficient of interest is a3. To capture any other variation that might drive both the

closure and the opening of funds, we include several family controls (X), such as the log(Family

TNA) and the Fund Family Return, as well as, family-fixed effects. We further distinguish between

the periods of low interest rate regime (odd columns) and high interest rate regime (even columns)

to see if the response to shocks is symmetric or not. Table 10 presents the results.



                                                     33
        Columns (1) and (2) of Panel A report the results for MMFs. We observe a negative and

statistically significant coefficient a3. The effect is particularly strong for the low interest rate regime.

Specifically, in that period, we find that treated families experience a reduction of more than three

funds compared to the control group. This result is not purely mechanical, because fund families

might decide to close one money fund to substitute it with another one. Finding the negative effect

validates our empirical strategy.

        The subsequent six columns report the results for three different asset classes. In columns

(3) and (4), we show that fund families that close their MMFs, tend to open more than six bond

funds. This effect is only present in the low-interest rate period underscoring the importance of the

monetary shock. In columns (5)-(8), we report results from estimating similar specifications for

equity and balanced funds. We find no significant differences between treatment and control groups

in the creation of these types of funds. One identification concern is that the creation of bond funds

might be driven by movement in interest rates, or by a general trend in the industry, and not merely

by the closure of MMFs in the same fund family. However, we can reject this possibility on two

grounds. First, we find a significant effect only in the low-interest regime, and there is no general

trend in the creation of bond funds, as captured by the insignificant coefficient of the After variable.

Second, using the difference-in-differences specification ensures that the general effects of changes

in interest rate or market conditions on the profitability of bond funds should not differentially

impact the fund families that closed a money fund and the ones that did not.

        In Panel B, we further explore these industry spillovers. Here, we collect data on the

different types of bond funds: short, medium and long-term. We analyze what are the types of bond

funds that are the most affected by this reallocation. We find that the most significant impact is on

the short-term bond funds: families that close their MMFs after the reduction in the interest rates




                                                     34
are more likely to open a new short-term bond fund. We do not find an effect for medium-term

funds, and we find a marginally significant effect for the long-term funds. We can interpret these

results as evidence that there might be a reallocation towards funds that have maturity similar to that

of MMFs and to funds that might exhibit a higher risk profile such as long-term bond funds, a result

that is consistent with our reaching for yield hypothesis.

        In sum, our results provide suggestive evidence that bond funds are the closest substitute to

MMFs in terms of resource allocation, either because the managerial skills can be easiest deployed in

bond funds, or because investors in MMFs are most likely to migrate to bond funds because they

match most closely the risk profile of MMFs.

        To shed more light on these competing mechanisms, we examine the managerial reallocation

across asset classes and fund families. To this end, we collect information about all the managers

that exit the MMFs industry. We track the managers’ subsequent career outcomes using data from

Morningstar, CRSP, iMoneyNet, and additional Internet searches, such as Investor Observer,

LinkedIn, Zabasearch, Zoominfo, and individual fund prospectuses.

        We distinguish among five possible career outcomes: (1) staying in the same family and

running another MMF, (2) staying in the same family and running a non-money market fund, (3)

going to a different family and running a MMF, (4) going to a different family and running a non-

money market fund, (5) leaving the fund industry (moving to private business, government

institutions, setting up own company, etc.). We condition on a single manager departure in a given

date (there are instances in which managers were running multiple funds at the same time, so we

count them as one single departure). We report the results in Table 11.




                                                   35
        There is a 50% probability that the manager will not work in another MMF in the same or

other families (i.e., 1 minus the sum of columns (1) and (3)). This seems to suggest that the exit from

the money fund industry is quite important perhaps because opportunities in the industry deplete or

managers voluntarily decide to pursue different career paths. Further, we compare the fraction of

managers that stay in the same family with those that decide to leave. We find that there is only a

48.4% chance that the manager stays in the same family, whereas 21.3% of managers that left after

the money fund closed pursue different careers in the financial industry. This result suggests that the

creation of new bond funds is likely a response to investors’ demand for a comparable product and

not catering to individual managers’ career concerns.



7. Concluding Remarks

With a rapid decline in economic output and a surge in unemployment rates, monetary authorities

worldwide launched an unprecedented policy of keeping short-term interest rates at record low

levels. Some critics have voiced concerns that the policy might have led to undesired dislocations in

various parts of financial markets. This paper empirically investigates such consequences in the

context of money funds. Given that money funds primarily invest in assets whose returns are linked

to the Fed funds rate, monetary policy plays an important role in their operations.

        Our novel evidence suggests that in the times of unusually low interest rates fund managers

increased, on average, their portfolios’ risk. In an attempt to deliver nonnegative net returns to their

investors almost all funds significantly reduced their expenses charged to investors, even though the

incurred expenses did not vary much over time. The observed subsidies amounted to an economically

large value of $27 million per average fund and about $7.3 billion for all funds. We also show that

funds that were not successful in retaining their investors’ base, or were worried about negative




                                                  36
reputation spillovers, were more likely to exit. Our results further suggest that the zero lower bound

policy triggered a reduction in capital supply to financial and large corporate sector and increased the

financial markets’ exposure to costly runs and defaults. 11 While our results hint that some of the

adjustments are economically adverse, a full welfare analysis is needed to establish such conclusions.

         More broadly, although our empirical results speak mostly to one part of financial markets,

we want to emphasize that the effects we document are not necessarily limited to money fund

industry only. The reaching-for yield phenomenon has been observed in other markets: for example,

an average insurance company has shifted its assets towards riskier equity holdings, reaching the

level of equity exposure of almost 20% in 2014. Similarly, pension funds, expanded their holdings

into more than 60% in equity, away from typically held bonds. More work is needed to better

understand the transmission mechanisms underlying the effects of the zero lower bound monetary

policy on the stability of financial markets.

References
Andersson, M. 2010. Using intraday data to gauge financial market responses to federal reserve and ECB
monetary policy decisions. International Journal of Central Banking 6.2: 117-146.
Baba, N., McCauley, R., and Ramaswamy, S. 2009. U.S. Dollar money market funds and non-US banks. BIS
Quarterly Review, March.
Bernanke, B., Reinhart, V., and Sack, B. 2004. Monetary policy alternatives at the zero bound: an empirical
assessment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2004, 1-100.
Buraschi, A., Carnelli, A., and Whelan, P. 2014. Monetary policy and treasury risk premia. Unpublished
working paper. Imperial College of London.
Chernenko, S., and Sunderam, A. 2014. Frictions in shadow banking: Evidence from the lending behavior of
money market funds. Review of Financial Studies 27, 1717-1750.
Chevalier, J. and Ellison, G. 1997. Career concerns of mutual fund managers. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114, 389-432.
Chodorow-Reich, G. 2014. Effects of unconventional monetary policy on financial institutions. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), 155-204.



11 We find that during the low interest rate regime many funds have submitted letters of support to the regulator, which
is a good proxy for the increase in expected default.



                                                           37
Christoffersen, S. K. 2001. Why do money fund managers voluntarily waive their fees?. Journal of Finance 56,
1117-1140.
Christoffersen, S. K. and Musto, D. K. 2002. Demand curves and the pricing of money management. Review
of Financial Studies 15, 1499-1524.
Di Maggio, M. 2013. Market turmoil and destabilizing speculation. Unpublished working paper. Columbia
Business School.
Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Palmer, C., 2015. Unconventional monetary policy and the allocation of credit.
Unpublished working paper. Columbia Business School.

Duygan‐Bump, B., Parkinson, P., Rosengren, E., Suarez, G. A., & Willen, P. 2013. How effective were the
federal reserve emergency liquidity facilities? Evidence from the asset‐backed commercial paper money
market mutual fund liquidity facility. Journal of Finance 68(2), 715-737.
Gürkaynak, R., Sack, B., and Swanson, E. 2005. Do actions speak louder than words? The response of asset
prices to monetary policy actions and statements. International Journal of Central Banking 1.1.
Jimenez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydro, and J. Saurina 2014. Hazardous times for monetary policy: what do
twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects of monetary policy on credit risk-taking?. Econometrica
82, 463-505.
Kacperczyk, M., and Schnabl, P. 2013. How safe are money market funds?. Quarterly Journal of Economics
128, 1073-1122.
Kuttner, K. N. 2001. Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: evidence from the fed funds futures
market. Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 523–544.
Maddaloni, A. and J.-L. Peydró 2011. Bank risk-taking, securitization, supervision, and low interest rates:
evidence from the Euro-area and the U.S. lending standards. Review of Financial Studies 24, 2121-2165.
McCabe, P. 2010. The cross section of money market fund risks and financial crises. Unpublished working
paper. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Rajan, R. 2010. Fault lines. Princeton University Press.
Stein, J. C. 2013. Overheating in credit markets: origins, measurement, and policy responses. Delivered at
restoring household financial stability after the great recession: why household balance sheets matter, a
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis.
Strahan, P., and Tanyeri, B. 2015. Once burned, twice shy: money market fund responses to a systemic
liquidity shock. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 50, 119-144.
Woodford, M. 2003. Interest rates and prices: foundations of a theory of monetary policy. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Yellen, J. 2011. Remarks at the international conference: real and financial linkage and monetary policy. Bank
of Japan, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20110601a.htm.




                                                       38
                Figure 1: Assets Under Management of Prime Money Funds: 2005-2014

Note: The figure presents the evolution of weekly total net assets under management for the universe of prime money
market funds over the period 2005-2014.




                                    Figure 2: Fed Funds Rate: 2005-2014




                                                        39
                                Figure 3: Yields Distribution and ZIRP Shocks

Note: Empirical distributions of the fund portfolio yields before and after the three ZIRP shocks.



                                                           40
                          Figure 4: Money Funds vs. Bond Funds AUM: 2005-2014
The figure presents the evolution of weekly total net assets for the universe of prime money market funds and bond
funds over the period 2005-2014.




                              Table 1: Zero Interest Rate Policy Events (ZIRP)
           We report the dates of FOMC meetings in which the Fed decided to change the Fed funds rate or
           provided policy guidance about the prevailing zero interest rate policy.
                             Date                                               Event
            December 16, 2008                                   Fed funds rate reduced to 0-0.25%
            March 18, 2009                                 Zero rates for “an extended period of time”
            August 9, 2011                                         Zero rates at least until 2013
            January 25, 2012                                       Zero rates at least until 2014
            September 13, 2012                                     Zero rates at least until 2015




                                                          41
                                                Table 2: Fund Gross Returns and Fed Funds Rate
 The sample is all U.S. prime money market funds over the period January 2005-December 2013. The dependent variable is Fund Gross Return computed as
 the annualized return. Fed Rate is the annualized Fed funds rate. Control variables include the natural logarithm of fund assets, the natural logarithm of
 family assets, the expense ratio (charged), fund age, fund flow computed as a percentage change in total net assets from time t to time t+1 adjusted for
 market appreciation, standard deviation of fund flow growth, and an indicator variable equal to one if the fund is offered to institutional investors and
 zero otherwise. All regressions are at the weekly level. Column (1) includes year-fixed effects, column (2) includes fund-fixed effects, column (3) includes
 sponsor-fixed effects, and column (4) includes year-fixed and sponsor-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the week level. ***, **, * represent
 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.
                                                              (1)                    (2)                     (3)                   (4)
                  Fed Rate                                93.025***             94.370***                62.291***             62.086***
                                                           (1.012)                (0.963)                  (5.087)              (5.083)
                  Controls                                   Yes                    Yes                      Yes                  Yes
                  Year-Fixed Effects                         No                     No                       Yes                  Yes
                  Fund-Fixed Effects                         Yes                    No                       No                   No
                  Sponsor-Fixed Effects                      No                     Yes                      No                   Yes
                  Observations                             98,496                 98,496                   98,496               98,496

                                                   Table 3: The Flow-Performance Relationship
The sample is all U.S. prime money funds over the period January 2005-December 2013. The dependent variable is Fund Flow, computed as the percentage
change in total net assets from time t to time t+1, adjusted for market appreciation. Fed Rate is the annualized Fed funds rate. Fund Return is the annualized
fund return. Control variables include the natural logarithm of fund assets, the natural logarithm of family assets, expense ratio (charged), fund age, fund
flow computed as a percentage change in total net assets from time t to time t+1 adjusted for market appreciation, standard deviation of fund flow, and an
indicator variable equal to one if the fund is offered to institutional investors and zero otherwise. All regressions are at the weekly level and include
sponsor-fixed effects. High Rate restricts the sample to the period of high interest rates (Fed funds rate greater than 1%). Low Rate restricts the sample to
the period of low interest rates (Fed funds rate between 0 and 1%). Columns (1), (4), and (5) additionally include week-fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the fund sponsor level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.
                                                                (1)                  (2)                   (3)                (4)
                     VARIABLES\MODEL                                     Flow                                       Flow
                     Fund Return                             0.001***            0.009***              0.002***            0.006***
                                                              (0.000)             (0.001)               (0.000)             (0.002)
                     Fund Return×Low Rate                                                               0.002**            0.006***
                                                                                                        (0.001)             (0.002)
                    Controls                                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                    Sponsor-Fixed Effects                      Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                    Week-Fixed Effects                         No                   Yes                  No                   Yes
                    Observations                             98,948               98,948               98,948               98,948




                                                                             42
                                                                Table 4: Fund Strategies and ZIRP Shocks
    The sample is all U.S. prime MMFs. The estimation window includes one month before and three months or six months after the event dates defined in Table 1. Event
    is an indicator variable equal to one for the period after the event date and zero for the period before the event date. In Panel A, the dependent variables are Number of
    Funds, defined as the number of funds in a given period, and Exit, defined as an indicator variable equal to one if the fund exits the fund industry in week t. In Panel
    B, the dependent variables are: the weekly annualized spread (Spread), the fraction of assets held in risky assets, net of the riskless assets (Holdings Risk), average
    portfolio maturity (Maturity Risk), and portfolio concentration, defined as a Herfindahl Index of asset classes (Concentration). In Panel C, the dependent variables are
    Charged Expenses, defined as percentage expense rate charged by a fund, Incurred Expenses, defined as percentage expense rate incurred by a fund, Subsidy, defined as the
    difference between incurred and charged expenses. Control variables include the annualized fund return, the natural logarithm of fund assets, the natural logarithm of
    family assets, expense ratio (charged), fund age, fund flow computed as a percentage change in total net assets from time t to time t+1 adjusted for market appreciation,
    standard deviation of fund flow, and an indicator variable equal to one if the fund is offered to institutional investors and zero otherwise. All regressions are at the
    weekly level and include year-fixed and sponsor-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the week level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance.
                                                                                 Panel A: Fund Exit
                                                                                (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
                             VARIABLES                                    # Funds                   Exit           # Funds                    Exit
                                                                                  3 Months Ahead                             6 Months Ahead
                             Event                                        -5.400***             0.002**           -9.000***                0.002**
                                                                           (0.543)              (0.001)               (1.152)                (0.001)
                             Controls                                        No                     Yes                No                     Yes
                             Year-Fixed Effects                              No                     Yes                No                     Yes
                             Sponsor-Fixed Effects                           No                     Yes                No                     Yes
                             Observations                                    10               18,568                    10                   25,914
                                                                              Panel B: Fund Risk
                                    (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                  (5)                  (6)                 (7)           (8)
VARBLES                           Spread          Holding Risk         Maturity       Concentration           Spread             Holding Risk          Maturity    Concentration
                                                          3 Months Ahead                                                               6 Months Ahead
Event                            34.329***           0.954***          -1.216**             0.005***         21.341**              0.879***            -1.347***      0.005***
                                  (12.113)           (0.323)            (0.503)             (0.002)          (10.471)              (0.271)              (0.386)        (0.001)
Controls                             Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes                 Yes            Yes
Year-Month-Fixed Effects            Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                   Yes                 Yes            Yes
Sponsor-Fixed Effects               Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                   Yes                 Yes            Yes
Observations                       16,830            16,882             16,879              16,882            23,462                23,527              23,524         23,527




                                                                                       43
                                                                           Panel C: Fund Expenses
                                                  (1)                (2)               (3)                     (4)                    (5)                   (6)
                 VARIABLES                     Charged            Incurred             Subsidy               Charged                Incurred              Subsidy
                                                               3 months ahead                                                    6 months ahead
                 Event                          -0.001             -0.002**             -0.002               -0.014**              -0.003***              0.010**
                                                (0.002)             (0.001)             (0.002)               (0.006)               (0.001)               (0.005)
                 Controls                        Yes                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                  Yes
                 Sponsor-Fixed Effects           Yes                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                  Yes
                 Year-Fixed Effects              Yes                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                  Yes
                 Observations                   18,568             18,506               18,506               25,914                  25,829               25,829

                                         Table 5: Fund Strategies and ZIRP Shocks: Conditioning on Sponsor Type
   The design follows Table 5. Independent Sponsor is an indicator variable equal one if the fund sponsor is an independent asset management company, and zero otherwise.
                                                                              Panel A: Fund Exit
                                                                              (1)              (2)                         (3)                    (4)
                               VARIABLES                                   # Funds          Exit                        # Funds          Exit
                                                                               3 Months Ahead                               6 Months Ahead
                               Event                                       -3.280***              0.002***              -2.862***              0.002***
                                                                            (0.803)                (0.001)               (0.767)                (0.001)
                               Independent Sponsor×Event                     0.077                 -0.002                0.178**               -0.003**
                                                                            (0.067)                (0.002)               (0.081)                (0.001)
                               Controls                                       Yes              Yes                         Yes                  Yes
                               Year-Fixed Effects                             No               Yes                         No                   Yes
                               Sponsor-Fixed Effects                          No               Yes                         No                   Yes
                               Observations                                   20             18,568                        20                  25,914
                                                                              Panel B: Fund Risk
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)                     (4)                     (5)                   (6)              (7)             (8)
VARIABLES                      Spread         Holding Risk      Maturity               Concentration             Spread              Holding Risk      Maturity       Concentration
                                                     3 Months Ahead                                                                         6 Months Ahead
Independent Sponsor            -3.837            6.642**           4.768***                  0                   -0.776                  5.681             5.107***      -0.011
                               (2.878)           (3.309)            (1.366)               (0.020)                (2.940)                (3.492)             (1.484)      (0.021)
Independent                   9.215***          1.821***           -1.010**               0.008**               4.646***                3.405**           -1.897***     0.026***
Sponsor×Event                  (1.239)           (0.634)            (0.460)               (0.004)                (1.668)                (1.533)            (0.709)       (0.007)
Controls                        Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                 Yes          Yes
Y/M-F.E.                        Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                 Yes          Yes
Observations                   16,830             16,882            16,879                16,882                 23,462                 23,527              23,524       23,527



                                                                                        44
                                                                      Panel C: Fund Expenses
                                                       (1)             (2)               (3)                    (4)                (5)                   (6)
          VARIABLES                               Charged           Incurred           Subsidy               Charged            Incurred           Subsidy
                                                                 3 months ahead                                              6 months ahead
          Independent Sponsor                     -0.003              0.030             0.032                 -0.006              0.029                 0.034
                                                  (0.020)            (0.039)           (0.027)                (0.022)            (0.039)               (0.027)
          Independent Sponsor×Event                0.005              0.008             0.003                  0.011              0.011                   0
                                                  (0.006)            (0.005)           (0.007)                (0.012)            (0.010)               (0.013)
          Controls                                  Yes                Yes              Yes                    Yes                Yes                   Yes
          Week-Fixed Effects                        Yes                Yes              Yes                    Yes                Yes                   Yes
          Observations                             18,568             18,506           18,506                 25,914             25,829                25,829

                                         Table 6: Variation in Reputation within Independent Fund Sponsors
The design follows Table 5. Business Risk is the ratio of assets under management held by a fund family in non-money funds and total assets under management. Panel
A presents the results for the 3-month announcement horizon and Panel B for the 6-month horizon.
                                                                       Panel A: 3-Month Horizon
                         Variable             Exit             Spread         Holdings Risk       Maturity             Concentration        Subsidy
                          Event               0.001           25.207**             4.368*          -0.120                 0.018*           -0.050***
                                             (0.002)          (12.275)            (2.439)         (0.936)                 (0.010)           (0.015)
                         Event×              -0.001           -11.003*            -3.661*         -1.774*                 -0.016           0.062***
                       Business Risk         (0.003)           (6.241)            (2.349)         (1.002)                 (0.012)           (0.019)
                         Controls              Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes                     Yes               Yes
                       Sponsor F.E.            Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes                     Yes               Yes
                        Year F.E.              Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes                     Yes               Yes
                       Observations           7635              7030                7036            7036                   7036               7619
                                                                       Panel B: 6-Month Horizon
                         Variable             Exit             Spread         Holdings Risk        Maturity            Concentration        Subsidy
                          Event              -0.001           22.596**           7.848***          2.395**               0.036***          -0.052***
                                             (0.004)          (10.835)            (2.016)          (0.958)                (0.008)           (0.011)
                         Event×              -0.001          -11.003**          -8.226***         -4.705***              -0.039***         0.079***
                       Business Risk         (0.005)           (4.826)            (2.367)          (1.113)                (0.009)           (0.015)
                         Controls              Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes                    Yes               Yes
                       Sponsor F.E.            Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes                    Yes               Yes
                        Year F.E.              Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes                    Yes               Yes
                       Observations          10,659             9789                9802             9802                   9802             10,633




                                                                                45
                                                       Table 7: Comparisons across Interest Rate Regimes
The sample is all U.S. prime money market funds over the period January 2005-December 2013. The definitions of all dependent and control variables follow those in
Table 5. All regressions are at the weekly level and include year/month-fixed and sponsor-fixed effects. Low Rate is an indicator variable equal to one if Fed funds rate
is below 1%, and zero otherwise. Standard errors are clustered at the week level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.
                                                                                  Panel A: Fund Exit
                                                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                    (4)
                         VARIABLES                                                # Funds                                  Exit
                                                                                                               RF>1                  RF<=1
                         Fed Rate                                     -1.555***        -2.348***                0.003               -0.072***
                                                                       (0.475)           (0.258)               (0.002)               (0.016)
                         Low Rate                                                     -132.783***
                                                                                        (12.459)
                         Fed Rate×Low Rate                                             16.861***
                                                                                         (3.171)
                         Controls                                       Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes
                         Year/Month-F. E.                               No                 No                   Yes                    Yes
                         Sponsor F. E.                                  No                 No                   Yes                    Yes
                         Observations                                   442                442                 50,334                 48,458
                                                                         Panel B: Fund Risk
                                                                        (1)                (2)                     (3)                    (4)
                         VARIABLES                                     Spread            Holdings Risk     Maturity Risk          Concentration
                         Fed Rate                                       2.713             -0.048               -0.893                  0.001
                                                                      (26.732)            (0.28)              (0.649)                (0.001)
                         Fed Rate×Low Rate                           -56.611***         -5.941***             -1.673*               -0.028***
                                                                      (13.628)           (0.723)              (1.032)                (0.006)
                         Controls                                        Yes                Yes                 Yes                     Yes
                         Sponsor-Fixed Effects                           Yes                Yes                 Yes                     Yes
                         Year/Month-Fixed Effects                        Yes                Yes                 Yes                     Yes
                         Observations                                  94,521             95,264              95,253                  94,264
                                                                        Panel C: Fund Expenses
                                                 (1)                 (2)                (3)                  (4)                    (5)                      (6)
 VARIABLES\MODEL                                   Charged Expenses                          Incurred Expenses                                  Subsidy
 Fed Rate                                    -0.006***         -0.005***                 -0.002           0.004***            0.004***                     0.008***
                                              (0.001)            (0.001)                 (0.002)           (0.001)             (0.001)                      (0.001)
 Fed Rate×Low Rate                                              0.080***                                   -0.001                                         -0.079***
                                                                 (0.027)                                   (0.011)                                          (0.022)
 Controls                                       Yes                Yes                     Yes               Yes                   Yes                        Yes
 Sponsor-Fixed Effects                          Yes                Yes                     Yes               Yes                   Yes                        Yes
 Year-Fixed Effects                             Yes                Yes                     Yes               Yes                   Yes                        Yes
 Observations                                  98,484            98,484                  98,484            98,484                 98,484                    98,484

                                                                                    46
                                                               Table 8: The Effect of Longevity Risk
The sample is all U.S. prime MMFs over the period January 2005-December 2013. The definitions of all dependent variables follow those in Table 5. Longevity is defined as the
natural logarithm of 1 + the number of days that would take for the interest rates (30-day) to exceed 1%. The values are interpolated off the future yield curve. All regressions are at
the weekly level and include year/month-fixed and sponsor-fixed effects. We focus on the case in which the Fed funds rate is below 1%. Standard errors are clustered at the week
level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.
                             Variable            Exit           Spread         Holdings Risk         Maturity       Concentration          Subsidy
                        Longevity               0.0012         29.937***         0.0090***            -0.193          0.00300***          0.030***
                                               (0.0008)         (7.046)           (0.0017)           (0.193)           (0.00120)           (0.006)
                        Controls                 Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
                        Sponsor F.E.             Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
                        Year F.E.                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
                        Observations            48458            45322              46286             46054              46065              48298

                                                            Table 9: Evidence from Portfolio Holdings
 The sample is all U.S. prime MMFs. The dependent variable is the mean of the yields of the new securities added to the fund portfolio. The estimation window
 includes one month before and three months after the last three event dates defined in Table 1. Event is an indicator variable equal to one for the period after the
 event date and zero for the period before the event date. Columns (4) and (5) repeat the analysis by considering a randomly drawn date that does not coincide with any
 of the ZIRP shocks dates. All regressions are at the monthly level and include year/month-fixed and fund-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the monthly
 level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.
                                                                                   Panel A
                                                   (1)                       (2)                       (3)                         (4)                        (5)
                                                                                                    Mean Yield
                                                                                                                                              Placebos
                                          Event: August 2011         Event: January 2012        Event: September 2012                March 2011 January 2013
 Event                                         0.0388***                 0.0439***                   0.0420***                  -0.0302***             -0.0107***
                                              (0.000701)                 (0.000971)                  (0.000371)                 (0.000438)             (0.000287)
 Controls                                         Yes                       Yes                         Yes                        Yes                       Yes
 Year/Month-Fixed Effects                         Yes                       Yes                         Yes                        Yes                       Yes
 Fund-Fixed Effects                               Yes                       Yes                         Yes                        Yes                       Yes
 Observations                                    49,242                    39,690                      59,716                     31,988                    24,129
                                                                                    Panel B
                                                  Number of Borrowers per fund                         (1)          (2)
                                                  Event                                             -0.423**     -0.378**
                                                                                                     (0.209)      (0.182)
                                                  Fund-Fixed Effects                                  Yes          Yes
                                                  Time Trend                                          No           Yes
                                                  Observations                                       1,288        1,288
                                                  R-squared                                          0.902        0.902




                                                                                      47
                                                                                 Panel C
                                                                                                (1)              (2)
                                                                                                 Outstanding Debt
                                                   Post Fund Closure                        -0.419***         -0.153**
                                                                                             (0.0686)         (0.0665)
                                                   Issuer-Fixed Effects                         Yes              Yes
                                                   Month-Fixed Effects                          No               Yes
                                                   Observations                               52,682           52,682
                                                   R-squared                                   0.492            0.524
                                                                                 Panel D
                                                    (1)                            (2)                             (3)                         (4)
                                         Leverage 6-Month Window       Leverage 6-Month Window       Avg. Leverage 6-Month Window   Leverage 1-Year Window
             Post × Closure                      -0.006**                       -0.006*                         -0.020*                      -0.004
                                                  (0.003)                       (0.003)                         (0.011)                     (0.008)
             Post                                  0.001                         -0.000                          0.007                        0.002
                                                  (0.002)                       (0.001)                         (0.004)                     (0.007)
             Closure                               0.004                        0.013**                          0.016*                       0.003
                                                  (0.012)                       (0.005)                         (0.008)                     (0.004)
             Time-Fixed Effects                     Yes                            Yes                            Yes                          Yes
             Issuer-Fixed Effects                   No                             Yes                            Yes                          Yes
             Observations                           895                            895                            448                         1,784
             R-squared                             0.005                          0.918                          0.929                        0.909
                                                                   Table 10: Industry Response
The sample includes all mutual funds families in U.S. over the period January 2005-December 2013. The dependent variable is the number of funds (at share class
level) in a given period for a given type of fund within a fund family. Panel A groups funds into money, bond, equity, and balanced. Panel B divides bond funds into
short-term, medium-term, and long-term. LR denotes low interest rate regime and HR denotes high interest rate regime. Treated is an indicator variable equal to one if
the fund family closed one of its MMFs and zero for all other funds. After is an indicator variable equal to one six months after the closure of the MMF and zero six
months before the fund closure. Control variables are family return and natural logarithm of family size. All regressions include fund family-fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the year-month level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.
                                                                   Panel A: Asset Allocations
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)               (6)        (7)           (8)
            VARIABLES                       Money Funds                     Bond Funds                    Equity Funds                Balanced Funds
                                           LR         HR                  LR         HR                  LR          HR              LR           HR
            After                        -0.113           0.000         0.070           -0.068           0.420           -0.275      0.174         0.296
                                         (0.068)         (0.500)       (0.206)          (0.198)         (0.654)          (0.546)    (0.158)       (0.185)
            After×Treated               -3.313**         -0.688        7.098**          -1.032          16.932            0.818     3.944*         0.643
                                         (1.528)         (1.657)       (3.620)          (1.987)        (13.802)          (3.455)    (2.255)       (1.181)
            Controls                       Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes
            Family-fixed effects           Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes
            Observations                  2951            2834          2951             2834            2951             2834       2951          2834
                                                                                   48
                                                                  Panel B: Bond Maturity
                                                          (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)
                          VARIABLES                      Short-Term Bonds           Medium-Term Bonds            Long-Term Bonds
                                                          LR          HR             LR            HR             LR            HR
                          After                          0.105      0.090**         0.765*       -4.410        -0.799**        4.251
                                                        (0.067)     (0.041)         (0.391)      (3.095)        (0.316)       (2.969)
                          After×Treated                 0.757**      0.397           1.604       -3.678         4.738*         2.249
                                                        (0.336)     (0.479)         (1.103)      (9.684)        (2.669)       (9.883)
                          Controls                       Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
                          Family-fixed effects           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
                          Observations                   2951         2834           2951         2834           2951          2834
                                                 Table 11: The Effect of MMF Closure on Managers’ Rotation
The sample is conditional on the fund closing its operations. We track managers’ subsequent career outcomes. Possible career outcomes are: (1) staying in the same
family and running a MMF, (2) staying in the same family and running a non-money market fund, (3) going to a different family and running a MMF, (4) going to a
different family and running a non-money market fund, (5) leaving the fund industry (moving to private business, government institutions, setting up own company,
etc.). We condition on a single manager departure in a given date (a particular multiple fund departure is called as one case).
                            Career Outcome      MMF in the          Non-MMF in         MMF in another Non-MMF in                Other finance
                                                same family        the same family          family         another family          career
                               # of Cases             61                   30                 35                  22                 40
                              % of Cases            32.4%               16.0%               18.6%               11.7%              21.3%




                                                                               49
