                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           HOUSING AND MACROECONOMICS

                                       Monika Piazzesi
                                       Martin Schneider

                                      Working Paper 22354
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22354


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2016




We thank Alina Arefeva, Eran Hoffmann, Amir Kermani, Moritz Lenel, Sean Myers, Alessandra
Peter, John Taylor, Harald Uhlig, and conference participants at Stanford for comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Monika Piazzesi and Martin Schneider. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing and Macroeconomics
Monika Piazzesi and Martin Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 22354 June
2016, Revised July 2016
JEL No. E0,E44,G11,G12,R2,R3

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper surveys the literature on housing in macroeconomics. We first collect facts on house
prices and quantities in both the time series and the cross section of households and housing
markets. We then present a theoretical model of frictional housing markets with heterogeneous
agents that nests or provides background for many studies. Finally, we describe quantitative
results obtained during the last 15 years on household behavior, business cycle dynamics and
asset pricing, as well as boom bust episodes.


Monika Piazzesi
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
piazzesi@stanford.edu

Martin Schneider
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
schneidr@stanford.edu
1    Introduction
The first volume of the Handbook of Macroeconomics, published in 1999, contains essentially
no references to housing. This statistic accurately summarizes the state of the field at the
time. Of course, housing was not entirely absent from macroeconomic studies, which typically
account for all production, consumption and wealth in an economy. The lack of references
instead reflected the treatment of housing as simply one component of capital, consumption or
household wealth that does not deserve special attention.
    At the turn of the millennium, housing was implicitly present in three loosely connected
literatures. One is work on aggregate fluctuations that studies the sources of business cycles
and the response of the economy to fiscal and monetary policy. In the typical 20th century
model, residential structures were part of capital, or sometimes “home capital” (together with
consumer durables). Housing services were part of nondurables (or home good) consumption.
Models of financial frictions and the role of capital as collateral focused on borrowing by firms.
Volatility of house prices played no role — in fact, any volatility of asset prices was largely a
sideshow.
    Second, housing was implicitly present in the large body of work on asset pricing concerned
with diﬀerences in average returns and price volatility across assets. Studies in this area used
to largely stay away from properties of house prices and returns. At the same time, a common
modeling exercise identified a claim to all consumption with equity and tried to explain the
volatility of its price with a consumption-based stochastic discount factor. Housing thus played
an implicit role as part of payoﬀs and risk adjustment. Finally, there is work on heterogenous
households that seeks to understand the role of frictions and policy for inequality as well as
distributional eﬀects of shocks. Here housing was included as a large implicit component of
household wealth as well as a share of consumption.
    The first half of the 2000s saw not only the largest housing boom in postwar U.S. history,
but also new research that introduced an explicit role for housing in macroeconomics. The new
research studies the interaction of house prices and collateralized household borrowing with
business cycles and monetary policy. It also explores how the role of housing as a consumption
good as well as a collateralizable asset aﬀects savings, portfolio choice and asset pricing. By
the time the U.S. housing boom turned into a spectacular bust in 2007, housing was already
a prominent topic in macroeconomics. The Great Recession added important new data points
and further underscored the importance and unique properties of housing. As a result, housing
now routinely receives special attention in macroeconomic discussions.
    While the new literature grew out of the three lines of research described above, the focus on
housing brought out several distinctive features. First, it naturally pushed researchers towards
integration of themes and tools from all three lines of research. It is diﬃcult to describe house-
hold behavior while ignoring uncertainty about house prices, or to think about mortgage debt
without heterogeneous agents. Many papers surveyed below thus employ tools from financial
economics to study exposure to uncertainty, and many quantitative models are analyzed with
computational techniques that allow rich heterogeneity within the household sector.
    The second feature is familiar from urban economics: “the housing market” is really a col-
lection of many markets that diﬀer by geography as well as other attributes. Disaggregating

                                                2
not only the household sector but also the housing stock provides valuable insights into the
transmission of shocks and alters policy conclusions. For example, shocks to financial interme-
diaries or policies that change the cost of mortgage credit might have stronger eﬀects on prices
in markets where the typical buyer is also a borrower. Moreover, those shocks might have larger
aggregate eﬀects if their impact cannot be shared across subpopulation of agents. Availability
of new large scale micro data sets has made it possible to explicitly study the interactions of
many agents in many markets, and derive the aggregate eﬀects of those interactions.
    A third, related, feature is that the literature on housing has brought to bear a lot of evidence
from the cross section of markets in a single episode to complement time series evidence that
is common in macroeconomics. To illustrate, one can learn a lot about the role of technology
shocks for residential investment from recurrent time series patterns in postwar history. In
contrast, to assess the role of recent financial innovation for house prices, such patterns are less
informative. Fortunately, though, we can learn from cross sectional patterns in financing and
prices across submarkets and types of households.
   The literature shows how both time series and cross sectional patterns on housing markets
lend themselves to the same style of analysis that is common elsewhere in macroeconomics.
Reduced form statistical tools are used to document facts and sometimes to isolate certain
properties of equilibrium relationships. Insights on the quantitative importance of diﬀerent
mechanisms as well as policy counterfactuals are derived from multivariate structural models.
In many ways, modeling the cross-sectional comovement in a single period of, say, mortgage bor-
rowing and wealth across households and house prices across market segments, is conceptually
similar to modeling the time series comovement of, say, residential and business investment,
GDP and house prices in postwar history. Both exercises require tracing out the eﬀect of
exogenous variation in some features of the environment jointly on many endogenous variables.
    This chapter describes work on housing in macroeconomics in three parts. Part I collects the
new facts that emerge once disaggregation makes housing explicit. We first document business
cycle properties of housing consumption, residential investment and mortgage debt. We then
look at the dynamics of house prices at the national, regional and within-city level, and compare
price volatility and trading volume for housing and securities. Finally, we document the dual
role of housing as a consumption good as well as an asset in household portfolios.
    Part II describes a theoretical framework that nests or provides background for many studies
in the literature. It allows for four special features of housing that are motivated by facts from
Part I: indivisibility, nontradability of dividends, illiquidity and collateralizability. Indeed, many
homeowners own only their residence, directly consume its dividend in form of housing services
and bear its idiosyncratic risk. Moreover houses are relatively costly to trade and easy to pledge
as collateral. In contrast, securities such as equity and bonds are typically held in diversified
portfolios, have tradable payoﬀs, are traded often at low cost, and are harder to use as collateral.
    Part III summarizes quantitative results derived from versions of the general framework over
the last two decades or so. While no study contains all the ingredients introduced in Part II,
each one quantifies one or more of the tradeoﬀs discussed there. We start by reviewing work on
consumption, savings and portfolio choice. We also consider mortgage choice and the role of
financial innovation for household decisions. We then move on to general equilibrium analysis of
the business cycle, monetary policy and asset prices. Finally, we consider boom-bust episodes,

                                                  3
with an emphasis on the 1970s and 2000s U.S. housing cycles.
    We interpret results from diﬀerent types of quantitative exercises in light of the general
framework. One approach studies structural relationships with an explicit shock structure. For
example, large bodies of work assess the ability of lifecycle models of consumption, savings and
portfolio choice to explain cross sectional patterns as well as the ability of DSGE models to
match time series patterns. An alternative approach investigates families of Euler equations
for diﬀerent agents and/or markets to reconcile allocations and asset prices. A third approach
tries to isolate properties of the decision rules or the equilibrium law of motion with reduced
form approaches.
    What have we learned so far? We highlight here two key takeaways from the new litera-
ture that underlie the quantitative successes reported in detail below. First, frictions matter.
Quantitative modeling of household behavior now routinely relies on collateral constraints, in-
complete markets and transaction costs as key ingredients. Incompleteness of markets means
in particular that homeowners bear property-level price risk. A large body of reduced form
evidence provides additional support for this approach. Second, heterogeneity of households
matters. Models with heterogeneous households and frictions introduce powerful new amplifi-
cation and propagation mechanisms. In particular, they provide more scope for eﬀects of shocks
to the financial sector which have become important in accounts of postwar U.S. history, espe-
cially the recent boom-bust cycle.
    We also conclude that making housing explicit improves our understanding of classic macro-
economic questions, previously studied only with models that provide an implicit role for hous-
ing. For thinking about business cycles, the comovement and relative volatility of residential
and business investment provide discipline on model structure. For thinking about asset pric-
ing, the role of housing as a consumption good as well as a collateralizable asset generate the
type of slow moving state variables for model dynamics that are needed in order to understand
observed low frequency changes in the risk return tradeoﬀs for many assets, including hous-
ing itself. Finally, financial frictions in the household sector change the transmission of both
aggregate and distributional shocks and policy interventions, especially to consumption.
    At the same time, many open questions remain and there is ample opportunity for future
research. One issue is the tradeoﬀ between tractability and detail faced by any macroeconomic
study. There are three areas in particular where more work is needed to converge on the
right level of abstraction — with possibly diﬀerent outcomes depending on the question. One is
aggregation across housing markets: do we gain, for example, from building more models that
treat the U.S. as a collection of small countries identified with, say, states or metropolitan areas?
Another area is choosing dimensions of household heterogeneity: since observable demographic
characteristics such as age, income and wealth explain only a small share of cross sectional
variation, how should unobservable heterogeneity be accommodated? Finally, the majority of
studies reviewed below capture financial frictions by assuming short term debt and financial
shocks as changes to maximum loan-to-value ratios. Given the rich and evolving contractual
detail we see in the data, what are the essential elements that should enter macroeconomic
models?
   A major outstanding puzzle is the volatility of house prices — including but not only over
the recent boom-bust episode. Rational expectations models to date cannot account for house

                                                 4
price volatility — they inevitably run into “volatility puzzles” for housing much like for other
assets. Postulating latent "housing preference shocks" helps understand how models work when
prices move a lot, but is ultimately not a satisfactory foundation for policy analysis. Moreover,
from model calculations as well as survey evidence, we now know that details of expectation
formation by households — and possibly lenders and developers — play a key role. A promising
agenda for research is to develop models of expectation formation that can be matched to data
on both market outcomes and survey expectations. A final point is that most progress we
report is in making sense of household behavior. The supply side of housing as well as credit
to fund housing has received relatively less attention, another interesting direction for future
work.
    To keep the length of chapter manageable, we have narrowed focus along some dimensions
where other recent survey papers already exist. In particular, the Handbook of Urban and
Regional Economics contains chapters on search models of housing (Han and Strange, 2015) as
well as U.S. housing policy (Olsen and Zabel, 2015).1 Since we focus on work that is already
published, we have also left out much of the important emerging literature on the housing
bust and Great Recession, as well as policy at the zero lower bound for nominal interest rates.
Finally, our chapter deals almost exclusively with facts and quantitative studies about the
United States. This reflects the focus of the literature, which in turn has been driven in part
by availability of data. Another exciting task for future research is to use the tools discussed
in this chapter to study the large variation in housing market structure and housing finance
across countries, surveyed for example by Badarinza, Campbell and Ramadorai (2016).


Part I

Part I: facts
2       Quantities
Figure 1 plots the aggregate expenditure share on housing from the National Income and
Product Account (NIPA) tables. The numbers in NIPA table 2.3.5 are based on survey data.
The questionnaires in these surveys (for example, the Residential Finance Survey conducted by
the Census Bureau) ask renters about their actual monthly rent payments. These payments are
imputed to comparable owner-occupied units (Mayerhauser and Reinsdorf 2007.). The sample
consists of quarterly data from 1959:Q1 to 2013:Q4.
    We compute the expenditure share in two ways. The blue line shows housing expenditures
as a fraction of expenditures on nondurables and services. This series has a mean of 21 percent
and a standard deviation of 0.061 percent. The green line shows housing services as a fraction
of total consumption (including durables). This series has a slightly lower mean of 17.8 percent
and a bit higher standard deviation of 0.064 percent. The yellow bars indicate NBER recessions.
    1
    The same handbook contains a chapter on housing, finance and the macroeconomy (Davis and Van Nieuwer-
burgh, 2015) that also discusses some of the material covered in the present chapter.


                                                   5
                    0.4
                                   nondur & services, mean 21.0%, std dev 0.061%
                  0.35             total consumption, mean 17.8%, std dev 0.064%

                    0.3

                  0.25

                    0.2

                  0.15

                    0.1

                  0.05

                      0
                      1960        1970        1980        1990       2000        2010


            Figure 1: Aggregate expenditure share on housing, 1959:Q1-2014:Q4.

    The overall impression from Figure 1 is that the aggregate expenditure share is pretty
flat over time. The expenditure share on housing is also similar across households in micro
data, as shown by Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel (2007). Their Table A.1 shows evidence from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey, where the definition of housing expenditures depends on
tenure choice. The CEX asks renters about their rent payments, while owner occupiers are
asked about their interest payments on mortgages and other lines of credit, property taxes,
insurance, ground rents, and expenses for maintenance or repairs. Davis and Ortalo-Magne
(2011) use micro data on the expenditure share of renter households alone. The paper shows
that individual expenditure shares based on the 1980, 1990 and 2000 Decennial Housing Surveys
do not vary much within or across the top 50 U.S. metropolitan statistical areas.
    Figure 2 plots three series: residential investment, nonresidential investment and output.
The series are from NIPA table 1.1.3; they are all logged and detrended using the Hodrick-
Prescott filter. The figure illustrates that both investment series are more volatile than output.
Also, residential investment is twice as volatile as nonresidential investment. The volatility of
residential investment is 9.7 percent, while nonresidential investment has a volatility of 4.6
percent and the volatility of output is 1.6 percent. The figure also shows that the series for
residential investment tends to increase before nonresidential investment and output, and it
tends to decrease before the other two series. In other words, residential investment leads the
cycle.
   Once investment has created housing capital, it stays around for a long time. As reported by
Fraumeni (1997), structures depreciate at rates of 1.5 to 3 percent per year. The depreciation


                                                6
                    0.3


                    0.2


                    0.1


                      0


                   -0.1


                   -0.2
                                                              residential inv σ=9.7%
                                                              nonresidential inv σ=4.6%
                   -0.3                                       output σ=1.6%

                      1960        1970       1980        1990        2000        2010


Figure 2: Aggregate residential investment, nonresidential investment and output; logged and
detrended with Hodrick-Prescott filter.

rates for nonresidential capital are higher, between 10 and 30 percent. Moreover, housing
combines housing capital with land, which is a fixed factor.
Constraints on the supply of housing
   The degree to which new developments can increase the supply of housing varies across
geographic areas. For example, developers in Indianapolis and Omaha find it easier to buy
land and construct new homes than developers in San Francisco and Boston. There are two
popular indices that carefully measure such housing supply constraints.
    The first index is by Saiz (2010) and captures physical constraints. These geographical
constraints capture two main features of land topology that make new developments diﬃcult
or impossible. The first feature is the presence of water. Saiz measures the area within 50
kilometers from cities that is covered by oceans, lakes, rivers, and other water bodies such as
wetlands. The second feature of land topology is steep slopes. Saiz computes the share of the
area with a slope above 15 percent within a 50 kilometer radius around an MSA.
   The second measure of supply constraints captures regulatory restrictions. These are mea-
sured by the Wharton Residential Urban Land Regulation Index created by Gyourko, Saiz, and
Summers (2008). This index captures the stringency of residential growth controls in terms of
zoning restrictions or project approval practices.




                                              7
                    70                                                                     20
                               stock price/dividends
                               house price/rents

                    60

                                                                                           15
                    50



                    40
                                                                                           10

                    30



                    20                                                                     5
                      1960        1970         1980        1990        2000        2010


     Figure 3: Aggregate price/dividend ratio for stocks and price/rent ratio for housing

3     Prices
Figure 3 shows the price-dividend ratio for stocks as a green line which measured on the left axis.
The figure also shows the price-rent ratio for housing as a blue line with units indicated on the
right axis. The figure illustrates the large volatility of the two series. The price-dividend ratio
for stocks uses data from the Flow of Funds and represents the overall valuation of companies
in the United States. The dividend series includes net repurchases. The price-dividend ratio
fluctuates between 20 and 65, as measured on the left axis.
    The numerator of the price-rent series for housing is the value of residential housing owned
by partnerships, sole proprietors, and nonfinancial corporations, which are landlords for many
rental units, as measured by the Flow of Funds. The denominator of the price-rent series is
rents from the NIPA table 2.3.5, which includes actual rent payments as well as imputed rents
for owner-occupiers (as discussed in the context of Figure 1). The price-rent ratio fluctuates
between 11 and 19, as measured on the right axis.
   The two valuation ratios often move inversely. For example, stocks tanked during the
housing booms in the 1970s and 2000s. By contrast, stocks appreciated during the 1990s
while housing did poorly. The recent boom-bust episode in housing stands out in the postwar
experience.
Excess volatility of individual house prices
    House prices, like the prices of other assets, are highly volatile. The prices of individual

                                                 8
houses are especially volatile. The volatility of various house price indices is smaller, but still
a challenge for economic models — this is the excess volatility puzzle.
    Most house price indices are constructed from repeat sales — average price changes in houses
that sell more than once in the sample. CoreLogic constructs such city-wide indices for many
metropolitan areas, various tiers of these markets, as well as the U.S. national index. These
indices are published as the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices by Standard & Poor’s. The
Federal Housing Finance Agency also constructs such indices from repeat sales or refinancings
on the same properties (formerly called the OFHEO index). Zillow also publishes such indices
for cities, states or the nation.
    Case and Shiller (1989) estimate the standard deviation of annual percentage changes in
individual house prices to be close to 15%. The paper concludes that individual house prices
are similar to individual stock prices that are also very volatile. City-wide indices are less
volatile than individual house prices. Flavin and Yamashita (2002) estimate a 14% volatility
for individual house prices in their Table 1A. Their Table 1B reports a 4% volatility for Atlanta,
6% for Chicago, 5% for Dallas and 7% for San Francisco. Landvoigt, Piazzesi and Schneider
(2015) estimate the volatility of individual house prices in diﬀerent years. Their Table 1 shows
estimates that range between 8-11% during the 2000s boom and 14% during the bust.
   Compared to stocks, which commove strongly with the aggregate stock market, a larger
share of the volatility in individual house prices is idiosyncratic, as documented in Case and
Shiller (1989). Their evidence stems from regressions of individual house price change on city-
wide price changes. The regressions have low 2 s: 7% for Atlanta, 16% for Chicago, 12% for
Dallas, and 27% for San Francisco.
    Table 1 summarizes information from Tables B1 and B2 from Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel
(2007). The table illustrates the rule of thumb that 1/2 of the volatility in individual house
prices is city-level variation, while 1/4 of the individual volatility is aggregate house price
variation. This volatility decomposition illustrates the importance to understand the variation
within narrow locations or individual houses. The high volatility of individual house prices
together with high transaction costs lead to low Sharpe ratios (defined as average excess return
on an asset, divided by its volatility) on housing. In other words, individual houses are not as
attractive as an investment.

                                 Table 1: House price volatility

                                individual house city state aggregate
                     volatility       14%        7% 5%        2-3%

      Note: This table is from Tables B1 and B2 in Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel (2007).

   Idiosyncratic shocks to house prices are diﬃcult to diversify. The problem with houses is
that they are indivisible — they are sold in their entirety, not in small pieces. As a consequence,
households own 100% of a specific house rather than small portions of many diﬀerent houses.
Moreover, the market for housing indices is not very liquid. In any given month, only a couple


                                                9
of futures contracts on city-wide house price indices trade on the Chicago Mercentile Exchange,
if they trade at all.2
    The ease of diversification distinguishes houses from other assets such as stocks. For exam-
ple, households can save a small amount of money and invest it in a stock market index (such
as the S&P 500) that tracks the value of a large stock portfolio. Alternatively, households can
buy a few shares from several companies. The conventional wisdom in finance is that a small
number of diﬀerent stocks — such as five or six companies — are suﬃcient to achieve a high
degree of diversification in a portfolio.
Momentum and reversal
    House prices have more momentum than other assets and also exhibit long-run reversal.
The changes in log real prices of houses are more highly serially correlated compared to other
assets. Case and Shiller (1989) provide the first evidence of such high serial correlation. They
document that a change in the log real price index in a given year and a given city tends to be
followed by a change in the same direction the following year between 25% and 50% as large.
Englund and Iaonnides (1997) provide cross-country evidence where changes are followed by
changes between 23% and 74% the next year. Glaeser, Gyourko, Morales and Nathanson (2014)
find changes the next year between 60% and 80%.
    Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1991) compare the serial correlation in housing markets to
that in other asset markets across many countries. For example, stocks, bonds and foreign
exchange exhibit weak momentum for horizons less than a year. The monthly autocorrelation
in excess stock returns is 10%, for U.S bonds it is 3%, 24% for foreign bonds, and 7% for foreign
exchange. The excess returns on all these assets are essentially uncorrelated from year to year.
In contrast, the excess returns on housing in their Table 4 has an autocorrelation of 21% from
year to year.
    Over longer periods, house prices experience reversal. Englund and Ioannides (1997) doc-
ument that changes in log real prices are followed by changes in the opposite direction after
five years. Glaeser et al. (2014) also provide evidence of such reversal in their Table 4. They
estimate the autocorrelation of real house price changes over five years to be −080
Predictable excess returns on housing
    The excess returns on many assets, including housing, are predictable. Case and Shiller
(1989) show that excess returns on the city indices are predictable with excess returns in the
previous year in their Table 3. Case and Shiller (1990) provide further evidence of predictability
for excess returns. Their Table 8 runs regressions of city excess returns on rent-price ratios and
construction costs divided by price. The coeﬃcient on the rent-price ratio is positive: a high
rent-price ratio predicts high excess returns over the next year.
   Cochrane (2011) compares the predictability regressions for houses and stocks. Table 2 here
replicates his Table 3. “Houses” in Table 2 refers to the aggregate stock of housing in the
United States. “Stocks” refers to a value-weighted index of U.S. stocks. The estimated slope
coeﬃcients indicate that high rents relative to prices signal high subsequent returns, not lower
  2
    The data on volume in these markets is here http://www.cmegroup.com/market-data/volume-open-
interest/real-estate-volume.html



                                               10
subsequent rents. The results for housing in the left panel look remarkably similar to those in
the right panel for stocks. The returns are predictable for both, but dividend growth and rent
growth are not predictable. The ratio of rents or dividends to prices is highly persistent, but
stationary.

                       Table 2: House Price and Stock Price Regressions

                                       Houses                            Stocks
                                                  2                          2
                       +1     0.12   (2.52)       0.15          0.13   (2.61)   0.10
                       ∆+1    0.03   (2.22)       0.07          0.04   (0.92)   0.02
                       +1    0.90   (16.2)       0.90          0.94   (23.8)   0.91

      Note: This table is Table 3 from Cochrane (2011). It reports results from regressions
      of the form
                                     +1 =  +  ×  + +1
      where  is either the log rent-price ratio in the left panel or the log dividend-
      price ratio in the right panel. In the left panel, +1 is either log annual housing
      returns +1 , log rent growth ∆+1 , or the log rent-price ratio +1 measured
      with annual data for the aggregate stock of housing in the United States, 1960-
      2010, from http://www.lincolninst.edu/subcenters/land-values/rent-price-ratio.asp
      In the right panel, +1 is either log stock returns +1 , dividend growth ∆+1 ,
      or the log dividend-price ratio +1 measured with annual CRSP value-weighted
      return data, 1947-2010.


  Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and Martin (2009) decompose house price movements with the
Campbell-Shiller linearization of the one-period return

                       +1 ≈ const. +  (+1 − +1 ) − ( −  ) + ∆+1 

where +1 = log +1 is the log housing return,  = log ( ) is the log house price,  = log ( )
is the log rent, ∆+1 = +1 − is rent growth and  = 098 is a constant in the approximation.
This return identity simply says that high returns either come from higher prices (future  − ),
lower initial prices, or higher dividends.
   By iterating the return identity forward, we get the present value identity

                                       X
                                                           X
                                                            
                                             −1
                      ≈ const. +               + −         −1 ∆+ +  +          (1)
                                       =1                  =1

where  =  −  is the log rent-price ratio. The present value identity holds state-by-state
as well as in expectation. Any movement in the rent-price ratio on houses therefore has to
be associated with a movement in either the conditional expected value of future returns + ,
expected future rent growth ∆+ or a bubbly anticipation of future high prices + .

                                                     11
    Campbell et al. estimate a vector-autoregression that includes real interest rates, rent
growth and excess returns on housing. The housing data are from various metropolitan regions
and U.S. aggregate data. Based on the estimated VAR, the paper evaluates the expected
infinite sums of future returns and future rent growth on the right-hand side of equation (1) for
 → ∞ by imposing the no-bubble condition3 lim→∞  + = 0. It finds that movements in
price-rent ratios can be attributed to a large degree to time variation in risk premia and less so
to expectations of future rent growth. The time variation in real interest rates does not explain
price-rent ratio movements. Their Figure 2 also shows that the 2000s boom is hard to explain
through the lense of their estimated VAR which predicts low price-rent ratios throughout the
2000s.
Value of land versus structures
    Figure 4 plots the value of the residential housing stock together with its two components,
the value of the residential structures and the value of land. All series are from the Flow of
Funds and are reported as multiples of GDP. The figure illustrates that movements in the value
of the residential housing stock are mostly due to movements in the value of land. The value
of structures fluctuates much less. The figure again highlights the importance of the recent
boom-bust episode in the postwar housing experience.
    Knoll, Schularick and Steger (2014) collect data on house values in many industrialized
countries going back to 1870. The paper documents that real house values in most countries
were largely constant from the 19th to the mid 20th century. Over the postwar period, real house
prices approximately tripled. The majority of this increase in real house prices is associated
with rising land prices, while real construction costs have been roughly constant.
    There is also large cross sectional variation in the share of land in the overall house value. A
key component of this variation is what realtors call “location, location, location”: each location
is unique. There may be attractive locations with unique characteristics in fixed supply such
as lake- and oceanfronts, locations with strict zoning rules, outstanding amenities such as good
schools or opera houses, low crime etc. For example, Table 4 in Davis and Heathcote (2007)
reports that houses in San Francisco have a land share of 80.4% while houses in Oklahoma City
have a land share of 12.6%. The table shows that areas with higher land shares tend to have
higher house prices, higher average house price growth and more volatile house prices.
    Another source of cross sectional variation are diﬀerences in the durability and/or attractive-
ness of the existing structures. For example, the building material for structures in earthquake
prone areas like California tends to be wood, which is cheaper and deteriorates faster than brick
which is used for most constructions in Pennsylvania. Architectural styles may also matter.
For example, Victorian homes are valued at a premium, while 1950s postwar structures come
at a discount.
Cross section of house prices
    There are important cross sectional patterns in house prices that help understand the vari-
ation across and within narrow areas. For example, during the 2000s, cheaper houses experi-
   3
    Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2016) provide direct evidence on the no-bubble condition in housing markets
by comparing the value of freeholds (infinite maturity ownerships of houses) with the value of leaseholds with
maturities over 700 years in the U.K. and Singapore.


                                                     12
                                  2.5
                                          housing stock
                                          structures
                                   2      land
               multiples of GDP


                                  1.5


                                   1


                                  0.5


                                   0
                                   1960     1970          1980   1990   2000    2010


Figure 4: The value of the residential housing stock together with its individual components,
the value of residential structures and the value of land.

enced a stronger boom-bust than more expensive houses. This pattern is diﬀerent from previous
boom-busts, where cheaper houses have experienced weaker boom-busts (such as in the 1970s.)
Gentrification matters for poorer neighborhoods within a city that are in close proximity to
more expensive neighborhoods. These low-price neighborhoods experience stronger booms-bust
episodes than other low-price neighborhoods as well as high-price neighborhoods. Finally, the
recent experience of the sand states challenges the notion that house prices in areas with an
elastic housing supply should be less volatile.
    Figure 5 plots median house prices by city and tiers starting in the mid 1990s. The series
are defined and constructed by Zillow Research. The top left panel shows that median house
prices in the top tier of Los Angeles, California, gained 22% per year during the recent housing
boom (1996-2006). The bottom tier gained additional 6 percentage points per year. During
the housing bust (2006-2011), the top tier made 4% capital losses per year, while the bottom
tier dropped 5 percentage points more than the top tier.
    The main stylized fact – houses in the bottom tier experienced a stronger boom-bust
episode during the 2000s than houses in the upper tiers — can also be observed in other cities.
In Las Vegas, houses in the bottom tier appreciated by 16% per year, while houses in the top
tier only appreciated by 13%. During the bust, bottom-tier house prices fell by 14% while
top-tier house prices fell only by 10% per year. In Chicago, capital gains across these tiers were
the same on the way up, but there were larger losses in the lower tiers on the way down. In
Omaha, the boom was not as pronounced, but still the bottom tier appreciated by 2 percentage


                                                           13
                                                           Los Angeles, CA                              Las Vegas, NV

                                                                 22%                       500               13%


             Thousands of Dollars
                                       1000
                                                                             -4%           400
                                              800
                                                                                                             14%
                                                                 27%                       300
                                              600                                                                       -10%
                                                                 28%         -7%                             16%
                                              400                                          200
                                                                                                                        -12%
                                                                             -9%
                                              200                                          100                          -14%
                                                    2000       2005        2010     2015         2000      2005      2010      2015


                                                             Chicago, IL                                 Omaha, NE
                                                                 12%
                                              400                                          500
                       Thousands of Dollars




                                                                             -4%
                                                                                           400
                                              300
                                                                 12%
                                                                                           300
                                                                             -6%                             3%         0%
                                              200                12%                       200
                                                                             -6%                             4%          0%
                                                                                           100               5%         -1%
                                              100

                                                    2000       2005        2010     2015         2000      2005      2010      2015




Figure 5: Median house prices (in thousands of Dollars) by city and tier: top tier (red line),
medium tier (magneta line) and low tier (blue line). The data are from Zillow Research. The
colored numbers indicate the tiered capital gains in percent per year during the housing boom
(1996-2006) and during the bust (2006-2011).

points more than the top tier and was the only tier to experience a capital loss during the bust.
    Landvoigt, Piazzesi and Schneider (2015) estimate these patterns for the metro area of San
Diego based on individual transaction data. The paper documents a roughly 20% diﬀerence
between capital gains on the cheapest houses and most expensive houses between the years 2000
and 2005. The Zillow tiers group the cross section of houses and thereby reduce these cross-
sectional diﬀerences. Kuminoﬀ and Pope (2013) show a similar pattern for the land component
of house values: cheap land appreciated more than expensive land during the 2000s boom.
   Hartley, Hurst and Guerrieri (2013) document that gentrification matters for poorer neigh-
borhoods that are geographically close to high-price neighborhoods within a city. Their Table 3
shows that neighborhoods with an initially low price which were in close promixity to high-price
neighborhoods appreciated more than otherwise similar initially low-price neighborhoods. For
example, low-priced neighborhoods that were roughly 1 mile away from high-price neighbor-
hoods appreciated by 12.4 percentage points more than low-priced neighborhoods that were
roughly 4 miles away.
   The recent experience in the “sand states” – Arizona, Florida, Nevada and inland California–


                                                                                   14
                                          1
                                               mortgage debt
                                               all household debt

                                         0.8




                      Multiples of GDP
                                         0.6



                                         0.4



                                         0.2



                                          0
                                               1960     1970         1980   1990   2000   2010



         Figure 6: Aggregate household debt and mortgage debt as fraction of GDP

has challenged the notion that supply constraints amplify house price cycles. Figure 1 in David-
oﬀ (2013) shows that the magnitude of the house price cycle in the early 2000s in the sand states
was larger than the cycle in coastal markets. His Figure 2 documents that the increase in the
number of housing units was also larger in the sand states. Nathanson and Zwick (2015) argue
that some cities, such as Las Vegas, do not have an abundance of land. Instead, these cities
face long-run supply constraints in the form of tight virtual urban growth boundaries, formed
by encircling federal and state lands.


4    Financing
Figure 6 shows aggregate household debt from the Flow of Funds as multiple of GDP in the
United States over the postwar period. The increase in the series happened in three discrete
steps: right after World War II, the 1980s, and the 2000s. After the collapse of the housing
market in 2006, households have been deleveraging. The red line in Figure 6 is mortgage
debt/GDP, which is roughly 3/5 of overall household debt. Most of household debt is thus
collateralized. The plot shows that mortgage debt is chiefly responsible for the three discrete
steps in which debt drastically increased. Household debt, especially mortgage debt, has also
increased in other countries over the postwar period, as documented by Cardarelli, Igan and
Rebucci (2008). Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2016a) document this increase for many indus-
trialized countries in a sample that goes back to 1870.
   Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2016b) document that asset price boom-bust episodes that are
combined with prior run-ups in leverage are associated with larger output costs during their
bust. The data sample covers many industrialized countries going back to 1870. Moreover,
boom-busts in housing have more severe output costs than those in equity markets.


                                                                    15
Mortgage growth during the 2000s
   Mian and Sufi (2009) investigate who borrowed more during the 2000s. Did these borrowers
expect higher future income growth? To address this question, Mian and Sufi use IRS data on
income and mortgage debt data from the “Home Mortgage Disclosure Act” (HMDA). Their
Figure 1 shows that income growth and mortgage growth are positively correlated across metro
areas between 2002 and 2005 (in their top right panel). The evidence within metro areas,
however, shows a negative correlation between income growth and mortgage growth across zip
codes (in the lower right panel.) Moreover, they show that this negative correlation at the zip
code level is unique to the 2002-2005 period. These findings suggest that the 2000s were a
unique episode in which mortgage debt increased in zip codes that experienced lower income
growth.
    Adelino, Schoar and Severino (2015) decompose mortgage growth into the extensive margin
— the growth rate in the number of mortgages in a zip code — and the intensive margin — the
growth rate in the size of individual mortgages. Their Table 2 shows that the extensive margin
is responsible for the negative correlation between IRS income growth and mortgage growth
across zip codes. In fact, the intensive margin is positively correlated with IRS income at the
zip code level. Moreover, Adelino et al. show that the growth rate of individual HMDA income
– borrowers’ income as indicated on their mortgage applications – is positively correlated to
individual mortgage size across households. The paper argues that the negative correlation
between income and mortgage growth documented by Mian and Sufi (2009) may be explained
by a change in buyer composition (i.e. richer buyers in poorer zip codes).
    Mian and Sufi (2015) present evidence that the growth rate of HMDA income is higher than
IRS reported income growth at the zip code level. They argue that the diﬀerence between the
two growth rates represents mortgage fraud. Of course, the comparison of HMDA income and
IRS income is tricky, because mover households who purchase a home have diﬀerent character-
istics than stayer households, especially during the 2000s boom. Table 2 in Landvoigt, Piazzesi
and Schneider (2015) compares the characteristics of home buyers and homeowners in 2000
Census data and 2005 data from the American Community Survey. They find that the median
buyer in 2005 has more income and is richer than in 2000 in real terms.
    Another important component of the increase in mortgage debt are existing homeowners
who borrowed against the increased value of their house. Mian and Sufi (2011) document that
especially homeowners in areas with stronger house price appreciation extracted equity from
their houses with home equity lines of credit. Chen, Michaux and Roussanov (2013) report
that a large fraction of refinancing during the 2000s were cash-outs, defined as more than 5%
increases in loan amounts.
Mortgage contracts
   In the United States, the predominant mortgage contract is a fixed-rate mortgage with
long maturity, usually 30 years. The main alternative is an adjustable-rate mortgage. In a
basic adjustable-rate mortgage, the initial rate is set as a markup (or margin) on top of a
benchmark, such as the one-year Treasury rate. Adjustable rates are periodically reset to the
current benchmark. During the recent housing boom, hybrid adjustable-rate mortgages became
more popular. These hybrid contracts have a fixed rate for an initial period up to 10 years and


                                              16
adjusted periodically thereafter.
    Campbell and Cocco (2003) report that fixed-rate mortgages accounted for 70 percent of
newly issued mortgages on average during the period 1985-2001, while adjustable-rate mort-
gages accounted for the remaining 30 percent. The share of fixed-rate mortgages in new origi-
nations fluctuates over time. Figure 2 in Campbell and Cocco (2003) shows the evolution of the
share of fixed-rate mortgages, which is strongly negatively correlated with long-term interest
rates.
    Cardarelli, Igan and Rebucci (2008), Andrews, Caldera Sánchez and Johansson (2011) and
Badarinza, Campbell and Ramadorai (2016) provide cross-country evidence on mortgage con-
tracts. Table 4 in Andrews et al. shows that the typical mortgage maturity varies across
countries between 10 years in Slovenia and Turkey to 30 years in Denmark and the United
States. Table 3 in Badarinza et al. shows wide diﬀerences in the use of adjustable-rate mort-
gages and prepayment penalties. For example, the majority of mortgages in Australia, Finland,
Portugal and Spain have an adjustable rate, while Belgium, Denmark, Germany and the U.S.
have mostly fixed-rate mortgages. Belgium and Germany have prepayment penalties, which
make these fixed-rate mortgages highly risky. Table 3.1 in Cardarelli et al. (2008) shows that
the countries with the largest fractions of securitized mortgages are the U.S., Australia, Ireland,
Greece, U.K. and Spain.
Recent financial innovation and lender incentives
    Leading up to the recent housing boom, the banking sector underwent a profound trans-
formation. The traditional role of banks was to originate mortgages and hold them on their
books until they are repaid. More and more, modern banks “originate-to-distribute”; banks
originate mortgages, pool and tranch them, and resell them in the securitization process. In
other words, mortgages are not kept on the balance sheet of the originating bank but are sold
to investors. This transformation of the banking sector has changed the incentives of banks to
screen mortgages. The resulting decline in lending standards has lead to a large expansion in
credit.
   Financial innovation also helped create new types of mortgages. Many mortgage contracts
were designed to defer amortization, for example with teaser rates or no interest rate payments
during an initial period (such as “2-28 mortgages”). The share of alternative mortgages in-
creased from below 2% until 2003 to above 30% during the peak years of the U.S. housing
boom (as documented, for example, in Figure 1 of Amromin, Huang, Sialm and Zhong 2013).
Another aspect of the deterioration of lending aspects were “no doc” loans, which did not
require any documentation of income, or NINJA (“no income, no job or assets”) loans.
   Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010) provide evidence that securitization was associated
with laxer screening of mortgages. The idea of the paper is to compare the performance of mort-
gages that are securitized with those that are not securitized. Since the 1990s, credit scoring
has become the key tool to screen borrowers. The guidelines established by the government-
sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, cautioned against lending to risky bor-
rowers with a FICO score below 620. The 620 cutoﬀ is also important for securitization as
mortgages above the cutoﬀ are easier to securitize. The paper studies the performance of a
million mortgages over the years 2001-2006. It finds that mortgages with a FICO score right


                                                17
above 620 performed worse than mortgages slightly below the 620 cutoﬀ.


5    Market structure
Housing has broad ownership. Roughly two thirds of U.S. households own a house. Over the
postwar period, the home ownership rate varied between 62% and 69%. It peaked at 69.2 at
the end of 2004, towards the peak of the recent boom. The current ownership rate is down to
63.7%.
   More households own a house than stocks. The ownership rate for stocks crucially depends
on whether indirect holdings (through mutual funds and pension funds) are included or not.
But even if we include indirect holdings, the ownership rate for stocks is below 50%.
    Housing markets are illiquid relative to other asset markets. Turnover (per year) in housing
markets is low relative to the stock market. The average turnover rate in the stock market is
110%, which means that every stock changes hands at least once in any given year. By contrast,
the average turnover rate in the housing market is only 7%. This illiquidity is manifested in the
fact that time on market – the number of days or months between listing and selling a house
– is a key statistic in housing markets, while time on market plays no role in stock markets.
   An important aspect of housing is that it is more diﬃcult to short than other assets such as
stocks. Because houses are unique and indivisible, an investor may not be able to take a short
position in a particular house. The low liquidity in house price indices and their derivatives
makes it either impossible or costly to take large short positions in the overall market. It is
possible to short REITs, which are indexed to the value of commercial real estate. However,
REITs are not perfectly correlated with the value of residential real estate. During recent
housing booms, investors have used creative strategies to short housing. For example, during
the recent housing boom, investors were short in mortgage-backed securities. In the ongoing
Chinese boom, investors short the stock of large developers. Many of these investment strategies
are costly and require sophistication, and are not perfect shorts for residential real estate.
   Bachmann and Cooper (2014) document a secular decline in the turnover rate (the sum of
their owner-to-owner and renter-to-owner moves) from the mid 1980s to 2000 in data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Moreover, the paper documents that the turnover
rate (in particular, the rate of owner-to-owner moves) is procyclical. Kathari, Saporta-Eksten
and Yu (2013) document a secular decline in moving rates of both renters and owners since the
mid 1980s based on the Current Population Survey.


6    Household portfolios
A sizeable literature uses various household level data sets to document cross sectional patterns
in housing consumption and the role of housing and mortgages in household portfolios. We
summarize here key cross sectional patterns that have been fairly stable over time. In particular,
housing choices depend significantly on age and net worth.


                                               18
    It is well known that expenditure on nondurable consumption is hump-shaped over the
lifecycle (e.g., Deaton 1992). Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2007) document a similar
hump-shaped lifecycle pattern for expenditure on durables. Their definition of durables includes
purchases of consumer durables as well as housing expenditure by renters and owners in the
CEX. Their Figure 6 shows that the hump peaks roughly at the age of 50 years, similar to the
pattern for nondurables. After the peak, durables expenditure declines substantially with age.
For example, durables expenditure at age 50 is twice as large as expenditure at 75.
   Yang (2009) distinguishes expenditure on housing from that on other durables. For renters,
housing expenditure is from CEX data. For owners, housing expenditure is from the SCF,
assuming that expenditure is proportional to house value. Her Figure 4 shows that housing
expenditure for owners also increases with age similar to durable expenditures. However, it
peaks later in life — at age 65 — rather than at age 50. Moreover, housing expenditure flattens
out after age 65; unlike durable expenditure, it does not decline with age.
   The homeownership rate is also hump-shaped over the lifecycle. For example, Table 6 in
Chambers, Garriga and Schlagenhauf (2009b) shows the homeownership rate first increases from
roughly 40% for young households (aged 20-34 years) to twice that share for older households
(aged 65-74 years). The homeownership rate then declines slightly for very old households.
    The homeownership rate also increases with income. For example, Gyourko and Linneman
(1997) study decennial census data from 1960 until 1990 to show that homeownership rates
increase with income even after conditioning on age. There is also evidence that low income
and minority households are less able to sustain homeownership than high income and white
households. For example, Turner and Smith (2009) examine data from the PSID spanning the
years 1970-2005 and document that homeowners in these groups have consistently higher exit
rates from ownership.
    The portfolio share on housing depends on both age and wealth. It declines monotonically
with age. Young households are house poor: they choose highly leveraged positions in housing.
As they age and accumulate wealth, they lower their portfolio weight on housing and pay
down their mortgages. For example, Table 2 in Flavin and Yamashita (2002) shows that young
homeowners (aged 18-30) have an average portfolio weight of 3.51 on housing and −283 on
mortgages in the PSID. Middle-aged households (aged 41-40 years) have an average weight of
1.58 on housing and −088 on mortgages. Older households (aged 71+) have an average weight
of 0.65 on housing and −004 on mortgages.
   The portfolio share on housing is hump-shaped in wealth. For example, Table 1 of Campbell
and Cocco (2003) shows that households in the bottom third of the wealth distribution are
renters — they do not own a home, so their portfolio share on housing is zero. Wealthier
households have a large fraction of their wealth, between 60 and 70%, invested in housing.
For rich households (in the top 20% of the wealth distribution), the portfolio share on housing
rapidly declines with wealth. These households shift more and more of their portfolio into
stocks.
   Wealth is also hump-shaped over the lifecycle. Figure 7 in Piazzesi and Schneider (2009a)
uses the Survey of Consumer Finances to document the hump in wealth for middle-aged house-
holds (aged 53 years). The figure plots wealth of “rich households” — defined as the top 10%


                                              19
of net worth in their cohort — separately from cohort totals. These rich households own more
than half of the cohort wealth — indicating a high concentration of wealth.
    The hump in wealth over the lifecycle multiplied by portfolio shares on housing that decline
with age results in a hump-shaped pattern in housing wealth over the lifecycle (third left panel
in Figure 7 of Piazzesi and Schneider 2009a). This housing wealth is somewhat concentrated
— rich households own roughly a third of the housing wealth in their cohort. However, most
of the overall wealth concentration can be attributed to the extremely high concentration of
wealth invested in stocks: rich households own almost all of the stock wealth in their cohort.


Part II

Part 2: Theory
This section describes a theoretical framework that nests or provides background for many
studies in the literature. At its heart is the intertemporal household decision problem with
housing as both an asset and a consumption good. The papers discussed below all share a
version of this problem. They diﬀer in what other aspects of housing are included — in particular,
the option to rent, collateral constraints or transaction costs — in whether equilibrium is imposed
and, if yes, in how the supply side is modeled.
    We thus begin with a "plain vanilla" household problem. It assumes that houses of every
quality as well as other assets and consumption of the non-housing good are all traded in com-
petitive markets. The only friction is that consumption of housing services requires ownership
of a house. Housing thus diﬀers from other assets because of indivisibility and nontradability
of dividends. Indeed, households hold either zero or one units of the housing asset and the
“dividend” — that is, the value of housing services less maintenance cost — cannot be sold in a
market to other households.
    After introducing the plain vanilla problem, we discuss household optimization, derive asset
pricing equations and define an equilibrium with a fixed aggregate supply of housing services.
Here we highlight the distinction between an exogenous distribution of house qualities and a
fixed stock of housing that developers can costlessly convert into one of many distributions
with the same mean. We also discuss the role of expectation formation. In later sections, we
then add further key ingredients one by one: production and land, a rental market, collateral
constraints and transaction costs.


7    Basic setup
We work in discrete time. Studies diﬀer in how long the economy lasts and what households’
planning horizons are. To explain the basic tradeoﬀs, these details are not important, so we do
not take a stand on them now. Instead we focus on the period  decisions of a household who
expects to also live in period  + 1. Studies also typically assume a large number of diﬀerent


                                                20
households who may diﬀer in characteristics such as age, income or beliefs. We do not make
such heterogeneity explicit, but instead describe a generic household problem with minimal
notation.
    To represent uncertainty, we fix a probability space (Ω F  0 ). The set Ω contains states
of the world. Events in the -field F correspond to all exogenous events that can occur. For
example, each state of the world could imply a diﬀerent sequence of shocks to a household’s
income over his lifetime. The probability measure  0 says how likely it is that each event
 ∈ F occurs. In other words, it tells us with what probability nature draws a state of the
world  ∈  . In general, the "physical" probability  0 need not coincide with the belief of a
household.4
Preferences
    The evolution of the households’ information is summarized by a filtration F on Ω:  ∈
F means that the household knows in period  whether event  has occurred or not. The
household’s belief about states of the world is described by a probability  . In what follows,
we keep these objects in the background and instead work directly with random variables and
conditional moments. Our convention is that random variables dated  are contained in the
household’s period  information set. For example,  is (random) consumption of non-housing
goods and we write  +1 for the household’s expected period  + 1 consumption given period
 information.
   Households derive utility from housing services  and other consumption . Utility is state
and time separable; in particular, period  utility from the two goods is given by

                                                ( (   )) 

where  : R2 → R is an “aggregator function” that is homogeneous of degree one and  : R → R
is strictly increasing and concave. Decomposing utility in this way helps distinguish substitution
across goods within a period from substitution of consumption bundles  (   ) across periods.
   The aggregator  describes households’ willingness to substitute housing services for other
consumption within a period. A common example is the CES functional form
                                              ³                     ´(−1)
                                                (−1)     (−1)
                                 (   ) =        +                                             (2)

where  is the intratemporal elasticity of substitution and  is a constant. Agents are more
willing to substitute within the period the higher is . As  → ∞, the two goods become perfect
substitutes and as  → 0, they become perfect complements. The limit  → 1 represents the
Cobb-Douglas case with constant expenditure shares.
    The function  captures agent’s willingness to substitute consumption bundles  over time
(as well as states of nature). A common example is the power function  () =  1−1  (1 − 1)
where  is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution among bundles at diﬀerent points in time.
For  → 0 households want to maintain a stable bundle over time whereas for  → ∞ utility
   4
    The physical probability is what one would use to compute or simulate the distribution of outcomes of the
economy. It thus coincides with the belief of an outside observer, for example an econometrician, who observes
a large sample of data generated from the model.

                                                      21
becomes linear in bundles. The limit  → 1 corresponds to logarithmic utility. With a CES
aggregator, the special case  = 1 results in utility that is separable across the two goods.
    While our assumptions on utility are convenient for exposition, several straightforward ex-
tensions are also common in the literature. First, some papers replace time separable utility
by recursive utility, for example the tractable functional form introduced by Epstein and Zin
(1989). To deal with multiple goods, the usual recursive utility formulation is applied directly
to bundles aggregated by .5 Second, some papers add preference shocks; in particular, a
"housing preference shock" is often introduced via a random weight  in (2). Finally, labor is
often added as a third good in utility.
Technology
    Households obtain housing services by living in exactly one house. Houses come in diﬀerent
qualities  ∈ H ⊂ R where the set H can be either discrete or continuous. Our convention is
that H may contain zero to accommodate households who do not live in a house. A household
who lives in a house of quality  from  to  + 1 obtains a flow of housing services  =  that
enters period  utility. In quantitative applications, the flows  and  are typically identified
with the household’s consumption over a time range that includes date , and the quality of his
residence  is an average over that time range. Our timing convention implies that the house
quality  relevant for period  consumption is chosen based on the period  information set.6
    The one-dimensional quality index  orders houses from low to high qualities. In general, it
captures many characteristics of a house — its location, the size of the land, square footage of
lot and structure, its view, amenities etc. The underlying assumption is that households agree
on the ranking of all houses within the housing market that is being studied. At the same time,
households may diﬀer in their taste for house quality relative to other consumption and hence
be willing to pay diﬀerent amounts for any given house.
   A household who lives in a house of quality  from  to  + 1 must undertake maintenance
worth  ( ) units of the other (non-housing) good. The quality of the house then evolves over
time according to
                                        +1 = +1 ( )                                  (3)
where the subscript +1 indicates that the evolution may be random. We highlight two popular
special cases. The first assumes that all depreciation is “essential maintenance” without which
the house is uninhabitable. As long as essential maintenance is performed, house quality is
constant, that is,  ( ) =   and  ( ) =  . A second special case is that households
do not pay for maintenance but average quality deteriorates geometrically, that is,  ( ) = 0
and  ( ) = (1 −  )  . In both cases,   is depreciation of housing. The first approach is
convenient when the set of qualities H is finite.
   5
    Formally, let  : R2 → R denote a function that captures substitution over time and let  : R → R denote
a function that captures aversion to risk about utility gambles. Utility from a consumption process (   ) is
defined recursively by                      ¡                                  ¢
                                     =   (   )   −1 ( [ (+1 )]) 
Our time separable case obtains if  =  and  ( ) =  () +  (). Epstein and Zin propose a CES
aggregator for  and a power function for .
   6
     Alternative timing conventions are possible and sometimes used in the literature. For example, we might
assume that quality chosen at date  yields housing services only at date  + 1.


                                                       22
Housing markets
     Houses are traded in competitive markets. The only friction is that consumption of housing
services requires ownership of a house. Housing thus diﬀers from other assets because of indivis-
ibility and nontradability of dividends. Indeed, it is held in indivisible units and its “dividend”
— that is, the value of housing services less maintenance cost — cannot be sold in a market. This
assumption is relaxed in Section 12 where we introduce a market for rental housing. In line
with our timing convention, utility from a house bought at date  is enjoyed at date  itself —
date  house prices are thus “cum dividend”.
    A house of quality  trades in period  at the price  ( )  denominated in units of the
non-housing good which serves as numeraire. The price function is increasing in quality. If the
set H consists of a finite number of house types, then house prices can be summarized by a
vector. With a continuum of qualities, it often makes sense to assume that the price function
is smooth — a small change in quality leads to a small change in price. For example, in some
applications the price function is linear, that is, there is a number ̄ such that  () = ̄  for
all quality levels .
What is a house?
   The setup emphasizes indivisibility and quality diﬀerences: housing services are provided
by a distribution of housing capital stocks of diﬀerent qualities, one for each household. In
general, pricing is nonlinear: each quality level represents a diﬀerent good and relative prices
depend on relative demand and supply. This approach goes back to Rosen (1974) who studied
competitive equilibrium with consumers who choose one “design” of a product that is identified
by a vector of characteristics.
    Braid (1981, 1984) and Kaneko (1982) studied housing with a one-dimensional quality index
in static models with a continuum and a finite set of qualities, respectively. Caplin and Leahy
(2014) characterize comparative statics of competitive equilibria in a static setting with a finite
number of agents and goods. The dynamic setup here follows the finite quality models in
Ortalo-Magné and Rady (1999, 2006) and Rios-Rull and Sanches-Marcos (2010) as well as the
continuum approach in Landvoigt, Piazzesi and Schneider (2015).
    At first sight, allowing for nonlinear pricing may appear unnecessary: why not assume that
there is a homogenous housing capital good — akin to physical capital in many macroeconomic
models — with households choosing diﬀerent quantities of that good at a common per-unit price?
The latter approach is a special case of the setup that obtains when some market participants
can convert houses of diﬀerent quality with a marginal rate of transformation of one. For
example, in Section 10 we derive it from the presence of a developer sector who undertakes this
activity.
    Work on housing has more often gone beyond setups with homogeneous capital and linear
pricing than work on, say, business capital. One likely reason is measurement. The diﬃculties
with measuring house prices in national accounts have been discussed frequently. At the same
time, new micro data provide evidence on price dynamics at fine levels of disaggregation by
geography and type of house. The evidence in Section 3 suggests that linear pricing is perhaps
too restrictive, since both volatility conditional on quality is high and conditional means vary
systematically by quality. We return to this issue below.


                                                 23
    While our setup nests essentially all specifications in the macro literature, it is restrictive
in at least two ways. First, it may not be possible or desirable to represent the cross section
of houses by a one-dimensional index. A more general approach could follow Rosen (1974) and
directly model preference over many characteristics. In particular, households may rank houses
diﬀerently because they disagree about the weighting of characteristics. Second, a more general
approach to household capital accumulation might start from an evolution equation

                                            +1 = +1  (   ) 

where +1 is a depreciation shock. In this equation, initial quality  and improvements  are
imperfect substitutes, so that upkeep of the house is an explicit margin for the household. This
approach could generate a distribution of houses in diﬀerent states of disrepair.


8     Household choice
We now consider the household’s decision problem when houses as well as other assets and
consumption of the non-housing good are all traded in competitive markets. The household
receives an exogenous labor income stream  . Securities, such as equity or bonds, trade at
date  at prices collected in a  × 1 vector  and provide payoﬀs at date  + 1 summarized by
a  × 1 vector +1 . For long-lived securities such as equity, the payoﬀ may contain the date
 + 1 price. We make no further assumption on market structure. Markets may be incomplete
in the sense that it is not possible for households to assemble a portfolio of securities in period 
with payoﬀ equal to any given consumption plan that depends on date  + 1 information. With
incomplete markets, households may not be able to insure against future labor income risk.
Recursive household problem
    Without trading frictions, past portfolio choice — including housing choice — aﬀects the
household at date  only through its eﬀect on wealth. We can thus formulate the problem
recursively with a single endogenous state variable cash on hand  that comprises housing
wealth, other wealth plus income from labor and securities. To start oﬀ the recursion, we
define a terminal value function  ( ). In a finite horizon life cycle problem, this function
captures utility at the end of life, perhaps including bequests. In an infinite horizon setup
( = ∞), existence of a value function can be derived from trading restrictions that prevent
Ponzi schemes.
    For a household who expects to live for an additional period, the Bellman equation is

                         ( ) =      max            ( (   )) +  [+1 (+1 )]      (4)
                                       ; ∈H


                                  +  ( ) +  ( ) + >  =  
                             +1 = > +1 + +1 (+1 ( )) + +1 
The first condition is the current budget constraint that says how cash on hand is split into
consumption, asset purchases and maintenance. The second constraint describes the evolution
of cash on hand which depends on future security payoﬀs, house value and labor income.

                                                            24
    The same Bellman equation works for problems with random horizon. Indeed, a common
approach assumes that households survive with a probability that can depend on age. Those
survival probabilities are then used in computing the conditional expectation in the Bellman
equation. In the terminal period of life, households learn that this is their last period, sell
all assets and either consume the proceeds or transfer wealth to children. Given our timing
convention on housing services and the need for ownership, we also assume that households do
not consume housing services in the terminal period of life.
Two stage solution approach
   We consider household choice in two stages. The household first decides on house quality
and thus how much of cash on hand to spend on housing. In a second stage, he allocates
the remaining funds to numeraire consumption and securities. The split is helpful because
indivisibility and nontradability make the housing choice special. On the one hand, indivisibility
means that house quality may be discrete and the pricing of house quality may be nonlinear.
On the other hand, nontradability means that housing and securities are imperfect substitutes
even if there is no risk — a case when all other securities become perfect substitutes.
    We write the second stage problem with returns and portfolio weights, rather than asset
prices and quantities. The gross return on the th security is +1 = +1  . We assume
that the th security is a riskfree bond and denote the gross riskfree rate by  . Moreover,
the returns on securities  = 1   − 1 are risky and collected in a vector +1 . The household
selects a portfolio weight  for each of the risky assets . These weights are collected in a
 − 1 vector  , so that 1 − >  is invested in riskfree bonds, where  is a  − 1 vector of ones.
There are no restrictions on the sign of the portfolio position: the households can short a risky
asset by choosing   0 or borrow at the riskless rate by choosing >   1. The return on
the portfolio is ̃+1 ( ) = > +1 + (1 − > ) 
   The second stage problem is

                        ̃ (̃   ) = max  ( (   )) +  [+1 (+1 )]
                                        


                       +1 = (̃ −  ) ̃+1 ( ) + +1 (+1 ( )) + +1                (5)
The household starts with cash ̃ =  −  ( ) −  ( ) left over after housing expenditure.
He then chooses numeraire consumption  and invests the remaining funds ̃ −  in securities.
Cash next period consists of savings in securities multiplied by their average return plus the
payoﬀs from housing and human capital, both of which are nontradable assets in the second
stage problem.
    Optimal choice depends on risk in house values, labor income and securities returns. To
illustrate, we perform a second-order Taylor expansion of the future value function in (5) around
expected future wealth to obtain

                                                               1      00
        ̃ (̃   ) ≈  ( (   )) + +1 ( +1 ) +  +1 ( +1 )  (+1 ) 
                                                               2
Without risk, the last term vanishes and the problem has a solution only if all returns are
the same. Securities are then perfect substitutes and portfolio choice is indeterminate. More

                                                    25
                                              00
generally, for a risk-averse household with +1  0, welfare declines with the volatility of future
wealth. As a result, securities are imperfect substitutes. Moreover, utility declines with the
volatility of future house values as well with the covariance of house values and labor income.
Housing choice
   The first stage problem takes as given the maximized objective ̃ from the second stage. We
assume that ̃ is increasing in both its arguments and smooth as a function of ̃ ; properties
usually inherited from   and  . The first stage problem is then to choose optimal house
quality to solve
                            ( ) = max ̃ ( −  ( ) −  ( )   )               (6)
                                           ∈H

The household thus trades oﬀ expenditure on a house against its indirect utility value. From
(5), the latter comes from two sources: housing not only earns capital gains, but also enters
utility as a consumption good — it delivers a nontradable dividend. Nontradability thus implies
that housing and other assets can be imperfect substitutes even when there is no risk.
    In the typical application, optimal house quality is increasing in wealth, other things equal.
Indeed, the objective on the right-hand side of (6) is typically supermodular in ( ), that is,
the benefit from additional cash is increasing in house quality and vice versa. Intuitively, one
key force is diminishing marginal utility of numeraire consumption and future wealth: if more
is spent on housing then extra cash becomes more valuable. However, we also need that the
utility value of house quality does not overturn this eﬀect. This might happen, for example,
if housing services are not a normal good in the aggregator  or if the distribution of capital
gains  becomes much more attractive at higher qualities.
   With a discrete set of house qualities, an increasing policy function is a step function in
wealth: there are cutoﬀ wealth levels at which households are indiﬀerent between two adjacent
quality levels. Households with wealth in between two cutoﬀs all choose the same quality level
which they strictly prefer. Moreover, our setup allows for zero holdings of housing — in general,
marginal utility need not increase without bound as consumption of housing services tends to
zero. As a result, there can be a wealth cutoﬀ at which households are indiﬀerent between the
lowest available house quality and not buying any house.
    With continuous house quality, we work with a smooth price function and also assume
further that the objective ̃ is smooth in  . At the optimal quality, a household is then
indiﬀerent between his optimal quality and a slightly better or worse house. Optimal choice is
characterized by the first order condition

                                                    ̃2 ( −  ( ) −  ( )   )
                          0 ( ) +  0 ( ) =                                              (7)
                                                    ̃1 ( −  ( ) −  ( )   )

where ̃ are the partial derivatives of ̃ .
    The marginal rate of substitution of housing for other expenditure is equated to the slope of
the house price function at quality . The slope appears because of indivisibility: the quantity
of housing is one for all households, and indiﬀerence is across nearby quality levels. In contrast
to a competitive model with divisible goods, the marginal rates of substitution of diﬀerent
households are not necessarily equated in equilibrium. The only exception is the case of a

                                                         26
linear function for prices as well as linear improvements (for example, either one of the two
special cases for technology highlighted above  ( ) =   and  ( ) = 0.). Indeed, if the
slopes on the left-hand side are the same everywhere, then  can equivalently be interpreted
as the quantity of a divisible housing capital.
Consumption and savings
   Consider now the second-stage problem for given house quality. The first-order conditions
with respect to non-housing consumption  as well as portfolio weights  on the  − 1 risky
securities can be arranged as
                                                         £ 0          ¤
                    0 ( (   )) 1 (   ) =  +1 (+1 ) 
                                                         h             ³          ´i
                                                            0
                                                 0 =  +1  (+1 ) +1 −        (8)

The first equation says that households are indiﬀerent at the margin between consumption
and borrowing or lending at the riskfree rate. The second equation shows the portfolio choice
margin: households are indiﬀerent between riskfree investment and investment in any of the
risky securities.
    The first equation helps understand which households hold leveraged positions in housing.
Indeed, suppose there are no risky securities. The first equation then determines optimal con-
sumption, the only variable aﬀecting future cash on hand +1 in (5) that is not predetermined
given  , ̃ and +1 . In particular, if the household has more labor income next period, he
consumes more so that his bond position ̃ −  declines and may become negative. We would
thus expect homeowners with an upward sloping labor income profile and little initial financial
wealth to leverage up. This intuition is quite general and continues to hold when labor income
or security returns are risky. It allows life cycle models to successfully replicate the age profile
of household portfolios in the data.
    We emphasize that borrowing (that is, negative ̃ −  ) does not imply negative savings,
because savings also include the positive housing position. This feature is important for match-
ing the data where savings are rarely negative. In the model, savings can be positive because
the purpose of borrowing is not necessarily to move income from the future to the present — in
fact, a borrower household with positive savings moves income from the present to the future.
Instead, the purpose of borrowing for such a household is to buy a large enough house to enjoy
his desired flow of housing services.
Securities portfolios
   To get intuition on the role of housing in portfolio choice, suppose that the continuation
value function +1 is known as of date .7 From the first order conditions for risky securities
and using the definition of cash on hand, we can then approximate the optimal portfolio weights
   7
    This is literally true only under restrictive conditions, for example when asset returns are iid and income
is deterministic. More generally, +1 is random conditional on date  because continuation values depend on
state variables that forecast future asset returns and income. The optimal portfolio weights then contain an
additional term that reflects "intertemporal hedging demand" — agents prefer assets that insure them against
bad realizations of the state variables. We simplify here to focus on the new eﬀects introduced by housing.




                                                      27
on risky securities by
                              µ    ³             ´     µ                                ¶¶
       +1              −1   −1                            +1 + +1 (+1 ( ))
  ≈           (+1 )    +1  +1 −  −  +1                               (9)
      ̃ −                                                          +1
                        00               0
where +1 = − +1 +1 ( +1 ) +1 ( +1 ) reflects curvature in the value function and
can be interpreted as a measure of relative risk aversion.
    The optimal portfolio equation resembles textbook formulas, but makes important correc-
tions for the presence of nontradable assets, here human capital and housing. To interpret it,
consider first the scale factor  +1  (̃ −  ). If there are no nontradable assets, then this
factor equals the expected return on the entire securities portfolio and typically has only a small
eﬀect on the optimal weights. More generally, it says that the weights should be scaled up if
there a lot of nontradable assets. This is because total wealth is not only ̃ −  but includes
the present value of those nontradable assets.
    Consider now the big bracket in (9). The first term reflects the desire to exploit premia
on securities — expected returns that diﬀer from the riskfree rate. To illustrate, suppose there
is a security with payoﬀs that are orthogonal to any other shock including house prices and
labor income. Up to the scale factor, the optimal weight on that security is simply its expected
excess return divided by its variance as well as risk aversion. The household thus exploits a
nonnegative premium on the security, and more so if there is less risk and he is less risk averse.
The sign of the premium determines the direction of trade: the household holds the security if
the premium is positive and shorts it otherwise.
    The second term reflects hedging of labor income and housing risk. Consider first the
role of labor income. If markets are complete, then there exists a portfolio of securities, 
say, that exactly replicates labor income, that is, +1 = +1>
                                                                  . Optimal portfolio choice
for any risk averse investor then involves a term that shorts the portfolio  . Intuitively, the
household wants to avoid risks that he is already exposed to via his nontradable human capital
position. With incomplete markets, it may not be possible to short labor income. Instead, the
household trades against labor income “as much as he can” with the existing set of assets. The
precise meaning of “as much as he can” is given by the projection of labor income on returns
 (+1 )−1  (+1  +1 ) 
    Housing enters the optimal portfolio formula (9) in much the same way as labor income:
it aﬀects the demand for securities through the second “hedging demand” term. The presence
of housing thus generally changes the optimal mix of securities. For example, households who
work at local companies with payoﬀs that are correlated with their house price would optimally
short the stocks of those companies. This type of interaction eﬀect is present whether or not
housing is traded in every period.
    An interesting special case arises when labor income is uncorrelated with all risky securities.
In this case, labor income enters (9) only because its mean increases the scale factor. The
portfolio weights on all risky assets are thus scaled up along with mean labor income, regard-
less of labor income risk. At the same time the riskless asset position 1 − >  is decreased.
Households again trade away labor income, except that the portfolio best suited to do so now
consists entirely of the riskfree security.


                                                28
9     Asset pricing
The previous section characterized households’ optimal decision rules given prices. In particular,
we have used household first-order conditions to interpret model implications for savings and
portfolio choice that can be evaluated with data on household asset positions. As usual, the
same first-order conditions imply restrictions on asset prices given consumption and payoﬀs. In
fact, a large literature in asset pricing uses household Euler equations to test assumptions on
preferences and market structure. Since Euler equations describe an equilibrium relationship
between observables, they can be tested without taking a stand on other features of the economy
such as asset supply.
    This section considers household Euler equations for housing and contrasts them with those
for securities. We thus move from the decisions of a generic household to restrictions on asset
prices due to optimization by an entire population of possibly heterogeneous households. In
order not to clutter notation, we mostly continue our practice of not explicitly labelling in-
dividual characteristics and choices such as income and consumption. At the same time, the
discussion emphasizes that there is a large number of households whose first-order conditions
hold simultaneously and whose choices and characteristics are observable.


9.1    Families of Euler equations
So far, we have taken as given a household’s subjective probability  and written subjective
conditional expectations as  . When discussing asset prices, it is useful to distinguish between
investor beliefs that relate prices and choices, and the “physical” probability that governs
the data-generating process and is therefore relevant for describing measures of conditional
moments constructed from the data. For example, an econometrician may measure expected
excess returns 0 +1 −  by regressing excess returns on public information. From now on
we assume that household beliefs and the physical probability agree on probability zero events
next period and use the random variable +1 to indicate a change of measure: for any random
variable  ,  [ ] = 0 [+1  ] Under rational expectations, we have +1 = 1
Pricing securities
   We denote a generic household’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (MRS) adjusted
by the change of measure by
                                     0 ( (+1  +1 )) 1 (+1  +1 )
                         +1 =                                             +1           (10)
                                           0 ( (   )) 1 (   )
From (8), any household MRS serves as a stochastic discount factor: returns satisfy 0 +1 +1 =
1 and securities prices can be written as  = 0 +1 +1  If markets are complete, all MRSs
are equated in equilibrium and there is a unique +1 that represents the prices of contingent
claims normalized by one-step-ahead conditional probabilities under 0 .
   The standard pricing equation is often used (together with the definition of covariance) to
decompose asset prices into expected discounted payoﬀs plus risk premia:
                               = 0 +1  + 0 (+1  +1 )                     (11)

                                                   29
The risk premium required by investors is larger (and the price therefore lower) if a security pays
oﬀ little when the MRS is high. A positive risk premium is equivalent to a positive expected
excess return 0 +1 −  . Measures of conditional moments 0 +1 or 0 +1 constructed
from the data — for example by regression on public information — imply that expected payoﬀs
are much more stable than prices, and that expected excess returns are predictable. Similar
results obtain for housing, as reviewed in Section 3. If investors have rational expectations and
have no or mild risk aversion, this finding cannot be reconciled with (11) — the excess volatility
puzzle.8
    We say that an agent is a marginal investor for an asset if any small change in its price
or return distribution changes his optimal position in that asset. This concept is key for
understanding asset pricing in heterogeneous agent models: it tells us whose behavior changes
along with asset prices. For example, shocks that mostly aﬀect inframarginal agents (that is,
agents who are not marginal) are unlikely to move prices. Conversely, if a shock moves the price,
it must also aﬀect the positions of marginal agents. In our setup, the first-order conditions (8)
imply that all households are marginal for all assets. Asset prices thus change if and only if all
households adjust their positions. This is true whether or not markets are complete.
House prices with a finite number of qualities
    Indivisibility means that only few households may be marginal for houses of any given
quality. Indeed, with a finite set of qualities H = {1    }, a household who strictly prefers
his optimal quality in the first stage problem (6) will not respond to a change in price. At
the same time, for every quality  except the highest, there are marginal investors who are
indiﬀerent at date  between  and the next highest quality. The indiﬀerence conditions
                  ¡       ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢      ¢      ¡          ¡      ¢    ¡    ¢     ¢
               ̃  −   −     = ̃  −  +1 −  +1  +1                   (12)

relate price steps between quality levels to the characteristics of the marginal investors. The
marginal investors are thus particularly important for pricing houses.
                                     ¡ ¢
    Restrictions on house values   are obtained by adding up price steps implied by (12).
In applications, there is typically an additional household optimality condition that serves as a
boundary condition. In particular, we assume in what follows that there is always a household
who is indiﬀerent between the worst quality house or no house at all. For such a household, the
indiﬀerence condition (12) holds at 1 = 0 and  (1 ) = 0. Alternatively, the price of the worst
quality house may be given by its value in some alternative use that leaves the house vacant.
Example 1. There are two periods, two states of nature and three house qualities 0 1 and
2 . The only security is riskfree with a zero interest rate. There is no maintenance and future
house values are  in state 1 and zero in state 2. There is a continuum of households with
linear utility in both goods as well as future wealth. Households share the same discount rate of
zero and the same wealth, but diﬀer in their subjective probability of the high price state, say
. The household characteristic  is distributed uniformly on [0 1]. We consider an allocation
   8
    Equation (11) indicates two reasons why asset prices could exhibit premia that are on average high but
also volatile. First, if investors have rational expectations then the covariance of the MRS with payoﬀs must be
negative and variable. Alternatively, investors may be more pessimistic than the econometrician (that is,  is
high when  is low) and their relative pessimism moves over time.


                                                      30
with 1 − 2 houses of quality 2 and 2 − 1 houses of quality 1 .9
    The following prices and individual choices are consistent with individual optimization.
There are cutoﬀ households with subjective probabilities 1 and 2 who are indiﬀerent between
zero and 1 , as well as 1 and 2 , respectively. Households with beliefs 1 determine the value
of a house of quality 1 as “dividend” (housing services) plus expected resale value,  (1 ) =
1 + 1 1  Households with 2 value house quality 2 as  (2 ) =  (1 ) + (1 + 2 ) (2 − 1 ).
Both expressions satisfy (12). Households with  ∈ [2  1] choose quality 2 , households with
 ∈ [1  2 ] choose 1 and households with   1 choose zero. In this example, the second
stage is trivial: agents are indiﬀerent between current and future consumption. In the first stage
problem, higher-probability households buy high quality houses. Lower probability households
perceive those houses as too expensive.
House prices with continuous quality
    With continuous house quality, every household is marginal for houses of his own optimal
quality, but not necessarily for any other quality. To see this, start from the first-order condition
(7) and substitute for the derivatives of ̃ using (8) and the envelope theorem to obtain
                           2 (   )                  £                                  ¤
               0 ( ) =               −  0 ( ) + 0 +1 0+1 (+1 ( )) +1
                                                                                    0
                                                                                        ( )   (13)
                           1 (   )
A household who chooses  is indiﬀerent between  and a slightly better or worse house:
the slope of the equilibrium price function must equal the change in the “dividend” 2 1 −  0
plus the change in the risk adjusted future value of the house. If now some range of houses
becomes more expensive while prices around quality  remain unchanged, this does not aﬀect
the optimal choice of  . No household needs to be marginal for any quality other than his own.
    The Euler equation (13) restricts the slope of the price function, much like (12) restricts
price steps along a discrete quality ladder. Restrictions on house values are again derived
using a boundary condition. To illustrate, we select for each quality        ¡ ∗ one household   ¢ who buys
                                                                                         ∗
that quality, and denote his numeraire consumption and MRS by  ()  +1 () . We then
integrate (13) starting from  (0) = 0 to write the house price at quality  as
               Z                                     ∙Z                                       ¸
                   2 (∗ (̃) ̃)                0       ∗        0               0
       () =           ∗
                                     ̃ −  () +       +1 (̃)+1 (+1 (̃))+1 (̃)̃      (14)
                0 1 ( (̃) ̃)                      0

With indivisibility, the “dividend” of a house of quality  reflects an average of intratemporal
MRSs of households who purchase qualities less of equal to  Similarly, risk adjustment reflects
an average of intertemporal MRSs of those households.
   A popular special case restricts price functions to be linear. Linear pricing can be derived
from the assumption that developers can freely convert houses of diﬀerent quality into each
other, as discussed further in Section 10 below. With the same slope 0 ( ) = ̄ at every
quality level, the Euler equation (13) applies to the price per-unit of quality ̄ . The value of a
house of quality  is
                           2 (∗ () )       0           0
                                                               £ ∗               0
                                                                                       ¤
                   ̄  =                  −    ()  +    +1 ()̄+1 +1 ()        (15)
                           1 (∗ () )
  9
    One way to think of this setup is as an equilibrium model with fixed supply. More generally, it simply
describes a family of households who buy a set of houses, for example all movers in a given period.

                                                    31
With linear pricing, markets for diﬀerent quality housing are tied more tightly together. As a
result, every household is marginal for every house, as is the case for securities. The dividend
and risk adjusted payoﬀ at quality  can then be related to the MRSs of households who buy
quality .
Example 2. To illustrate nonlinear pricing with a continuum of qualities, we adapt the simple
example from above. The set of households is unchanged, but the set of qualities is now
H = [0 1 − 1 ]. We consider an allocation with 1 houses of quality zero and 1 − 1 houses of
positive quality uniformly distributed along the interval. Without maintenance, the first order
condition (13) simplifies to 0 () = 1 +  We again construct prices and choices that satisfy
all optimality conditions. There is a cutoﬀ household who has subjective probability 1 and
is indiﬀerent between no house and an infinitesimal house. Households with   1 buy no
house, while households with   1 buy a house of quality  =  − 1 . House values are
 () =  (1 + 1 ) + 12 2 .
     Again higher probability households buy better houses, which lower probability households
perceive to be overpriced. Let 0 denote the true probability of state 1. The stochastic discount
                        ∗
factors for securities +1 () are equal to ( + 1 )0 in state 1 and (1 − ( + 1 )) (1 − 0 ) in
state 2. Since the discount rate is zero and utility is linear, they diﬀer only by the change of
measure from the subjective probability of households who buy quality  to the true probability
0 10 Every stochastic discount factor correctly prices the riskless bond, the only available
security.
    So far the example emphasizes heterogeneity in risk assessment through beliefs. The essential
feature however is only that agents disagree about the future value of houses. We can thus
alternatively assume that there is no risk (0 = 1) but  represents households’ discount factors.
For the above choices to remain optimal, we also assume that there is no riskfree security so
houses are the only traded assets. Prices are then the same as above: the interpretation is that
more patient households buy larger houses since they want to save more. The absence of a
riskfree security is important to ensure a solution to households’ problems without borrowing
constraints.


9.2       Limits to arbitrage
In general, there need not exist a stochastic discount factor that prices all houses. This is a
key diﬀerence between houses and divisible securities with tradable payoﬀs. The existence of
a stochastic discount factor says that all investors who choose to buy assets discount riskfree
payoﬀs at the same rate and pay the same risk premia per unit of payoﬀ. In a frictionless
market, these properties are guaranteed by the absence of arbitrage opportunities, which in
turn is necessary for the existence to a solution to the investor’s optimization problem.11
       A stochastic discount factor need not exist because indivisibility and nontradability intro-
  10
      The example relies on diﬀerences in beliefs for tractability. For the issues discussed below, it does not matter
whether diﬀerences in risk attitude stem from beliefs or other household characteristics such as risk aversion or
nontradable income risk.
   11
      If an investor perceives two assets with same exposure but diﬀerent risk premia, he expects unlimited profits
from shorting the expensive portfolio and buying the cheaper one.


                                                         32
duce limits to arbitrage. In fact, each friction separately is suﬃcient to preclude discount rates
or risk premia to be equated across houses. If either the quantity of assets is restricted to
zero or one, or if all dividends have to be consumed, then fewer arbitrage trades are feasible
or desirable and the absence of arbitrage places weaker restrictions on prices. We consider the
mechanisms in turn and then draw conclusions for matching observed prices.
Indivisibility and the valuation of quality steps
    Example 2 above illustrates the role of indivisibility. Suppose there was a stochastic discount
factor +1 pricing all houses. With two states of nature, +1 consists of two numbers. Since
houses pay oﬀ zero in state 2, the risk-adjusted future payoﬀ from a house of quality  would
have to equal  multiplied by the value of +1 in state 1. However, in example 2 the risk
adjusted payoﬀ is 1  + 12 2 , a contradiction. The result does not depend on a continuum of
house qualities — a similar contradiction can be shown in Example 1. Moreover, it does not
depend on nontradability; in fact, in the examples the housing dividend per unit of quality
2 1 −  0 is independent of , as it would be if dividends could be sold at a per-unit price in a
rental market.
    Why do optimizing households not arbitrage away diﬀerences in the valuation of house
payoﬀs? Consider the pricing equation (13): it resembles a standard pricing equation  =
0 +1 +1 , except that it is applied only to the quality step from  to  + .12 The pricing
of that quality step reflects the valuation of buyers of . Buyers of lower quality houses may
not share the same valuation — in fact, in the examples they perceive a lower probability of a
positive payoﬀ and would like to short the quality step at . However, quality steps are not by
themselves traded in markets: households can only trade houses, that is, portfolios of quality
steps. Moreover, households cannot sell houses short. As a result, they cannot in general
generate a synthetic claim that replicates the change in payoﬀ at a quality step.13
    If other forces equate risk-adjustment factors, a stochastic discount factor exists even with
indivisibility and short sale constraints. For example, suppose that housing risk is spanned by
the securities, that is, for every house there exists a portfolio of securities with the same payoﬀ
                  ∗
profile. Every +1   () is then a valid stochastic discount factor for all houses.14 If optimizing
investors can replicate houses by trading securities, they equate their assessment of housing
                                                                              ∗
risk. For example, in the special case when markets are complete, all +1       () are equal.
Nontradability and individual specific returns
   We refer to 2 1 −  0 as the dividend from housing because it records the flow benefit to
homeowners, as does the dividend on a security such as equity. However, nontradability implies
  12
      Another diﬀerence is that by our timing convention house prices are always “cum dividend” — they include
the current flow payoﬀ from housing — whereas securities prices are ex dividend. This convention is not central
to the discussion that follows.
   13
      The eﬀect of indivisibility is diﬀerent from that of short sale constraints with divisible securities. Indeed,
in models with only short sale constraints and no other constraints a stochastic discount factor does exist: for
any given risk, it reflects the MRS of the investors who are most optimistic about that risk and end up as the
only investors exposed to that risk in equilibrium. As a result, investors do not diﬀer in the risk premia they
pay for risks they are actually exposed to.
   14                                                                  ∗
      If housing risk is spanned, the marginal rates of substitution +1 () are equated on all events over which
house payoﬀs are constant and can be pulled out of the integral in (14). Integrating over ̃, we obtain a standard
risk-adjusted payoﬀ.


                                                        33
that the housing dividend may diﬀer across households who consume  because those households
have diﬀerent consumption bundles and preferences. As a result, the returns earned on the
same housing position may diﬀer across households, in contrast to the return on securities.15
Returns on owner-occupied housing are thus more diﬃcult to observe than those on other
assets, including rental housing where the dividend to the landlord can be observed in the
rental market.
    Nontradability implies that a stochastic discount factor need not exist even when the pricing
of houses is linear. Indeed, (15) says that with linear pricing the MRS of buyers of quality 
determines the price of assets and houses of quality . However, it is not necessarily true that
the same MRS determines house prices for any other quality 0 6= . Arbitrage is limited because
households who disagree about the required riskfree return on assets or on the risk premium
on houses may also obtain diﬀerent marginal benefits from housing services, or “marginal
dividends”. More patient or more optimistic households thus buy larger houses, while more
impatient or more pessimistic households buy smaller houses.


9.3     Pricing houses vs pricing equity
What are the testable restrictions on the prices of houses and other assets that are implied by
optimizing behavior in our framework? The large literature on the pricing of equity employs
two working hypotheses. The first is that equity, or firm capital, is a divisible asset that is
priced linearly, so that it suﬃces to focus on the properties of a single per-unit price. Second,
there exists a stochastic discount factor that can be inferred from optimality conditions of some
investor, for example certain households or institutional investors. Success of a model is then
measured by whether the family of stochastic discount factors implied by the model can explain
how the price of equity moves relative to dividends. Moreover, one can learn about desirable
features of a model up front from a reduced form approach that postulates a specific functional
form for the stochastic discount factor and infers its properties from securities prices.
    The previous discussion shows that models of owner occupied housing satisfy these two
working hypotheses only under restrictive assumptions. On the one hand, indivisibility implies
that pricing may be nonlinear for any given observable concept of quality — houses of diﬀerent
qualities are diﬀerent assets. The challenge for a model is then not to reconcile movements in one
price with many household MRSs, but rather to generate the right cross sectional links between
diﬀerent prices and MRSs. On the other hand, when markets are suﬃciently incomplete, limits
to arbitrage preclude the existence of a stochastic discount factor altogether. In this case,
reduced form frictionless pricing exercises do not help infer how pricing works — a more explicit
analysis of frictions is called for.
   Whether or not pricing is linear or a stochastic discount factor exists, models of optimizing
households imply strong testable restrictions on the joint distribution of house prices, house
quality choices and household characteristics. Suppose for example that according to the model,
wealth is the only dimension of heterogeneity among households. Optimal choice of housing
implies an assignment of house qualities to wealth levels. Given that assignment, (14) predicts a
  15
    In fact, when we select households with (∗ ()  ∗ ()) such that (13) holds, it is not necessarily the case
that all households who buy  share those characteristics.

                                                        34
cross section of prices by quality. Success of a study then depends on how well it can match the
cross sectional comovement of wealth, quality and prices when compared to micro data. The
restrictions are derived from household optimization alone, much like standard Euler equation
tests.
Nonlinear pricing and the cross section of house prices
    With indivisibility and nontradability, the cross section of house prices is especially informa-
tive about the merits of diﬀerent models. In particular, nonlinear pricing can account for richer
patterns in the cross section of capital gains than linear pricing. We have seen in Section 3 how
capital gains systematically diﬀer across the quality spectrum over the recent U.S. boom-bust
cycle. With linear pricing, capital gains are
                                 +1 (+1 ( ))   ̄+1 +1 ( )
                                                   =                  
                                       ( )              
The conditional distribution of capital gains depends on current quality  only via actual
changes in quality between  and  + 1. In contrast, the eﬀects of valuation are the same for
all qualities. This feature implies that models with linear pricing have trouble generating the
large diﬀerences in average capital gains across quality tiers. If pricing is instead nonlinear,
then changes in the characteristics of marginal investors along the quality spectrum can also
aﬀect capital gains.
   Nonlinear pricing of houses can reflect various dimensions of heterogeneity. Example 2
highlights how diﬀerences in risk assessment or discount factors aﬀect intertemporal MRSs.
However, even if all intertemporal MRSs agree, so that a stochastic discount factor exist,
the intratemporal MRSs (7) are not necessarily equated because of nontradability. Nonlinear
payoﬀs and hence prices can thus obtain even in a static setting or if all intertemporal MRSs
agree so that a stochastic discount factor exists.
    With nonlinear pricing, individual characteristics of marginal investors at a given quality
matter for the relative price of that quality. The same property arises in markets that are seg-
mented by quality. The diﬀerence between nonlinear pricing and segmentation is that nonlinear
pricing creates spillovers in pricing across qualities. For example, changes in the preferences of
households who buy low quality houses aﬀect also the values of higher quality houses.
Volatility of house values in heterogeneous agent models
    Indivisibility — and to some extent also nontradability — provide extra scope for hetero-
geneity of agents to aﬀect the volatility of house prices. This is promising because standard
heterogeneous agent models face a challenge when it comes to generating volatility. The chal-
lenge arises because optimizing households respond to shocks by reallocating assets until all
Euler equations hold jointly. If a stochastic discount factor exists, discount rates 0 +1 and
risk premia 0 (+1  +1 ) are equated across agents. Any shocks to the distribution of agent
characteristics or shocks that aﬀect a subset of agents have only a muted impact on prices
because portfolio adjustments keep MRSs similar. As the simplest example, if markets are
complete, pure changes in the distribution of individual income risks are oﬀset by portfolio
adjustment and prices remain unchanged.
   With indivisible housing and markets suﬃciently incomplete so that housing risk is not
                               ∗
spanned, intertemporal MRSs +1 () are not equated. Suppose there is a shock that aﬀects

                                                35
the income or beliefs of low quality home buyers. The shock can change the MRS of low quality
buyers and hence the slope of the price function at low qualities, but have no eﬀect on the MRS
of high quality buyers. Reallocation of housing risk is limited since no household buys more
than one house. As a result, the shock will likely have a stronger impact on house prices in the
low quality segment than the high segment, and the aggregate market will move together with
the price of low quality houses.
   To illustrate the implication of cross sectional shocks on risk premia in the standard pricing
equation (14), we let  () denote the housing dividend and rewrite the pricing equation as
      () =  () + 0 [+1 (+1 ())]  +  0 (+1
                                                                ∗
                                                                    ()) 0+1 (+1 ())+1
                                                                                           0
                                                                                               ())
                                                                                     ∗
where we have exchanged expectation and integration, and used the fact that all +1     () agree
on the riskfree rate. The second term on the right-hand side is the expected present value of the
house discounted at the riskfree rate. The notation 0 indicates that the random variables
vary not only across states of nature, but also across qualities, where quality is uniformly
distributed on [0 ] by construction — this is because we have selected one household for quality
level.
   For securities, MRSs are all equal and risk premia depend on variation common to all MRSs
and payoﬀs across states of nature. Any excess volatility of prices is due to changes in this
common variation. With indivisible housing, excess volatility can also be due to changes of the
cross sectional distribution of agent characteristics. In particular, changes in the environment
that aﬀect only a subset of agents that buy low quality houses can shift the distribution and
aﬀect many prices and hence the aggregate market.
    When pricing is linear, nontradability implies that MRSs are still not equated across in-
vestors. However, the same per-unit price ̄ appears in all Euler equations (15). Hence, the
per-unit price will only change if the Euler equations of buyers at all quality levels are aﬀected.
A shock that aﬀects only a subset of households can thus only matter for prices if it also changes
the Euler equation of high quality buyers. This requires changes in either the intertemporal
or the intratemporal MRS of high quality buyers. Models with linear pricing thus imply that
the distribution of house choices respond more strongly, which dampens the eﬀect on prices.
Overall, the scope for price volatility is reduced.


10      Equilibrium
In this section we take a first look at equilibrium. We close the frictionless model presented
so far by introducing an exogenous supply of securities as well as an exogenous endowment
of numeraire consumption. We also assume a fixed aggregate supply of housing services. To
emphasize the role of indivisibility, we compare two stark special cases for technology that are
common in applications: a fixed distribution of house qualities, and free conversion of house
qualities into each other.
   We take a general approach to expectation formation that can accommodate various con-
cepts in the literature. We first define a temporary equilibrium for date  as a collection of prices
and allocations such that markets clear given beliefs and agents’ preferences and endowments.

                                                   36
Following Grandmont (1977), temporary equilibrium imposes market clearing and individual
optimization, but does not require that each agent’s belief coincide with the physical probability
 0 . We then discuss further restrictions on expectations and their role in quantitative work.
In particular, we compare rational expectations equilibrium and self-confirming equilibrium —
a common shortcut that simplifies computations in heterogeneous agent models — as well as
temporary equilibria with directly measured expectations.
Housing market clearing
    We denote the mass of households that makes decisions at date  by I . For each individual
 ∈ I , the solution of the individual household problem delivers decision rules for consumption,
savings and portfolio choice that depend on calendar time, the endogenous state variable cash on
hand and current prices. Moreover, household decisions depend on preferences and in particular
beliefs about future income, prices and asset payoﬀs. Let  be the belief of household  at
date  and  (   ;    ) be his housing demand at date 16
    We assume that there are always at least as many households as houses of positive quality.17
We thus fix the mass of houses at I and let  denote the date  cumulative density function
of available house qualities, defined on [0 ∞). If the households’ choice set H is finite, then
 is a step function. If  (0)  0, then not every household will be able to buy a house of
positive quality in equilibrium. The housing market clears if at every quality   0 the number
of households who choose a house of quality  or better is the same as the number of houses
with these qualities:           ¡ ¡                     ¢   ¢
                              Pr     ;    ≥  = 1 −  ()                   (16)

Fixed supply versus linear conversion
    If the distribution of house qualities  is exogenous, prices adjust so that the household
sector absorbs the given distribution. The endogenous objects in this case include equilibrium
house prices — one for every quality level — as well as the assignment of individual houses
to individual households. In general, house prices are nonlinear in quality and reflect the
distributions of qualities and household characteristics. The simple examples of Section 9.2
show how this can happen: if we take the set of houses used there to describe an exogenous
supply, then the prices and individual choices characterize an equilibrium given that supply.
    The polar opposite of a fixed quality distribution is linear conversion. Suppose that the
total housing stock (measured as the aggregate supply of housing services) is fixed at some
number  , but that it can be divided up every period into individual houses without cost.
Since the marginal transformation across quality types is now fixed at one, pricing must be
linear. There is only one price that reflects the value of a unit of housing in terms of numeraire.
The distribution of qualities  becomes an endogenous object that is determined in equilibrium
  16
     Here  represents a probability on infinite sequences. Beliefs at diﬀerent information sets therefore do
not have to be derived as conditionals from a single probability. This generality is useful to accommodate for
example beliefs that are derived from a forecasting model estimated with data up to date .
  17
     This assumption covers most applications we discuss below. Alternatively, we would have to develop further
the use of a vacant house.




                                                      37
subject to a constraint on the mean
                                            Z    1
                                                      () =                                       (17)
                                             0


    A fixed distribution is interesting in applications that consider the short-term response to
shocks. It is also useful for longer-term analysis if the market can be viewed as a collection of
segments fixed by geography or regulation such as zoning. In contrast, linear conversion is an
interesting assumption in applications that consider long-run outcomes or when studying new
developments where developers design the distribution of houses from scratch. Beyond these
polar opposites, it could be interesting to explore intermediate cases of costly conversion by
developers. The macroeconomics literature has yet to consider this explicitly.
    To decentralize an economy with linear conversion, we assume that there is a competitive
developer sector that buys existing houses and sells new houses. The endogenous distribution
of houses will then satisfy our earlier assumption that the number of houses is always less or
equal than the number of households. Since households have no use for more than one house,
developers never create more than I houses at date . Moreover, competition among developers
and linear conversion force linear pricing: the relative price of any two qualities must equal the
unitary marginal rate of transformation.
   With either technology, the housing component of equilibrium includes a price function  ()
as well as an allocation of house qualities such that the market clearing condition (16) holds. In
an equilibrium with fixed quality distribution, (16) holds for the exogenous cdf  . In contrast,
an equilibrium with linear conversion includes an equilibrium distribution of house qualities 
that satisfies (17) and moreover features a linear price function  () = ̄ .
Temporary equilibrium
    We assume that household  ∈ I enters period  endowed with a house of quality ̄ ,
securities ̄ as well as  units of numeraire. We allow for households in their last period
of life who mechanically sell any housing and securities and consume all the proceeds. To
accommodate long-lived securities, we write payoﬀs as price plus dividend, that is,  = ̂( ) +
 . For example, the th security is a riskfree one-period bond, so  = 1. If the th security
is equity then  =  +  where  is the dividend.18
    In addition to a price function, a house allocation and — with linear conversion — a distrib-
ution of house qualities, a date  temporary equilibrium consists of securities and consumption
allocations as well as security prices such that housing, numeraire and securities markets clear
at the optimal demand, with initial wealth evaluated at the equilibrium prices. The conditions
  18
     The function ̂ helps accommodate debt with longer but finite maturity. For example, if the th security
is a riskfree two-period zero-coupon bond, then  = ̂ =  since the two period bond turns into a one
period bond after one period.




                                                         38
for wealth, numeraire and securities are
                                                                                               ¡ ¢
                                                                =  + ̄> ̂ ( ) +  ̄ ;    ∈ I
        Z                                                            Z
             
               ¡               
                                  ¢  ¡ ¡                 
                                                             ¢¢
                ;    +      ;     =           ( + >  )
         I
                                    Z                                ZI
                                          ¡                   ¢
                                           ;     =       ̄                                 (18)
                                       I                               I


    A sequence of temporary equilibria is a collection of date  temporary equilibria that are
connected via the updating of endowments. In particular,
                                                     ¡       for any household¢     ∈ I who was
already alive at date  − 1, we impose ̄ = −1 −1  −1 ; −1
                                                                          
                                                                        −1   and similar for the
securities holdings. Agents who enter the economy at date  are endowed only with labor
income  . While a sequence of temporary equilibria tracks the distribution of asset holdings
over time, it still does not restrict expectations.
Rational expectations equilibrium vs self-confirming equilibrium
    A rational expectations equilibrium is a sequence of temporary equilibria such that  =  0
for every period  and agent . Beliefs thus coincide with the physical probability for all events:
all agents agree with the econometrician on the distribution of all exogenous and endogenous
variables. Rational expectations equilibrium is common in macroeconomic studies, especially
when the model has few agents and assets or when there is no aggregate risk. In such cases, it
is straightforward to move from the recursive formulation of decision problems to the definition
of a recursive equilibrium that expresses prices as a function of a small set of state variables.
    For the simplest example, suppose there is a representative agent. Since we have assumed a
fixed supply of assets, there are no endogenous state variables. Prices only depend on current
variables such as consumption as well as current variables required to forecast future exogenous
variables such as income and asset payoﬀs. With rich heterogeneity, rational expectations
equilibria become more diﬃcult to characterize. With incomplete markets as well as other
frictions described below, defining a recursive equilibrium may require a large dimensional
state space that contains the distribution of not only wealth but also individual asset holdings
— for example housing and long term mortgages — as well as their dependence on age.
    To avoid explicitly dealing with a large state space and the resulting complicated distribution
of endogenous variables, studies with heterogenous agents and aggregate risk often look for a
self-confirming equilibrium in which agent beliefs coincide with the physical probability  0 only
on a subset of events.19 A common approach follows Krusell and Smith (1998) and parametrizes
agent beliefs about future prices with “forecast functions” that map future prices to a simple
set of current predictor variables (such as the current cross-sectional mean of asset holdings)
and shocks. A self-confirming equilibrium requires that the forecast functions match prices also
under the physical probability.
    Self-confirming equilibrium imposes diﬀerent restrictions on allocations and prices than ra-
tional expectations equilibrium since the forecast functions only involve a limited set of moments
  19
    The labeling here follows Sargent (1999) who in turns builds on the game theoretic concept in Fudenberg
and Levine (1998). Krusell and Smith (1998) refer to “approximate equilibria”.


                                                          39
of the state variables. In general, there can be other self-confirming equilibria with other fore-
cast functions, and there is no guarantee that any particular self-confirming equilibrium is a
rational expectations equilibrium.20 Applying self-confirming equilibrium with a given forecast
function thus calls for justifications of assumptions on beliefs, perhaps by appealing to bounded
rationality.
Temporary equilibrium with measured expectations
    An alternative approach implements temporary equilibria by directly measuring expecta-
tions about future variables that are relevant for agent decisions. The temporary equilibrium
then provides a map from technology and the distribution of household characteristics as well
as expectations into prices and allocations. To specify beliefs, one relevant source is survey data
which can be informative in particular about the cross sectional relationship between expec-
tations and other characteristics (for example, Piazzesi and Schneider 2009a). Alternatively,
expectations about prices can be specified using a forecasting model (Landvoigt, Piazzesi and
Schneider 2015).
    Temporary equilibrium with measured expectations also simplifies computation. It is helpful
to think of the computation of equilibrium in two steps — first individual optimization given
prices and then finding market clearing prices. To find temporary equilibrium prices for a
given trading period means finding a solution to the nonlinear equation system (18) in as many
unknowns as there are prices. This is in contrast to rational expectations equilibrium where
one looks for an entire price function. Since the price finding step for temporary equilibrium is
easier, the optimization step can be made more diﬃcult: the concept lends itself well to models
with a rich asset structure, for example with many house types or many risky assets.
    A conceptual diﬀerence between temporary equilibrium with measured expectations and
rational expectations equilibrium is that the modeler does not a priori impose a connection
between expectations at any given date and model outcomes at future dates. Of course, if
the model is well specified, then this does not matter for the fit of the model: any rational
expectations equilibrium gives rise to a sequence of temporary equilibria given the set of beliefs
that agents hold in the rational expectation equilibrium. With a well specified model, that
same set of beliefs should be apparent in expectation surveys or in a good forecasting model.
   The conceptual diﬀerence is thus in how we assess the fit of a misspecified model and how
we achieve identification of parameters. Rational expectations equilibrium and self-confirming
equilibrium view both prices and the cross section of endowments as a function of state vari-
ables. To identify parameters that aﬀect the coeﬃcients in prices and decision rules requires
controlled variation of the state variables. The concepts are thus most easily and most com-
monly applied when variables display recurrent patterns: the empirical moments of prices and
other variables can then be compared to the stationary equilibrium implied by the model. In
contrast, temporary equilibrium can be implemented even with data on only a single trading
period. Prices are then a single set of numbers and endowments are measured directly. Iden-
  20
    At the same time, if there exists a recursive rational expectations equilibrium, then it is also a self-confirming
equilibrium for some forecast function (not necessarily simple). In suﬃciently tractable models, one can try out
diﬀerent forecast functions systematically so as to establish that a self-confirming equilibrium is indeed close to
a rational expectations equilibrium. This route is taken by Krusell and Smith (1998), but not in the typical
application on housing reviewed below.


                                                         40
tification of parameters that aﬀect prices comes from cross sectional variation in prices and
allocations.
    There is also a diﬀerence in how we deal with misspecification and counterfactuals. Rational
expectations insist that expectations are “consistent with the model”, so beliefs are as misspec-
ified as the model itself. Moreover, counterfactuals — such as changes in a policy parameter
— vary expectations in a way that is consistent with the model. Temporary equilibrium with
measured expectations instead emphasizes that expectations are “consistent with the data” at
the initial equilibrium. As a result, there is no prediction on how expectations change with
parameters; any counterfactual requires a reassessment of the assumptions on expectations.21
    There are two reasons why the use of temporary equilibrium with measured expectations
is particularly attractive in models of housing. First, as we have discussed, there are payoﬀs
from including a rich set of assets, in particular houses of many diﬀerent qualities. Second,
the postwar data on housing is shaped by the two boom periods — the 1970s and the 2000s —
that saw several unusual shocks, as discussed in Section 19 below. Given this data situation,
identification of a stationary equilibrium price function from regular patterns is less powerful.
In contrast, there is much to learn from the cross section and from data on expectations for
both boom episodes.


11      Production and land
In this section we describe models of housing supply that are common in the applications
below. We start from a general setup that allows for land and structures as separate factors
of production. We then explain when housing can nevertheless be represented by the single
state variable “quality”, as we have done throughout this chapter. Finally, we review additional
restrictions on house prices derived from firm optimization.
    Consider a general production function at the property level. When a new structure of size
0 is paired with a lot of size , initial house quality is  =  0 (0  ). Once a house has been
built, its lot size remains the same, whereas the structure may depreciate or improve. With a
stream of investments  , the quality of a house of age  is given by

                                 + = +   (0  +1   +   )                    (19)

where + is a productivity shock. The production function   may depend on the vintage 
    Both new structures and improvements to existing houses are produced by a construction
sector from capital  and labor  . As before, the mass of houses is I and we index indi-
vidual houses by  ∈ [0 I ]  We further assume that it is costless to scrap an existing house.
Construction output — or residential investment — is then
                         Z I
                                ¡ 0             ¢
                                  () +  ()  =  =    (   )            (20)
                            0
  21
     Predictions on expectations can be obtained by imposing more structure on expectation formation for
example via learning rules. For a survey on learning in macroeconomics, see Evans and Honkapohja (2009).


                                                      41
where   and  are the production function and the productivity shock for the construction
sector, respectively.
   We distinguish the construction sector labeled  from the rest of the business sector —
labeled  — that makes numeraire from capital and labor. Capital in both sectors is made from
numeraire one for one without adjustment costs and depreciates at constant rates   and   .
The resource constraints for numeraire and the capital accumulation equations are
                                 +  +  =    (   ) 
                                          
                                        +1   = (1 −   )  +    =                                 (21)
It remains to describe how costly it is to change the distribution of existing individual housing
units. We distinguish diﬀerent scenarios below.
    In each case, the definition of equilibrium is amended by adding () construction output as
a separate intermediate good that trades in a competitive market at the relative price  , ()
both types of capital as securities in the households’ problems that trade at a price of one and
yield a net return equal to the marginal product of capital less depreciation, () as market
clearing conditions for construction output and numeraire (20) and the first equation in (21),
respectively, () labor income as labor times the competitive wage in the household budget
constraint.
From land and structures to house quality
    In principle, the above technology could give rise to rich dynamics for the distribution of
house types. For example, if diﬀerent vintages of houses have diﬀerent capital-land ratios, they
may yield the same housing services, but depreciate at diﬀerent rates. The macroeconomics
literature has by and large sidestepped this issue with assumptions that allow housing to be
summarized by one number, quality. We now discuss several special assumptions that accom-
plish the same outcome even when land is present. The simplest approach is to leave out land
altogether, as in the literature on home production. Housing is then identified with structures
only.
The tree model
    Another simple approach is a “tree model” of housing that can motivate setups with a fixed
or slow-moving quality distribution. Suppose that structures depreciate at rate , but that a
house remains inhabitable (that is, yields positive housing services) only as long as structures
and land are always paired in exact proportions.22 All owners who hold a house from one period
to the next then make the improvement  = 0 every period. In other words, a house works
like a tree that yields fruit equal to housing services less improvements.
    The tree model implies that the state of a house can be summarized by a single variable,
quality. From the perspective of households, quality is constant as long as maintenance is per-
formed, the case of “essential maintenance” discussed in Section II above. When the distribution
of lots is fixed, one can apply the definition of equilibrium with a fixed quality distribution from
Section 10. Alternatively, we could add a technology by which lots are converted. For example,
  22
     In terms of the above notation, assume first that  0 ( ) =  if  =  and  0 ( ) = 0 otherwise, so every
inhabitable house built must have a structure-land ratio of . Assume further that future quality   is equal
to  if  = 0 for all  =    +  and zero otherwise.

                                                         42
if it was possible for developers to freely redivide lots, then we would obtain an equilibrium
with linear conversion.
A frictionless model
    Suppose that the production of housing from land and structures has constant returns and
that structures depreciate at a constant rate. Suppose further that houses are produced by a
competitive developer sector who can linearly convert both land and structures. We thus have
a frictionless model with two factors of production.23 All houses built at the same point in time
will share the same ratio of structures to land. From the perspective of households, the change
in house quality depends on the land share together with the depreciation rate of structures.
The household problem thus looks like one with geometric depreciation of quality, determined
endogenously from the equilibrium land share.
    The frictionless model imposes a supply-side restriction on house prices that must hold
together with Euler equations from the household side discussed earlier. Indeed, from the
first-order condition of a developer, we have
                                                   ̄ 10 (  ) =  
where  is aggregate structures,  is aggregate land, assumed constant, and  is the relative
price of construction output. If there are many structures, then the scarcity of the fixed factor
land drives up the per-unit price ̄ of housing. Since aggregate structures move slowly over
time, this type of model typically has trouble generating a lot of volatility in house prices
relative to the price of construction output. The problem is similar to that encountered by
models of the firm without adjustment costs to capital.
Land as a flow constraint
   An alternative frictionless model uses land as a constraint on the flow of new housing, as
opposed to as a factor of production for all housing as above. Since the model assumes linear
conversion, we write technology directly in terms of aggregate quality:
                                                 ¡                         ¢
                          = (1 − ) −1 + ̃     (   )  ̄             (22)

Here ̃  is a constant returns production function that transforms construction output (that
is, housing investment) and a constant flow of new land into new housing. The technology is
decentralized via competitive firms.
    The flow constraint approach also reduces the state variables to only house quality. It does
so by applying the depreciation rate directly to the bundle of land and structures. Even though
diﬀerent vintages of new houses will generally have diﬀerent land shares, they are nevertheless
assumed to depreciate at the same rate. The flow constraint also diﬀers from the frictionless
model above in the restriction on prices. Firm first-order conditions deliver
                                         ¡                         ¢
                                 ̄ ̃1    (   )  ̄ =  
  23
       In terms of the above notation, let

                                         (0  +1   +   ) =  0 (+   ) 

where + = (1 − ) + −1 is recursively defined.

                                                                43
The ratio of house prices to the price of construction output now relates to residential invest-
ment, which is much more volatile than the level of capital.


12     Rental housing
So far we have focused on owner-occupied housing, that is, we have forced households to own a
house if they want to consume housing services. We now modify the model to allow for rental
housing. We discuss implications for portfolio choice and discuss how additional restrictions
on house prices can be derived from household as well as from landlord decisions to invest in
tenant-occupied housing.
    We continue to assume that households have exactly one residence that is now either owned
or rented. We denote the quality of a rented residence by  and the rental rate at that quality
by  ( ). We then modify the second-stage problem to
                   ̃ (̃   ) = max  ( (   +   =0 )) +  [+1 (+1 )]
                                   

                  +1 = (̃ −  −  ( )) +1 ( ) + +1 (+1 ( )) + +1        (23)
In the budget constraint, expenditure now includes rent. The indicator function in the objective
ensures that only households who have not chosen to own (that is,  = 0) obtain utility from
a rented residence.
    To handle the landlord side of renting, we assume that tenant-occupied houses of a given
quality are held in real estate investment trusts (REITs) and households can purchase shares in
those trusts subject to short-sale constraints. REIT shares then enter the second stage problem
much like standard securities. The dividend earned by the REIT from a house of quality  is
given by the rent net of maintenance cost  ( ) −  ( ). We allow maintenance cost to be
higher when the house is tenant occupied than when it is owner occupied.
    The formulation here thus introduces one advantage of ownership — lower maintenance cost
— that is traded oﬀ against the disadvantage of bearing housing price risk. This approach
to studying rental markets and tenure choice in an otherwise frictionless equilibrium model
goes back to Henderson and Ioannides (1983). Their paper also provides microfoundations
for the diﬀerence in maintenance cost using a moral hazard problem between landlord and
tenant. A closely related approach assumes that homeowners receive more housing services
from owned houses. In addition to the tradeoﬀ studied here, diﬀerences in tax treatment as
well as the interaction of tenure choice with collateral constraints and transaction costs are also
important; they are discussed further below.
Optimality conditions and tenure choice
    Renters’ first-order condition is one of intratemporal choice between the two goods, housing
services and numeraire. We focus on the case of a continuum of qualities. With a smooth rent
function, a household who rents a house of quality  must be indiﬀerent between renting that
house or renting a slightly better or worse house:
                                                        2 (   )
                                           0
                                             ( ) =                                        (24)
                                                        1 (   )

                                                     44
Much like for owner occupiers, a renter of quality  is marginal for houses of quality  , but
not necessarily for house of any other quality. As a result, the rent function can in general be
nonlinear — a linear rent function obtains under special assumptions such as when rental houses
of diﬀerent qualities can be converted one for one.
    The first-order conditions for REIT shares at diﬀerent quality levels work like those for stocks
of diﬀerent companies. The intertemporal MRS of a landlord household serves as a stochastic
discount factor for tenant-occupied houses. Without frictions, the typical landlord household
will build a diversified portfolio that contains houses of all qualities. For tenant-occupied houses,
discount rates and risk-adjustment factors are thus also equated across quality levels. This does
not mean, however, that prices become linear in quality: rent and hence the dividend to the
landlord is generally nonlinear due to indivisibility in the rental market.
    The presence of a rental market separates the roles of housing as a consumption good and
asset. While owners must commit more savings towards the housing asset and bear housing risk,
renters simply pay the flow expenditure of housing services. At the same time, the diﬀerence
in maintenance cost implies that the rent for a house of given quality may be higher than the
dividend that a household would earn if he instead were to own the house. In the current setup
with indivisibility as the only friction, we would thus expect households who perceive a higher
risk-adjusted payoﬀ from housing to become owners.
The user cost of housing
    Consider a household who is indiﬀerent between owning and renting a house of quality
. Suppose further that housing risk is spanned so that the stochastic discount factor is the
intertemporal MRS of an indiﬀerent household.24 The indiﬀerence condition now equates the
rent  () to the “user cost of housing”, that is, price less discounted payoﬀ. Equivalently, we
can write the current price as

                         ( ) =  ( ) −  ( ) +  [+1 +1 (+1 ( ))]                    (25)

Here the payoﬀ from ownership includes the maintenance cost  ( ) of an owner occupied
house. We thus obtain a conventional asset pricing equation for houses at quality .
   An alternative derivation starts from the first-order condition of landlords and assumes
that there is free conversion between tenant and owner occupied houses. We can then use the
landlord’s MRS as a stochastic discount factor:

                         ( ) =  ( ) −  ( ) +  [+1 +1 (+1 ( ))]                   (26)

For both equations to hold at the same time, we must either have no diﬀerence in maintenance
cost, or the intertemporal MRSs of landlords and owners must be diﬀerent. This might be, for
example, because landlords are more optimistic than owners and are thus willing to incur more
housing risk.
  24
     This is true in particular if the household is a landlord and there is free conversion between tenant and
owner occupancy — the household can then assemble REITs portfolios with the same payoﬀs as any individual
house. Of course, the indiﬀerent household may not be a landlord — in the presence of short-sale constraints
not all households need to participate in the market for tenant-occupied housing.



                                                      45
   If we solve the user cost (25) forward, and impose a transversality condition on the expected
weighted house price in the distant future, the price of a house of quality  can be written as
the present value of future rents
                                       "∞                                 #
                                        XY
                          ( ) =        + (+ (+ ) −  ( ))                (27)
                                        =0 =1

Since we have assumed that housing risk is spanned, we can further aggregate across quality
levels and obtain pricing equations for the entire housing market.
    Applied studies often take (27) as a starting point and construct a reduced-form pricing
kernel. The test is analogous to testing whether a particular candidate stochastic discount
factor prices equity given observable prices and dividends. As we have seen, user-cost equations
hold only under special assumptions. We also emphasize that even when those assumptions are
met, they represent additional restrictions on prices that hold on top of the equations already
discussed above that characterize optimal quality choice conditional on owning or renting.


13      Collateral constraints
Much of the literature captures the role of housing as collateral by a linear constraint on the
amount of short term riskfree debt, our th security:

                                       −  ≤   ( )                               (28)

Households who take out a mortgage must make a large enough downpayment so that the
loan-to-value ratio remains below  . The maximum loan to value ratio can be random —
exogenous variation in  is a popular example of a “financial shock” that either loosens or
tightens household borrowing capacity. We also shut down borrowing opportunities through
risky securities by imposing short sale constraints  ≥ 0 for  = 1   − 1.
    The downpayment constraint (28) goes back to theoretical work on optimal savings by Artle
and Varaiya (1978). Slemrod (1982) used it in an early quantitative life cycle model. In 1990s
several papers explored equilibrium eﬀects. In static setups, Shleifer and Vishny (1992) stressed
the potential for asset fire sales, while Stein (1995) considered its role in generating comovement
of house prices and housing volume. Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) emphasized the amplification
eﬀects from collateral constraints in a dynamic model. Detemple and Serrat (2003) and Chien
and Lustig (2009) study economies with contingent claims subject to collateral constraints.
Geanakoplos (2011) endogenizes the downpayment constraint in a model that allows for default.
    While the simple constraint (28) provides a tractable way to capture the benefit of housing
as collateral, it leaves out several features of observed mortgages. First, while it is in principle
possible for the price to drop below the face value of the mortgage over the next period, the
chance of this happening is negligible in most quantitative studies. In contrast, in the data
many households with long-term mortgages are “under water". Moreover, a key decision for
households is whether to prepay and/or refinance mortgages in response to changes in house
prices or interest rates. The simple constraint eﬀectively assumes that refinancing is costless, so

                                                  46
that an increase in house prices translates directly into higher borrowing capacity. While it may
capture the basic tradeoﬀs well when the period length is relatively long, or when adjustment
of mortgage terms is cheap, several applications discussed below show that details of mortgage
contracts can matter significantly for quantitative results.
Household optimization
    The collateral constraint restricts the choice of the riskfree security in the second stage
problem (5): we thus modify that problem by adding the constraints − (̃ −  ) (1 − 0 ) ≤
  ( ) and  ≥ 0. Denoting the multipliers on these constraint by  and  , respectively, the
first order conditions (8) become

                    0 ( (   )) 1 (   ) =  [ 0 (+1 )]  + 
                                                          h             ³        ´i
                                                 =   0 (+1 ) +1 −  +                 (29)

As long as the constraints do not bind, the conditions are unchanged. If a household runs up
against his borrowing constraint, however, the marginal cost of borrowing includes not only
the expected repayment, but also the shadow cost of the constraint. This aﬀects indiﬀerence
conditions at both the borrowing/lending and portfolio choice margins. In particular, if the
borrowing constraint is tight (high  ) and the expected excess return on a risky security is low,
then it may be optimal to not hold that security at all (  0).
   If housing serves as collateral, its marginal benefit in (6) reflects its marginal collateral
benefit, in addition to the utility benefit from housing services and the expected capital gain.
To compare the three components, we focus on the case of continuous housing quality. The
counterpart of (13) is
           ³      ³                 ´´  (   )                        £                               ¤
                                           2       
  0 ( ) 1 −  1 − 0 +1 =                   −  0 ( ) + 0 +1 0+1 ( ( )) +1
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                    ( ) 
                                          1 (   )
                                                                                                        (30)
On the left hand side, the collateral benefit is expressed as a percentage discount to the pricing
step 0 . From (29), the discount is zero if the household is unconstrained (that is,  = 0 and
 +1  = 1). It is higher if the lower is the intertemporal MRS: collateral is more useful if
the household has a greater need for borrowing.
Savings and portfolio choice
    The constraints imply that household net worth  ( ) + 0  is nonnegative. This feature is
useful for matching household portfolios in the data since negative net worth is not common. It
also implies that borrowing does not move future income to the present, in contrast to a simple
permanent income model. Instead borrowing is a portfolio choice decision, undertaken in order
to build a large enough housing position. The forces discussed in Section 8 remain at work:
households with a lot of future income should choose leveraged housing positions, especially if
their labor income is uncorrelated with housing payoﬀs.
    In the cross section, optimal savings depend on the relative abundance of current wealth
relative to future income as well as the remaining life span. When wealth is low relative to
income, households do not save at all. Young households with low wealth-income ratios save
to be able to make a downpayment. As soon as they have saved enough, they build leveraged

                                                    47
portfolios in housing and also some attractive other assets, such as stocks. Older households
have higher wealth-income ratios and are thus long in all assets.
    As wealth rises relative to income, households start saving until their savings rate approaches
an unconstrained optimal savings rate that depends on the distribution of returns — it is constant
when returns are iid. Younger households have a longer planning horizon and therefore spread
their savings over more years. This eﬀect tends to increase the savings by the young. However,
middle aged households have more income, so that they can save more. The higher savings
rates of young households dominate when labor income is not important, which means at high
wealth-income ratios. For empirically relevant ranges of the wealth-income ratio, the higher
savings of the middle aged dominate and create a hump-shaped wealth pattern, which we also
see in the data.
    Another implication is that constrained households are more reluctant to buy risky se-
curities. Indeed, consider the first-order conditions (29) for households who hold securities:
constrained households are indiﬀerent between risky securities and riskfree investment only if
the marginal utility weighted expected excess return is strictly positive. In contrast to housing,
securities do not come with collateral benefits, and thus require higher premia in order to be
held. This feature helps in applications to explain why young households with low cash relative
to income do not hold equity even though the equity premium is high.
The pricing of securities
    The first order conditions (29) suggest that the presence of a collateral constraint might
help generate more volatile expected excess returns on risky securities, and hence help resolve
the volatility puzzle. Indeed, changes in the tightness of the constraint do aﬀect conditional
risk premia. However, a problem with this eﬀect is that it also tends to generate volatility in
the riskfree interest rate. Combining the first-order conditions, we obtain

                             0 ( (   )) 1 (   ) =  [ 0 (+1 ) +1 ] 

The marginal condition for the level returns of risky securities is thus the same as without a
collateral constraint. In applications that generate volatility in expected excess returns, that
volatility is typically due to volatility in the riskfree rate moves, as opposed to volatility in
conditional risky returns as in the data.
House prices
    The presence of a collateral constraint also alters the pricing of houses. The most immediate
eﬀect is that if constrained households buy houses, then the collateral benefit increases house
prices, holding fixed payoﬀs and the households’ intertemporal MRS. This is a liquidity eﬀect
that occurs even with linear pricing and when dividends are tradable. Dividing (29) by the big
bracket on the left hand side, we have that housing payoﬀs are discounted at a lower rate to
price in the collateral benefit.
    Whether the liquidity eﬀect is important for price movements in a heterogeneous agent
model depends on market structure and the presence of other constraints. Collateral con-
straints provide an important example why households can be aﬀected diﬀerently by shocks —
for example, the financial shock  aﬀects (30) if and only if the household is constrained. At
the same time, as discussed in Section 9, shocks alter a family of Euler equations via both price

                                                        48
and quantity adjustment. The eﬀect on prices will be higher if market structure requires price
adjustment because quantities do not move.
    To illustrate, suppose  increases to relax the downpayment constraint. In the typical
population, some households are constrained while others are unconstrained. Suppose now the
model assumes linear pricing because houses of diﬀerent quality can be converted freely. In
order for a housing boom to occur, the price per unit of housing will move only if the shock is
strong enough to alter the valuation of payoﬀ by unconstrained households; otherwise quantity
adjustment will provide more housing for constrained households accompanied by a smaller
price reaction. In contrast, with nonlinear pricing and indivisibility, the shock can strongly
aﬀect the prices of houses bought by constrained households, without a big impact on the
Euler equation of the unconstrained. With limited quantity adjustment, the overall eﬀect on
prices can thus be bigger.


14     Transaction costs
We now introduce a proportional transaction cost  whenever a household sells a house. This
tractable and popular specification is often motivated by the rule of thumb that about 6% of
the house price are typically paid to the seller’s agent in a transaction. It was first studied
by Flemming (1969) in a deterministic context and by Grossman and Laroque (1990) in a
stochastic model. Beyond these direct costs, it is plausible that most households face other
moving costs, either pecuniary — such as changing local services — or possibly nonpecuniary, for
example disutility from leaving a familiar environment. Such costs sometimes motivate a fixed
component to moving costs. In what follows we work only with proportional costs since those
are suﬃcient to understand the key eﬀects.
   Once transaction costs are taken into account, the existing house becomes illiquid and its
quality at the beginning of the period ̃ =  (−1 ) becomes a separate state variable in the
household problem. We thus write the value function as  (  ̃ ) where  is total wealth at
the beginning of period  as before. We introduce separate notation for ̃ since it depends not
only on quality chosen in the previous period, but may also depend on random events such
as depreciation. The presence of transaction costs does not aﬀect choices in the second stage
problem from Section 8. To keep track of the new state variable, we only need to modify the
expected continuation utility in the objective to  [+1 (+1  +1 ( ))] 
   Let  ∈ {0 1} denote the moving choice. The first stage problem is now
                              ³                               ´
    (  ̃ ) = max  ̃  −  (̃ ) −  ( )   + (1 −  ) ̃ ( −  (̃ ) ̃ )   (31)
                  +1 ∈H


The first term is the utility of a mover who sells the old house, incurs the transaction cost and
buys a new house. The second term is the utility of a stayer: house quality remains unchanged,
and the disposable funds for consumption and securities in the second stage problem consist of
liquid wealth, that is, wealth net of the illiquid house.
  To illustrate the benefits of illiquid housing, consider the model with continuous quality.
The marginal benefit of house quality at the beginning of the period consists of the eﬀect of

                                                     49
housing on wealth as well as the direct benefit. From the envelope theorem, the total marginal
benefit is
                                                move                                   stay
                  1 0 (̃ ) + 2 =  ̃1   (1 − ) 0 (̃ ) + (1 −  ) ̃2    (32)
where the subscripts in ̃move and ̃stay indicate whether ̃ is evaluated at the first or second
arguments in (31). A mover household, enjoys the marginal benefit of liquid funds conveyed by
an extra unit of house quality. In contrast, a stayer household experiences no increase in liquid
fund and only enjoys the continuation utility benefit of house quality.
    The household problem illustrates three key new features of pricing introduced by trans-
action costs. First, only movers can be marginal investors in housing in any given period.
Since housing has low turnover, the characteristics of only a few people matter directly for
determining prices. Second, the value of housing depends less on future prices if moving is
less likely. Indeed, (32) shows that the price matters more the higher is  . In the extreme
case where households know they will never move in the future, their benefit from housing is
independent of future prices. Finally, transaction costs lower marginal benefit, and this eﬀect is
capitalized into house prices. Other things equal, we thus expect lower prices in markets with
higher turnover.
    Transaction costs also alter portfolio choice tradeoﬀs described above. First, they make
ownership more expensive than renting, and more so for households who expect to move again
quickly. In a market with heterogenous agents, the price will compensate the average investor
for future transaction costs. It is more likely then that frequent movers prefer renting. Second,
households with rising income profiles may leverage even more so they can lock in a large
housing position early and do not have to move later. Finally, collateral constraints are more
likely to bind even for rich households: whether constraints bind depends on the amount of
liquid resources ̃ in the second stage problem. With transaction costs, household may let ̃
decline even though total wealth  is large.25


Part III

Part 3: Theory vs data
We are now ready to discuss work that quantifies the framework in Section II and studies its
implications in various applications.
  25
    The issue is compounded in a model with long term mortgages that are costly to adjust so that the mortgage
position also becomes illiquid. The household then faces a liquidity constraint unless he either sells the house
or adjusts the mortgage. As long as he does neither, a change in house prices does not alter funds available for
spending.




                                                      50
15        Magnitudes
At the core of any quantitative work based on the framework in Section II is the individual
household problem. For a problem in which households may choose to buy an individual house,
it is important to correctly specify the risk-return trade-oﬀs involved. As discussed in Section 3,
the prices of individual houses are highly volatile. Moreover, a large component of this volatility
is idiosyncratic. House prices may also covary with income and other asset prices. These return
moments can be taken from empirical studies that estimate their means and covariances with
micro data, such as individual property level data and the PSID. Below we discuss whether and
how the magnitudes matter in applications.
Preference parameters
   Since housing expenditure shares in the data are similar over time as well as across house-
holds (as discussed in Section 2), a common specification of the aggregator (2) over housing
consumption and nonhousing consumption is Cobb-Douglas. The preference parameter is set
equal to the expenditure share on housing, which is roughly 20%.
    The choice of the risk aversion parameter depends on whether the portfolio choice problem
involves other assets such as stocks. As discussed in Section 3, high transaction costs and high
volatility lower the Sharpe ratio of individual houses and thereby reduce their attractiveness.
In the absence of more attractive assets, a household problem with low risk aversion around 5
will have reasonable implications for optimal portfolios. When the problem allows households
to invest in more attractive assets such as stocks, low risk aversion will typically lead to extreme
optimal portfolios that exploit the equity premium. To explain observed household portfolios,
higher risk aversion or higher perceived risk about stock returns are needed, or high participation
costs in the stock market.
Shocks
    Exogenous moving shocks capture reasons for moving that are exogenous to the model.
The probability of such shocks can be estimated from the American Housing Survey which
asks households about their reasons for moving. Roughly a third of movers provide reasons
that are unrelated to the economic reasons for moving captured in the models. Examples are
disasters such as fires or floods, marriage, divorce, death of spouse, etc. This 1/3 probability
is multiplied by the overall probability of moving which is roughly 1/10 per year, resulting in
a 1/30 probability for an exogenous move per year.
    Households face exogenous survival probability that depend on age. These survival proba-
bilities can be taken from life tables published by the National Center of Health Statistics.26
    The volatility of individual house prices has a large idiosyncratic component. As discussed
in Section 3, the volatility of exogenous idiosyncratic shocks is around 9-15 percent per year.
A small component of individual house prices also correlates with aggregate income and other
asset prices (such as stock prices). This component can be estimated by assuming that house
prices grow at the aggregate growth rate of the economy.
 26
      Their website is http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/life_tables.htm




                                                     51
   A common specification for individual income is

                                   log  =  (  ) +  +                             (33)

where  (  ) is a deterministic function of age and a vector of other individual characteristics
   is an idiosyncratic temporary shock distributed  (0 2 ) and permanent income  is
given by
                                            = −1 + 
where  is distributed as  (0 2 ) and is uncorrelated with  
    Individual log income is the sum of the age profile, the permanent component  and a
transitory shock  . The deterministic age profile is a third-order polynomial in age, which is
estimated to match the observed hump-shaped life-cycle profile of income. Carroll (1997) and
Gourinchas and Parker (2002) assume that the process for the persistent component  is a
random walk as in the last equation. Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995) estimate an AR(1)
for  and find that the autocorrelation coeﬃcient is indeed close to one. Cocco, Gomes and
Maenhout (2005) report estimates for the standard deviation  of persistent shocks around
10-13% per year in Table 3, depending on education. Their estimate for the standard deviation
of  of transitory shocks is around 22-31%. It is common to somewhat reduce these numbers
to account for measurement error in the PSID. For example, Campbell and Cocco (2003) use
2% for  and 14% for  
   The transitory shock  is uncorrelated across households. The persistent shock  can be
decomposed into an aggregate component  and an idiosyncratic component  

                                             =  +  

The aggregate component  helps to introduce correlation between individual labor income
and aggregate variables, such as aggregate income or asset prices.
    The process (33) is specified for income received in periods  before retirement  . After
retirement, income may be a fraction  of permanent labor income in the last working year

                            log  = log  +  (  ) +    for   

This approach is taken in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (1995), who estimate  as the ratio
between the average income for retirees in a given education group to the average labor income
in the year before retirement. The estimate is between 68% and 94% in their Table 2.
    With this specification of the income process, households do not face any further risks after
they retire. This assumption abstracts from a number of risks that older households face,
especially uncertain life spans and out-of-pocket medical expenses. Recent work has made
progress to quantify such risks. For example, De Nardi, French and Jones (2010) estimate
large and volatile medical expenses for retired singles. Moreover, they find that the volatility
of shocks to medical expenses increases with age and permanent income. In a lifecycle model,
the risk of living long and requiring expensive medical care is an important reason to save
for many older high-income households. More empirical work is needed that quantifies these
risks for non-single households as well as distinguishes the savings motives in the presence of

                                                   52
these health risks from bequest motives. In the meantime, it seems reasonable to assume the
individual income process (33) for    and thereby to allow for shocks during retirement.
Other housing parameters
    Houses depreciate at a rate between 1.5 and 3 percent, as discussed in Section 2. With the
assumption of “essential maintenance”, the depreciation rate is also the fraction of the house
value that is spent on maintenance. Transaction costs vary across cities and states as well
as the price spectrum within cities. They are between 6% in real estate fees (for example, in
California) and 10% when moving costs are included.


16     Consumption, savings and portfolio choice
The literature on consumption-savings problems is concerned with the facts in Section 6. Em-
pirical work documents cross sectional patterns of consumption and portfolios, and measures
properties of returns and income that are relevant for optimal portfolio choice. In order to con-
front theory and data, a common approach is to quantify a household problem with frictions
as discussed in Section II. Some studies impose equilibrium but nevertheless emphasize cross
sectional patterns. Much of the work discussed in this section precedes the financial crisis and
focuses on cross sectional patterns that are a key feature of any quantitative study.
   We divide the literature into five groups. The first considers quantitative models with
housing and one other asset. The focus then is on consumption and savings in housing versus
other goods or assets, respectively The second group tackles explicitly the choice of equity
portfolios with return properties as in the data. This is a more challenging problem since it
requires not only matching facts on housing but household behavior towards equity, a well
known puzzle in its own right. Third, we consider a set of papers that looks for reduced
form evidence on specific mechanisms at work in portfolio choice models, especially the role of
housing as a hedge. We then discuss the eﬀects of more complex mortgage products, as well as
the eﬀects of house prices on consumption.
    Quantitative models can successfully explain wealth and portfolio patterns over the lifecycle.
The models predict that wealth is positive and hump-shaped, as discussed in Section 9. More-
over, the models imply that young households hold highly leveraged portfolios in housing, while
older and richer households have positive positions in many assets, including bonds and stocks.
According to the models, the hump shape in the wealth position will translate into hump-
shaped positions in other assets such as houses and stocks. These age patterns are roughly
consistent with the data, especially for housing. However, the models struggle to explain the
high concentration in wealth we observe in the data, especially the extreme concentration in
stock wealth. The extensive margins are also hard to match for these models. It remains a
puzzle why so many middle-class households choose not to participate in the stock market. It
is also diﬃcult to quantitatively match the homeownership rate along various dimensions of
heterogeneity such as income and wealth.




                                               53
16.1     Housing and savings over the life cycle
Early work on housing choice over the life cycle considered savings via multiple capital goods
without price risk. Households face a two asset special case of the problem with collateral
constraints in Section 13. Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2010) consider a household with
a finite horizon who accumulates capital used in production as well as a stock of durables that
enters the utility function. The income process has idiosyncratic shocks and a deterministic age
profile. The collateral constraint is important to explain the accumulation of durables early in
life, as described in Section 13.
   Yang (2009) narrows the definition of durables to housing consumption and focuses on the
accumulation of housing. The key new feature in her setup are transaction costs for adjusting
the housing stock, as in Section 14. Those costs are shown to be important for matching the
slow downsizing of the housing stock late in life that is observed in the data. Both papers
conclude that a standard life cycle model is broadly successful at explaining the hump-shaped
patterns in nondurable consumption, durables, and wealth by cohort.
    Focus on cohort averages omits variation along the extensive margins, that is who owns and
who rents. A number of papers explore the various determinants of tenure choice discussed in
Section 12. A new feature in these paper is uninsurable house price risk that may correlate
with income risk. Li and Yao (2007) study tenure decisions in an environment where renting
is expensive; rents are a higher fraction of the house value than the sum of maintenance and
mortgage rates. The paper confirms the earlier findings regarding hump-shaped patterns in
nonhousing consumption. A new feature in the model is a hump-shaped homeownership rate,
which is the overall pattern shown in their Figure 8(a). The homeownership rate in the model
shown in Figure 7(a) is a more extreme function of age than the data: all households aged 30
years and below rent, while all households aged 40-80 years own. This discrepancy illustrate the
diﬃculty associated with quantitatively accounting for the extensive margin. The paper studies
a number of counterfactuals in which older households benefit from house price increases, while
younger households loose.
    While Li and Yao (2007) abstract from taxes and directly assume that renting is costly,
Díaz and Luego-Prado (2008) embed the U.S. tax system into their model. The paper carefully
compares housing costs for renters and homeowners. It finds that rental equivalence approach
(as used in the NIPA tables) overestimates the costs of owner-occupied housing services by
roughly 11 percent. Reasons include the diﬀerential tax treatment of renter-occupied versus
owner-occupied housing services, the tax deductability of mortgage interest rates and transac-
tion costs in housing markets.
   Chambers, Garriga and Schlagenhauf (2009a, 2009b) study an equilibrium model with
tenure choice. with long-term mortgage contracts. The model parameters are estimated with
1994 data. Table 2 in Chambers et al. (2009b) shows that the 1994 model predictions match
the homeownership rate as a function of age quite well. Its predicts, however that all households
with income in the upper 40% of the income distribution should own — again, illustrating how
diﬃcult it is to match the extensive margin along observed dimensions of heterogeneity.
   Attanasio, Bottazzi, Low, Nesheim and Wakefield (2012) match the homeownership rate
by age and education in a setup with two discrete house sizes: flats and houses. The paper

                                               54
documents that transaction costs are crucial for both homeownership and the property ladder.
Lower transaction costs increase the homeownership rate because they increase the number of
young households who find it optimal to buy a flat before upgrading to a house.
Home equity as a buﬀer stock for consumption smoothing
    Hurst and Staﬀord (2004) study a lifecycle problem in which homeowners may want to use
the equity from their house as a buﬀer stock to smooth their consumption. When homeowners
with low savings in liquid assets (such as checking accounts or stocks) experience an adverse
income shock, they may have to drastically lower their consumption. To avoid a painful cut in
consumption, these homeowners may want to refinance into a mortgage with a larger principal.
While refinancing might not necessarily lower the costs of their mortgage, it helps their desire
to smooth their consumption.
    Hurst and Staﬀord provide empirical support for this mechanism with micro data from the
PSID. Households who were unemployed between 1991 and 1996, and who had zero liquid assets
going into 1991, were 25% more likely to refinance than otherwise similar households. They
also were more likely to extract equity during the refinancing process.
    The lifecycle problem in Hurst and Staﬀord is not designed to be quantitative. For example,
it has constant house prices and a fixed house that cannot be sold, the income process is iid, and
mortgages are interest-only. Chen, Michaux and Roussanov (2013) introduce a choice between
renting and owning, house price risk, aggregate and idiosyncratic persistent income risk, long-
term mortgages, and various frictions (such as loan-to-value and loan-to-income constraints.)
When the observed historical paths for house prices, aggregate income and interest rates are
taken as given, the model predicts a dramatic increase in mortgage debt during the 2000s house
price boom. A significant portion of the debt increase is associated with home equity extraction
in the model as well as in the data.
   Mian and Sufi (2011) provide new empirical evidence on the importance of this mechanism
with micro data from the recent housing boom. The paper documents that existing homeowners
— households who already owned their home in 1997 — started to borrow significantly more
during the early 2000s. The tendency to extract equity was strongest among young homeowners
with low credit scores and high credit card utilization rates, while homeowners with good credit
scores did not extract more equity from their house.


16.2     Household portfolio choice
Accounting for risk in household portfolios requires combining the illiquidity and collateraliz-
ability of housing with a richer menu of securities. Portfolio choice then depends on risk in
multiple tradable assets, as described in Section 8. Houses now enable households to borrow
and invest their liquid funds in assets with more attractive return properties, such as stocks.
When transaction costs are high, illiquid houses act as undiversifiable background risk (similar
to nontradable labor income) in portfolio choice.
Myopic investors
   Early work focused on the risk return tradeoﬀs in models with myopic investors. Berkovec


                                               55
and Fullerton (1992) study a two period general equilibrium model in which households consume
housing and choose a portfolio of owner-occupied housing, housing as an investment, stocks, and
bonds. Ownership is attractive because of tax subsidies, but exposes owners to undiversifiable
risk. Indeed, the paper estimates the variance of house prices as the sum of national, regional
and intraregional eﬀects on house prices, resulting in a volatility of 8.2 percent per year.
    Starting from the current U.S. tax system, the paper runs counterfactuals to eliminate
subsidies, namely that owner-occupied housing services are not taxable, nominal mortgage
interest is deductable, and that there is an extra deduction for property taxes. Starting from
the current U.S. tax system, the eﬀects are a priori ambiguous: while abolishing subsidies
lowers the average return on housing, it also reduces the variance of returns — the government
becomes a silent partner who shares both gains and losses on the house. The overall eﬀect on
homeownership then depends on risk attitudes and tax brackets.
    Flavin and Yamashita (2002) study portfolio choice by myopic investors with an emphasis
on the illiquidity of housing. The setup resembles the second stage problem from Section 8:
the position in housing is predetermined. Households have mean variance preferences and the
focus is on the asset portfolio: there is no explicit consumption margin and no labor income.
The portfolio share on housing thus acts as a constraint on the problem of choosing a portfolio
of financial assets, namely short and long bonds, stocks and a mortgage. Bonds and stocks
cannot be sold short and there is a collateral constraint: the mortgage cannot exceed the value
of the house.
    Flavin and Yamashita construct the returns on an individual house from PSID data. The
housing return has a high volatility as in Table 1, and a zero correlation with financial returns.
The solution to the portfolio choice problem that includes housing is an eﬃcient frontier that
achieves the minimum-variance portfolio for a given expected return subject to the housing
constraint. The constraint is matched to average portfolio shares on housing for various cohorts
in the PSID. As discussed in Section I, these observed portfolio shares decline in age.
   For households with a high portfolio share on housing, the optimal portfolio involves the
maximum possible amount of mortgage borrowing. Since leverage is risky, any remaining
funds are invested in a safer financial portfolio consisting of mostly bonds, while the shorting
constraint binds for the short bond. For households with a lower portfolio share on housing,
the position in housing is less leveraged. These households choose more risk in their remaining
portfolio by increasing their portfolio weight on stocks. Higher risk aversion lowers the risk in
the optimal portfolio by reducing leverage and shifting the remaining portfolio towards bonds.
   A high portfolio share on housing is typical of young households, while middle-aged house-
holds have a lower portfolio share. By connecting the magnitude of the initial housing constraint
with data on age profiles, the mean-variance benchmark provides intuition for why younger
households hold a lower portfolio share in stocks than older households.
Housing and other assets over the life cycle
   Cocco (2005) studies the consumption-portfolio choice problem of an owner-occupier house-
hold with finite horizon. The household receives a nontradable income process (33) with both
transitory and persistent shocks. The household can choose stocks, bonds, housing and a mort-
gage. The returns on stocks are iid and uncorrelated with aggregate income risk, while the


                                               56
price of the house is perfectly correlated with aggregate income risk. The real interest rate on
bonds and the (higher) mortgage rate are constant.
    The consumption-portfolio problem has several important constraints. The first two of these
constraints are similar to those in Flavin and Yamashita (2002). First, bonds and stocks cannot
be shorted. Second, there is a downpayment constraint; the mortgage cannot exceed a fraction
of the house value. A new feature in Cocco’s setup is that households choose the size of their
house (while the house is fixed and acts as a constraint in Flavin and Yamashita). A third
constraint is that houses have a minimum size. Together with the downpayment constraint, the
minimum size creates a strong motive to save for young households, especially in the absence
of a rental market. There are additional frictions in the form of transaction costs for housing
and a one-time fixed cost to participate in the stock market.
     The model generates low rates of stock market participation among poorer households —
consistent with the data — who are not willing to pay the fixed costs to participate. Households
with enough wealth get a large mortgage and invest most of their portfolio in housing; they
still choose not to participate in the stock market. Richer households participate in the stock
market and increase their portfolio share on stocks with wealth. Over the lifecycle, the model
with housing is successful at predicting that young households are house poor: they take a large
mortgage and buy a house, while they do not participate in the stock market. As they grow
older, they pay down their mortgage and invest more in the stock market, as in the data.
   Yao and Zhang (2005) study a lifecycle problem in which households can choose between
owning and renting a house. The possibility to rent is important for younger and poorer
households who do not have enough savings to aﬀord the downpayment. Older, wealthier
households choose to own a house. The downpayment is equity in the house, which acts as
a buﬀer against income shocks. Once they own a house, households have riskier portfolios
because of the leveraged position in housing. But homeowners still invest a larger fraction of
their (non-housing) portfolio in stocks for diversification reasons, because of the low correlation
between stock and housing returns.


16.3     Housing as a hedge
Section 8 emphasizes that once risk is explicitly taken into account, the attractiveness of housing
depends on the covariance of housing returns with other random state variables in the future.
Those state variables include, among others, () labor income, a component of future wealth
() the price of rental housing which aﬀects continuation utility in a problem with a rental
market and () house prices in other markets if the household is subject to moving shocks or
has the option to move across diﬀerent markets. We now consider evidence on these eﬀects.
Housing as a hedge against income risk
    Housing is riskier for households whose incomes covary positively with house prices. For
these households, housing is not as good a hedge against income risk. These households will
thus tilt their portfolios away from housing towards other assets. Cocco (2005) shows that
this eﬀect is quantitatively small in his life-cycle model. For example, raising the correlation
coeﬃcient between income and house prices from 0 to 0.33 lowers the portfolio share on housing


                                                57
by one percentage point. The eﬀect is small because housing is not only an investment but also
a consumption good.
    Davidoﬀ (2006) provides empirical evidence on the eﬀect. The paper first uses time series
data to estimate the covariance between income and house prices in various regions and indus-
tries. The paper then predicts the value of owner-occupied housing as well as tenure choices
in the 1990 census with the estimated covariances. The results show that a one-standard de-
viation increase in income-price covariance is associated with a $7500 reduction in the value of
the housing investment for owners. They also show that a higher income-price covariance has
a negligible eﬀect on the probability of renting.
Housing as a hedge against rent risk
   A common and reasonable assumption is that every household needs to consume some
housing services. In a setup with a rental market as in Section 12, those services can be
obtained either in a rental market or by buying a housing asset that promises a stream of
housing services. The rental market is a spot market, where housing services are sold at the
current rental rate which fluctuates over time. By buying a house, households can lock in a
known price for a stream of future housing services. They still face house price risk in case they
need to sell the house later because, for example, they want to move to a new city.
    Sinai and Souleles (2005) compare the two sources of risk in a simple spatial model with two
locations. Households choose whether to rent or own a single housing unit to maximize their
expected wealth net of the housing costs. There is a fixed number of housing units equal to the
number of households. The stochastic processes for rents in the two locations are exogenous.
Rents are AR(1) processes with correlated shocks. After a known number years, households
move from one to the other location. The price of owner-occupied housing units is determined
endogenously and clears the housing market. In the model, both the demand for homeownership
and equilibrium price-rent ratios tend to increase with expected tenure, the volatility of rents
and the correlation between rents across locations.
   Table 1 of Sinai and Souleles documents a 2.9% volatility of real rents at the MSA level
during the years 1990-1998, almost half the volatility of MSA real house prices. Much of this
volatility is variation across MSAs. For example, rent volatility ranges from 1.7 percent in Fort
Lauderdale to 7.2 percent in Austin. Tables 2 and 3 documents that both the probability of
owning estimated from a probit model and price-rent ratios are higher in areas with higher
mean tenure rates and rent volatility.
Housing as a hedge against future house prices
    Han (2008) solves a lifecycle problem with many locations. The problem assumes that
households know that they will want to move in the future, sell their house in the current
location and buy a house in the new location. Whether or not the current house can act as
a hedge for the future house purchase depends on the correlation between house prices across
locations. The conventional wisdom is that correlation in house prices across housing markets is
low. Since house prices within MSA are more correlated than across MSAs, the hedging motive
will be more important for moves within metropolitan areas. The paper documents some
evidence on the importance of such within-MSA moves. It reports that among households in
the PSID from 1968-1997, 62% of them traded up later by buying a more expensive house


                                               58
(in real terms.) Among households who traded up, 71.3% of them moved within the same
metropolitan area.
    Sinai and Souleles (2013) document that the correlation of house prices across MSAs is
indeed low. They estimate this correlation with annual observations on the OFHEO constant-
quality MSA-level house price index over the years 1980-2005. The simple unweighted median
correlation in real house price growth across MSAs is 0.35. Sinai and Souleles argue that house-
holds do not move randomly across MSAs. Instead, households move between housing markets
that are highly correlated. The paper computes the household’s own expected correlation in
house prices across MSAs by weighing each correlation with the probability that the household
will move to that MSAs. The data for moving from one MSA to another MSA is from the U.S.
Department of the Treasury’s County-to-County Migration Patterns. The resulting expected
correlation is 0.60 for the median household.


16.4     Mortgage choice and refinancing
Mortgages are often modeled as short-term debt contracts, as we did in Section (13). In this
case, the collateral constraints (28) can capture home equity lines of credit. Most mortgages
are long-term debt contracts, however. Recent work has therefore started to incorporate longer
maturities as well as other features, such as fixed versus floating mortgage rates, deferred
amortization, prepayment penalties etc. Much more work is needed in this area to understand
the recent foreclosure crisis, the welfare losses associated with certain contracts more broadly,
and their implications for financial regulation.
Fixed versus adjustable rates
    Campbell and Cocco (2003) study the choice between a fixed-rate mortgage and an adjustable-
rate mortgage in a lifecycle model. The household receives the nontradable real labor income
process (33). The growth rate in house prices experiences iid shocks. The only other asset is a
short-term real bond with an interest rate that is also hit by iid shocks. Expected inflation is
an AR(1), so that inflation is an ARMA(1,1). The nominal short-term interest rate is the sum
of expected inflation and the real rate. Longer-term nominal interest rates are determined with
the expectations hypothesis. Adjustable mortgage rates include a constant default premium,
while fixed rates include a default premium as well as a compensation for prepayment risk, both
are constant as well.
    The household buys a house with a minimum downpayment and finances the remaining
balance with either an adjustable or fixed rate mortgage. A nominal fixed-rate mortgage with-
out prepayment option is a highly risky contract, because the real present value of its future
payments is sensitive to inflation. The prepayment option insures households against a surpris-
ing fall in nominal interest rates, because they can refinance at the lower rate. The option is
not free, however — it is priced into a higher fixed rate. During times of low inflation and low
real rates, the fixed rate mortgage is thus an expensive form of borrowing. An adjustable-rate
mortgage mortgage is safe because the real present value of its future payments is unaﬀected
by inflation. However, it comes with real payments that vary over time with expected inflation
and real rates. These high payments may coincide with adverse income shocks and low house
prices, so that homeowners may not be able to borrow more to meet these payments.

                                               59
    The optimal choice between the two mortgage contracts compares the expected costs for
the homeowner over the life of the mortgage with the risks associated with higher or lower
realizations of these costs. The expected costs for the homeowner are either the expected
adjusted rate over the life of the mortgage or the known fixed rate. The risks associated with
higher cost realizations matter more for homeowners who are either risk averse or close to their
borrowing constraints. These homeowners tend to have low savings, large houses relative to
their income and volatile incomes. The horizon matters for computing the expected adjustable
rate over the life of the mortgage. For homeowners who are likely to move in the near future, the
current adjustable rate matters more. These homeowners will compare the current adjustable
rate with the fixed rate and opt for the rate that is currently cheaper. Since fixed rates include
the cost of the prepayment option and are longer maturities interest rates, the cheaper rate will
on average be the adjustable one-year rate.
    More generally, the diﬀerence between the fixed rate and the expected adjustable rate over
the life of the contract is determined by risk premia (as well as the cost of the prepayment
option). These risk premia vary over time. Koijen, Hemert and Van Nieuwerburgh (2009)
compute a time series of these risk premia and show that they highly correlate with the actual
share of adjustable-rate mortgages among newly originated mortgages. The expected adjustable
rate can be computed, for example, with survey data on interest rate forecasts, VARs or some
other estimated time series process, or under the assumption that beliefs are extrapolative.
Bandariza, Campbell, and Ramadorai (2016) investigate the share of adjustable-rate mortgages
in cross-country data. They find that low expected adjustable rates over short horizons, such
as a year or a few years, relative to fixed rates are associated with a high share of adjustable
rate mortgages.
Deferred amortization contracts
   Piskorski and Tchistyi (2010) is a theoretical study of optimal mortgage design in a setup
in which income by an impatient household is stochastic and unobservable by the lender. The
household needs to borrow from the lender to be able to buy a house. The paper shows that
the optimal contract is a combination of an interest-only mortgage and an equity line of credit
— an alternative mortgage product that oﬀers deferred amortization. The intuition behind the
result is that deferred amortization helps borrowing-constrained households to smooth their
consumption.
    Chambers, Garriga and Schlagenhauf (2009a,b) study mortgage choice in a quantitative
general equilibrium model with tenure choice and long-term mortgage contracts. The model
parameters are estimated with 1994 data. The model is recomputed with 2005 data by oﬀering
households a range of mortgage contracts with lower downpayment constraints, other forms
of deferred amortization, and lower closing costs. The paper finds that these new mortgage
contracts have enabled many borrowing-constrained renters to buy a house. It concludes that
these mortgage innovations can explain around 70% of the large increase in the homeownership
rate from 1994 to 2005.
    Cocco (2013) provides empirical evidence that supports this consumption-smoothing mech-
anism with data from the British Household Panel Survey. The survey collects detailed housing
information from a group of households over time (for example, about the type of mortgage, the
year the mortgage began, the amount borrowed, monthly payments etc.) The paper documents

                                               60
that, at least since 2001, households who choose alternative mortgages are better educated
and have higher subsequent income growth These mortgages are used to buy expensive houses
with high loan-to-value ratios. Amromin, Huang, Sialm and Zhong (2013) document similar
evidence for alternative mortgages in the United States.
Suboptimal borrower behavior in mortgage markets
   Mortgages are complex products. Mortgage lenders do not have the incentives to make
these contracts comparable, unless forced by regulation. Households make their mortgage
choice infrequently and cannot learn much from their past mistakes. In this situation, it is not
surprising that mortgage choices are not made optimally.
   Woodward and Hall (2012) show that new home buyers vastly overpay for their mortgages.
They use data on a sample of 30-year fixed-rate mortgages insured by the Federal Housing
Administration to show that borrowers do not push brokers towards competitive pricing. Most
borrowers would benefit from comparing quotes from a larger number of brokers. Borrowers
would also benefit from comparing quotes of mortgages that do not involve any up-front cash
payments, such as points. These findings hold especially for less educated borrowers.27
    A large literature on mortgage-backed securities documents that households’ refinancing
behavior is suboptimal. For example, Schwartz and Torous (1989) and Stanton (1995) show
that many households do not refinance their fixed-rate mortgage when market rates fall below
their locked-in contact rate. Other households refinance even though market rates are above
their locked-in contract rate. Agarwal, Driscoll and Laibson (2013) develop a formula for the
(S,s) inaction range for refinancing in the presence of fixed costs. Andersen, Campbell, Nielsen,
and Ramadorai (2015) document suboptimal refinancing behavior in Denmark, especially for
older, less educated and lower income households.


16.5     Consumption response to higher house prices
House price booms are often associated with higher aggregate household consumption. What
are the mechanisms that explain the consumption increase? There are two related issues. The
first is to measure the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of housing wealth for diﬀerent
groups of consumers. The second is to identify what exogenous shocks might have given rise to
the joint movement in house prices and consumption. For example, was the boom generated
by changes in financial conditions, or rather by an increase in household income.
   The household problem from Part II suggests potential determinants of the MPC out of
housing wealth. Consider first the frictionless problem from Section 8. Here an increase in the
house price has three possible eﬀects: it changes the relative price of housing services, it may
change expectations of returns on housing or other assets in the future (that is, it may change
the continuation utility +1 ), and it changes current wealth (or cash on hand). Only the first
eﬀect is unique to housing which has a nontradable dividend — the latter two eﬀects are shared
by any other security.
  27
    Woodward and Hall (2012) also show that minority households overpay more for their mortgages. Important
early work on discrimination in mortgage markets is the paper by Munnell, Tootell, Browne, and McEnearney
(1996). These authors show that minorities are more than twice as likely to be denied a mortgage as whites.


                                                    61
    Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni and Vavra (2015) provide conditions on the problem such
that only the last eﬀect prevails. In particular, they consider permanent price changes that
do not alter return expectations, and they assume Cobb-Douglas felicity so that income and
substitution eﬀects of the relative price of housing services cancel. They also point out that the
result does not depend on the presence of incomplete markets, a rental market or a collateral
constraint of the type (28) — indeed, the result is due to the fact that cash in hand is the only
state variable that house prices aﬀect which is true in all of these cases. The result does not
hold once transaction costs for either housing or mortgages are added.
Consumption and house prices in life cycle models
     Many studies have analyzed aggregate data on consumption during housing booms. For
example, Muellbauer and Muphy (1990) argue that in the U.K. house prices in the 1980s
generated a wealth eﬀect on aggregate consumption that was enabled by financial liberalization.
The liberalization allowed households to extract more wealth from the value increase in their
illiquid housing investment. King (1990) and Pagano (1990) question the importance of wealth
eﬀects in accounting for the high correlation between house prices and consumption in the U.K.
They argue that higher income growth expectations account for the increase in consumption
and also for higher house prices.
    Micro evidence on household consumption helps distinguish between competing mechanism.
For example, Attanasio and Weber (1994) argue that in basic lifecycle models (with a single good
and a single asset), wealth eﬀects versus higher income expectations have diﬀerent predictions
for the consumption of younger versus older households. Older households have more wealth
and have shorter horizons over which to spread an increase in their wealth. Therefore older
households will increase their consumption more than younger households in response to a
1 percent increase in wealth. Younger households respond more to income shocks, because
they have more human wealth. The paper uses micro data from the UK family expenditure
survey (FES) to document that the 1980s consumption boom was driven in large part by strong
consumption by young households.
    In a lifecycle model with housing as a collateral asset, the predictions of these mechanisms
are less obvious. In this setup, higher house prices not only increase the wealth of homeowners
as in the basic model, but also relax collateral constraints and thereby enable the young to
consume more. Attanasio, Leicester and Wakefield (2011) solve such a lifecycle problem with
exogenous house price and income processes in which the collateral constraint (28) is only
imposed in the period when a house is bought or the mortgage amount changes. They use the
observed aggregate time series for house prices and income to extract two shock series. The
paper then feeds the two shocks separately into the model and analyzes how various age cohorts
adjust their consumption to a particular shock. The quantitative results show that the intuition
from the basic lifecycle model carries over to this model with housing: higher house prices lead
to stronger consumption responses by older households, while higher income causes stronger
consumption responses by young households. The paper again concludes that the evidence
suggests that higher income expectations or common shocks that aﬀect both income and house
prices are more important than pure wealth eﬀects.
   Homeowners who want to consume more in response to higher house values need to adjust
their portfolio position either by selling their house or by borrowing more against their house.

                                               62
When transaction costs are high in housing and mortgage markets, the costs of adjusting the
portfolio may not make it optimal to cash out. Indeed, Berger et al. (2015) show that their
theoretical result does not apply in the presence of transaction costs. They find that a model
with transaction costs around 5% has approximately the same consumption elasticities than
a model without transaction costs. With higher transaction costs, around 10%, the MPC ×
house value formula overstates consumption elasticities, especially for younger households.
   Models with short-term mortgages make it easy for households to extract cash from their
house and may overstate consumption elasticities. Gorea and Midrigan (2015) consider a model
in which long-term mortgages are costly to refinance. When these costs are selected to match
the share of mortgages that are refinanced, consumption elasticities are substantially lower.
Reduced form estimates and housing supply elasticities as instruments
    Are consumption elasticities for individual households large enough for house price increases
to generate quantitatively big eﬀects on consumption? Reduced form estimates of the consump-
tion elasticity vary widely across studies. Case, Quigley and Shiller (2005) provide reduced-form
evidence on the consumption elasticity to house price changes with aggregate data from many
countries. Their estimate ranges from 0.02 to 0.17. Carroll, Otsuka, and Slacalek (2011) also
use aggregate data and estimate an immediate (next quarter) consumption elasticity of 0.02,
with an eventual elasticity of 0.09. Attanasio, Blow, Hamilton and Leicester (2009) use micro
data from the UK family expenditure survey to estimate consumption elasticities across house-
holds. They regress the level of consumption on changes in house price and other demographic
variables. The paper obtains an average elasticity of 0.15 and higher elasticities for young
households. Campbell and Cocco (2007) also use the FES and obtain a much larger average
elasticity of around 1.2 and higher elasticities for older homeowners than for younger renters.28
    Reduced form regressions should ideally have exogenous variations in house prices on their
right hand side. The identification of such variation is tricky. Even if we had a good identi-
fication strategy to isolate such exogenous variation in the data, it is not possible to directly
compare the observed consumption responses in the regressions with those implied by a life-
cycle model. The response of consumption to an exogenous increase in house prices includes
any general equilibrium eﬀects of higher house prices on consumption. For example, higher
house prices may encourage more residential investment and employment, and thereby increase
consumption. These GE eﬀects are typically not included in the model.
    To address the identification problem, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) use IV regressions with
the local housing supply elasticity index constructed by Saiz (2010) discussed in Section 2
as instrument. The instrument provides a source of exogenous variation in the exposure of
diﬀerent geographical areas to a common aggregate house price shock. Intuitively, areas with
an inelastic housing supply (such as San Francisco and Boston) should experience larger house
price changes than areas with a highly elastic housing supply (such as Omaha and Kansas
City). The paper estimates high consumption elasticities between 0.34-0.38 with Mastercard
data that measures credit-card spending on nondurables and house prices from Core Logic.
Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2016) confirm these estimates with store-level sales from the
  28
    Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010) collect data from various U.S. metro areas to document that risk
sharing between regions is reduced when the value of housing is low. More specifically, regional consumption is
more sensitive to regional income when housing collateral is scarce.


                                                      63
Kilts-Nielsen Retail Scanner Dataset and Zillow house prices.
   To interpret the causality of these elasticities, the housing supply elasticity instrument
has to be valid. The instrument satisfies the first-stage requirement: areas with steep slopes,
bodies of water and zoning restrictions tend to experience higher house price growth during
booms, so that the instrument is correlated with house prices (for example, Table 2 in Saiz
2010, Table A2 in Stroebel and Vavra 2015). A more diﬃcult requirement to satisfy is the
second stage exclusion restriction. In a standard IV approach, the supply constraints must
be uncorrelated with omitted demand factors. Saiz (2010), however, documents that supply
constraints are associated with high demand. For example, land-constrained areas have higher
incomes, are more creative (in the sense of more patents per capita) and attract more tourists
(measured by tourist visits per person.) As skilled workers sort into more attractive areas,
their productivity/income growth will increase the demand for amenities and house prices. A
detailed exposition of this argument is in Davidoﬀ (2016).29


17      Housing over the business cycle
The literature on housing over the business cycle is concerned with the facts presented in
Figure 2. As for quantities, residential investment and consumption of housing services are
procyclical, with residential investment being more volatile than other investment and leading
the cycle. Moreover, the price of housing is procyclical and comoves positively with housing
investment. At the same time, the literature aims to account at least as well, or possibly
better, for standard business cycle facts such as the volatility, cyclicality, autocorrelation of
GDP, nonresidential investment, consumption, hours worked, as well as wages and interest
rates and possibly mortgage debt.
    We divide the literature into two parts. Early work focused on frictionless representative
agent models; the key diﬀerence to the standard real business cycle model (RBC) is the presence
of two final goods, one of which is either housing services or a “home good” with a large housing
component. Papers in this line of research diﬀer mostly in the production technology, and the
bulk of the empirical work provides new evidence on technology by sector. More recent work
has emphasized simple heterogeneity of agents, usually a borrower and a lender type, as well as
nominal rigidities. These papers diﬀer mostly in the asset structure and empirical work often
provides new evidence on financial variables.
   Models in this section are quantified using a mix of parameters from earlier literature and
new estimates. Some papers work with observable shock processes — for example, sectoral
TFP — which allows them to estimate the shock process in a first step before computing an
equilibrium of the model. Other papers jointly estimate parameters of preferences, technology
and the shock processes using GMM or maximum likelihood approaches. In all cases, model
  29
     Various papers try to provide more direct evidence on the exclusion restriction. For example, Table 5 in
Mian and Sufi (2011) shows that IRS per capita wage growth is negatively correlated with supply elasticities,
indicating that more constrained areas such as San Francisco experience higher wage growth. Other measures
of income growth, however, appear uncorrelated with supply elasticities. Stroebel and Vavra (2015) provide
additional evidence that measures of income growth are not correlated with supply constaints.



                                                     64
performance is assessed by comparing the empirical distribution of a set of observables to the
joint distribution of those variables implied by a stationary rational expectations equilibrium
of the model economy.
    While much progress has been made in understanding the role of diﬀerent shocks and model
ingredients, the basic facts of housing over the business cycle remain puzzling. In particular, we
do not yet have a joint account of the volatility and lead-lag behavior of residential investment
together with the volatility of house prices. This is in part by design: most models in this
section are solved by linearization around a balanced growth path and do not allow for changes
in uncertainty. As a result, asset prices move only with changes in expected cash flow or interest
rates which limits the scope for volatility. A promising area for future work is to place more
emphasize on mechanisms for price volatility and draw tighter connections to the micro evidence
on portfolios discussed in Section 16.
Home production
    Home productions models are two sector stochastic growth models. The “market” sector
produces a market good using business capital and “market labor” — identified with hours
as conventionally measured. The "home" sector produces a home good using home capital —
identified with housing and consumer durables — together with home labor. Market output
is used to make either type of capital — we can define technology as in (21) and assume that
construction capital equals home capital that directly provides utility. In line with the features
of housing stressed above, home capital is an asset with a nontradable dividend, the return of
which is diﬃcult to measure directly. Of course, nontradability and indivisibility of housing
have no bite for model properties when there is only one agent.
    In a frictionless two-good model, a positive TFP shock to sector A induces reallocation of
labor away from sector B and hence lower output in that sector. Hours worked and output
in sector B are thus more volatile than what one would expect if there were only TFP shocks
to sector B itself. The home production literature exploits this mechanism to generate more
volatile market hours and output than a standard RBC model. Suppose sector B is the business
or market sector, then hours worked and GDP — the series usually targeted by business cycle
models — correspond to hours and output in sector B. Sector A is the household sector which
produces home goods using housing capital and work at home. Home good TFP shocks can
then help increase the volatility of hours and output, especially if they are imperfectly correlated
with business TFP.30
    At the same time, sectoral reallocation gives rise to a “comovement puzzle”. Indeed if
sectoral TFP shocks were uncorrelated, output, labor and investment would all be negatively
correlated across sectors: it makes sense to move both labor and capital towards the most
productive sector. The home production literature shows that this force helps make hours
and GDP more volatile. However, it also makes home and business investment negatively
correlated, whereas residential and nonresidential investment are both procyclical in the data.
There is therefore a tension between the promise of the mechanism for labor reallocation and
its implications for capital reallocation.
  30
    See Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1991) and Greenwood, Rogerson and Wright (1994) for an exposition
of the main mechanism.



                                                  65
    A second puzzle follows from the input-output structure of the models. A typical assumption
is that capital for both home and business use is produced by the business sector only. Consider
now the response to a perfectly correlated shock to both sectors: it makes sense to shift factors
to the business sector in order to build capital before increasing investment and production in
the home sector. This force make home investment lag the business cycle, again contrary to the
data. If the eﬀect is strong enough, such as when the elasticity of substitution between home
capital and labor is high, we can further have negative correlation of investment across sectors
even with strong positive correlation of TFP.
    Progress in the literature has been to compare specifications of technology that might over-
come these two puzzles. Roughly, comovement obtains more easily if shocks aﬀect sectors
similarly and there are reasons not to move capital. Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991) consider
highly correlated shocks together with a low elasticity of substitution between capital and labor
in the home sector. In Hornstein and Praschnik (1997), all capital is produced by a durables
good sector that uses nondurables as an intermediate input. Gomme, Kydland and Rupert
(2001) assume time to build in the business sector. Chang (2000) studies capital adjustment
costs. The upshot of this literature is that comovement can be obtained with technologies
justified by standard input-output matrices.
    The lead-lag pattern of residential investment has been a tougher nut to crack. Fisher (2007)
proposes a model in which home capital serves as an input into business production. The idea
is that workers who live in better houses are more rested and deliver higher quality work. This
type of technology cannot be justified by standard NIPA input-output accounting; it is instead
motivated by a regional level estimation of a production function that takes the new eﬀect of
home capital on business output into account. With that eﬀect and appropriate elasticities, it
can make sense to build home capital first in response to productivity shocks.31
Land and house prices
    Davis and Heathcote (2005) incorporate land into a two-sector stochastic growth model.
Their setup is more directly geared towards housing than the typical home production model
— the “home good” is explicitly identified with housing services. A simplified version of their
technology is given by (21)-(22): housing services are provided by a housing asset produced
by a construction sector, and while there are no adjustment costs to capital, a limited flow of
new land induces an adjustment cost to housing. These assumptions on technology have been
adopted by a number of later papers. The paper itself has a richer structure with input-output
links between construction and other sectors via intermediate goods derived from NIPA sectoral
accounts.
   The model is driven by sectoral TFP shocks and produces comovement of residential and
business investment, where the former is substantially more volatile, but does not lead the
cycle. At the heart of the model is the construction sector, which is labor intensive and subject
to particularly volatile TFP shocks. A positive construction TFP shock is amplified by hiring
and generates a lot of construction output. The response of residential investment is larger
  31
    Recently Kydland, Rupert and Sustek (2012) have shown that both the lead-lag behavior of residential
investment and the prevalence of long term fixed rate mortgages are special features of US data. They provide
a model in which residential investment leads the cycle because the cost of housing depends on forward looking
long term yields in the US, but less so in other countries.


                                                     66
than for business investment since housing is more construction-intensive and depreciates more
slowly. At the same time, the input-output structure ensures that comovement still obtains,
but it does not allow for residential investment to lead the cycle.
    The model-implied house price is procyclical but negatively correlated with residential in-
vestment. Its volatility is less than one third of that in the data. The key eﬀect here is that
a positive construction TFP shock not only increases residential investment, but also makes
housing cheaper. At the same time, TFP shocks to other sectors can make the prices of all long
lived assets, including the housing asset, procyclical. Put together, these results again illustrate
the promise and limitations of sectoral productivity shocks as a driving force of housing. It
is tricky to come up with input-output structures that generate the right quantity dynamics.
Once prices are explicitly considered, further challenges arise.
Household debt and nominal rigidities
    A number of papers in the early 2000s extended New Keynesian models to allow for housing
and collateral constraints along the lines of Section 13. Early work was concerned with the
response to monetary policy, described further below.32 To illustrate the business cycle prop-
erties of such frameworks, we focus below on the results of Iacoviello and Neri (2010, IN). On
the firm side, that paper combines nominal rigidities, the technology of Davis and Heathcote,
capital adjustment costs and free linear conversion of houses. There are two types of households
who diﬀer in discount factors and no rental markets so that housing dividends are nontradable.
The model features many shocks and is estimated using consumption, house prices, inflation,
the nominal interest rate as well as housing and nonhousing investment, hours and wages.
   Heterogeneity in discount factors gives rise to a borrower-saver household sector. Impatient
borrower households borrow and run into collateral constraints, whereas patient saver house-
holds are unconstrained in equilibrium. Borrowers are always constrained near the steady state,
which allows for linear solutions.33 The assumption of linear conversion implies that there is
a per-unit price of housing. Nontradability of dividends nevertheless allows for a steady state
in which both types of households own housing. This makes the model diﬀerent from linear
two-agent models of equity pricing, in which the agent with the highest valuation of a tradable
asset is typically the only owner.
    Three key features distinguish New Keynesian borrower-saver models from the models dis-
cussed so far. First, a “housing preference shock” increases the felicity from housing. Together
with the shock to construction productivity, it is the most important driver of house prices and
residential investment. Since it increases housing demand rather than supply, it also makes
those two variables move together. At the same time, it lowers comovement of business and
residential investment. This tension implies that the model has trouble matching jointly the
volatility and cyclicality of house prices and investment, as well as the lead-lag behavior of
  32
     A related early borrower-saver business cycle model is Campbell and Hercowitz (2005) who study borrow-
ing collateralized by durables with a constant price. They show that lower downpayment requirements allow
borrower households to better smooth labor supply and hence lower the volatility of aggregate hours. They use
this eﬀect to relate financial innovation in the early 1980s to the Great Moderation of the US economy.
  33
     Linear solution imply symmetric business cycles. Allowing for occasionally binding constraints could alter
dynamics by introducing nonlinear dynamics; for example the response to shocks could be stronger in downturn
when constraints bind, giving rises to asymmetric cycles as in the data. Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2015) develop
a model to study such eﬀects.

                                                      67
investment, even though it does generate volatile house prices (IN Table 4).
    Second, the models feature nominal rigidities which amplify “demand” shocks such as those
to housing preference. In particular, with sticky wages, housing preference shocks have much
larger eﬀects on residential investment (IN Figure 2). Stickiness of prices is less relevant since
house prices are flexible. At the same time, however, sticky wages worsen the comovement
problem: a construction productivity shock no longer increases business investment (IN Figure
4). Nominal rigidities also matter in that they allow other shocks — e.g. to monetary policy
and markups — to feed through to the housing sector.
    The heterogeneity of households is not particularly important for the behavior of investment
and house prices (IN Figures 2-4). Linear conversion of housing matters here: housing (as
well as other capital) satisfies the Euler equation of the patient unconstrained investor, so
investment and price dynamics look much like in a representative agent model. At the same
time, the presence of collateral constrained households matters for the response of consumption
to shocks. In particular, changes in housing wealth will aﬀect aggregate consumption more. In
a model with nominal rigidities, this also translates into eﬀects on output.
Financial frictions in the business sector
    With financial frictions in the household sector, house prices can matter for output through
their eﬀects on demand. If businesses face collateral constraints, then real estate values can
also aﬀect firms’ cost. For example, in Iacoviello (2005), entrepreneurs borrow using housing
as collateral. Liu, Wang and Zha (2013) estimate a model in which firms borrow against land
as collateral. Housing or land preference shocks can then serve as a driver of the business cycle
together with the price of land and the level of business debt.
    In the wake of the financial crisis, it has become common to introduce shocks that directly
change borrowing or intermediation costs. Some papers have studied such shocks in models
with housing. For example, Dorofeenko, Lee and Salyer (2014) add financing constraints as
well as risk shocks to the construction sector. Risk shocks then increase the volatility of house
prices although this comes at the cost of overstating the volatility of residential investment.
Gerali, Neri, Sessa and Signoretti (2010) estimate a model of the Euro Area. Their estimation
backs out an important role for shocks to a frictional banking sector that lends to households
and firms against collateral.
Eﬀects of monetary policy
    A growing literature studies the eﬀect of monetary policy shocks in New Keynesian models
with heterogenous households, following Aoki, Proudman and Vlieghe (2004) and Iacoviello
(2005). The goal is to match the impulse response to a change in the short term nominal
interest rate obtained from structural VARs. A stylized fact is that an expansionary monetary
policy shock — a decline in the short rate — increases house prices and residential investment
along with output (see for example, Calza, Monacelli and Stracca (2013) for evidence for a cross
section of countries). The goal of the literature is to account for this fact as well as to show
whether the presence of heterogenous agents and housing is an important force behind impulse
responses for other variables.
   As a benchmark, consider the response to a monetary policy shock in a New Keynesian model
with a representative agent. With sticky prices, a decline in the nominal short rate generates a

                                               68
decline in the real short rate. From the Euler equation, the representative agent would like to
substitute away from expensive future consumption and increase current consumption. Since
firms are on their labor demand curve, hiring and output increase to provide extra consumption
— monetary policy stimulates the economy. The Euler equation also says that the return on
housing should decline — this can happen either through a drop in the dividend (an increase in
the relative consumption of housing) or a drop in house prices. Finally, the return on investment
declines and so does residential investment.
    Suppose now instead that the short rate declines in model with heterogeneous agents and
collateral constraints. Assume also that housing is priced linearly. A change in the real rate
directly aﬀects the Euler equation of unconstrained agents. Again the return on housing has
to decline as well and this happens in part via an increase in housing consumption by the
unconstrained — which decreases dividends — and in part through a drop in the house price.
The quantity adjustment is not very large, so that the price response typically looks similar
to a representative agent model. A key diﬀerence to the representative agent model is that
the price change now tightens the collateral constraint and lowers consumption of constrained
agents. As a result, the consumption and output responses are typically much larger than in
a representative agent model, and they are driven to a much smaller extent by intertemporal
substitution.
    Iacoviello (2005) studies the above mechanism in a two-agent model with borrower and saver
households. Aoki, Proudman and Vlieghe (2004) consider savers and an entrepreneurial housing
sector. Monacelli (2009) compares the implications of models with and without collateral
constraints with evidence on the consumption response for durables and nondurables. Rubio
(2011) introduces long term debt in a model without capital and shows that eﬀects of monetary
policy are stronger with variable rate mortgages, since real interest rate movements have larger
eﬀects. Calza, Monacelli and Stracca (2013) present SVARs evidence that monetary policy has
larger eﬀects in countries with more variable mortgages; as well as a model with capital that
generates qualitatively similar eﬀects. Garriga, Kydland and Šustek (2013) consider a flexible
price model and emphasize that variable-rate mortgages generate important nominal rigidities
in their own right.
Rich household sector
    Much of the literature on business cycles and monetary policy has built on traditional macro
models with limited heterogeneity. In light of results on portfolio choice discussed above, there
is considerable promise in models that allow for richer heterogeneity in both households and
houses as well as for aggregate risk. Early work in this direction abstracted from house price
risk. Silos (2007) studies a model with two capital stocks that also accounts for the cross section
and time series properties of housing and wealth positions. Iacoviello and Pavan (2013) allow
for a rental market and emphasize the procyclicality of debt. Another interesting direction is
to explicitely incorporate geography (for example, Van Nieuwerburgh and Weill 2010).
   The literature on monetary policy shocks has also been moving towards models with a richer
household sector. For example, Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2016) consider a perpetual youth
model with borrowing constraints and a subset of illiquid assets (including housing). Wong
(2016) considers an overlapping generations model with long term mortgages and highlights
the role of heterogeneity by age for the transmission mechanism. All of these papers show that

                                                69
the details of how the household sector is modeled matter for the strength of impulse responses.


18       Asset pricing with housing
This section summarizes work that studies regular patterns in asset prices implied by models
with housing. Similarly to the business cycle analysis in the previous section, model exercises
compare empirical distributions in the data to stationary equilibria implied by the model. The
key diﬀerence is that explicit nonlinear solutions allow for time variation in risk implied by the
role of housing as a consumption good or collateral asset. Changes in the risk return tradeoﬀ
then aﬀect the pricing of all assets including housing.
    The upshot from this literature is that the presence of housing introduces slow movement
in the stochastic discount factor that lines up with observed movements in risk premia. At
the same time, rational expectations versions of the models here do not generate suﬃcient
volatility to price risky assets, unless risk aversion is large. It is an open question how much the
channels described here can contribute once they are combined with less restrictive assumptions
on expectations.
Housing as a consumption good
    The standard consumption-based asset pricing model focuses on consumption risk: the value
of an asset depends on the comovement of its return with a single factor, aggregate consumption
growth. In a model with housing, households worry not only about future consumption growth,
but also about the future composition of the consumption bundle (   ). With frictionless rental
markets, composition risk can be measured by the expenditure share of housing in the overall
consumption bundle. Assets are then valued also for whether they provide a hedge against this
second risk factor.
  More formally, Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel (2007) assume a power utility function  () =
 1−1
      (1 − 1) over the CES aggregator  =  ( ), and assume a frictionless rental market.
The pricing kernel (10) can then be written as
                                       µ          ¶−1 µ              ¶ (−1)
                                                                          −
                                           +1             1 − +1
                            +1 =                                                           (34)
                                                           1 − 
where  is the expenditure share on housing consumption. If   1   then households worry
both generally about recessions — low consumption growth — and in particular about "severe
recessions" in which the expenditure share on housing consumption is low.
    The pricing kernel (34) is observable since the housing expenditure share  is available in
the NIPA tables. Use of expenditure shares avoids reliance on problematic measures of housing
quantities   Figure 1 above shows movements in  over the postwar period. The key feature
is that the expenditure share contains a slow moving component that lines up with the low
frequency component in the price dividend ratio on equity: both series are high in the 1960s,
low in the 1970s and recover in the 1980s. These movements are predictable and occur at
frequencies that are much lower than business cycle frequencies.
   Low frequency movements in the housing share induce movements in stock prices that are

                                                    70
in line with the data. For example, agents’ concern with severe recessions increases risk premia
on assets that pay oﬀ little when the expenditure share on housing drops, and more so when the
housing share is already currently low. Comovement of  with the price dividend ratio implies
that equity is such an asset. Since the expenditure share is stationary, the price-dividend ratio
on stocks is persistent but mean reverting. This mean reversion explains why the price-dividend
ratio forecasts excess returns on stocks. The model also implies that the housing expenditure
share should predict excess stock returns, which it does in the data.
    Since movements in the housing share are small, large risk premia obtain only if the exponent
in (34) is suﬃciently large. This can happen for two reasons. On the one hand, suppose that
the intratemporal elasticity of consumption is close to one. Since household desire constant
expenditure shares, the prospect of a drop in the housing share causes them large discomfort
and requires high risk premia on equity even when risk aversion is low. At the same time,
however, the intratemporal Euler equation (24) implies very large volatility in rents. On the
other hand, high risk premia obtain without high rent volatility when risk aversion is large. In
this case the role of housing is still important in generating time variation in risk premia.
Adjustment costs and production
    The same asset-pricing implications continue to hold when housing is costly to adjust (see,
for example, Stokey 2009). Adjustment costs typically alter the optimal consumption allocation
— for example consumption is constant or depreciates at a constant rate as long as there is no
adjustment. At the same time, the Euler equation (8) for other securities still holds. The
pricing kernel (34) continues to be observable with quantity data on housing and nonhousing
consumption, or with data on nonhousing consumption and the expenditure share  . The
argument further extends to setups with preferences over consumption and housing that deviate
from expected utility. In this case, the pricing kernel has to be evaluated with continuation
utility (10).
    Flavin and Nakagawa (2008) measure the pricing kernel with quantity data on housing
consumption. More specifically, they use square footage to measure housing consumption.
An important disadvantage of this quantity-based measure is that it does not capture quality
diﬀerences that would be reflected in dollar expenditures and therefore the expenditure share
 as in (34). For example, a 2000 square foot house with a view will provide more utility than
the same square footage without view. This quality diﬀerence will be reflected in a higher rent
for the house with a view and an associated higher expenditure share  on housing.
   Jaccard (2011) studies a two-sector model with production of housing. There is habit
formation over the consumption bundle  (   ) and leisure. The presence of adjustment costs
in housing production together with habit formation helps to generate volatile house prices.
Habit formation also helps to generate a sizable equity premium as well as comovement between
hours worked and output.
Housing as a collateral asset
    Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005) consider the asset pricing implications of a heteroge-
nous agents model with uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk and collateral constraints. The
collateral constraint is similar to (28), except that the set of securities is a complete set of one-
period-ahead contingent claims and any state contingent promise must be backed by the value


                                                 71
of housing in the relevant state of nature next period. The presence of contingent claims allows
an aggregation result that expresses the pricing kernel +1 as an aggregate consumption term
as in (34) multiplied by a term that depends on the “housing collateral ratio”, that is, the ratio
of housing wealth relative to human wealth.
    The housing collateral ratio now serves as a second state variable that describes variation in
investors’ required compensation for an additional risk factor. Indeed, investors perceive reces-
sions as particularly severe when the housing collateral ratio is low and collateral constraints
are more likely to bind. Moreover, if the current collateral ratio is already low, opportunities for
smoothing uninsurable income shocks through collateralized borrowing are poor and required
risk premia are high. Empirically, measures of the housing collateral ratio predict stock returns
and also help explain the cross section of stock returns.
    The paper further shows that large movements in risk premia are associated with large
movements in the riskless interest rate. Indeed, if opportunities to borrow are currently low,
then the supply of all contingent claims falls, which drives up the prices of all claims as well
as their sum, the price of a riskless bond. This logic is not limited to models with collateral
constraints on contingent claims but also applies with the constraint (28) or when default is
punished by autarky. Quantitatively, it prevents rational expectations models with borrowing
constraints from generating high and volatile equity premia without excessively volatile interest
rates, unless risk aversion is high.


19      Housing boom-bust cycles
A growing body of work tries to understand the mechanisms behind large house price swings and
their quantitative importance. Two boom-bust episodes stand out — they were associated with
high nationwide house prices both in the U.S. as well as many other industrialized countries. The
first occurred during the Great Inflation of the 1970s, as documented in Figure 2 of Piazzesi and
Schneider (2008). During the boom, houses in high quality segments of the U.S. housing market
appreciated by 11% more than low quality segments, as shown in Table 2 of Poterba (1991).
The second boom happened during the 2000s, when many countries experienced large increases
in mortgage debt together with large house prices increases, as documented by Tsatsaronis
and Zhu (2014). During this boom, houses in high quality segments of U.S. housing markets
appreciated less than low quality segments, as discussed in Section 3.
    The typical account of a boom episode consists of one or more “shocks”, that is, changes
in the economic environment, together with a mechanism for how the economy responds to the
shocks. Broadly, candidate shocks are changes to macroeconomic conditions that aﬀect income
and assets other than housing, changes in financial conditions that aﬀect the ability to borrow
given house prices, as well as changes in government policy and expectations about future house
values. How exactly the shocks and the mechanism are modeled depends on how much of the
response of the economy is endogenous in a given model exercise.
Overview of the results
   Studies of the 1970s housing boom show that the Great Inflation depressed user costs,
especially for richer households. The lower user costs can quantitatively account for both higher

                                                72
overall house values as well as higher house values in high quality segments. Higher mortgage
interest-rate tax deductions increased the attractiveness of homeownership. They can explain
a large share of the overall increase in real house prices. The higher deductions especially
benefitted households in higher tax brackets, which accounts for the higher appreciation of high
quality segments. In surveys, young households reported to have higher inflation expectations
and thereby lower perceived real rates than older households. This disagreement about inflation
expectations and real rates across generations is consistent with the increase in credit during
this episode. As a consequence, young households borrowed more at rates that they perceived
as low and bought houses, pushing up prices.
    User costs were again low during the 2000s boom. Credit was easy to get — with low
interest rates and relaxed downpayment constraints, enabled partly by an inflow of foreign
savings as well as an increase in securitization. The lower interest rates raised the present
value of future housing services and thus house values across the board. The relaxation of
downpayment constraints mattered mostly for poor households who were able to borrow more
and buy houses, driving up house prices especially in the low quality segments of the housing
market. Richer households increasingly bought low quality houses and neighborhoods gentrified,
further pushing up prices in these low quality segments. All studies, however, find it diﬃcult to
quantitatively account for the entire increase in house prices. This suggests that expectations
played a role during the 2000s boom. As long as households were expecting house prices to
growth at trend together with income (instead of mean reverting to lower levels), it is possible
to quantitatively explain the boom.
    There has been much progress in our understanding of boom-bust episodes. Micro data —
including on household behavior and survey expectations — have helped sort out the importance
of competing mechanisms. At the same time, the nature of the shock that started the housing
boom is yet not well understood. Changes in housing preferences, expectations, foreign capital
inflows or downpayment constraints are essentially stand-ins for changes in various market
participants’ attitudes towards housing and housing credit. To understand what generates these
changes requires theories of expectation formation, financial innovation as well as international
capital market integration.
    Another open question is the precise role of the U.S. government during the recent boom.
It is clear that many policies (for example, associated with the 1994 National Homeownership
Strategy developed by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) encouraged
poor households to take out large mortgages and buy houses, especially in low quality seg-
ments. How much did these policies contribute to the boom? A related question is whether
the government should promote homeownership in the first place, given that it involves a large
undiversified investment and potential welfare costs in default.


19.1     The 1970s boom
Poterba (1984) investigates the user cost equation with Census data from the 1970s housing
boom. His findings show that high expected inflation substantially lowered the user costs of
housing. High expected inflation pushes up mortgage rates and thereby increases the mortgage
tax subsidy. This mechanism is able to explain a 30% increase in real house prices during the

                                               73
1970s.
    Poterba (1991) calculates that user costs dropped especially for households in high tax
brackets. The reason is that high mortgage rates translate into a larger mortgage tax subsidy
for households who earn high incomes that are taxed at higher rates. Lower user costs for richer
households increase the demand for more expensive houses. Tables 3 and 4 in the paper indeed
find higher capital gains for more expensive houses during the 1970s boom, while cheaper houses
appreciated less percentage-wise.
    Piazzesi and Schneider (2009a) study an equilibrium model with three assets — houses,
stocks and nominal bonds. Households solve lifecycle consumption-portfolio choice problems
with an exogenous nontradable income process (33). The paper computes temporary equilibria
as described in Section 10 in this model. The benchmark household beliefs about future returns
and income dynamics are estimated with historical data. Moreover, these dynamics feature a
large idiosyncratic component in house price volatility. When the model is evaluated during
the 1970s, the temporary equilibrium concept is useful for exploring the implications of higher
expected inflation as well as higher inflation volatility.
    When evaluated with 1990s data on income and asset endowments, the temporary equilib-
rium of this model is successful at matching observed asset prices as well as life cycle patterns
in wealth and portfolio weights on houses, stocks and nominal bonds. In particular, the model
predicts that young households borrow to buy a house and do not participate in the stock
market. As they get older, households pay down their mortgage and start saving in nominal
bonds and stocks.
    The model is evaluated with endowment data from the Survey of Consumer Finances in the
1960s, 1970s and 1990s. The model predicts a 25% dip in aggregate wealth during the 1970s —
which is exactly the pattern we observe in the data. There are three separate mechanisms that
contribute to the drop in household wealth during the Great Inflation in the model. First, the
1970s experienced a demographic shift towards more young households — the Baby Boomers —
who have lower savings rates. Second, capital losses from realized inflation lowered wealth and
hence savings, especially for older households. Third, lower savings were not counteracted by
a large increase in interest rates, because the outside supply of bonds to the household sector
also fell.
    While aggregate household wealth dropped, the portfolio composition looks similar across
all three periods at benchmark beliefs which do not take into account higher expected inflation
rates during the 1970s. When all households believe in the high expected inflation rate from
the 1970 consensus forecasts in the Michigan survey, they increase their portfolio away from
stocks towards housing. This shift happens because high expected inflation generates tax eﬀects
that favor housing investments: the returns on housing are essentially untaxed, while mortgage
interest rate payments are tax deductable. Disagreement about inflation expectations shifts the
portfolio further towards housing. The reason is that young households expect high inflation
and perceive a low real interest rate. They therefore borrow more and buy housing. The two
inflation mechanisms — higher mean inflation and disagreement across cohorts — explain roughly
half of the portfolio shift towards housing observed in the data.34 The remaining shift can be
 34
      Relatedly, Piazzesi and Schneider (2008) study a model in which some households suﬀer from inflation



                                                    74
attributed to lower stock return expectations in times with high expected inflation, which lead
to a large decline in price-dividend ratios for stocks while the housing market was booming.
The resulting negative comovement of house and stock prices is an important step towards our
understanding of the 1970s.


19.2      The 2000s boom
We divide studies of the 2000s boom into three groups by the type of exercise they undertake.
One set of papers evaluates versions of the user cost equation (27): it asks whether reasonable
scenarios for interest rates and housing payoﬀ expectations — as well as other parameters of the
user cost equation such as taxes — are consistent with high house prices. Second, studies that
employ small open economy models take securities prices — in particular interest rates — from
the data and endogenously determine only house prices and allocations. Finally, papers that
work with closed economy models jointly determine house prices and the prices of other assets.
    As usual these three approaches are complementary. Indeed, user cost studies (as well as
more generally studies of Euler equations) or small open economy models do not explain why
interest rates move. At the same time, they evaluate a given model mechanism without taking
a stand on the explicit shock structure as well as the details of who participates in securities
markets. They thus generate conclusions that are robust to those details. While a closed
economy exercise is in principle more ambitious as it makes those details explicit and takes a
stand on the nature of the shocks, it is also more prone to misspecification.
User cost calculations
    Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005) study user costs leading up to the recent housing
boom. Their approach assumes that future payoﬀs can be discounted at the current long-term
interest rate. They conclude that the large decline in long rates during the early 2000s can
explain the house price boom during that time. Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2013) show
that discounting all future payoﬀs at the low 2000s long rate is crucial for this quantitative
result. In an environment in which low current rates are allowed to mean revert in the future,
the magnitude of the boom is significantly reduced. They conclude that optimistic expectations
played an important role in the housing boom.
House prices in small open economies
    Kiyotaki, Michaelides and Nikolov (2011) study a small open economy in which households
solve lifecyle problems, choose between renting and owning, and face collateral constraints
as in Section 13. In the model, housing is a capital stock that is produced with land and
capital. The paper compares steady states with looser collateral constraints: downpayment
constraints that range from 10% to 100%. The findings in their Table 3 show that varying
the downpayment constraint has large quantitative eﬀects on the homeownership rate: while
only 46% of households own a home when it is not possible to borrow against housing, 90% of
illusion. These households confuse changes in the nominal interest rates with changes in real interest rates,
while smart households understand the Fisher equation. The model predicts a nonmonotonic relationship
between the price-rent ratio and nominal interest rates: house prices are high when nominal rates are either
particularly high (as in the 1970s) or low (as in the 2000s).


                                                     75
households own a house when the downpayment constraint is 10%.
    Despite their large eﬀects on extensive margins, Kiyotaki et al. show that lower down-
payment constraints have negligible eﬀects on house prices. The price-rent ratio is essentially
constant across all steady states in Table 3. This outcome is intuitive, because all homeowners
in the model are marginal investors and determine the per unit price of housing. With looser
collateral constraints, there is an inflow of new home buyers. However, these new buyers do not
aﬀect the per unit price of housing because the Euler equations also hold for rich households.
Their Table 4 studies how these results quantitatively depend on the scarcity of land for the
production of housing. Kermani (2012) studies these mechanisms in a continuous-time model
with a representative agent.
    Sommer, Sullivan and Verbrugge (2013) solve a similar model but without production.
Instead, the overall housing supply is fixed and there is free conversion of housing units. The
paper also finds small quantitative eﬀects of looser collateral constraints and lower interest
rates, and considers higher income expectations. Chu (2014) assumes that the supply of rental
housing and the supply of owner-occupied housing are fixed separately and cannot be converted
into each other. As a result, looser collateral constraints have larger eﬀects on house prices.
In particular, the value of owner-occupied housing appreciates more than rental housing. The
bond market in the model clears; income shocks are assumed to be more volatile in 2005 which
keeps the equilibrium interest rate constant over time (instead of matching the lower interest
rates observed in the data.)
     Landvoigt, Piazzesi and Schneider (2015) study an assignment model with indivisible and
illiquid houses in a metro area. The housing demand of movers is derived from a lifecycle
consumption and portfolio choice problem with transaction costs and collateral constraints. As
in Section 10, house prices are determined in a temporary equilibrium to induce households
with lower demand for housing services to move into lower quality houses. The distribution
of equilibrium prices thus depends on the distribution of mover characteristics as well as the
distribution of house qualities. While the market for all house qualities clears, the metro area
is a small open economy.
    Landvoigt et al. (2015) measure continuous distributions for movers and house qualities
with micro data from San Diego County for two years: 2000 and 2005, the peak of the boom.
The distribution of mover characteristics — age, income and wealth — is measured with data
from the American Community Survey. The 2005 distribution shows that movers were richer
than in 2000. Moreover, the 2005 house-quality distribution has fatter tails than in 2000 —
relatively more houses traded at the low and the high end of the quality spectrum than in
intermediate ranges.
    To measure the distribution of house qualities, Landvoigt et al. (2015) assume that house
quality is a one-dimensional index. Therefore, house quality can be measured by price in the
base year 2000. The paper documents that 2005 house prices are strictly increasing in 2000
prices. This monotonicity implies that for every 2005 quality level, there is a unique initial 2000
quality level so that the average house of that initial quality resembled the given house in 2005.
The 2000 distribution of house qualities is simply the distribution of transaction prices in that
year. The 2005 distribution of house qualities can be constructed from the 2005 distribution of


                                                76
transaction prices using the monotonicity of the map from 2000 qualities to 2005 prices.35
    The paper compares the predictions for equilibrium prices in both years and derives the
cross section of capital gains by quality. These predictions are compared to capital gains by
quality in the data. Two key mechanisms allow the model to quantitatively match the observed
cross section of capital gains by quality from 2000 to 2005. The first mechanism is cheaper
credit: looser collateral constraints and lower mortgage rates in 2005 allowed poorer households
to borrow more and increase their demand for housing, especially at the low end of the quality
spectrum. Richer households were not aﬀected much by lower downpayment constraints. But
these richer households are not marginal investors for low quality houses (as discussed in Section
9.1). Therefore, the higher housing demand by poor households translates into higher prices of
low quality houses.
    The second mechanism is that more low quality houses transacted in 2005. When the
distribution of movers is assigned to the distribution of houses in 2005, the marginal buyer of a
low quality house is richer compared to 2000 and pushes up low-end prices. Both mechanisms
generate capital gains that monotonically decline in house quality.
    Whether or not the model quantitatively matches capital gains by quality depends on expec-
tations. An advantage of temporary equilibria is that we can find out how much expectations
matter. Under the assumption that households in 2005 were expecting house prices to continue
to grow at the same rate as labor income and easy credit conditions to remain, the model
implies the same capital gains from 2000 to 2005 as in the data. Under the assumption that
households in 2005 foresee that future house prices and credit conditions will return to their
2000 values, capital gains as a function of house quality are shifted down until expensive houses
do not appreciate in value. Our conclusion is that easy credit and fatter tails in the house qual-
ity distribution predict a monotonically declining pattern in capital gains. To quantitatively
explain capital gains, expectations are important. In particular, expectations in 2005 cannot
be pessimistic about the future.
Closed economy and the determination of interest rates
   The closed economy models considered in the literature all assume costless conversion and
thus linear pricing, which by design reduces the quantitative importance of looser collateral
constraints on house prices. The per-unit price of housing enters the Euler equations of all
investors, which includes rich investors for whom collateral constraints do not matter. Therefore,
any change in collateral constraints will have small eﬀects on per-unit house prices. A key
contribution of these models is to make the point that looser collateral constraints tend to push
up equilibrium interest rates, so that a major force is needed to keep rates low during the boom.
    Garriga, Manuelli and Peralta-Alva (2012) study a closed economy with production in two
sectors without aggregate shocks and a representative household. The production of housing
involves land and irreversible investment in structures. Foreign lenders determine mortgage
rates. The collateral constraint is selected to match aggregate mortgage debt to housing wealth.
Under the assumption of perfect foresight about looser collateral constraints and low mortgage
  35
    Epple, Quintero and Sieg (2015) also assume house quality is a one-dimensional index. They estimate house
prices as well as rental values as nonlinear functions of quality with data for various metro areas using a new
structural estimation approach.



                                                      77
rates in the future, the model is able to explain roughly half of the observed increase in national
house price indices. Since housing and nonhousing consumption are strong complements, higher
house prices do not lead to a large consumption increase (which would be counterfactual). The
paper attributes the other half of the increase to expectations.
    Favilukis, Ludvigson and Van Nieuwerburgh (2016) study a closed economy with households
who solve lifecycle problems with uninsurable labor income shocks as well as aggregate shocks.
There is no rental market, so households have to buy in order to consume housing services. The
paper solves the model under the assumption that foreigners bought more bonds during the
2000s and thereby increase the mortgage supply. The paper carefully measures the size of these
bond purchases and quantifies their eﬀect on equilibrium mortgage rates. Looser collateral
constraints lower risk premia and thereby increase house prices by roughly half of the observed
increase in national house prices.
    The asset “house” in Favilukis et al. is a claim to the national housing stock. As discussed
in Section 3, households in the data hold individual houses instead of such diversified claims.
In fact, a diversified claim has much more attractive return properties than individual houses
because national house price indices are not volatile. In Panel B of Table 5 of Favilukis et al.,
the equilibrium Sharpe ratio of the national housing stock is an impressive 0.82 compared a less
attractive 0.37 Sharpe ratio for stocks. To better capture the Sharpe ratios of individual houses
that households face in the data, the paper considers small idiosyncratic shocks to housing
depreciation. These idiosyncratic shocks increase precautionary savings and thereby depress
the equilibrium riskfree rate, but they do not match the high idiosyncratic component in the
variance decomposition of individual housing returns.
    Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2015a) consider a closed economy in which patient
households lend to impatient households until their lending reaches an exogenous supply limit.
There are collateral constraints, so impatient households borrow to buy houses. The paper
shows that looser collateral constraints increase the demand for houses and mortgages by the
impatient households. As a consequence, both house prices and mortgage rates increase in
equilibrium — contrary to what we saw in the data, where mortgage rates fell. The paper then
argues that an exogenous increase in the credit supply limit increases borrowing while keeping
mortgage rates low in equilibrium. It is important for this argument to assume that patient
household have a fixed housing demand or buy houses in a diﬀerent segment from impatient
households, otherwise their Euler equation would determine house prices and thereby keep house
prices low. Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2015b) add poorer (subprime) borrowers to
the model. They show that subprime borrowers increase their mortgage borrowing more than
richer borrowers in response to an increase in the credit supply.
    Landvoigt (2015) endogenizes the supply of mortgages in a closed-economy model with banks
and aggregate risk. Households diﬀer in their patience as well as their risk aversion. Banks issue
deposits and equity to make mortgages. Looser collateral constraints increase the demand for
housing and mortgage borrowing, but increase mortgage rates — contrary to what we observed
in the data. Landvoigt introduces securitization, which allows banks to sell mortgages directly
to risk-tolerant savers. The boom is initiated when banks underestimate the riskiness of new
borrowers during the early 2000s and collateral constraints are relaxed. As banks securitize
their mortgages and sell them as MBS to savers, risk premia decline, the supply of lending


                                                78
increases, and the model generates a boom-bust in house prices.
Expectations
    The broad conclusion from existing studies of the 2000 boom is that expectations played
a quantitatively important role. This conclusion is consistent with survey expectations about
future house prices. For example, Table 9 in Case and Shiller (2003) reports that homebuyers
in 2003 were expecting house prices to appreciate between 9 and 15 percent each year over the
next decade. Piazzesi and Schneider (2009b) document that at the peak of the recent boom,
the fraction of households who believed that house prices would continue to increase doubled.
    Recent research has started to capture such house price expectations. Piazzesi and Schnei-
der (2009b) show that since only a small fraction of houses trade every year, a few exuberant
households are enough to push up equilibrium house prices in these transactions. Barlevy
and Fisher (2011) assume that a stream of new households enters every period with a cer-
tain probability and the stream may stop. Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011) assume
infectious-disease dynamics for expectations. Adam, Kuang and Marcet (2012) study learning
dynamics that temporarily decouple house prices from fundamentals. Landvoigt (2016) uses
micro data to estimate beliefs that rationalize the consumption-portfolio decisions of households
in the SCF. The estimation finds that an important feature of beliefs is higher uncertainty about
future house prices which increases the option value of default and thereby leverage during the
housing boom.




                                               79
References
Adam, Klaus, Pei Kuang & Albert Marcet, 2012. “House Price Booms and the Current
   Account.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, University of Chicago Press, vol. 26(1), pages
   77 - 122.

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar and Felipe Severino 2015. “Loan Originations and De-
    faults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class.” NBER Working Paper No.
    20848.

Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, and David Laibson, 2013. “Optimal Mortgage Refinancing: A
    Closed Form Solution.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 45, pp. 591-622.

Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong 2013. “Complex Mort-
   gages". Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.

Anderson, Steﬀen, John Y. Campbell, Kasper Meisner Nielsen and Tarun Ramadorai 2015.
   “Inattention and Inertia in Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Mar-
   ket.” Working Paper, Harvard.

Andrews, Dan, Aida Caldera Sánchez and Åsa Johansson 2011. “Housing Markets and Struc-
   tural Policies in OECD Countries.” OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No.
   836.

Aoki, Kosuke, James Proudman, and Gertjan Vlieghe 2004. House prices, consumption, and
    monetary policy: a financial accelerator approach.” Journal of Financial Intermediation
    13, pp. 414-435.

Artle, R. and P. Varaiya. 1978. "Life cycle consumption and homeownership." Journal of
    Economic Theory 18, pp. 38-58.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Laura Blow, Robert Hamilton and Andrew Leicester 2009. “Booms and
    Busts: Consumption, House Prices and Expectations.” Economica 76, pp. 20-50.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Renata Bottazzi, Hamish W. Low, Lars Nesheim and Matthew Wake-
    field 2012. “Modelling the demand for housing over the life cycle.” Review of Economic
    Dynamics 15, pp. 1-18.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Andrew Leicester and Matthew Wakefield 2011. “Do House Prices Drive
    Consumption Growth? The Coincident Cycles of House Prices and Consumption in the
    U.K.” Journal of the European Economic Association 9(3), pp. 399-435.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Gugliemo Weber 1994. “The UK Consumption Boom of the Late
    1980s: Aggregate Implications of Microeconomic Evidence.” Economic Journal 104(427)
    pp. 1269-1302.

Bachmann, Ruediger and Daniel Cooper 2014. “The Ins and Outs in the U.S. Housing Mar-
    ket.” Working Paper, Notre Dame.


                                           80
Badarinza, Cristian, John Y. Campbell and Tarun Ramadorai 2016. “International Compar-
   ative Household Finance.” Forthcoming Annual Review of Economics.

Barlevy, Gadi and Jonas D.M. Fisher 2011. “Mortgage Choices and Housing Speculation.”
    Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson and Randy Wright 1991. “Homework in macroeconomics:
    household production and aggregate fluctuations.” Journal of Political Economy 99, 1166—
    1187.

Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni and Joseph Vavra 2015. “House Prices
    and Consumer Spending.” NBER Working Paper 21667.
Berkovec, James and Don Fullerton 1992. “A General Equilibrium Model of Housing, Taxes,
    and Portfolio Choice.” Journal of Political Economy 100(2), pp. 390-429.
Braid, Ralph 1981. “The short-run comparative statics of a rental housing market.” Journal
    of Urban Economics 10, pp. 280-310.
Braid, Ralph 1984. “The eﬀects of government housing policies in a vintage filtering model.”
    Journal of Urban Economics 16, pp. 272-296.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo 2011. “Understanding Booms and
    Busts in Housing Markets.” Forthcoming Journal of Political Economy.
Calza, Alessandro, Tommaso Monacelli and Livio Stracca 2013. “Housing Finance and Mon-
    etary Policy.” Journal of the European Economic Association 11(1), pp. 101-122.

Campbell, Jeﬀrey R. and Zvi Hercowitz 2005. “The Role of Collateralized Household Debt in
   Macroeconomic Stabilization.” NBER Working Paper No. 11330.

Campbell John and João F. Cocco 2003. “Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage
   Choice.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), pp. 1449-1494.

Campbell John and João F. Cocco 2007. “How Do House Prices Aﬀect Consumption? Evi-
   dence from Micro Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(3):591—621.
Campbell, John and João F. Cocco, 2003. "Household Risk Management and Optimal Port-
   folio Choice." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), pp. 1449-1494.

Campbell, Sean, Morris Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert F. Martin 2009. “What Moves
   Housing Markets: A Variance Decomposition of the Rent-Price Ratio." Journal of Urban
   Economics 2009, vol. 66 (2), p. 90-102.
Caplin, Andrew and John V. Leahy 2014. “A Graph Theoretic Approach to Markets for
    Indivisible Goods.” Journal of Mathematical Economics 52, pp. 112-122

Cardarelli, Roberto, Deniz Igan and Alessandro Rebucci 2008. “The Changing Housing Cycle
    and Its Implications For Monetary Policy.” World Economic Outlook, April 2008, Chapter
    3.

                                            81
Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. “Buﬀer-Stock Saving and the Life-Cycle/Permanet Income
    Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1-55.

Carroll, Christopher D., Misuzu Otsuka, and Jiri Slacalek 2011. “How Large Are Housing
    and Financial Wealth Eﬀects? A New Approach,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking
    1(43), pp. 55-79.
Case, Karl E., John Quigley & Robert Shiller, 2005. “Comparing Wealth Eﬀects: The Stock
    Market versus the Housing Market.” Advances in Macroeconomics, Berkeley Electronic
    Press, vol. 5(1), pages 1235-1235.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller 1989. “The Eﬃciency of the Market for Single-Family
    Homes.” American Economic Review 79(1), pp. 125-137.
Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller 1990. “Forecasting Prices and Exess Returns in the
    Housing Market.” Real Estate Economics 18(3), pp. 253-273.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller 2003. “Is there a bubble in the housing market?" Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 2, 299-362.

Chambers, Matthew S., Carlos Garriga and Don E. Schlagenhauf 2009a. “The loan structure
   and housing tenure decisions in an equilibrium model of mortgage choice.” Review of
   Economic Dynamics 12, pp. 444-468.
Chambers, Matthew S., Carlos Garriga and Don E. Schlagenhauf 2009b. “Accounting for
   Changes in the Homeownership Rate.” International Economic Review 50(3), pp. 677-
   726.

Chang, Yongsung 2000. “Comovement, excess volatility and home production” Journal of
   Monetary Economics 46, pp. 385-396.
Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux and Nicolai Roussanov 2013. “Houses as ATMs? Mortgage
    refinancing and macroeconomic uncertainty.” NBER Working Paper 19421.
Chien, YiLi and Hanno Lustig 2009. The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth
    Distribution. Review of Financial Studies 23(4), pp. 1596-1650.
Chu, Yongqiang 2014. “Credit constraints, inelastic supply, and the housing boom.” Review
    of Economic Dynamics 17, pp. 52-69.

Cocco, João F. 2005. “Portfolio choice in the presence of housing.” Review of Financial Studies
    18, 535—567.
Cocco, João F. 2013. “Evidence on the Benefits of Alternative Mortgage Products.” Journal
    of Finance 68(4), pp. 1663-1690.

Cocco, João F., Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout 2005. “Consumption and Port-
    folio Choice over the Life Cycle.” Review of Financial Studies 18(2), pp. 491-533.
Cochrane, John H. 2011. “Discount rates.” Journal of Finance, 66(4), pp. 1047-1108.

                                             82
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers 1991. “Speculative Dynam-
    ics.;; Review of Economic Studies 58, pp. 529-546.

Davidoﬀ, Thomas 2006. “Labor income, housing prices, and homeownership.” Journal of
    Urban Economics 59, pp. 209-235.

Davidoﬀ, Thomas 2013. “Supply Elasticity and the Housing Cycle of the 2000s." Real Estate
    Economics 41(4), pp. 793-813.

Davidoﬀ, Thomas 2016. “Supply Constraints Are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home
    Prices Because They Are Correlated With Many Demand Factors.” Forthcoming Critical
    Finance Review.

Davis, Morris A. and Jonathan Heathcote 2005. “Housing and the Business Cycle.” Interna-
    tional Economic Review 46(3), 751-784.

Davis, Morris A. and Jonathan Heathcote 2007. “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land
    in the United States.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (8), pp. 2595-2620.

Davis, Morris A. and François Ortalo-Magné 2011. “Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents.”
    Review of Economic Dynamics 2011, vol. 14 (2), 248-261.

Davis, Morris A. and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh 2015. “Housing, Finance and the Macro-
    economy.” Forthcoming Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 5 edited by Gilles
    Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson and William C. Strange, pp. 813-886

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French and John Jones 2010. “Why Do the Elderly Save? The
    Role of Medical Expenses.” Journal of Political Economy 118, pp. 39-75.

Deaton, Angus 1992. Understanding Consumption. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Detemple, Jérôme and Angel Serrat 2003. “ Dynamic Equilibrium with Liquidity Constraints.”
    Review of Financial Studies 16 (2), pp. 597-629.

Díaz, Antonia and María José Luengo-Prado 2008. “On the User Cost and Homeownership.”
    Review of Economic Dynamics 11(3), pp. 584—613.

Dorofeenko, Victor, Gabriel S. Lee and Kevin D. Salyer 2014. “Risk Shocks and Housing
    Supply: A Quantitative Analysis.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 45, pp.
    194-219.

Englund, Peter and Yannis M. Ioannides 1997. “House Price Dynamics: An International
    Empirical Perspective.” Journal of Housing Economics 6, pp. 119-136.

Epple, Dennis, Luis Quintero and Holger Sieg 2015. “A New Appproach to Estimating Hedonic
    Equilibrium for Metropolitan Housing Markets.” Working Paper, University of Pennsyl-
    vania.




                                           83
Epstein, Larry G. and Stan E. Zin 1989. "Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
    Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Thoeretical Framework.” Econometrica
    57(4), pp. 937-969.

Evans, George W. and Seppo Honkapohja 2009. “Learning and Macroeconomics.” Annual
    Review of Economics 1, pp. 421-449.

Favilukis, Jack, Syndey C. Ludvigson and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh 2016. “The Macroeco-
     nomic Eﬀects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance and Limited Risk Sharing in General
     Equilibrium.” Forthcoming Journal of Political Economy.

Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus and Dirk Krueger 2007. “Consumption over the Life Cycle: Facts
    from Consumer Expenditure Survey Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(3),
    pp. 552-565.

Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus and Dirk Krueger 2010. “Consumption and Saving over the Life
    Cycle: How Important are Consumer Durables?” Macroeconomic Dynamics 15, pp. 725-
    770.

Fisher, Jonas D. 2007. “Why Does Household Investment Lead Business Investment over the
    Business Cycle?” Journal of Political Economy 115(1), 141-168.

Flavin, Marjorie and Shinobu Nakagawa 2008. “A Model of Housing in the Presence of
    Adjustment Costs: A Structural Interpretation of Habit Persistence.” American Economic
    Review 98(1), pp. 474-495.

Flavin, Marjorie and Takashi Yamashita 2002. “Owner-Occupied Housing and the Composi-
    tion of the Household Portfolio.” American Economic Review 92(1), 345-362

Flemming, J.S. 1969. “The Utility of Wealth and the Utility of Windfalls.” Review of Economic
    Studies 36, pp.55-66.

Fraumeni, Barbara M. 1997. “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income
    and Product Accounts.” Survey of Current Business July 1997, pp. 7-23.

Fudenberg, Drew and David Levine 1998. “Learning in Games”. M.I.T. Press.

Garriga, Carlos, Finn E. Kydland and Roman Šustek 2013. “Mortgages and Monetary Policy.”
    NBER Working Paper 19744.

Garriga, Carlos, Rodolfo Manuelli and Adrian Peralta-Alva 2012. “A Model of Price Swings
    in the Housing Market.” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2012-022A.

Geanakoplos, John 2011. “What’s Missing from Macroeconomics: Endogenous Leverage and
   Default.” in Marek Jarocinski, Frank Smets, and Christian Thimann (eds.), Approaches
   to Monetary Policy Revisited — Lesson from the Crisis, Sixth ECB Central Banking Con-
   ference 18-19 November 2010, European Central Bank, 2011, pp. 220-238



                                            84
Gerali, Andrea, Stefano Neri, Luca Sessa and Federico M. Signoretti 2010. “Credit and Bank-
    ing in a DSGE Model of the Euro Area.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42(6),
    pp. 107-141,

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori and Johannes Stroebel 2016. “No-Bubble Condition: Model-
     Free Tests in Housing Markets.” Econometrica 84(3), pp. 1047-1091.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, Joseph Gyourko 2013. “Can Cheap Credit Explain
    the Housing Boom?” in Housing and the Financial Crisis, ed. Glaeser and Sinai.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles G. Nathanson 2014.
    “Housing Dynamics: An Urban Approach.” Journal of Urban Economics 81, pp. 45-56.

Gomme, Paul, Finn E. Kyland and Peter Rupert 2001. “Home Production Meets Time to
   Build.” Journal of Political Economy 109(5), pp. 1115-1131.

Gorea, Denis and Virgiliu Midrigan 2015. “Liquidity Constraints in the U.S, Housing Market.”
    Working Paper, NYU.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker 2002. “Consumption Over the Life Cycle.”
   Econometrica 70, pp. 47-91.

Grandmont, Jean-Michel 1977. “Temporary General Equilibrium.” Econometrica 45, pp. 535-
    572.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Zvi Hercowitz 1991. “The Allocation of Capital and Time over the
    Business Cycle.” Journal of Political Economy 99(6), pp. 1188-1214.

Greenwood, J., Rogerson, R., Wright, R., 1995. Household production in real business cycle
    theory. In: Cooley, T.F. (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton Univer-
    sity Press, Princeton.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Guy Laroque. 1990. “Asset pricing and optimal portfolio choice
    in the presence of illiquid durable consumption goods.” Econometrica 58, pp. 22—51.

Guerrieri, Luca and Matteo Iacoviello 2015. “OccBin: A toolkit for solving dynamic models
    with occasionally binding constraints easily.” Journal of Monetary Economics 70(C), pp.
    22-38.

Guerrieri, Veronica, Hartley, Dan, and Erik Hurst 2013. “Endogenous Gentrification and
    Housing Price Dynamics.” Journal of Public Economics 103(5), pp. 1664-96.

Gyourko, Joseph and Peter Linneman 1997. “The Changing Influences of Education, Income,
   Family Structure, and Race on Homeownership by Age over Time.” Journal of Housing
   Research 8(1), pp. 1-25.

Gyourko, Joseph, Albert Saiz and Anita A. Summers 2008. “A New Measure of the Local
   Regulatory Environment for Housing Markets.” Urban Studies 45(3), pp. 693-729.



                                            85
Han, Lu 2008. “Hedging House Price Risk in the Presence of Lumpy Transaction Costs.”
    Journal of Urban Economics 64(2), 270-287.

Han, Lu and Will Strange 2015. “The microstructure of housing markets: search, bargaining,
    and brokerage,” Forthcoming Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 5 edited by
    Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson and William C. Strange, pp. 813-886

Henderson, J. Vernon and Yannis M. Ioannides 1983. “A Model of Housing Tenure Choice.”
   American Economic Review 73(1), pp. 98-113.

Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai 2005. “Assessing High House Prices:
   Bubbles, Fundamentals and Misperceptions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 67-92

Hornstein, Andreas and Jack Praschnik 1997. “Intermediate inputs and sectoral comovements
    in the business cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, pp. 573-595.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes 1995. “Precautionary Savings
   and Social Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy 103, pp. 360-399.

Hurst, Erik and Frank Staﬀord 2004. “Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing
    and Household Consumption.” Journal of Money Credit and Banking 36(6), pp.985-1014.

Iacoviello, Matteo 2005. “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
    Business Cycle.” American Economic Review 95(3), pp. 739—64.

Iacoviello, Matteo and Stefano Neri 2010. “Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an
    Estimated DSGE Model.” American Economic Review 2, pp. 125-164.

Iacoviello, Matteo and Marina Pavan 2013. “Housing and Debt over the Life Cycle and over
    the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 60(2), pp. 221-238.

Jaccard, Ivan 2011. “Asset Pricing and Housing Supply in a Production Economy.” B.E.
    Journal of Macroeconomics, Vol. 11(1), Article 33.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor, 2016a. “The great mortgaging: housing
    finance, crises and business cycles.” Economic Policy, 31(85), pp 107-152.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor, 2016b. “Leveraged Bubbles.” Forthcom-
    ing Journal of Monetary Economics.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti 2015a. “Credit Supply
     and the Housing Boom.” Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti 2015b. “A Simple Model
     fo Subrprime Borrowers and Credit Growth.” Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Kaneko, Mamoru 1982. “The Central Assignment Game and the Assignment of Markets”.
   Journal of Mathematical Economics 10, 205-232.



                                           86
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Gianluca Violante 2016. “Non-durable Consumption and
    Housing Net Worth in the Great Recession: Evidence from Easily Accessible Data.” Work-
    ing Paper, NYU.

Kaplan, Greg and Gianluca Violante 2014. “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
    Stimulus.” Econometrica 82(4), 1199-1239.

Kathari, Siddarth, Itay Saporta-Eksten and Edison Yu 2013. “The (un)importance of geo-
    graphical mobility in the Great Recession.” Review of Economic Dynamics 16, pp. 553-
    563.

Kermani, Amir 2012. “Cheap Credit, Collateral, and the Boom-Bust Cycle.” Working Paper,
   Berkeley.

Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig 2010. “Did Securitization
    Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    125(1), pp. 307-362.

King, Mervyn 1990. “Discussion.” Economic Policy 11, pp. 383-387.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, Alexander Michaelides, and Kalin Nikolov 2011. “Winners and Losers in
    Housing Markets.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43(2-3), pp. 255-296.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore 1997. "Credit Cycles." Journal of Political Economy
    105(2), pp. 211-248.

Knoll, Katharina, Moritz Schularick and Thomas Steger 2014. “No Price Like Home: Global
    House Prices, 1870-2012.” CEPR Working Paper 10166.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Otto Hemert, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh 2009. “Mortgage timing.”
    Journal of Financial Economics 93(2), pp. 292-324.

Krusell, Per and Tony Smith 1998. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy.”
    Journal of Political Economy 106(5), pp. 867-896.

Kuminoﬀ, Nicolai V. and Jaren C. Pope 2013. “The Value of Residential Land and Structures
   during the Great Housing Boom and Bust.” Land Economics 89 (1), pp. 1-29.

Kydland, Finn E., Peter Rupert and Roman Sustek, 2012. “Housing Dynamics over the
    Business Cycle.” NBER Working Paper 18432.

Landvoigt, Tim 2015. “Financial Intermediation, Credit Risk, and Credit Supply during the
    Housing Boom.” Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.

Landvoigt, Tim 2016. “Housing Demand During the Boom: The Role of Expectations and
    Credit Constraints." Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi and Martin Schneider 2015. “The Housing Market(s) of San
    Diego.” American Economic Review 105(4), 1371-1407.


                                           87
Li, Wenli and Rui Yao 2007. “The Life-Cycle Eﬀects of House Price Changes.” Journal of
    Money, Credit and Banking 39(6), pp. 1375-1409.

Liu, Zheng, Pengfei Wang and Tao Zha 2013. “Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic
     Fluctuations.” Econometrica 81(3), pp. 1167-1184.

Lustig, Hanno and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh 2005. “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insur-
    ance and Risk Premia: an Empirical Perspective.” Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1167-1219.

Lustig, Hanno and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh 2010. “How much does household collateral con-
    strain regional risk sharing?” Review of Economic Dynamics 13(2), pp. 265—294.

Mayerhauser, Nicole and Marshall Reinsdorf 2007. “Housing Services in the National Eco-
   nomic Accounts.” Working Paper, Bureau of Economic Analysis

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
    from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1449-
    1496.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
    Household Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review 101(5), 2132—2156.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
    and the Economic Slump.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (4), pp. 1687-1726.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi 2015. “Fraudulent income overstatement on mortgage applications
    during the credit expansion of 2002 to 2005” NBER Working Paper No. 20947.

Monacelli, Tommaso 2009. “New Keynesian Models, Durable Goods, and Collateral Con-
   straints.” Journal of Monetary Economics 56(2), pp. 242-254.

Muellbauer, John and Anthony Murphy 1990. “Is the UK Balance of Payments Sustainable?”
   Economic Policy 5(11), pp. 347-395.

Munnell, Alicia H., Geoﬀrey M. B. Tootell, Lynn E. Browne, and James McEneaney 1996.
   “Mortgage Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data.” American Economic Review
   86(1), pp. 25-53.
Nathanson, Charles G. and Eric Zwick 2015. “Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence
    of Supply-Side Speculation in the Housing Market.” Working Paper, Booth and Kellogg.

Olson, Edward and Jeﬀrey Zabel 2015. “United States housing policies.” Forthcoming Hand-
    book of Regional and Urban Economics 5 edited by Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson
    and William C. Strange.

Ortalo-Magné, François and Sven Rady 1999. “Boom in, bust out: Young households and the
    housing price cycle.” European Economic Review 43, pp. 755-766.

Ortalo-Magné, François and Sven Rady 2006. “Housing Market Dynamics: On the Contribu-
    tion of Income Shocks and Credit Constraints.” Review of Economic Studies 73, 459-485.

                                           88
Pagano, Marco 1990. “Discussion.” Economic Policy 11, pp. 387-390.

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider 2008. “Inflation Illusion, Credit, and Asset Pricing.”
    in Campbell, John (ed.) Asset Pricing and Monetary Policy. Chicago, IL: Chicago
    University Press, 2008.

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider 2009a. “Inflation and the Price of Real Assets.” Federal
    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staﬀ Report 423

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider 2009b. “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market:
    Survey Evidence and a Search Model.” American Economic Review 99(2), 406-411.

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider and Selale Tuzel 2007. “Housing, Consumption and Asset
    Pricing.” Journal of Financial Economics 83, 531-569.

Piskorski, Tomasz and Alexei Tchistyi 2010. Optimal mortgage design. Review of Financial
    Studies 23, 3098—3140.

Poterba, James M. 1984. “Tax Subsidies to Owner-occupied Housing: An Asset-Market Ap-
    proach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, pp. 729-52.

Poterba, James M. 1991. “House Price Dynamics: The Role of Tax Policy and Demography.”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 143-203.

Ríos-Rull, José-Víctor and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos 2010. “An Aggregate Economy with
    Diﬀerent Size Houses.” Journal of the European Economic Association 6(2/3), pp. 705-
    714.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Diﬀerentiation in Pure
    Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 82(1), pp. 34-55.

Rubio, Margarita 2011. “Fixed- and Variable-Rate Mortgages, Business Cycles, and Monetary
    Policy.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43(4), pp. 657—688.

Saiz, Albert 2010. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 125(3), pp. 1253-1296.

Sargent, Thomas J. 1999. “The Conquest of American Inflation”. Princeton University Press

Schwartz, Eduardo S. and Walter N. Torous 1989. “Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-
    Backed Securities.” Journal of Finance 44(2), pp. 375-392.

Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny 1992. "Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
     Equilibrium Approach." Journal of Finance 47(4), pp. 1343-66.

Silos, Pedro 2007. “Housing, Portfolio Choice and the Macroeconomy.” Journal of Economic
     Dynamics and Control 31, pp. 2774-2801.

Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles 2005. “Owner-occupied Housing As A Hedge Against Rent
    Risk.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(2), pp. 763-789.

                                             89
Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles 2013. “Can Owning a Home Hedge the Risk of Moving?”
    American Economic Journal-Economic Policy 5(2), pp. 282-312.

Slemrod, Joel, 1982. "Down-Payment Constraints: Tax Policy Eﬀects in a Growing Economy
    with Rental and Owner-Occupied Housing." Public Finance Quarterly 10(2), pp. 193-217.

Sommer, Kamila, Paul Sullivan and Randal Verbrugge 2013. “The equilibrium eﬀect of fun-
   damentals on house prices and rents.” Journal of Monetary Economics 60, pp. 854-870.

Stanton, Richard 1995. “Rational Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securi-
    ties.” Review of Financial Studies 8(3) pp. 677-708.

Stein, Jeremy 1995. “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with
     DownPayment Eﬀects.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(2), 379-406.

Stokey, Nancy 2009. “Moving costs, nondurable consumption and portfolio choice.” Journal
    of Economic Theory 144(6), pp. 2419-2439.

Stroebel, Johannes and Joseph Vavra 2015. “House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices.”
    Working Paper, NYU.

Tsatsaronis, Kostas and Haibin Zhu 2014. “What drives house price dynamics: cross-country
    evidence.” BIS Quarterly Review March, pp. 65-78.

Turner, Tracy M. and Marc T. Smith 2009. “Exits from Homeownership: The Eﬀects of Race,
    Ethnicity, and Income.” Journal of Regional Science 49(1), pp.1-32.

Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2010): “Why Has House Price Dispersion
    Gone Up?” Review of Economic Studies, 77(4), 1567—1606.

Wong, Arlene 2016. “Population Aging and the Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy.”
   Working Paper, Northwestern.

Woodward, Susan E. and Robert E. Hall 2012. “Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub-
   Optimal Shopping Eﬀort: Theory and Mortgage-Market Evidence.” American Economic
   Review 102(7), pp. 3249-3276.

Yao, Rui and Harold H. Zhang 2005. “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Choices with Risky
    Housing and Borrowing Constraints.” Review of Financial Studies 18(1), pp. 197-239.

Yang, Fang 2009. “Consumption over the life cycle: How diﬀerent is housing?” Review of
    Economic Dynamics 12, pp. 423-443.




                                           90
