NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW INNOVATIONS IN PAYMENTS
Marc Rysman
Scott Schuh
Working Paper 22358
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22358

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We thank Shane Greenstein, Josh Lerner, Yasin Ozcan and Scott Stern for encouragement and
valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marc Rysman and Scott Schuh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

New Innovations in Payments
Marc Rysman and Scott Schuh
NBER Working Paper No. 22358
June 2016
JEL No. L1
ABSTRACT
We discuss prospects for innovation in consumer payment instruments. We discuss recent
research into consumer payments and what can be learned about consumer behavior towards new
payment options. We consider three new innovations in payments: mobile payments, faster
payments and digital currencies. For each, we describe prospects and impediments to adoption.

Marc Rysman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
mrysman@bu.edu
Scott Schuh
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue, T-9
Boston, MA 02210
scott.schuh@bos.frb.org

New Innovations in Payments
By Marc Rysman, Boston University
and Scott Schuh, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Abstract: We discuss prospects for innovation in consumer payment instruments. We discuss
recent research into consumer payments and what can be learned about consumer behavior
towards new payment options. We consider three new innovations in payments: mobile
payments, faster payments and digital currencies. For each, we describe prospects and
impediments to adoption.

1. Introduction
Money and payments have been central to the efficient functioning of markets throughout
history, and have been subject to government policy for just as long. Payment may be an
afterthought in many transactions, but it is critical nonetheless. Payment instruments, which
are methods for transferring money, have also been among the earliest industries to
experience digitization, with profound impacts for the payments market and for markets more
generally. 1 The process is ongoing, with numerous new innovations in payments appearing in
the near horizon.
This paper briefly discusses this history of digitization in payments, and then turns to evaluate
prospects and barriers for several new technological innovations in payments. We focus on
retail payments (payments among consumers or payments between consumers and retailers)
as opposed to wholesale payments (payments between financial institutions, typically to settle
large debts). Understanding prospects for new innovations in payments requires an
understanding of how consumers use payments. Recent data collection has enabled new
research on consumer usage patterns, and we discuss what can be learned from recent
research about adoption prospects. 2
In particular, research sheds light on important factors for how consumers will evaluate new
payment technologies. Some observers might be skeptical that consumers will ever switch
away from their current payment options, and indeed, there is no doubt that the current
payment system in the United States is fast and efficient in many ways, and serves the needs of
consumers as we understand them now. However, we read the research to say that there is
1

In addition, payments innovation can have implications for monetary theory and policy. For example, Hester
(1972) discusses how the digitization of payments affects the velocity of money. Townsend (2010) analyzes mobile
payments in Kenya and the implications for monetary theory.
2
Another recent paper that studies innovations in payments is Chakrovorti (2016).

1

scope for new technologies to make inroads into consumer payment habits, and we believe
that small inroads in the near term can lead to transformation in the long term. 3
We then focus on three important innovations in the payments system that have the potential
for widespread adoption, and are the subject of current policy debate. All three make intense
use of the Internet and computing power, all three raise important security issues, and all three
threaten the traditional business model of banks. The first is mobile payments, the ability to
use a mobile telephone to make retail payments. This technology has already achieved
popularity in a number of countries, such as Japan, Korea and even Kenya. However, the
technology is more recent and less widespread in the United States. Recent new offerings, such
as ApplePay, suggest that the market may still move forward. We discuss barriers to innovation
in this market, similar to the discussion in Crowe, Rysman and Stavins (2010), and we update
that discussion based on recent developments.
The second technology we discuss is the prospects for a real-time payment system in the
United States. Even with modern digital payment systems such as the credit card network, the
debit card network and the Automatic Clearing House (ACH, used for, among many other
things, the direct deposit of paychecks), payments are not settled between banks for at least a
day, and often longer, and this has important implications for the use of payments in many
contexts. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve has issued an initiative for a faster
payments system, and various industry respondents, such as the ACH system and The
Clearinghouse, are responding. We discuss what the benefits might be of a faster payments
system, and the current prospects. Much of our discussion is based on Greene, Rysman, Schuh
& Shy (2014).
The third technology we discuss is digital currencies, such as Bitcoin. Digital currencies are the
subject of a great deal of popular coverage, and we focus on what we can add to the discussion.
We briefly describe how this type of technology works from the perspective of how it functions
for a consumer. We discuss recent trends in the adoption of digital currencies based on data
collected by the Consumer Payments Research Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Our presentation of consumer trends is a summary of Schuh & Shy (2016). Another important
paper that studies merchant trends in payments is Polasik et al. (2015). 4
Two broad themes emerge in our paper. First is a tension between the benefits of balkanized
proprietary systems and the benefits of market-wide compatibility and standardization.
Payments are a network good, and payment systems generally grow more valuable with
ubiquitous acceptance and widespread usage. However, the incentive to differentiate is a
powerful driver for firms to invest in new products and promote their usage. Can rivalry
3

Several papers we discuss are Koulayev, Rysman, Schuh & Stavins (2016), Cohen & Rysman (2013) and Yang &
Ching (2014).
4
There are certainly more innovations that we could discuss, such as the rise of pre-paid cards, and the spread of
on-line banking.

2

between proprietary systems, such as between Apple and Google in mobile payments (which
still rely on the same technology for merchant acceptance), generate a successful market?
Second, new technologies threaten the traditional role of banks in the payments process.
Traditional payments, such as credit and debit cards, have been a source of revenue for many
banks. These revenue sources appear threatened by the innovations we discuss here. The
ability of banks to price or monetize these technologies is unclear, and the innovations are
often led by non-bank companies. These developments have implications for bank revenues,
prices and also for bank regulation.
2. The Digitization of Payments
For most of the twentieth century, payments meant exchanging paper money or checks, which
were a paper confirmation of transfers. Even credit card transactions required paper receipts
to be shipped among banks. However, digitization came to payments as early as any industry,
and indeed, it is difficult to imagine digitization of other industries without prior digitization of
the payments industry. We briefly discuss a few important moments in this history.
Credit cards and charge cards originated in the 1950’s. However, at that time, using a credit
card required a lengthy phone authorization (about four minutes), and then an exchange of
paper confirmation among banks. A series of investments brought a fully electronic system to
Visa in 1974, which reduced authorization time to 40 seconds and eliminated the exchange of
paper entirely. Mastercard made a similar investment shortly after. 5
At the same time, there was a recognition that the system for personal and business checks,
which required the presentation of signed paper checks, was inefficient and difficult to scale up
indefinitely. This led to the development of regional Automated Clearing Houses throughout
the United States in the early 1970s. ACH systems allowed banks to process payments by
exchanging payments in digital form. Today, the ACH system processes common repeated
payments such as direct deposit of paychecks and mortgage payments. 6
Regional ACH systems merged into a national system, coordinated by NACHA, in 1974. The
legislative foundation for NACHA’s work towards the digitization of payments came in the
Electronic Funds Transfer Act of 1978. Even so, for decades, the ACH system still relied on the
exchange of physical digital media, such as diskettes and magnetic tape. It was not until 1994
that the Federal Reserve mandated that all participating banks were required to have an
electronic link to the ACH system and that payment files would be exchanged electronically.
Although the ACH system could replace checks for many purposes, the checking system still
relied on extensive exchange of paper. The next major milestone for checks was the Check 21
Act of 2003, which was meant to move the checking system into the 21st century. The law
relaxed the requirement for the presentation of paper checks, and allowed banks to use digital
5
6

See Evans & Schmalensee (2005) for a history of payment cards. This discussion draws from page 74.
For a more detailed history, see https://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/fedpoint/fed31.html.

3

“substitute checks.” This meant that the checking system could be almost entirely digitized.
This change is what has enabled modern innovations such as depositing checks through the
camera on mobile phone.
We view these developments as the most important ones for modern retail payments, but
there are numerous developments that we could discuss, such as the rise of debit cards and the
development of entirely electronic exchange systems, such as Paypal.
3. Academic Research on Consumer Payments
We begin with a discussion of the academic study of existing payment mechanisms, to see what
can be gleaned for new innovations in payments. Fortunately, recent data collection and new
academic interest in payments has led to a deeper understanding of how consumers approach
payments decisions. This section covers a few recent papers, and discusses their implication for
the adoption of new technology. We focus on studies of consumer usage behavior, rather than
more general diffusion studies. Research sheds light on two important questions. First, are
consumers willing to adopt new technologies? And second, what factors cause consumers to
do so? We emphasize two sets of results. The first is that consumers switch among payment
types from transaction to transaction, perhaps more than is commonly acknowledged. The
second is that consumers use different payment instruments in different contexts, for instance,
paying bills with one instrument and paying for retail purchases with another. These results
suggest that consumers are willing to adopt new payment innovations even if they are useful in
only a limited set of circumstances, but naturally the innovation must provide some use value.
First, are consumers willing to adopt new technologies? Some hold the belief that consumers
have set modes of making payments, which do not change in response to circumstance. We
argue that the truth is more complex, and there appears to be room for adoption of new
technology. Adoption may be limited in the short run, but this can lead to more widespread
adoption in the long run.
A problem for new technologies would be if consumers strongly single-home. Single-homing is
a concept from the study of platform and two-sided markets that describes when consumers
use only one platform (see Rochet & Tirole, 2006). That is, if consumers prefer to make all
payments in the same way, for instance by using a single credit card, then it is difficult for a new
technology to displace that credit card, since it must be superior as an overall payment
instrument. 7 If a consumer is willing to multi-home, the consumer might be willing to adopt a
new technology even if the consumer uses the new technology in only a few settings.
Do consumers single-home with respect to payment instruments, and in what way? Rysman
(2007) considers single-homing with the choice of credit card network. That is, do consumers
7

We can also define single-homing at the level of the type of instrument. For instance, if a consumer always uses
credit cards to make payments but holds several credit cards, that is still single-homing of a sort, and it can still
limit the ability of a new innovation to be successful.

4

tend to use only a single payment network, such as Visa, or use multiple networks such as Visa
and American Express? Rysman (2007) shows that consumers do tend to single-home. Rysman
(2007) uses the Visa Payment Panel Study, in which consumers keep a diary of their payments
for a month. For instance, three-quarters of consumers put 97% or more of their spending in a
month on a single network. Further, using data from the Survey and Diary of Consumer
Payment Choice, Shy (2013) shows how consumers tend to concentrate most of their card
payments on only one type of card (debit, credit, or prepaid) and Briglevics, Schuh, and Zhang
(2016) show that consumer homing on single payment instruments occurs when extending the
analysis to include cash, checks, and electronic payment methods.
However, the fact that consumers single-home within credit cards is perhaps less important for
evaluating new technologies, because credit cards are so similar. A more relevant question for
this discussion is whether consumers single-home within payment modes, such as credit versus
cash, and cash versus check.
This question is taken up in several papers, such as Klee (2008), Cohen & Rysman (2013), and
Wang & Wolman (2015). Instead of using diaries of payments, these papers make use of
scanner data. This is superior in that it tends to be passive on the part of the consumer, and so
is less subject to error and is more complete, although often the scope is more limited than we
would find in a consumer survey.
Klee (2008) draws data directly from the register at a retailer. She shows in a regression
framework that, on average, consumer payments switch from cash to card as transaction size
grows. A drawback of Klee’s data set is that it cannot track individuals over time. Thus, retailer
scanner data cannot reveal whether there is switching among payment types by individual
consumers based on the situations they face, or otherwise address single-homing. As a result, a
potential explanation for the pattern in her data is that households never switch between
payment instruments, but that some households both use cards and purchase bigger baskets of
goods. That would also lead to a correlation between transaction size and card usage.
The extent of within household switching is addressed in Cohen & Rysman (2013). Cohen &
Rysman draw scanner data from the Nielsen Home-Scan database in which participants scan
their grocery purchases with a UPC scanner in their home. Households also submit receipts,
which Nielsen uses to identify payment type.
Cohen & Rysman (2013) present a table showing the extent to which households use cash, card
and check. We repeat the table here. For each household, they define the favorite payment
instrument based on which instrument is used most often, and then the table shows how much
of the population devotes a given share to the favorite. For example, the first column says that
only 5% of the population puts 51% or less of their transactions on their favorite payment type.
In contrast, 75% of the population puts up to 95% of their transactions on their favorite
payment type. Thus, most households locate the great majority of their payments on their
favorite payment type. However, there is still some switching within households, as very few
5

households put literally all of their payments on a single instrument. But note that households
rarely use three payment types. Half of households do not use a third payment instrument at
all, and the next quartile of households use a third favorite payment instrument for less than
1% of transactions.
Because the data set allows us to track purchases and payment type within a household, we
can control for household heterogeneity with a fixed effects approach. A drawback is that we
see only grocery purchases, but groceries and supermarkets in particular are important venues
for determining household payment choices. Cohen & Rysman (2013) go on to analyze within
household switching using a fixed effects approach, showing the extent that households still
switch among payment instruments, and how this relates to transaction size.
It might be a nearly insurmountable barrier for a new payment innovation if it needed to be
superior to current payment mechanisms in an overall sense to be successful. However, these
papers show that households are sensitive about matching the appropriate payment type to
the situation. For instance, many households use cards infrequently, but still use cards for large
transactions. We take this to mean that if a new innovation in payments were superior for only
a niche of transactions, consumers would still be willing to carry the payment instrument and
use it for those transactions. Thus, a new innovation in payments does not need to displace
current payment methods entirely to be initially successful.
That is particularly good news, as it appears very difficult to displace a consumer’s primary
payment instrument. Long panels can be exploited to see how often consumers switch their
favorite payment instrument. That is, rather than looking from transaction to transaction to
see how often a consumer switches between payment instruments, we can determine a
consumer’s favorite payment instrument each month or quarter, and see how often the
favorite changes. In both Rysman (2007) and Cohen & Rysman (2013), this appears to be very
little, but not zero. For instance, Cohen & Rysman (2013) determine the favorite payment
instrument among cash, check, and card (at grocery stores only) and observe 12 quarters of
data. When focusing on favorite payment instruments that get well above 50% of a households
share of payments, Cohen & Rysman (2013) find that about 85% of households do not switch
their favorite, about 15% switch once, and less than 1% switch twice. An implication for
innovation is that new innovations will probably achieve relatively low usage for the near term,
but this dovetails well with our earlier point that consumers are willing to adopt new
instruments for relatively niche uses.
A second point that comes clearly from academic research is the importance of usage in
determining which payment mechanisms consumers adopt. Certainly, it is not surprising that
consumers are more likely to adopt payment mechanisms that can be used in more
environments. However, data analysis reveals the diversity of situations in which consumers
find themselves, and their need for multiple payment instruments.

6

Koulayev, Rysman, Schuh & Stavins (2016) (KRSS) analyze these issues in the context of a model
that captures both adoption and usage of payment instruments. 8 They estimate the
parameters in their model using the Survey of Consumer Payment Choice, an annual panel
study of consumer payment behavior in which consumers report their payments over the
previous month. This survey is collected by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and the RAND
Corporation, and is freely available at the Consumer Payments Research Center at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston. In the survey, consumers report the number of times they use an
instrument in a month, and the number of times in several contexts, such as brick-and-mortar
retail, on-line retail, and several bill-pay contexts.
The goal of KRSS is to evaluate substitution patterns among payment instruments, such as debit
and credit, particularly motivated by recent regulation of debit card interchange fees by the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. Conventional wisdom would suggest that if debit
cards became more expensive, most consumers would switch either to cash or credit cards, but
KRSS find surprisingly high substitution to checks. It turns out that this is driven by the high use
of debit card usage to pay bills. Indeed, the survey data shows that about 20% of debit card use
is in a bill-pay context.
Figure 1 displays an important set of results from KRSS. The figure considers an increase in the
cost of a debit card, which leads to a decrease in the use of debit. The table shows how
consumers increase their use of other payment instruments.9 The figure reports the results
separately for retail and bill pay. Summing up over both retail and bill-pay lines for each
payment instrument (that is, the solid and dashed lines) leads to 100%, and thus explains the
entire decrease in debit card usage.10 Note that these results are simulations from an
estimated model.
When looking at retail payments, the results have what is perhaps the expected sizes: cash and
then credit are the leading alternatives to debit. KRSS show that consumers who do not hold
credit cards drive the strong showing of check in retail. However, when we switch to the billpay context, check is the leading alternative to debit cards. Adding up retail and bill-pay lead to
the result that check is more popular as a substitute to debit cards than credit cards. Bill-pay
also explains the popularity of bank-account deduction as an alternative to debit card usage.
There are several implications for the adoption of new innovations in payments. First, use
matters. The paper confirms the basic intuition that a new payment innovation needs to have
clear and attractive use applications in order to gain traction. Second, consumers face a wide
variety of contexts in which they make payments, and they use quite different instruments in
these contexts, varying from on-line bill pay to cards to cash. Third, more specific to the US
8

See also Wakamori and Welte (2012) for a similar model applied to data from a consumer payment diary.
This experiment is motivated by the behavior
10
In constructing Figure 1, KRSS assume consumers do not cut back on overall payments. Also, Figure 1 reports
the 95% confidence interval for bill-pay. The confidence interval for retail is similar but has been dropped to avoid
clutter. See KRSS for more on this.
9

7

case, bill-pay matters. Paying bills is an important concern for households, and KRSS shows that
bill-pay drives the overall portfolio of payment choices in important ways. Thus, new payment
innovations with implications for bill payment may be particularly attractive. We are aware of
very few studies that focus on bill-pay, or other data sets that even allow for a detailed study of
bill-pay behavior, so this appears to be an important area for future work. Fourth, for the
banking industry, technology choice impacts banking revenues. Revenue to banks may differ
significantly for debit cards, cash and check, so an intervention that moves consumers from one
to the other has important implications for the industry, and ultimately for regulators.
Another interesting question for innovations is whether they can be attractive to older
households. There is a sense that older households are “set in their ways,” and will not switch
to new technologies. However, Yang & Ching (2014) challenge this conception. They analyze
the adoption of ATM cards using panel data from Italy. Indeed, older households are less likely
to use ATM cards. However, they argue that this is explained not by high switching costs for
older consumers, but by lower expected benefits to be collected over a shorter lifespan. Yang
& Ching use an explicit structural model of dynamic adoption behavior and show that the
shorter lifespan over which to realize the benefits of ATM cards explains much of the difference
in adoption patterns, leaving relatively little room for higher switching costs as an explanation
for the low adoption by holder households. This result changes our view of the barriers to
adoption of new technology by older households, and implies that if a new innovation offers
large benefits, older households will adopt along with younger ones.
4. Mobile Payments
An important and already visible innovation in the payment space is mobile payments. We use
the term mobile payments to refer to the use of a mobile telephone as a general-purpose
payment device at a retail point-of-sale. 11 A number of national schemes have been
implemented, with varying success and many countries continue to emphasize mobile
payments as an important new innovation. In the US, most innovation in this area appears to
be led by technology companies rather than by banks, and thus provide a threat to banks both
by undercutting their business model and by controlling the customer experience.
First, what are the benefits of mobile payments? Because mobile phones are ever more
powerful, and ever more connected, integrating payments into a mobile phone has many
potential advantages. Not only could a consumer simply wave a mobile phone in front of a
reader and have his bank or payment card account debited automatically, but using the
11

Different definitions might apply. Some refer to any kind of banking via a mobile phone as a form of mobile
payment. However, most payments made on a mobile telephone rely on existing payments instruments such as a
credit card. Also, mobile telephones can be used to make person-to-person payments (or account-to-account
payments) via applications like Paypal and Venmo. In some case, mobile telephones can make payments via text
messages, with money drawn either from a bank or the consumer’s account with the mobile carrier. Also, there
are interesting mobile payment tools that are specific to a seller rather than general purpose. For instance, mobile
phones enable payments to Uber from a bank account.

8

computing and communication power of a mobile phone, the customer could also perform
many other activities at the same time. For instance, a consumer could compare prices with
prices offered by other local merchants, store the payment record with financial management
software, download a warranty or instructional video on how to use a product, and more.
Merchants could benefit by having the phones interact with reward or other promotional
programs. In addition, this technology could greatly increase the efficiency of the US payment
system by offering a payment method that would encourage the transition to electronic
payments even for small dollar purchases. Mobile payments are an important step in
establishing a digital wallet on a telephone, which contributes to further innovation, such as
mobile electronic medical records, which may have further benefits.
Crowe, Rysman & Stavins (2010) (CRS) evaluate barriers to mobile payments in the US market.
Why might mobile payments be slower to take off in the US than Japan? In order to research
this topic, CRS conducted interviews with industry participants including executives and trade
association representatives from banks and mobile carriers.
CRS finds that standard concerns such as the cost of adoption and network effects play a role.
In one popular technological solution, accepting mobile payments requires the merchant to
install a reader that can read an NFC (near-field communication) chip on a telephone.
Merchants are hesitant to make such an investment without being sure that consumers will
actually adopt this product, and naturally consumers do not adopt a product for which there is
little use. The cost of installing an NFC chip in a mobile phone is also problematic, although
probably now, most current mobile phones come with NFC chips installed.
Implementing a single national mobile payments mechanism most likely will require agreement
between mobile carriers and banks that issue cards to consumers. Thus, another important
impediment is the unconcentrated nature of the US banking and telecom industries. In Japan,
the entire process was driven by NTT, the largest mobile carrier in Japan. In terms of market
share, there is no equivalent to NTT in the US. In addition, the US banking industry is drastically
less concentrated than in Japan. With so many participants, it is difficult to develop a
nationwide open standard.
An alternative would be to implement a proprietary solution, which is how the Japanese market
evolved under NTT. However, even if the market were to tend to a proprietary solution (such
as Apple Pay) rather than an industry wide agreement, it is difficult to develop valuable
partnerships in unconcentrated industries. For instance, suppose that Verizon chooses to work
with Bank of America, two of the largest firms in their respective markets. Even so, the
combined efforts of these firms could sell only to consumers who hold both products, which
might not be large enough. It is difficult to get phone manufacturers to produce telephones for
very restricted markets.
Interestingly, there is a standard-setting group working on an open standard for how to
implement mobile payments. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has played a role in moving
9

these discussions forward. 12 However, CRS finds little general awareness, or even an
acknowledgement that an open standard is important for success. Indeed, Japan utilizes a
proprietary standard, associated with Sony and NTT.
The explanation that most often came to people’s minds in the CRS interviews was the lack of a
business plan that determined how banks and carriers would benefit from this technology.
Debit and credit cards are a significant source of revenue for a number of banks, and so it was
difficult to foresee a plan that was attractive to banks in which that revenue was shared with
carriers such as Verizon or producers such as Apple. How such negotiation would play out was
a major concern.
However, the CRS interview process led them to conclude that the lack of a business model and
the failure of market participants to coordinate is not the source of the problem, but rather the
symptom of deeper problems. Ultimately, CRS focus on the widespread use of debit and credit
card use in the US, relative to cash-oriented Japan. Mobile payments in Japan largely compete
against cash, a much less attractive option than the card systems in place in the US. Thus, in
the view of CRS, the widespread use of cards in the US means that US customers are already
well served by a payment system that is fast and efficient.
In this view, the lack of a business model that was attractive to various parties is a symptom of
the fact that they were bargaining over relatively small surplus that would be created by mobile
payments, especially relative to the adoption costs associated with the new technology. In
CRS’s view, the long-term surplus created by mobile payments is potentially quite large,
particularly when one considers the possibility for a fully digital wallet. However, the direction
these innovations will take is uncertain. Thus, a better statement than saying that there is little
surplus is that there is little certain surplus for the market participants that must invest now. It
is unclear whether current firms that must invest in order to make mobile payments a success
will be able to profit from the surplus they create.
In such an environment where direct revenue is unclear, one of the main attractions for a firm
to invest in mobile payments will be to differentiate its product or service from rivals. That
leaves little role for industry-wide agreements, which may not provide sufficient ability for firms
to differentiate from each other.13 Indeed, visible mobile-payments implementations such as
Apple Pay is entirely proprietary. Similar programs are Samsung Pay and Android Pay.
Merchants are developing their own program, and mobile carriers have invested in a program
called Softpay, but appear to have switched to support Android Pay now. The systems have
important differences. For instance, most work with only a subset of banks, and a subset of
phones. Samsung Pay has a technology for working with traditional magnetic swipe readers
rather than just NFC terminals.
12

For example, see http://www.bostonfed.org/bankinfo/payment-strategies/index.htm.
Augereau, Greenstein & Rysman (2006) argue that standards that allow firms some scope to differentiate from
each other are more likely to succeed.
13

10

We wonder how widespread adoption of mobile payments can be if there are many balkanized
systems for implementing mobile payments, particularly if that slows merchant adoption of
readers. Certainly, it is not impossible to imagine a world of multiple competing propriety
mobile payments systems, especially if they do not require separate merchant
implementations. But we wonder whether a balkanized system will be as effective in realizing
the wider benefits we might associate with mobile payments, such as better communication
between merchants and consumers, and the development of digital wallets.
5. Faster Payments System
Unlike a number of countries such as the UK and Mexico, the US has no real-time payment
system for retail payments, other than cash. By real-time, we mean that the payment is
completed almost immediately. That is, at the very least, consumers should be able to
authorize a payment and banks should agree that the payment will be made immediately. In
addition, the payment should be actually made (called the settlement step for the payment
between banks) quickly as well. The only US system that accomplishes this is Fedwire, which is
meant for transfers between financial institutions. While consumers perceive debit and credit
card payments as immediate, in fact that settlement step often takes several days. Payments
through the Automated Clearing House (which is how direct deposit works for salary and
mortgage payments, among others) can also take several days to complete.
The implications of this slowness are important. For parties to a one-time transaction who are
unlikely to meet again, or for merchants who cannot immediately ship goods and replacement
parts until they receive a full payment, the speed of payment may be an important determinant
of their business. Even if consumers perceive the payment as immediate, merchants
sometimes refuse to ship until banks settle the payment. Further, under a fast payments
system, workers can be paid for their most recent work hours. Even for more mundane
operations such as paying rent, being able to control the actual day of payment can be
important. Indeed, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve has pushed forward an
agenda of developing a fast payments system for the US. In a consultation paper soliciting
public comments, the Federal Reserve, Board of Governors (2013, p.2), sets forth a "vision to
improve the speed and efficiency of the U.S. payment system from end to end." 14
An important question is how to go forward with such a proposal. One option is adapting a
current system, such as adapting Fedwire to retail payments, or speeding up the ACH system.
Another option is investing in an entirely new system. Doing so would require more investment
from market participants but the benefits to both consumers and sellers could be large.
Greene, Rysman, Schuh & Shy (2014) (GRSS) study the implementation of a faster payments
system in the United Kingdom, which took place in 2008. An emphasis of GRSS is that the
benefits of building a new faster account-to-account payments system may extend well beyond
14

Similar initiatives appear in other countries, such as Australia (Reserve Bank of Australia, 2012).

11

speed itself. First, current account-to-account systems, such as Paypal and Venmo, have
relatively low take-up rates. A new system may be able to overcome the network effects of
adoption, and achieve widespread use. A new system could be designed to be more attractive
to business-to-business transactions, which appears ripe for digitization, as checks are still a
very popular method of business-to-business payments. A new system could be optimized for
mobile payments as well. A new system could be designed with modern fraud protection
techniques, and would presumably work at all times of the day and year, unlike the ACH
system. A new system could facilitate international transactions by being consistent with
international standards, such as ISO 20022, which is currently barely implemented in the US.
Naturally, an important concern with a new system is cost. However, the costs of the UK
implementation are surprisingly modest. The UK contracted with a private firm to develop the
infrastructure and manage the system for the first several years for a price of about $65 million.
In an industry in which new systems can easily be measured in billions, this struck us as quite
moderate. Additional costs are borne by banks that must connect to the new system. Some
banks used this opportunity to overhaul a large set of their accounting system practices, where
others did not, so estimating the costs directly associated with this investment is challenging.
The system has been successful in achieving a reasonable scale of growth, growing to about a
billion transactions in 2013, representing about 5% of non-cash payments. The new system has
been particularly popular for bill payment and has significantly displaced checks as a method of
payment. This point is related to our earlier points about the importance of bill payment, and
that consumers are willing to adopt payment innovations with only limited applications. As the
system develops more retail applications, such as mobile payments, perhaps it will also
threaten card-based systems, but it has not done so yet.
An important part of GRSS is devoted to understanding how these costs would translated to a
US setting, with its larger population, larger land area, and much larger number of banks. A
challenging question is how such a system should be structured. Similar to the case of mobile
payments, developing a workable business model remains an important step. Whether the
development of such a system requires government intervention, and whether the system
should be owned by banks, or by some third party, or by the government, and what sort of fees
should be charged remain important questions. In the UK, under central bank direction, banks
fund the system and receive no revenue from it for the start. However, competition concerns
recently led the UK Payment System Regulator to direct banks to divest themselves of the firm
that manages the Faster Payments System.15 The fee structure may evolve as the system
ownership changes, and as it grows in popularity.
An important issue is how a new system, whether it is brand-new or whether it is an adaption
of an old system, impacts current bank revenue. A system that provides little bank revenue but
15

https://www.psr.org.uk/psr-publications/news-announcements/banks-should-sell-stake-paymentsinfrastructure-help-increase-innovation-competition.

12

cannibalizes current revenue from cards will meet significant bank resistance. Public
statements from representative organizations underscore these points.
GRSS was written in 2014, and this issue continues to evolve. Importantly, the ACH system has
implemented plans for a “same-day ACH,” which will clear within the day. 16 While still not a
real-time payment system, same-day ACH certainly enhances the attractiveness of the ACH
system in a number of contexts.
Currently, the plan calls for a 5.3 cent interchange fee. While interchange fees are common for
debit and credit cards, there has never been an interchange fee on ACH or check transactions.
The interchange fee is a transaction or value-based fee that goes from the receiving bank to the
sending bank. Theoretically, interchange fees can enhance efficiency because they give the
payer (who usually decides which payment instrument to use) some of the payee’s benefits
from a particular choice, which allows the payer to internalize the externality they place on the
payee. In practice, interchange fees can also enhance bank revenue under some conditions. 17
Overall, this is an issue that is very much in flux. The Federal Reserve Bank appears interested
in encouraging a faster payments system for the US, and such a system exists in a number of
other countries. GRSS suggest the potential benefits can be large, and perhaps extend well
beyond speed itself. Important questions remain, such as whether to build a new system or
adapt an old system, how such a system will be managed and funded, and what fee structure
such a system may use. Another important question is how much government intervention is
necessary and desirable to move this market forward.
6. Virtual Currencies
A striking new phenomenon is what is known as virtual currencies, digital currencies, or cryptocurrencies, highlighting different features.18 National currencies have many of these features,
so it is difficult to come up with an appropriate name. Bitcoin is the most well known, but there
are many others; Schuh and Shy (2016) report about 700, and entry of new ones is not difficult.
Bitcoin can be thought of as consisting of two main innovations. The first is a method for
assigning ownership over an asset. Assets are governed by a “block chain” of information
describing the account that the asset is held by, and the history of transactions of that asset.
Only the account holder can move the asset to another account. This is done by sending a
message to servers that process Bitcoin transactions. This process is decentralized. It is
somewhat analogous to sending an e-mail. The transfer message involves intense

16

The ACH system is really two systems. The first is run by the Federal Reserve (FED ACH), and processes about
70% of the transactions. The second is the Electronic Payments Network (EPN), and it primarily serves large banks.
FED-ACH has adopted plans for a same-day ACH option, and EPN plans to take up this issue shortly.
17
See Rysman & Wright (2014) for a full discussion of the economics of two-sided markets and interchange fees in
the context of payments.
18
For reviews, see Bohme, Christin, Edelman and Moore (2015) and Halaburda & Sarvary (2015).

13

cryptography, and so requires substantial computational power to process, and thus takes nontrivial time to process. Ten minutes would not be unusual.
This approach to registering ownership could be applied to any sort of asset, such as real
estate, automobiles, art or US dollars. The second innovation is inventing a currency to be
traded under this system, such as Bitcoin. Under Bitcoin, computers that solve cryptographic
problems that transfer assets lead to the generation of new Bitcoins, which are assigned to the
owners of the computers. Thus, computer owners are paid in Bitcoins for providing processing
power. This process is referred to as mining.
Virtual currencies have attracted a great deal of attention in the press, and policy makers such
as central banks watch this closely as well (see Badev & Chen 2014). Prospects for virtual
currencies for retail payments are unclear. The transfer of Bitcoins perhaps takes too long to be
useful at the point-of-sale, and the value it offers over current card systems is unclear. Even
merchants that accept Bitcoins as payment tend to employ a payment processor that
immediately converts Bitcoins to dollars. Thus, while the consumer pays in Bitcoin, it is unclear
that the merchant can be said to accept Bitcoins. Some believe that the leading edge for virtual
currencies will be international transfers, which are priced fairly high by banks. But prices can
change in the face of competition, and it is unclear whether the system for the international
transfer of national currencies is more expensive than that of Bitcoins at a technical level.
On the other hand, virtual currencies have attracted serious investment from people who
believe that virtual currencies have an important future. Rather than go further into the
debates about the prospects for virtual currencies (and associated issues of security, crime and
monetary policy), we focus on the use of virtual currencies now. The SCPC (used by KRSS)
currently includes questions about virtual currencies, and Schuh and Shy (2015) present tables
based on these answers. Here, we briefly summarize their findings.
Schuh & Shy (2016) find that 43% of 2015 households report being aware of virtual currencies,
up from about 40% in 2014. But even among those who are aware, the vast majority report
being only “slightly familiar” or “not at all familiar” with virtual currency. Only about 1% of
consumers report owning a virtual currency, the majority of them being Bitcoin owners, and at
least 0.34% of consumers (one in three owners) discard virtual currency each year. At this time
these estimates were obtained, the value of a Bitcoin was about $300. However, estimates of
Bitcoin holdings (in coins or dollars) are not particularly reliable, perhaps because of the
unfamiliarity of consumers with virtual currencies. Table 2 shows the incidence of use, and the
context. According to the estimates, about half to three-quarters of holders of virtual currency
report having actually used a virtual currency in the previous year. Of those, about half report
having used virtual currency to pay a merchant, about half report having used virtual currency
to pay a person (not a business), and about one third do both. Obviously, it is difficult to infer
too much from the answer of half of a percent of survey respondents. But in 2014, only 46% of
virtual currency holders reported having used a virtual currency in the previous year, relative to
75% in 2015. Thus, it does appear that the use of virtual currency may be increasing over time.
14

7. Conclusion
Payments systems have undergone continuous digitization and innovation for the last 40 years.
In this paper, we discuss the prospects for several new innovations in payments. Academic
research on consumer behavior with regard to payments suggests a willingness to experiment
with new innovations, at least to a limited extent, when a clear use case is present.
We discuss three innovations: mobile payments, faster payments, and virtual currencies. Each
has the prospect for widespread adoption, and for each, the most important implications
perhaps fall outside of their direct application. For instance, paying with a mobile telephone
may have special convenience, but some of the most important implications are probably based
around increased and long-lasting buyer-seller communication, and the development of digital
wallets. A new faster payments system is likely to be not only faster, but also more convenient
for modern applications, and would be well adapted for B2B payments and international
transfers. Virtual currencies are associated with enormous speculation about how they might
transform the political landscape with respect to payments and monetary policy.
All three technologies affect banks in complex ways. Banks derive revenue from their role in
the payments process, particularly on credit and debit cards. In contrast, banks have not been
able to generate comparable revenue from new developments such as mobile and faster
payments, or digital currencies. Indeed, technology companies appear to be leading the way in
these areas. To the extent that card revenues are threatened by these developments, banks
may be put in a difficult situation.
Furthermore, bank operations as a payment provider tend to be more heavily regulated than
those of technology companies, which makes it difficult for banks to respond to innovation.
Banks do not appear able to block the development of these technologies, and indeed, there
are many instances of banks investing to be part of the development of these technologies.
Regardless of any bank investment though, the centrality of banks in the payments process may
be in question, which has implications for wider bank business strategy, as well as payments
regulation.
The current milieu for payments has many players, from both within and outside of the
traditional financial services industries, and these many players bring many potential
innovations, some that directly compete with each other. In this state of competition between
balkanized networks, it may be difficult for a new technology to emerge as dominant, even if
the technology is somehow superior. However, at the same time, it does not appear that any
firm has the ability to block a new efficient technology. In fact, we might characterize the
current setting as very creative, where a transformative technological innovation would have at
least an opportunity to succeed. However, it is unclear that competition between balkanized
systems can deliver the widespread benefits (such as the transition to a digital wallet) that we
might associate with a standardized system, or set of compatible systems.

15

The payments system is transformed from what it was 50 years ago, and it seems clear that the
transformation will continue into the future. The digitization of other parts of the economy
interacts with the digitization of payments, with each supporting innovation in the other.
“Digital convergence” of all types of media into a single digital stream of information has been
widely recognized. Perhaps we should recognize that convergence includes payments as well,
in which account holdings and transfers are another type of information to be digitized and
communicated over modern computer systems.

Table 1: Concentration of Payments on a Favorite Pay Types

Percent of Population
5 10 25 50 75 90
Percent on Favorite Pay Type
51 56 68 85 95 100
Percent on Favorite Two Pay Types 88 94 99 100 100 100

Income deduction
Bank acct deduct
Online banking
Prepaid card
Credit card
Check
Cash
0.00

0.10
Retail (66%)

0.20

0.30

Bill Pay (34%)

Figure 1: Substitution Patterns in Response to an Increase in the Cost of Debit Card Usage

16

Table 2: Incidence of use and payee for virtual currency

Incidence of use and payee for virtual currency
Percentage of adopters. SCPC Tables 19-27.
Incidence of use and payee

2014 SCPC

Used in last 12 months................................................................................................
Bitcoin......................................................................................................................
Other virtual currency*..........................................................................................
Used in last month..................................................................................................
Bitcoin................................................................................................................
Other virtual currency......................................................................................
Payee
Merchant..................................................................................................................
Person.......................................................................................................................
Both..........................................................................................................................
* Excluding incorrectly identified

17

Oct

Jul 2015

45.7
39.8
31.6

75.1
79.9
64.4
72.5
74.5
55.7

2015 SCPC
Oct
42.6
46.1
49.6
38.0
40.4
49.6

40.0
58.2

52.0
42.7

24.7

39.4

Bibliography

Augereau, A., Greenstein, S., & Rysman, M. (2006). Coordination versus differentiation in a
standards war: 56K modems. The RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4), 887-909.
BOG. (2013). Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System.
Badev, A., & Chen, M. (2014). Bitcoin: Technical Background and Data Analysis. FEDS Working
Paper No. 2014-104.
Bohme, R., Christin, N., Edelman, B. & Moore, T. (2015). Bitcoin: Economics, Technology and
Governance, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2), 213-238.
Briglevics, T., Schuh, S., & Zhang, D. H. (2016). Consumer Homing and Payment Instrument
Choice. Working Paper.
Chakrovorti, S. (2016). New Payment Technologies: Back to Basics. Working Paper.
Cohen, M. A., & Rysman, M. (2013). Payment Choice with Consumer Panel Data. Working
Paper.
Crowe, M. D., Rysman, M., & Stavins, J. (2010). Mobile Payments in the United States at Retail
Point of Sale: Current Market and Future Prospects. FRB of Boston Public Policy Discussion
Paper No. 10-2.
Evans, D. S., & Schmalensee, R. (2005). Paying with Plastic: The Digital Revolution in Buying and
Borrowing (2nd Edition). MIT Press.
Greene, C., Rysman, M., Schuh, S. D., & Shy, O. (2014). Costs and Benefits of Building Faster
Payment Systems: The U.K. Experience and Implications for the United States. FRB of Boston
Research Paper Series Current Policy Perspectives No. 14-5.
Halaburda, H. & Sarvary, M (2015). Beyond Bitcoin: The Economics of Digital Currencies.
Palgrave.
Hester, D. (1972). Monetary Policy in the “Checkless” Economy. Journal of Finance, 27, 279-293.
Jack. W., Suri, T. and Townsend R.M. (2010). Monetary Theory and Electronic Money:
Reflections on the Kenyan Experience. Economic Quarterly. 96, 83-122.
Klee, E. (2008). How people pay: Evidence from grocery store data. Journal of Monetary
Economics, 55(3), 526-541.
Koulayev, S., Rysman, M., Schuh, S., & Stavins, J. (2016). Explaining Adoption and Use of
Payment Instruments by U.S. Consumers. RAND Journal of Economics. 47, 293-325.
Polasik, M., Piotrowska, A. I., Wisniewski, T. P., Kotkowski, R., & Lightfoot, G. (2015). Price
Fluctuations and the Use of Bitcoin: An Empirical Inquiry. International Journal of Electronic
Commerce, 20(1), 9-49.
RBA. (2012). Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments System: Conclusions.
Rochet, J., & Tirole, J. (2006). Two-sided markets: A progress report. The RAND Journal of
Economics, 37(3), 645-667.
Rysman, M. (2007). An Empirical Analysis Of Payment Card Usage. Journal of Industrial
Economics, 55(1), 1-36.
Rysman, M., & Wright, J. (2014). The Economics of Payment Cards. Review of Network
Economics, 13(3).
Schuh, S., & Shy, O. (2016). U.S. Consumers’ Adoption and Use of Bitcoin and other Virtual
Currencies. Working Paper.
18

Shy, O. (2013). How Many Cards Do You Use? FRB of Boston Working Paper No. 13-13.
Wakamori, N., & Welte, A. (2012). Why Do Shoppers Use Cash? Evidence from Shopping Diary
Data. Working Paper.
Wang, Z., & Wolman, A. L. (2015). Payment Choice and Currency Use: Insights from Two Billion
Retail Transactions. Working Paper.
Yang, B., & Ching, A. T. (2014). Dynamics of Consumer Adoption of Financial Innovation: The
Case of ATM Cards. Management Science, 60(4), 903-922.

19

