                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EQUITY IS CHEAP FOR LARGE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS:
                         THE INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE

                                       Priyank Gandhi
                                        Hanno Lustig
                                        Alberto Plazzi

                                     Working Paper 22355
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22355


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2016, Revised August 2017




We thank Anat Admati, Jeremy Bulow, Peter DeMarzo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Sebastian Müller
(discussant), Paul Pfleiderer, Michael Roberts and Jeff Wurgler (discussant) for comments on an
early draft. We also thank participants in the 2016 Paris AFFI Conference, 2017 AFA Meeting,
20th Annual Conference of the Swiss Society for Financial Market Research, and Chicago
Financial Institutions Conference for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Priyank Gandhi, Hanno Lustig, and Alberto Plazzi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Equity is Cheap for Large Financial Institutions: The International Evidence
Priyank Gandhi, Hanno Lustig, and Alberto Plazzi
NBER Working Paper No. 22355
June 2016, Revised August 2017
JEL No. G12,G18,G2,G21

                                           ABSTRACT

In most countries, equity is a cheap source of funding for a country’s largest financial institutions.
On average, the stocks of the top 10% financial companies in a country account for over a quarter
of total market capitalization, but these stocks earn returns that are significantly lower than stocks
of non-financial firms of the same size and with the same risk exposures. In a bailout-augmented
asset pricing model with rare disasters, country characteristics that inform the likelihood of a
bailout should predict stock returns. We find greater financial pricing anomalies for the largest
banks in developed countries with a highly concentrated and large banking sector and fiscally
strong governments, but smaller anomalies in countries with strong corporate governance,
government integrity, and property rights as well as high bankruptcy costs. The pricing
discrepancy widens in anticipation of large stock market and GDP declines, as the bailout-
augmented asset pricing model would predict.

Priyank Gandhi                                    Alberto Plazzi
Mendoza College of Business                       University of Lugano and
University of Notre Dame                          Swiss Finance Institute
gandhip@ucla.edu                                  Via Buffi, 13
                                                  Lugano, 6904, Switzerland
Hanno Lustig                                      alberto.plazzi@usi.ch
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
hlustig@stanford.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22355
1    Introduction
There is a wealth of evidence from credit markets that implicit government guarantees reduce the borrow-

ing costs of large financial institutions. Our research shows that the largest financial institutions (the top

10%) seem to benefit from a lower cost of equity capital, but the size of the effect depends on a country’s

institutional and macroeconomic characteristics.

    Government guarantees extended to financial institutions absorb risk that is otherwise borne by their

creditors and shareholders. These guarantees not only reduce the risk that financial stocks are exposed to,

but also impact the equilibrium stock returns after netting out the adjustment for standard risk. In the

Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2016) bailout-augmented dynamic asset pricing model, which builds

on the rare event models of Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011); Gabaix (2012); Wachter (2013), financial

stocks that benefit from guarantees earn low risk-adjusted returns during normal times, in anticipation of

shareholder bailouts in event of disasters. Under assumption of bailout, all firm and country characteristics

that determine the likelihood and extent of bailouts also predict risk-adjusted returns on financial stocks.

We find empirical evidence in a large panel of countries that supports these predictions of the model.

    The clear implication is that regulators should not use stock-based risk measures, because these in-

evitably reflect the value of the guarantee. For example, Atkeson, Eisfeldt, and Weill (2013) find no

difference in financial soundness between U.S. financial and non-financial institutions prior to the 2007-

2008 crisis, while Sarin and Summers (2016) find that investors do not see large U.S. banks as less risky

after the new wave of regulations and financial reforms. The authors attribute this to a decline in the

franchise value of banks, but our results indicate that the repricing of government guarantees may also

be the reason (see Bond and Goldstein (2015) for a theoretical analysis of the pitfalls of government

intervention when the government relies on market prices).

    This paper makes three contributions. Our first contribution is to establish that equity is a cheap

source of capital for the very largest banks. One can see in Figure 1 that financial institutions that exceed

the 90th size percentile in their home country earn negative risk-adjusted returns that are statistically and

economically significant. This is truly a size effect rather than a market capitalization effect (Berk (1997)

discusses the distinction). The largest financial firms, measured by market cap (book value), earn 3.41%

(5.97%) lower returns than the largest non-financial firms after netting out risk compensation. Consistent

with the Minton, Stulz, and Taboada (2017) findings for the U.S., we do not find similar effects for



                                                      1
medium-sized banks.1 We also uncover significant differences between developed and emerging markets.

In developed markets, only the largest banks in the top size decile deliver negative risk-adjusted returns

(-3.29% per year); other financials do not. This is an important anomaly. On average, the largest financial

stocks account for 27% of the total market capitalization in our sample of countries. Thus, we see that

over the entire sample, the implied subsidy to the cost of equity capital for large financial firms is 2.68% of

gross domestic product (GDP). Furthermore, unlike other anomalies (for e.g., the momentum anomaly),

this anomaly does not rely on sophisticated dynamic trading strategies, but instead is highly persistent

at the firm level, and presumably has large effects on equilibrium allocations as a result (Van Binsbergen

and Opp (2017)).2

       Our second contribution is that banks’ cost of equity adjusts in anticipation of a financial crisis.

Bank stock investors partly anticipate financial crises, contrary to the credit spread evidence reported

by Krishnamurthy, Muir, and Yale (2015) and the stock market evidence in Muir (2016) and Baron and

Xiong (2017).3 In that stock markets price in guarantees that are activated in financial crises, we find

that an increase in the expected return gap between small and large banks, measured by the difference

in dividend yields, forecasts large drops in GDP and the stock market. This is a discount rate effect.

In a rare disaster model with time-varying probabilities (Gabaix (2012); Wachter (2013)), an increased

probability of disaster increases the disaster risk premium spread between small and large banks, provided

that large banks are perceived to benefit from a stronger government guarantee.

       Finally, equity is a cheaper source of funding for large banks when bailouts seem more likely and

more valuable. We correlate the spread in the average risk-adjusted return on size-sorted portfolios

of financial firms for each country with the regulatory, policy, and institutional framework of the each

country. Assuming efficient markets and no implicit bailouts, these correlations should be insignificant.

Nor are these cross-sectional effects consistent with mispricing or behavioral biases. Rather they point to

a rational pricing of government guarantees by bank shareholders, consistent with the bailout-augmented

asset pricing model. In a placebo test, we did not find similar correlations for non-financials.

   1
     Minton, Stulz, and Taboada (2017) define large banks as banks with total assets in excess of $50 bn.
   2
     Exposure to this anomaly also requires very limited turnover, which implies that adjusting for transaction costs would
have a very limited effect on its size. Except during financial crises, there is no evidence to suggest that shorting large
financial firms is costlier than shorting large non-financial firms.
   3
     It is rational to expect large banks to fare better during crises. We also verify that large financial firms fare much better
during economic crises in developed countries, even though they are more levered than smaller banks. A portfolio that goes
long in large financial firm stocks and shorts small financial firm stocks on average gains 16% during an economic crisis.
Finally, we find find that on average nearly 1% of the firms in the bottom 10th decile are delisted during an given quarter
that a country spends in an economic or financial crisis, while the corresponding number for the top 10th decile is only 0.20%.


                                                                2
       We identify three main determinants of our results the characteristics of (i) the banking industry

itself, (ii) the government, and (iii) the institutional environment. First, the risk-adjusted large-minus-

small return spread is wider in countries with a large depositor base, a dense network of branches, and a

heavily concentrated banking sector; all of these raise the likelihood of a bailout. Second, the size of the

risk-adjusted large-minus-small return spread also increases with the fiscal health of the government and

the size of its central bank balance sheet. Implicit bailout guarantees are credible only if governments

have the resources to back up these promises.4 Third, institutions matter as well. The large-minus-small

spread is significantly wider than average in countries with a common law legal system, and lower than

average in countries with a Scandinavian legal system as well in countries with high perceived government

integrity and stronger property rights. La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000), for

example, show that shareholders are perceived to be better protected from expropriation in common law

countries. Governments in common law countries may be legally unable or else reluctant to wipe out the

shareholders of large financial institutions in the process of a bailout.5

       Spreads are also wider in countries with weaker corporate disclosure and governance, as well as weaker

business regulations. Better corporate governance may reduce risk-taking in large banks, possibly by

limiting executive compensation thus reducing the value of the guarantee (Acharya, Amihud, and Litov

(2011) and Bebchuk, Cohen, and Spamann (2010)). Spreads are negatively correlated with bankruptcy

costs, presumably because the banks are less likely to increase leverage when the cost of bankruptcy is

high. While there are other possible explanations for our findings, such as missing risk factors or behavioral

issues, these would have trouble accounting for these cross-sectional correlations.

       Large financial institutions do have high betas and higher systematic volatility. Yet, our findings are

not another example of the low-risk anomaly that has been documented for non-financials (see, e.g., Ang,

Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2009); Baker, Bradley, and Wurgler (2011)). We find no evidence to support a

betting-against-beta explanation as in Frazzini and Pedersen (2014). Large financial firms earn low returns

even when compared with large non-financial firms with the same betas and idiosyncratic volatility. In

addition, the returns on the largest financial firms do not co-vary with the Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)

   4
     Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl (2014) find that European bank credit default swap (CDS) spreads were highly correlated
with sovereign risk of the country of origin during the 2008 crisis. Our results indicate that sovereign risk is always a large
determinant of bank stock valuations, even before crises.
   5
     There are some recent judgements that support this notion. Recently, the U.S. courts ruled that the Federal Reserve
had illegally taken a large equity stake in AIG in 2008, thus expropriating its shareholders (New York Times, June 15, 2015),
while Fannie and Freddie shareholders have also challenged the Treasury’s profit sweep in courts. We also find that this
common law effect is mitigated by stronger corporate governance or creditor rights.


                                                              3
betting-against-beta factors.

       Baron and Xiong (2017) find that U.S. bank dividend yields do not forecast bank crashes, while credit

expansion does, which they interpret as evidence that bank shareholders neglect tail risk and are at times

overly optimistic, possibly because of extrapolation (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) Barberis,

Shleifer, and Vishny (1998); Barberis, Greenwood, Jin, and Shleifer (2015)). Our work suggests that bank

shareholders price tail risk differentially into large and small bank stock prices, because an increase in the

spread in bank dividend yields forecasts stock market and GDP crashes. We cannot rule out that bank

shareholders are overly optimistic at times, but their optimism seems limited to the largest banks, and

concentrated in countries with regimes that favor shareholders of those banks.

       If markets are efficient, then bank equity is not an expensive source of funding, as explained by Admati,

DeMarzo, Hellwig, and Pfleiderer (2011), and imposing higher capital requirements does not destroy bank

value. Baker and Wurgler (2015) counter that there is a low-risk anomaly in U.S. financials, and that

increased capital requirements may reduce the overall value of banks, because the reduction in volatility

and leverage increases the equity cost of capital. Our international evidence does not support the idea

that leverage-constrained investors (or any other investors) are responsible for bidding up the prices of

large bank stocks. Instead, we find evidence that equity is always a cheap source of funding for the largest

banks in a country. There is no obvious behavioral explanation for our findings.

       There is a large literature on size effects in stock returns (see Banz (1981), Basu (1983), Fama and

French (1993), Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), Berk (1997) among others). Most of these papers

exclude financial stocks, presumably because of their high leverage. More recently, Gandhi and Lustig

(2015) (GL hereafter) analyze the size effect in bank stock returns in the U.S. and show that the largest

commercial banks in the U.S. have significantly lower risk-adjusted returns than small banks.6

       Our work is also related to other research that shows direct evidence from options markets that tail

risk in the financial sector is priced differently.7 Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2016) find that

out-of-the-money index put options of bank stocks were relatively cheap during the recent financial crisis

   6
     They find a considerable anomaly for U.S. bank stock returns. The average risk-adjusted return on the last decile portfolio
of bank stocks with the highest market capitalization (or book value) exceeds the average risk-adjusted return on the first
decile portfolio of bank stocks with the lowest market capitalization (or book value) by nearly 0.60% per month. Thus, GL
argue that the size anomaly in bank stocks in the U.S. is really about size, rather than market capitalization. This result is
consistent with government guarantees that protect shareholders of large, but not small, financial firms in disaster states.
   7
     There is also evidence that government guarantees reduce borrowing costs of large financial institutions. See Acharya,
Anginer, and Warburton (2013) for evidence. Office (2014) also finds all 42 of the econometric models that it considered to
estimate funding costs implied that large U.S. bank holding companies had significantly lower funding costs than small banks
prior to the financial crisis.


                                                               4
because the government absorbed sector wide tail risk. In related work on bank stock returns, Fahlenbrach,

Prilmeier, and Stulz (2012) document that banks that incurred substantial losses during previous crises

were more likely to incur losses during the recent crisis. If some banks benefit from greater perceived tail

risk subsidy, they have an incentive to load up on this type of risk.8

        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the dataset, and explains how we construct

portfolios of financial firms sorted by size as measured by market capitalization and book value. Section

3 establishes a size anomaly in financial stock returns around the world. Section 4 shows that wide large-

to-small financial spreads forecast economic downturns. Section 5 relates the size anomaly to a country’s

legal, business, financial, sovereign, and regulatory environment. Section 6 describes a bailout-augmented

dynamic asset pricing model based on Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2016), which delivers pricing

relations consistent with our findings.



2        Identifying Financial Institutions in the Data
Our dataset includes the monthly equity returns, market capitalization, total book value of assets, and the

market/book ratio for financial firms from 31 countries. The data source is Thomson Reuters Datastream

(henceforth TRD). We select countries included in either the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI)

Developed or the MSCI Emerging Markets index. We further restrict the sample to countries that report

stock returns for at least 40 financial firms. For a country to be part of our sample, we also require that

data for equity returns and market capitalization be available for at least three years. The starting year

for data for a particular country is determined by the first full year in which the number of financial firms

in that country exceeds 40. The ending time for all is December 31, 2013. In all countries, we exclude

very small firms as measured by market capitalization by eliminating the 10% of firms with the lowest

market capitalization.

        In TRD, we identify financial firms using the sector variable. This variable is based on the Worldscope

Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB) codes.9 ICB allocates a company to the sector of ICB codes

whose definition most closely coincides with the source of its revenue or the source of the majority of its

revenue. In any country, firms with sector values equal to banks, financial services, insurance, or real
    8
     In fact, shareholder value maximization requires that they do so, as pointed out by Panageas (2010), who analyzes
optimal risk management in the presence of guarantees. Interestingly, Fahlenbrach, Prilmeier, and Stulz (2012) find some
evidence that banks whose managers’ interests were more aligned with shareholders actually performed more poorly during
the recent financial crisis.
   9
     ICB classification benchmark codes are also referred to as the FTSE’s Global Classification system, because the classifi-
cation was developed by FTSE Group and Dow Jones Index.


                                                              5
estate investment services are classified as financial firms. In other words, our definition of financial firms

includes banks (ICB Sector DS Level 4 code equal to 8350); non-life insurance (ICB Sector DS Level 4

code equal to 8530); life insurance (ICB Sector DS Level 4 code equal to 8570); real estate investment

services (ICB Sector DS Level 4 code equal to 8630); and financial services (ICB Sector DS Level 4 code

equal to 8770).

       We include all financial firms, not just banks, for two reasons. First, there are significant differences

across countries in the way banks and financial services firms are organized. In the U.S., firms that

own a commercial bank and entities that provide other financial services are almost always classified as

bank holding companies. Bank holding companies are, first and foremost, banks; that is their economic

function, so restricting the sample to firms with sector values equal to banks seems inappropriate for the

U.S. In many other countries, firms that own a commercial bank as well as other financial entities may

be classified as banks, financial services, insurance, or real estate investment services firms10 . Second, in

the U.S., the largest financial firms as measured by market capitalization are banks or financial services

firms, but in many other countries the largest financial firms may be insurance or real estate investment

services firms. For example, the largest financial firm as measured by market capitalization in Australia

is AMP, an insurance firm. Similarly, the largest financial firm as measured by market capitalization in

Belgium is Ageas, another insurance firm. As a result, we decided to include all financial firms in our

sample.

       We eliminate all observations where either the name of the firm, price, or market-capitalization data

is missing. Observations for firms that are cross-listed in more than one country are kept only in the

country of incorporation. For example, stocks for the bank HSBC trade in New York, London, Paris, and

Hong Kong. Since HSBC is incorporated in London, in our database, observations for HSBC appear only

with United Kingdom as its country. Cross-listed firms and countries of incorporation are identified using

the TRD data-item primary quote.

       Within a particular country, multiple observations for the same firm within a month (for e.g., for

different share classes) are aggregated at the firm level by value-weighting the returns and price-to-book

values and aggregating (summing) the market value. For each country for each month, we winsorize the

returns at the 5th and 95th percentile levels to remove outliers. Finally, for a given firm, we identify

  10
    This is especially true given TRD’s classification system. In TRD a firm that owns a commercial bank and an investment
bank will be classified as financial services (i.e., ICB Sector DS Level 4 code equal to 8770) if the investment bank accounts
for more than 50% of the total revenue of the firm.


                                                              6
pairs of consecutive observations that have total equity returns that exceed 90%, are of the exact same

magnitude, but of opposite signs. An example of this would be a firm that has a total equity return of

95% in January 2013 and -95% in February 2013. We conclude that such entries are likely corrupt, and

set the return for this firm in January and February 2013 to be missing. All these changes are necessary,

given the data quality in TRD.

       We can identify delisted firms because even after a firm delists, TRD continues to report its monthly

total equity return, market capitalization, and price-to-book as stale values that do not vary. We specify

the first month of a stale value series as the month the firm delists. Data for delisted firms are excluded

only after the month in which they delist. Thus, for firms that delist in January of any year, we set

monthly total equity returns, market capitalization, and price-to-book values as missing starting only in

February of that year. This ensures that the returns properly account for delistings. We also exclude

data for all firms that are inactive throughout the sample period by assuming that the investor liquidated

holdings of that firm at the final listed price. Our results are robust when we assume that the investor

lost all its holdings at the time of delisting. In a final step, we remove all observations for which the firm

name includes the word fund, mutual fund, income, or income fund. This filter ensures that our results

are not driven by mutual funds or other such investment services.

       The final dataset consists of 1,418,532 observations across 31 countries. For all observations total

equity returns, market capitalization, total book value of returns, and the ratio of price-to-book value of

assets are denominated in local currency. We cross-check the TRD files with other providers to ensure

that our filters works well to identify financial firms.11

       Panel A of Table 1 presents the list of countries in our sample and the number of unique financial firms

available throughout the sample period in each country. For each country in the sample, the table lists the

country classification (developed vs. emerging market), the start year for the data, the number of unique

financial firms in our dataset, the percentage of publicly listed firms that are classified as financial firms,

and the percentage of financial firm market capitalization as a percentage of total market capitalization

in the country. Note the substantial cross-sectional variation in number and size of financial firms across

  11
     We compare our list of U.S. financial firms from TRD to the list of the top 100 bank holding companies by total book
value of assets compiled by the Federal Deposit Insurance Company. The TRD list includes firms that account for 80.71%
of the total book value of assets of the top 100 bank holding companies in the U.S. The FDIC considers Macy’s, Nordstrom,
Apple Financial Holdings, and United Services Automobile Association as bank holding companies. DataStream (correctly)
does not identify these firms as banks or any other kind of financial firm because that is not their primary business function.
Similarly, the FDIC identifies BBVA, Deutschebank, HSBC, and Barclays as large U.S. bank holding companies. Our list
includes these firms in their country of incorporation but not as bank holding companies incorporated in the U.S.


                                                              7
countries. For example, in Japan and Taiwan, 10% of publicly listed firms are classified as financial firms,

but they account for less than 25% of market capitalization, while in Hong Kong, 34% of publicly listed

firms are classified as financial firms and they account for approximately 50% of the market capitalization.

       The actual number of unique financial firms also varies by country. The U.S. has the largest number

of unique financial firms at 3,201 (accounting for 13.16% of total market cap), followed by India at 778

accounting for (9.35% of total market cap) and the United Kingdom at 778 (accounting for 17.85% of

total market cap). The South American countries Chile and Peru have the fewest unique financial firms

at 67 (accounting for 32.10% of total market cap) and 55 (accounting for 40.16% of total market cap),

respectively. On average, financial firms account for nearly 21% of firms and nearly 28% of the market

capitalization in our sample of 31 countries.

       Next, we build size-sorted portfolios of financial intermediary stocks. For this, we employ the standard

portfolio formation strategy of Fama and French (1993). In each month, for each country, we sort all

financial firms into deciles according to market capitalization. So, for example, in January 2013, we rank

all financial intermediary stocks in each country by market capitalization. In each country stocks of

financial firms are then allocated to deciles on the basis of market capitalization. We then calculate the

value-weighted returns for each decile for each country for February 2013. In February 2013, we repeat

the process to calculate the same returns for March 2013. At the end of this exercise, we have monthly

value-weighted returns for each size-sorted portfolio of financial firms, for each country, over the entire

sample.12

       Panel B of Table 1 reports summary statistics for the size-sorted deciles of financial firms. The statistics

are averaged across all countries, and separately across developed and emerging markets. Large and small

denote the portfolios of financial firms with the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively, and

LMS denotes the return of large minus small financial firms. Panel B also reports the average number of

unique financial firms (N ); the average market capitalization of financial firms as a percentage of market

capitalization of the entire financial intermediary sector (%F Cap); the turnover rate i.e. the probability

(in %) that a firm migrates to another portfolio in the subsequent month (%T urn); and the average

value-weighted monthly return (Ret) for large and small portfolios. Here, and henceforth, we annualize

average returns by multiplying by 12, and express them in percentage by multiplying by 100.

  12
     Later, for benchmarking our results to the standard size-anomaly, we also repeat the porfolio formation exercise separately
for all non-financial firms in each of the 31 countries to get the monthly value-weighted returns for each size-sorted portfolio
of non-financial firms, for each country, over our entire sample.


                                                               8
    Firms in the first decile account on average for 0.20% to 0.42% of the market capitalization of the

entire financial sector. On the contrary, the largest financial firms account for anywhere between 67%

and 76% of the market capitalization of the entire financial sector for emerging and developed markets,

respectively. Thus, it appears that, on average, the financial intermediary sector for the 31 countries

is concentrated, with the bulk of market capitalization held by the largest financial companies. There

are average of 143 unique financial firms in the small portfolio in a given country compared to 46 for

the large portfolio. This pattern also holds for the turnover rate – the probability that a small financial

firm migrates to another portfolio is only 13%, and the probability that a large financial firm migrates

to another portfolio is even lower at just 3%. This evidence is important for our asset pricing tests as it

implies that the performance of a portfolio strategy that goes long the large while shorting the small is

not driven by portfolio turnover.

    The last two columns of panel B show that, on average, large financial firms underperform small

financial firms by 7.84% across all countries. This result is statistically significant at the 1% level. The

return to the LMS portfolio, which is the difference in the returns to large and small portfolios, is -3.74%

for developed markets and even more negative for emerging markets at -14.77%. Note that the wider gap

between the performance of small and large financial firms for emerging markets is driven mainly by the

small portfolio.



3     The Cost of Equity Capital for Financial Institutions
To estimate financial firm’s cost of equity capital, we start by adjusting the portfolio returns for exposure

to the standard risk factors that explain cross-sectional variation in average returns on portfolios of non-

financial stocks. We find that small financial firms, measured by market capitalization, outperform a

benchmark portfolio of stocks, while large financial firms underperform.



3.1   Cost of Equity Capital after Risk Compensation

To evaluate the performance of financial firms, we use the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model.

We use Market, SMB, and HML to represent the returns on the three Fama-French stock factors, namely,

the market, small minus big, and high minus low, respectively. For each country, we construct local

Fama-French factors using data for all publicly listed entities in each country (including financial firms).

To construct the Market factor in each country, we measure the excess return on the market using the

                                                     9
value-weighted return on all stocks in that country minus the return on the one-month U.S. Treasury bill

rate (from Ibbotson Associates). For each country, we construct the local size factor (SMB) and the local

value factor (HML) using the six value-weighted portfolios of all stocks in that country sorted by size and

book-to-market, respectively. Thus our vector of risk factors includes: f t = [Market SMB HML] .

      We estimate the time-series regression of excess returns to large and small portfolios, and their differ-

ence, denoted LMS, on the three Fama-French factors, and report the average risk-adjusted returns along

with their statistical significance in Table 2. The columns titled Fin report the estimates for financial

firms. Because there is variation in the characteristics of firms across countries, we directly compare size-

sorted portfolios of financial firms to size-sorted portfolios of non-financial firms within the same country.

To form the size-sorted portfolios of non-financial firms, we apply the standard Fama and French (1993)

portfolio formation strategy to all firms not classified as financial firms within a particular country. The

columns titled Non-fin report the results for non-financial firms. Finally, the last two columns of the

table report the average risk-adjusted performance of portfolios of financial firms relative to non-financial

firms.

      Panel A reports pooled estimates for all countries.13 The risk-adjusted return on the portfolio of

largest financial firms is -2.41% (annualized) with a t-stat of -2.41 compared to 8.07% (annualized) for

the smallest financial firms with a t-stat of 3.75. Thus, the risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio

for financial firms in our sample is -10.47%, statistically significant at the 1% level. In other words, a

zero-cost portfolio that goes long $1 in the portfolio of largest financial firms by market capitalization and

short $1 in a portfolio of the smallest financial firms by market capitalization loses 10.47% per year over

the entire sample.

      The risk-adjusted returns for both large and small non-financial firms are positive at 1.46% and 3.98%,

respectively. Thus, the alpha (risk-adjusted return) of the LMS for non-financial firms is much less negative

at -2.52% and is statistically significant at only the 10% level. We compare the country-level risk-adjusted

performance of size-sorted financial and non-financial firms in Figure 2. Taken together, the LMS portfolio

for financial firms delivers a risk-adjusted return that is approximately 8% lower than the LMS portfolio

of non-financial firms (the solid black line in Figure 2). Nearly half of this occurs because large financial

firms underperform large non-financial firms by 3.86%. Thus, across 31 countries, stocks of large financial

firms seem consistently overpriced compared to a benchmark of non-financial firms of the same size, even

 13
      Table A1 and Figure A1 in Appendix C report the results for individual country estimates.


                                                             10
after adjusting for exposure to standard risk factors.

       Panels B and Panel C of Table 2 report estimates for data pooled separately for developed and emerging

markets. The risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio for financial firms in developed markets at -9.47%,

is comparable to that for emerging markets at -13.82%. The overpricing of stocks of large financial firms

relative to stocks of large non-financial firms is also comparable across developed and emerging markets

at nearly -4.31% and -3.70%, respectively.14

       Table 3 evaluates the performance of the large portfolio of financial firms in terms of specific businesses.

That is, for each country we separately analyze the returns of size-sorted portfolios of banks and financial

services firms, insurance firms, and real estate investment services firms as identified by the TRD data-item

sector. Panel A reports the results for data pooled across all countries.

       Over the full 1980 - 2013 sample, the risk-adjusted return for the largest banks and financial services

firms is -2.01%, compared to just -0.29% for the insurers and -2.28% for the largest real estate firms.

Over 2000-2013, the top decile of banks and financial services firms loses approximately -3.16% per year

in risk-adjusted terms compared to -1.44% for insurance firms (not statistically significant) and -2.07%

for real estate firms (only marginally statistically significant).

       In developed markets, banks benefit from special provisions: deposit insurance, access to special

lending facilities at central banks, and implicit or explicit guarantees to creditors. Insurance and real

estate investment firms rarely enjoy the same level of protection. Given this background, it may seem

surprising that large real estate investment firms also deliver negative risk-adjusted returns. To understand

why large insurance and real estate investment services firms also perform poorly, we separately analyze

developed and emerging markets in Panels B and C. Much of the underperformance of developed markets

is concentrated in banks. Over 2000-2013, for the subset of developed countries the risk-adjusted return

on the largest banks is -6.40% (t-stat of -3.48), compared to -1.35% in insurance firms (not statistically

significant) and -1.30% for real estate firms (not statistically significant). Further, while the risk-adjusted

return on large banks declines monotonically over time, this is not the case for insurance and real estate

firms. For emerging countries, only real estate firms are found to deliver abnormally low average returns

of -3.72% over the full sample and in the recent sample (when it loses significance).

       A statistically significant loss for a long-short portfolio for financial firms other than banks and financial

services can be explained by important differences in the way banks and financial services firms are
  14
    The difference between the LMS portfolio of financial and non-financial firms is -6.26% in developed markets, but -12.21%
in emerging markets, driven entirely by the risk-adjusted returns of the smallest financial firms in emerging markets.


                                                             11
organized across different countries. In the U.S., firms that own a commercial bank and entities that

provide other financial services are almost always classified as bank holding companies. In many other

countries, firms that own a commercial bank as well as other financial entities may be classified either as

banks, financial services, insurance, or real estate investment services firms. In fact, in TRD, an entity

that owns a commercial bank and other subsidiaries would always be classified as a “non-bank” financial

intermediary if the commercial bank accounts for less than 50% of its total revenues. Further, in the

U.S., the largest financial firms as measured by market capitalization are banks or financial services firms.

These are exactly the kind of firms that benefit from implicit government guarantees and are considered

too-big-to-fail. In many other countries, the largest financial firms as measured by market capitalization

may be insurance or real estate investment service firms.

   Tables A2 and A3 in Appendix C provide further results for the largest financial firms or financial

firms sorted by the type of business they engage in. Table A2 shows the results for size-sorted portfolios

of firms that are classified as banks and financial services firms only and Table A3 presents the results

for the top three largest commercial bank in each country. When we restrict the sample to just banks

and financial services firms, the risk-adjusted return on the LMS portfolio is more negative at -11.37%,

again statistically significant at the 1% level or better. Table A3 shows that, when we restrict the sample

to just the largest banks in each country, the risk-adjusted returns are on average -5.16% for developed

markets and +3.81% for emerging markets.

   Thus, it appears there are important differences in the size anomaly across emerging and developed

markets. There may also be important cross-country differences in regulatory, bank supervision, and

crisis-response policies that may drive differences in the magnitude of the size anomaly across different

countries.



3.2   Financials’ Cost of Equity Depends on Size

We directly compare the performance of large and small financial firms with similar loadings on standard

risk factors. For each country, for each financial intermediary in our sample, we estimate loadings on the

three Fama-French factors in a given month using data for the prior 12 months. We roll the regression

one month at a time to obtain a time series of factor loadings for each financial intermediary in each

country in our sample. Next, in each month, for each country, we sort all financial firms into 10 portfolios

by loadings on the SMB factor. We compute the firm Z-score as Z = std(βMarket ) + std(βHML ), where std

                                                     12
denotes cross-sectional standardization, for each financial intermediary. Finally, in each month, we match

a financial firm in the large portfolio to the financial firm in the small portfolio in the same SMB decile

and with the closest Z-score possible. We form value-weighted returns for all financial firms in the large

portfolio and in the small portfolio of matched firms.15

      At the end of this exercise, we have monthly value-weighted returns for large and small portfolios

of financial firms that differ by market capitalization but have similar loadings on the Fama-French size

factor, SMB. We report the average risk-adjusted returns for the large, matched small, and large minus

matched small (LMS) portfolios in Panel A in Table A4 in Appendix C. The LMS portfolio loses about

7.59% in risk-adjusted terms per year over the entire sample. This number, although 2.88% lower than

the risk-adjusted number for the size-sorted deciles, is still statistically and economically significant.

      In Panel B of Table A4 in Appendix C we present results for financial firms matched on the Market

factor. That is, we compare the risk-adjusted return for financial firms that differ in market capitalization

but have similar market betas. Now the large-minus-small LMS portfolio loses about 10.24% in risk-

adjusted terms per year over the entire sample. The loss increases to 12.45% by 2000-2013, which is even

higher than the -10.83% reported in Panel A for the same period. Overall, the size anomaly does not

appear to be impacted by the loadings on standard risk factors.

      Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2009) show that firms with high idiosyncratic volatility earn lower

average returns than firms with low idiosyncratic volatility. Baker and Wurgler (2015) have revisited this

anomaly in the context of U.S. banks. To make sure that the size anomaly is not merely capturing this

spread, we match large financial firms to small financial firms with the closest idiosyncratic volatility,

computed as the standard deviation of the residuals in the rolling regression on the three Fama-French

factors. Panel C of Table A4 in Appendix C shows that small financial firms still outperform large financial

firms with comparable idiosyncratic volatility by 8% on a risk-adjusted basis.

      We also carefully compare size-sorted portfolios of financial and non-financial firms (Table A5 in

Appendix C). We note that the risk-adjusted returns of the Financial-minus-Non-Financial LMS portfolio

have been rather stable over different sample periods at about -8%. Panel A of this table also shows that

it is the underperformance of large financial firms that increasingly accounts for a large proportion of the

difference between financial and non-financial firms. By 2000-2013, the total spread between financial and

non-financial firms is -7.82%, nearly 60% (-4.37%) of which can be traced to firms in the top decile.

 15
      When there are no small firms in a given SMB decile, we assign the risk-free rate.


                                                               13
    The size distribution of financial and non-financial firms can be quite different. To make the results

more directly comparable, next we sort all financial and non-financial firms into size bins using the decile

breakpoints based on the market capitalization of all traded stocks in a country (i.e. both financial

and non-financial firms). We then apply these common decile breakpoints to separately form size-sorted

portfolios of both financial and non-financial firms. The results are in Panel B of Table A5. Here, by

design, the financial and non-financial firms in each portfolio are roughly of the same size. The value-

weighted risk-adjusted return for financial firms in the last size bin are now 14.22% lower than those in the

first bin. For non-financial firms, the size anomaly is a mere -5.05%. By 2000-2013, this size anomaly for

financial firms increases to -14.71% while that for non-financial firms drops to -4.77%. Thus, the anomaly

for financial firms is at least three times greater than for non-financial firms.

    The results of financial and non-financial firms sorted by book value of assets are in Panel C of Table

A5. Market capitalization measures size, but it also measures expected returns. Firms that generate

more cash flow will tend to have higher market capitalization, but firms with lower expected returns,

holding cash flows constant, may also have higher market capitalization. Of course, this argument does

not apply to other measures of size such as book value. For example, while market cap sorts are likely

to be picking up liquidity effects, book sorts are likely not to. A priori, there is no reason to expect

a relation between book values and expected returns. Berk (1997) thus argues that there should be a

relation between expected returns and market capitalization.

    Panel C shows a similar pattern in risk-adjusted returns when sorting by book value of assets to the

pattern when sorting by market capitalization; it is in fact even stronger than the one documented in

Panel A. For non-financial firms, there is no evidence of a size anomaly when firms are sorted by book

value of assets. For non-financial firms, the value-weighted risk-adjusted return on the large portfolio is

5.51% higher than that on the small portfolio. As a result, the spread between the LMS portfolio of

financial and non-financial firms is now -14.44%. The sort by book value reveals that for financial firms

actual size as measured by book value seems to be a key determinant of returns. That is, larger financial

firms have negative abnormal returns.16
   16
      Table A6 in Appendix C confirms this evidence when we run the standard characteristics regressions separately for
financial firms, banks, and non-financial firms for all countries in the sample. For financial firms, when we run a cross-
sectional regression of average annual returns on firm characteristics (log of market capitalization and log of book value
of assets), we obtain a negative coefficient for log book value (-5.20%) as well as for market capitalization (-5.16%) both
statistically significant at the 1% level. When we include both log book value and market capitalization, however, the
coefficient on book value for financial firms is at least four times higher than the coefficient on market value. Further, the
coefficient on market capitalization is not statistically significant at conventional levels. These results suggest that a 100%
increase in the book value of financial firms above the sample average reduces annual returns by nearly 400 basis points for


                                                              14
    As a final check, we also compare the risk-adjusted return on large financial firms and a set of large

non-financial firms that are similar along various dimensions of risk. Analogous to Table A4 we match

large financial firms to large non-financial firms according to loadings on the SMB factor or idiosyncratic

volatility. In untabulated results, we find that large non-financial firms still significantly underperform

large non-financial firms on a risk-adjusted basis by -6.50% (when matched by loadings on SMB) and by

-3.50% (when matched by idiosyncratic volatility).


3.3    Robustness

We carry out a battery of additional tests to check that the size anomaly for financial firms is robust

to a number of changes in experiment design and specification. We confirm that the baseline results are

robust to the use of delisting returns, alternative winsorization schemes, sorting techniques, equal-weighted

returns, and risk factors.


Delisting returns:          Accounting for delisting returns is important, as research shows that the extent

of empirical asset pricing anomalies can be sensitive to the treatment of delisting returns. Adjusting

for delisting returns is also important if delisting rates for financial firms are different from those of

non-financial firms, and if delisting rates are a function of firm size.17

    To see whether our results are robust to delisting returns, we begin by identifying delisted firms in

TRD. We can take advantage of the fact that even after a firm delists, TRD continues to report its monthly

total equity return and market capitalization as a stale value that does not vary. We then impute a -100%

return to the stock return of all delisted firms so identified. The imputation of a -100% return in this case

is equivalent to assuming that all delistings are on account of financial distress or bankruptcy.18

    We use this new data series (with the -100% imputed returns), to form size-sorted portfolios (sepa-

a typical financial firm, holding market capitalization fixed.
The columns titled banks in Table A6 show that a similar effect pertains for banks. For banks, size measured by both book
value and market capitalization is negatively correlated with returns. Once we control for book value, however, the relation
between size as measured by market capitalization and returns is not statistically significant. In most cases the coefficient
on book value is at least nine times higher than the coefficient on market capitalization.
The last column reports the results for non-financial firms. For non-financial firms, size as measured by market capitalization
drives out any relationship between book value and returns. Over the entire sample the coefficient on market capitalization
is nearly twice as high as the coefficient on book value, although neither coefficient is statistically significant. Overall, size
explains less than 2% of the variation in annual returns for non-financial firms but nearly 5% of the variation in returns of
financial firms and banks in our sample.
   17
      For example, Gandhi and Lustig (2015) show that in the U.S., small banks are delisted ten times more than large banks.
   18
      Clearly the assumption that all firms delist for financial distress is a strong one. Beaver, McNichols, and Price (2007)
analyze reasons for delisted firms in the stock return dataset provided by the Center for Research in Security Prices and find
that more than half the delistings are on account of mergers and acquisitions not related to financial distress.


                                                               15
rately) for financial and non-financial firms in each country. Table A7 in Appendix C shows that delisting

returns barely impact our result. The return on the large-minus-small LMS portfolio for financial firms

improves only slightly from -10.47% in Table 2 to -9.11% in Table A7 and remains statistically significant

at the 1% level or better.


Winsorization:      In our baseline results, given the data quality in TRD, we winsorize raw data for stock

returns from TRD at the 5th and 95th percentile. There is a chance that winsorization at these levels is a

severe response and may exclude valid return observations that could substantially impact the results.

   Panel A of Table A8 presents the results with the data winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile levels.

The risk-adjusted return on the portfolio of largest financial firms is -2.28% with a t-stat of -2.22 compared

to -2.41% with a t-stat of -2.41 in Table 2. The risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio for financial firms

is still large and negative at -18.96% (statistically significant at the 1% level). The risk-adjusted returns for

both large and small non-financial firms are positive at 1.13% and 10.76%, respectively. Finally, the alpha

of the LMS portfolio for financial firms is 9.33% lower than the α of the LMS portfolio of non-financial

firms.


Accounting for the January effect:         Reinganum (1983) shows that small firms experience high returns

in January and exceptionally high returns during the first few trading days in January. Keim (1983) also

shows that the relation between size and abnormal returns is more pronounced in January than in any

other month; nearly 50% of the size effect is driven by abnormal returns in January. To ensure that the

January effect does not drive the fact that large financial firms underperform small financial firms, Panel

B of Table A8 presents risk-adjusted returns for data pooled across all countries but after excluding all

returns for January in each year over the sample period. The alpha of the LMS portfolio for financial

firms is -6.91% lower than the α of the LMS portfolio of non-financial firms, which is only 100 basis points

lower.


Equal-weighted versus value-weighted returns:               Our results are also unchanged when we use either

value-weighted or equal-weighted portfolio returns. In Panel C of Table A8, the risk-adjusted return on

the equal-weighted portfolio of the largest financial firms is -1.81%. The risk-adjusted return to the LMS

equal-weighted portfolio for financial firms is still high and negative at -11.81% (statistically significant

at the 1% level). Finally, the alpha of the LMS equal-weighted portfolio for financial firms is 8.51% less

                                                       16
negative than the α of the LMS portfolio of non-financial firms.


Sub-sample analysis:       We examine the time variation in the size of the risk-adjusted performance to

the LMS portfolio and report average risk-adjusted returns computed using the three-factor Fama-French

1993 model over different subsamples in Panel A of Table A9 in Appendix C. The first two columns report

estimates for the longest available sample for each country, and coincide with those in Panel A of Table

2. The next two columns are for 1990-2013, and the last two columns are for 2000-2013.

   The loss on LMS portfolio of financial firms increases to 10.84% over 1990-2013 and to 10.83% over

2000-2013. The progressively more negative performance of LMS is attributable to a worsening in un-

derperformance of the largest financial firms over time from -2.41% for the full sample to -3.00% for

2000-2013. The small portfolio, by contrast, consistently outperforms the benchmark portfolio of stocks

by about 8% in all periods.


Returns denominated in U.S. dollars:           Panel B of Table A9 shows the results for returns denomi-

nated in U.S. dollars using the U.S., the regional, or the global Fama-French factors to risk-adjust returns.

The regional factors are available for 4 regions: Asia, Japan, Europe, and North America. We apply the

corresponding regional factors when we analyze returns denominated in U.S. dollars for countries located

in each region. Finally, we also use the global Fama-French factors (data available from Kenneth French’s

website). Panel B of Table A9 shows that whatever the factor model, the LMS portfolio of financial firms

loses at least 10% (approximately) over the entire sample.


Additional risk factors:      We test if our results are robust to the inclusion of additional risk factors

such as “betting against beta” (BAB) factor from Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), a co-skewness factor from

Harvey and Siddique (2000), and the idiosyncratic volatility factor of Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang

(2009). We control for the BAB factor because larger financial firms are more levered and hence higher

market betas are imputed to large financial intermediary stock portfolios. Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)

show that high beta assets are associated with low average risk-adjusted returns. They also document that

a long-short portfolio that goes long high-beta stocks and short low-beta stocks generates significantly

negative risk-adjusted returns. Baker and Wurgler (2015) also argue that a low-risk anomaly is present

in U.S. banks and could be linked to degree of leverage.

   In addition, we control for the co-skewness factor because by granting shareholders of large financial

                                                     17
firms a menu of out-of-the money put options, the government reduces the negative co-skewness of large

financial intermediary stock returns, and Harvey and Siddique (2000) already show that co-skewness is

priced in the cross-section of U.S. stock returns. We follow the procedure in Harvey and Siddique to

construct the traded co-skewness factor for each country in our sample.

   Finally, we construct a volatility factor as the return to a portfolio that goes long stocks of financial

firms in the bottom decile of idiosyncratic volatility and short the stocks of financial firms in the top decile

of idiosyncratic volatility.

   Panel C of Table A9 shows estimates for average risk-adjusted returns for the augmented five-factor

model. As is clear from the table, our results are essentially unchanged. The annual return on a portfolio

that goes long $1 in a portfolio of large financial firms and short $1 in a portfolio of small financial firms

is still large, negative, and statistically significant. The loss on this portfolio is 10.94% (11.03% in the

most recent sample) when these additional risk factors are included, and is still statistically significant at

conventional levels.



Results for the largest financial firms:         Finally, we focus on the very largest firms in each country.

We present results for the value-weighted portfolio of the top n financial firms in each country in Panel D

of Table A9. Each row corresponds to a distinct value of n, 3, 5, or 10. Over the full sample, a significant

share of the negative alpha on the tenth decile is due to the very largest financial firms. The top three

financial firms by size account for nearly 67% of the risk-adjusted return for the largest financial firms.

The loss for the largest three financial firms increases to -2.72% over the 2000-2013 sample, compared to

-2.16% for the largest then financial firms. Thus, over 2000-2013, the risk-adjusted return for the top 3,

5, or 10 financial firms by size across all countries accounts for 90%, 80%, or 70% of the risk-adjusted

return of all financial firms in the tenth decile.



3.4    Cost of Implicit Guarantees

If the differences in the average risk-adjusted returns of large and small financial firms is the result of

financial crisis tail risk insurance offered to large (but not small) financial firms, our methodology allows

us to compute a direct estimate of this insurance on the cost of equity capital of financial firms. To this

end, we first regress the returns to LMS on the three Fama and French (1993) stock risk factors for each

country, and store the resulting abnormal return or alpha. Next, for each country, we multiply this alpha

                                                      18
by the average market capitalization of firms in the large portfolio. We then normalize this quantity by

the gross domestic product (GDP) of the country as of December 2013.

    Table A10 in Appendix C reports the average of this normalized quantity across different groups and

time periods. All entries in the table are negative, meaning that the total effect is consistent with tail risk

subsidy. Panel A shows estimates averaged across all countries. We see that over the entire sample, the

subsidy to the cost of equity capital for large financial firms is 2.68% of GDP. By 2000-2013, this figure

increases to as much as 3.45% of GDP.

    In Panel B, we report averages separately for developed and emerging markets. The subsidy in

developed markets is always greater than in emerging markets. In the most recent sample, the difference

is quite significant, with developed markets averaging 5.39% of GDP compared to 1.08% figure for emerging

countries. In USD terms, these differences are even more stark if we consider that the average GDP of

developed markets in our sample is $2,270 billion in December 2013 compared to only $206.63 billion for

emerging markets.

    Finally, Panel C collects averages by geographical region. Note that the subsidy is the highest for

Asia Pacific countries, followed by Americas, the Middle East, and Africa. In USD terms, the subsidy is

highest for Asia ($1,356 billion), and for the Americas ($759 billion), and lagged by Europe ($129 billion)

and the Middle East ($17 billion).

    It is worth noting that our estimates of the subsidy measure only impact of tail risk insurance on the

cost of equity capital. As financial institutions are highly levered, even if the direct effect on the overall

cost of capital may be minute, the indirect effect would note be because shareholders are last in line, the

implied subsidy to other bank creditors would be even greater.



4    Financials’ Cost of Equity Capital and the Probability of a Financial

     Crisis
A financial crisis is typically defined as an event during which a country’s financial sector experiences runs

and sharp increases in financial sector default rates accompanied by large losses of capital that result in

public intervention, bankrutpcy, or the forced merger of financial institutions. In the event of a financial

crisis, governments and regulators often provide an implicit guarantee to shareholders of large financial

institutions, but not to those of small financial institutions. This is true not only for the U.S. but also for



                                                      19
most developed and emerging markets included in our samples.19

    The presence of implicit government guarantees would induce a systematic link between a financial

firms’ exposure to tail risk (associated with the risk of a financial crisis) and firm size. The model

we define below suggests that these implicit guarantees will impact the expected returns of size-sorted

portfolios of financial firms. If a financial firm is considered too-big-to-fail, then its expected return is

lower in equilibrium than a smaller financial firm holding the exact same assets. Further, variation in

the probability of financial crisis will drive variation in the expected returns of size-sorted portfolios of

financial firms over time. In other words, not only are the expected returns of large financial firms lower

than those of small financial firms, but the expected return gap between large and small financial firms is

directly proportional to the probability of a financial disaster.

    Historically, the probability of a financial disaster increases during economic and market downturns.

In the U.S. data, there is a strong connection between the business cycle and the incidence of financial

crisis.20 Therefore, we next study the link between the differences in the returns of large and small

financial firms and the potential risk of a future economic downturn. Our hypothesis is that if the size

anomaly is indeed driven by implicit guarantees, an increase in the expected return gap between small

and large financial firms is, on average, associated with an increase in the probability of an economic or

market downturn (hence a financial crisis) in the near future. As long as financial crises are not perfectly

correlated across countries, our international panel structure enhances identification and increases the

power of our test.

    Table 4 presents the estimates from a panel conditional fixed-effect logit regression. The dependent

variable is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 when the H-month ahead return on the aggregate

stock market index (for Panel A) or the H-month ahead growth rate of gross domestic product (for Panel

B) is below the 10th percentile level, with H = {3, 6, 9, 12}. The independent variable is the monthly

value-weighted dividend yield of large over small financial firms.

    We expect that as the probability of a financial crisis increases, the risk premium on large-minus-

small LMS increases; i.e., the expected return on the LMS portfolio becomes more negative. This in turn

implies that the difference between the dividend yield of large and small financial firms should become

   19
      For example, Laeven and Valencia (2008) document that in most countries, an emerging financial crisis results in direct
liquidity injection, large-scale government intervention, or even blanket guarantees extended to customers, creditors, and
shareholders of large financial institutions.
   20
      See, for example, Romer and Romer (2015) among others for the link between financial crisis and economic and market
downturns.


                                                             20
more negative. That is, the sign on the monthly value-weighted dividend yield of large over small financial

firms should be negative. This is exactly what we see in the data.

   An increase in the expected return gap between small and large banks indicates an increase in the

probability of a drop in the stock market or a drop in GDP. A 1% increase in the dividend yield gap

increases the odds of a 10% drop in the stock market over the next three months by nearly 13% and that

of a 10% drop in GDP by approximately 10%. Thus, the size anomaly in financial firm returns appears

to be a reliable measure of future economic downturns, and is sensitive to changes in the probability of

a financial crisis in the near future. This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that the existence of

implicit government guarantees to shareholders of large financial firms drives the observed size anomaly

in size-sorted portfolios of financial firms.

   If large financial institutions benefit from government implicit guarantees, we should also expect that

the performance of the LMS portfolio, while negative on average, should improve (i.e. turn positive)

during crisis periods when large firms are in fact shielded. We investigate whether this is indeed the case

in Table 5, which collects the returns to the LMS portfolio during an economic or financial crisis.

   As before, for each country in our sample, we identify an economic or a financial crisis as a quarter

during which the GDP or stock market return falls below the 10th percentile for that country. If there

are consecutive quarters that meet this criterion in any country, they are counted as one incident of an

economic or financial crisis. For each country, for each economic or financial crisis, we consider a $100

investment in the long-short LMS at the start of the crisis, and measure its cumulative performance at

the end of the crisis.

   Each row in Panel A of the table displays the average performance of this investment over all economic

and financial crisis in each country in our sample. In Panel B, we report the average performance of this

long-short portfolio over all crises across all countries, developed markets only, and emerging markets only.

   Table 5 shows that such a portfolio on average gains 6% during an economic crisis. Thus, the LMS

portfolio is sensitive to large slowdowns in the economy (i.e., performance improves during economic

or financial contractions). We attribute this result to differences in shareholder recovery rates on these

portfolios under economic or financial distress. During economic or financial crisis, large financial firms

fare much better even though they are typically more leveraged than small financial firms. In other words,

as the probability of a financial disaster increases (during economic or financial crisis), the expected return

gap between large and small financial firms grows, and large financial firms do much better than smaller


                                                      21
financial firms (in realized returns).

    The performance of the LMS portfolio during an economic and financial crisis may be attributed partly

to differences in delisting rates. It is well established that governments and regulators, due to the implicit

bailout guarantee, are not willing to let large financial firms fail, even if they regularly allow individual

small financial firms to go under. Therefore, the last three columns in Table 5 report the delisting rates of

firms within the top and bottom 10th percentile in each country, as a percentage of total number of firms

in these portfolios at the start of the economic or financial crisis. The table shows that on average, 0.86%

of the firms in the bottom 10th decile fail during an economic crisis, while the corresponding number for

the top 10th decile is only 0.20%. These numbers imply that in each quarter in which a given country in

our sample is in an economic or a financial crisis, on average 2 small financial firms fail. The total number

of crisis quarters across all 31 countries in our sample is 331. This implies that on average 662 small

financial firms delisted over all financial crises across the 31 countries in our sample. The corresponding

number for large financial firms is 30.

    Table 5 also highlight clear differences between developed and emerging markets in the crisis perfor-

mance of the LMS portfolio. While for developed markets, the LMS portfolio on average gains 16%, for

emerging markets this portfolios loses approximately 2% of its value. These differences suggest that there

may be significant cross-sectional (cross-country) differences in the size anomaly in the financial sector,

which result from the implicit bailout guarantee provided by regulators. These differences may be closely

related to the legal, economic, policy, regulatory, and institutional frameworks in a particular country.



5    Determinants of Financials’ Cost of Equity Capital
So far, we have established that the size anomaly for financial firms is very different from that for non-

financial firms and is also distinct from the market capitalization effect first documented by Banz (1981).

We have also shown that the differences in risk-adjusted returns for financial firms cannot be imputed to

differences in exposures to standard risk factors. We exploit the cross-sectional dimension of the dataset to

lend further support to the claim that this anomaly is related to the presence of implicit bailout guarantees

to large financial institutions.

    We begin by relating the extent of financial sector tail risk insurance, as captured by the difference

in the average risk-adjusted return on the size-sorted portfolios of financial firms for each country to the

country’s legal, business, financial, and regulatory framework. If the size anomaly for financial firms is


                                                     22
merely an extension of the market capitalization effects documented in the literature for non-financial

firms, then the time-series/cross-sectional variation in the extent of the anomaly should not be related

to variables that measure the institutional environment. The converse is that, if the underperformance

of large financial firms indeed occurs because of explicit or implicit guarantees extended to large but

not small financial firms, we expect a more severe anomaly (a more negative result) when a country’s

regulatory, policy, and institutional framework makes bailouts more likely in the event of a financial crisis.

We also expect a greater anomaly in countries where financial firms respond rationally to a lower cost of

capital (due to implicit guarantees) by increasing risk.

      We use a standard panel regression framework to study the relation between the size anomaly in

financial stock returns and a country’s legal, business, financial, and regulatory framework. The dependent

variable in each case is the large-minus-small LMS returns (i.e., the difference in the risk-adjusted return to

large minus small financial firms), computed using data for all financial firms over 2-year non-overlapping

windows. While all the results use data for all financial firms to compute LMS, most of our results are

robust either to using data for just banks or to using the difference in the risk-adjusted returns of financial

and non-financial firms.

      Note that our panel regressions include country fixed effects and time-fixed effects where applicable.

In all the panel regressions we almost always include country fixed effects and also account for time fixed

effects whenever there is sufficient time-series and cross-sectional variation in the dependent variables.


5.1      Legal Environment

Table 6 examines the relation between the size anomaly in financial stock returns and the legal environment

in a country using a standard panel regression framework. The independent variables are a set of dummy

variables that take for the origin of the legal system in a country a value of either British (LU K ), French

(LF R ), German (LGR ), or Scandinavian (LSC ), and zero otherwise.

      As explanatory variables we also include an index of property right index (P roperty), an index of

how left-leaning the federal (central) government is (Lef t), and an index of government integrity in each

country in our sample (Integrity). Higher values of P roperty, Lef t, and Integrity imply that the country

has stronger property rights, a more left-leaning federal government, and a lower levels of corruption (or

perception of corruption).21
 21
      The data for the legal origin come from La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000); for P roperty and


                                                           23
   Each column in Table 6 presents the results for a separate specification of the panel regression, where

the dependent variables are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation one. Each regression

includes time fixed effects and t-statistics are based on robust standard errors.

   The results in Table 6 indicate more of an anomaly (i.e., the risk-adjusted return on LMS financial firms

is more negative) in countries with British legal origin (common law countries), and less in countries with

Scandinavian legal origin. In other words, investors in countries operating under common law perceive a

higher probability of bailout of large financial institutions than those in countries operating under other

legal systems.

   At first glance, this result is surprising because La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002), for

example, show that governments in countries with French, German, Scandinavian, or socialist legal systems

are more likely to intervene in economic activity than governments in countries with a common law legal

system. When it comes to financial firms, however, the opposite seems to be true – market participants

anticipate that governments in countries with a common law legal system will intervene on behalf of

shareholders of large financial firms more often or to a greater extent than governments in countries with

other kinds of legal systems. Yet, the more negative α for common law countries is consistent with the

notion that common law countries are perceived to offer better protection to shareholders. As a result, in

a bailout, shareholders are less likely to be wiped out.

   There is yet another reason why the LMS α can be expected to be higher in common law countries.

Implicit or explicit guarantees of large financial firms, coupled with stock-based compensation plans for

CEOs, may motivate managers to try to increase shareholder wealth, in part by increasing risk. In most

common law countries, stock-based compensation plans are common, and common law systems usually

place little limits on higher pay for CEOs. For example, Gomez-Mejia and Werner (2008) find that there

are few limits on higher pay for CEOs in common law countries because these systems are less prescriptive.

In most other legal systems (especially civil law systems), there are legal limits on CEO compensation.

For example, in both Argentina and the Philippines CEO pay is limited by law. CEO compensation must

also meet an unstated “reasonability” criteria in many other countries including Germany.

   Any institutional feature that credibly puts investors of large financial firms at risk of loss would

likely reduce the LMS α. Stern and Feldman (2004) argue that although expectations of bailouts cannot

be eliminated, they can be reduced or better managed through a credible commitment by regulators to

Integrity from the Heritage Foundation; and for Lef t the World Statesman (http:\www.worldstatesman.com).


                                                        24
impose losses on investors. They further argue that strong property rights along with other reforms can

help ensure that excessive risk taking does not occur in the financial sector, thereby reducing the need to

bail out financial institutions. These reforms can also help reduce the moral hazard incentives for excessive

risk taking created by the government safety net even if large financial firms are not treated differently

from small financial firms. Consistent with this view, we find that the overpricing of large financial firms

(relative to small financial firms) is less severe in countries with stronger property rights.

   Finally, Table 6 also shows a smaller LMS α in countries where government integrity is high and

there is less corruption. This result can be understood if interpreted in light of the classic principal-agent

problem. Regulators are ultimately agents of taxpayers, as any losses on account of bailouts are borne

by taxpayers, but regulators may have incentives that differ from those of taxpayers. That is, regulators

and governments may pursue a too-big-to-fail (TBTF) policy for reason of personal gains (Mishkin (2006)

and Kane (1989, 1991)). In this case, guarantees may be provided to large financial firms not because of

any wider economic benefits, but because failure on a regulator’s watch is too personally important, or

because regulators may accede to implicit industry pressure in order to be in line for favorable private-

sector jobs later. If higher government integrity (less corruption) makes such principal-agent violations

between regulators and taxpayers,this should reduce the likelihood of bailouts. This is exactly what the

result in Table 6 suggests.



5.2   Business Environment

Table 7 examines the relation between the size anomaly in financial stock returns and a country’s business

environment. The estimation framework is the same as in Table 6, except that some regressors exhibit

enough within-country variability that allows us to include country fixed effects. The independent variables

are an index that measures the strength of corporate disclosure (Disclose) and an index that measures

the strength of corporate governance (Govern). Higher values of these indices indicate stronger disclosure

and corporate governance requirements.

   We include as explanatory variables the number of publicly listed firms in the country (N f irm); an

index that measures the ability of the government to formulate and implement sound business regulations

(Regln); the strength of bankruptcy resolution measured by looking at average recovery rates, time

taken to resolve bankruptcy cases, outcomes, and cost of bankruptcy in a country (Bankrupt); and an

index that measures the extent of economic and political globalization (Global). Higher values in this

                                                      25
case indicate a country’s tighter regulation of businesses, stronger bankruptcy mechanisms, and more

globally connected economy. We relate the α to an index that measures the risk of appropriation by the

government (ExpropRisk) in a country. We also include variables that measure the size and importance

of stock markets in a country such as the overall market capitalization of all publicly listed firms in the

country (M ktcap), the average annual volatility of the primary stock market index (StockV ol), and the

average annual return on an index of all publicly traded firms in the country (StockRet).

   The results in Table 7 indicate less of a difference in the risk-adjusted return on LMS financial firms

in countries with stronger corporate disclosure and corporate governance requirements, in countries with

tighter business regulations, and in countries that are economically and globally more connected with

other countries. The LMS α is larger (more negative), however, in countries with tighter bankruptcy laws

and when there is a higher risk of government expropriation, and when the stock market is more volatile.

Finally, the size of the LMS α does not seem to be significantly related to either number of publicly listed

firms, overall stock market size, or the average aggregate stock return.

   There is a large literature that analyzes the effect of corporate disclosure and governance policies on

the financial outcomes for firms. To the extent that the size anomaly reflects implicit bailout guarantees

in financial disasters, the government essentially subsidizes large financial firms to take on tail risk. Any

external mechanism that counters such risk-taking behavior of financial firms would attenuate the anomaly.

Acharya, Amihud, and Litov (2011) show that stronger disclosure and corporate governance rules are such

mechanisms. They show that firms in countries with strong corporate governance do not take as much

risk as compared to firms in other countries. A negative association between corporate governance and

risk taking is also suggested by Laeven (2002), who shows that financial firms with more concentrated

ownership take more risks than financial firms with diverse ownership.

   Thus, the fact the extent of the size anomaly is inversely related to corporate governance is consistent

with the hypothesis that the anomaly is a manifestation of implicit government guarantees. The strength

of general disclosure laws can also affect the incentives of policymakers to engage in providing explicit or

implicit guarantees to TBTF financial firms. If regulators and policymakers know that their involvement

with a bailout of uninsured investors will receive considerable publicity and review, they might be less

willing to provide one.

   Stronger supervision and regulation of business and financial firms in particular can reduce the ex-

pectations of TBTF coverage. Stronger regulation could also make bailouts less likely if it reduces risks


                                                     26
taken and the subsequent losses that the failure of a financial firm imposes on taxpayers. In addition, a

strong regulatory framework, could also reduce risk taking by increasing the market discipline of financial

firms. For these reasons, it is not surprising that the coefficient on Regln is positive and economically

and statistically significant – stronger regulations reduce the incidence of distress and the likelihood of

bailout by regulators.

   Table 7 indicates (somewhat surprisingly) that the LMS α is more negative in countries with stronger

creditor rights, as captured by Bankrupt whose coefficient is negative and statistically significant. Ex-ante

one might expect stronger creditor rights to reduce the incentive of financial firms to take on unnecessary

risk (asset-substitution). Yet, Houston, Lin, Lin, and Ma (2010) in a study of 69 countries show that

stronger creditor rights are in fact correlated with higher risk. They find that stronger creditor rights

encourage financial firms to assume more risk, and that unnecessary risk taking significantly increases the

likelihood of financial crisis in the future. If large financial firms require bailout in the event of subsequent

financial crisis, stronger creditor rights should be related to a greater difference in the risk-adjusted returns

of large and small financial firms. This is exactly what we see in Table 7.

   The positive coefficient on Global is quite striking. It indicates less of a difference between the risk-

adjusted performance of large and small financial firms in countries that are more politically and econom-

ically connected with other countries. Obstfeld (1998) examines how the extent of globalization impacts

the national policy choices of a government and regulators. He finds that globalization has the beneficial

side-effect of disciplining governments, directing them toward sustainable budgets and price sustainability.

This implies that globalization might exert a similar downward pressure on fiscal profligacy in financial

firms. Thus, globalization (and a measure of openness) of an economy may give regulators and policy-

makers an incentive to refrain from protection of insolvent financial firms, thus reducing the likelihood of

bailouts.

   Table 7 also shows a higher LMS α in countries with a higher risk of expropriation, indicating that

market participants expect shareholders of large financial institutions are more likely to be bailed out in

the event of a financial crisis. This result is a bit puzzling, if the higher risk of expropriation implies that

governments and regulators are more likely to let shareholders of publicly listed firms (and of financial

firms in particular) be wiped out in the event of a financial crisis. That is, if expropriation is associated

with a higher probability that governments and regulators will take private property away from owners

(shareholders) of financial firms, the TBTF guarantees should not be priced in stock returns. On the


                                                       27
other hand, if market participants believe that governments and regulators are more likely to intervene

on behalf of shareholders of large financial firms in countries with a higher risk of expropriation, then our

results make sense.

   Finally, the coefficient on stock market volatility StockV ol is -4.10 (statistically significant at the 5%

level), indicating that higher volatility (in bad times) is associated with a greater gap in the risk-adjusted

returns of large and small financial firms. Standard neo-classical models (such as Cochrane (2008)) suggest

that improved macroeconomic conditions should be negatively correlated with stock market volatility,

that is, stock market volatility increases in bad times. The model in section 6 above also suggests that

in bad times, as the probability of financial crisis increases, the expected returns gap between size-sorted

portfolios of financial firms widens.



5.3   Financial Environment

Table 8 examines the relation between the size anomaly in financial stock returns and a country’s financial

sector environment. The independent variables are size of the financial sector in a country as measured by

the log of the total number of branches of financial firms (Branches) and the ratio of total financial sector

demand deposits to GDP (Deposits). We also include variables that measure the financial performance

of the financial sector: the ratio of non-performing loans to total loans (N onperf orm); the ratio of

total financial sector liquid assets (e.g., cash, liquid securities) to total book value of assets (Liquidity);

the return on equity of financial firms (P rof it); the ratio of defaulted loans to total loans (Def aults);

and leverage as measured by the total capital-to-assets ratio (Leverage). Variables that measure the

characteristics of the financial sector and the type of consumers that use financial services include the

total depth of public debt markets in a country (BondDepth) and the percentage of financial claims held

by non-residents (F oreign). We include a dummy variable that equals 1 if a country has deposit insurance

and the degree of concentration/competitition in the financial sector as a percentage of total assets held

by the top 3 (T op3) and top 5 largest financial firms (T op5). We also include measures of credit provided

by financial firms to private entities (P vtCredit) and to government-owned entities (GovCredit).

   Four key results emerge from the analysis in Table 8. First, there is a greater risk-adjusted difference

between the returns of large and small financial firms, the more dependent a country is on the finan-

cial sector, as measured by the number of financial firm branches in the country and the ratio of total

demand deposits-to-GDP. The coefficients on these variables are -11.20 and -6.35, resepectively and are

                                                      28
statistically significant at the 10% level or better. This result is consistent with the fact that regulators

and governments are more likely to provide implicit and explicit guarantees to financial firms in countries

where a higher percentage of the population accesses formal financial institutions.

   Poor performance of the financial sector increases the likelihood of a financial crisis and makes it more

likely that regulators will likely need to step in to bailout financial institutions that are at the risk of

failure. Indeed, we see that the LMS α increases when the ratio of non-performing loans in a country

increases, when financial firms are liquidity-constrained, when financial firms suffer from low profitability,

or when there is an increase in the percentage of non-performing assets (defaulted loans) held by financial

firms.

   Surprisingly, the overall leverage of the financial sector does not affect the likelihood of bailouts as

perceived by the shareholders of large financial firms. The coefficient on Leverage is not statistically

significant and has the wrong sign. An increase in the capital held by financial firms indicates that

bailouts are more likely (i.e., LMS α is more negative). This result is consistent with Jordà, Richter,

Schularick, and Taylor (2017), who show that the amount of capital held by financial firms is not a

significant predictor of financial crisis in the near future.

   Third, the size anomaly is lower in countries where bond markets are more developed and where a

higher percentage of claims on financial firms are held by foreigners. In contrast, the LMS α is higher

where the financial sector is more concentrated (and less competitive), as measured by the percentage of

financial sector assets held by the three or five largest financial firms in the country. Surprisingly, the

degree of government ownership of financial firms and the presence (or absence) of deposit insurance does

not seem to be statistically significantly related to the likelihood of bailouts as perceived by shareholders.

   The fact that bond market development and foreign ownership of financial firm claims reduce LMS α

is not surprising. If borrowers in a particular country have easy access to public debt markets, they are

less likely to be dependent on financial firms. This in turn makes financial firms less important for an

economy, and regulators more unwilling to expend valuable resources in an attempt to save large financial

firms.

   The fact that financial firm concentration increases the size anomaly for financial firms is consistent

with Boyd and De Nicolo (2005), who show that concentrated (less competitive) markets induce financial

firms to assume greater risk. Boyd and De Nicolo (2005) find a positive relation between concentration

and financial firm fragility and thus the probability of systemic distress. Similarly, Caminal and Matutes


                                                       29
(2002) show that less competition can lead to less credit rationing, larger loans, and a higher probability of

failure. Concentrated financial systems generally have fewer financial firms and render policymakers more

concerned about financing firm failures than when there are only a few financial firms. Thus, financial

firms in concentrated systems will tend to receive larger subsidies through implicit “too-important-to-fail”

policies that intensify risk-taking incentives and hence increase financial system fragility – this is exactly

what we find in the data.

   Finally, the relation between credit to private and government entities and shareholder perception

of implicit guarantees (as measured by the LMS α) is not statistically significant at conventional levels.

Interestingly, the coefficient on P vtCredit is positive and that on GovCredit is negative. Although, the

values are not statistically significant, the direction of the relation suggests that financial firms are more

likely to be bailed out when they have extended a large amount of credit to either the government or

government-owned entities, but not if they are providing credit primarily to private companies.



5.4    Sovereign Environment

In Table 9, we examine the link between the size anomaly in financial stock returns and a country’s

fiscal and sovereign environment. We capture that environment using the amount of fiscal surplus (as a

percentage of GDP) in the country (Surplus); the difference in the yield-to-maturity on the long-term

bond issued by a country and the yield-to-maturity on the long-term bond issued by the U.S. Treasury

(Spread); the ratio of central bank balance sheet assets to GDP (CentBank); the level of inflation

(Inf lation); and the per-capita GDP in the country. The results indicate a greater size (more negative)

in countries with a higher corporate tax rate, a higher ratio of central bank assets-to-GDP, and and a

higher per-capita GDP. These findings confirm that governments in better health are more likely to step

in and bailout large financial firms in the event of a financial crisis.

   The positive and statistically significant coefficient on Inf lation in Table 9 also makes sense. Histori-

cally, the most severe financial crises are also associated with severe economic contractions. For example,

in the U.S., the financial crises of 1857, 1873, 1893, 1907, and 1930-1933 were all accompanied by severe

economic contractions. This was also true of the recent credit crisis of 2007-2009. Financial crises almost

always involve sharp declines in asset prices and risk of deflation or disinflation. This is precisely when

the risk of failure of large financial firms is high.

   Finally, table 9 shows a more negative size anomaly, the higher the value of assets held by a country’s

                                                        30
central bank (as a percentage of GDP). Arguably, a well-equipped, well-financed central bank is needed

to provide support to large financial firms in the event of financial crisis, and large financial firms can be

supported only by the balance sheet of central banks.



5.5   Regulatory Environment

Finally, Table 10 relates the size anomaly to the response of regulators and policymakers to past financial

crises, as measured by the severity of a crisis (N P Level); the cost it imposes on regulators and gov-

ernments (Cost, LiqSupport, N P Level); and various variables capturing their response (SovDebtInc,

M onetaryExp, EntryBarrier, Supervision, P rivatize, Ref orm, and Restrict).

   We find a wider risk-adjusted spread between large and small firms when the costs imposed by a

recent financial crisis are high. When the loss of output during a financial crisis is high (Cost) or when

the government provides a large amount of liquidity to financial firms at the peak of the financial crisis

(LiqSupport), the spread between large and small financial firms widens. Similarly, the spread also

widens in an especially severe financial crisis. A substantial increase in the level of non-performing loans

(as a percentage of total financial sector loans) indicates the severity of the financial crisis, increases the

likelihood of bailouts of large financial firms, and thereby widens the risk-adjusted return spread between

large and small financial firms.

   Finally, when a financial crisis threatens, regulators and policymakers have two broad approaches

available to them. The first, which we call an accommodative approach, recommends that regulators and

policymakers support financial firms via various regulatory policies such as open-ended liquidity support,

repeated recapitalization, and blanket guarantees to their depositors and creditors. The alternative ap-

proach is to restore depositor confidence but to require financial firms to meet standard regulatory rules

(such as capital requirements) or face official intervention that includes bankruptcy resolution mechanisms.

If a particular country has adopted an accommodative approach to financial crises in the past, investors

would anticipate similar intervention in the future as well, and this would be reflected in a greater size

anomaly for financial firms.

   Table 10 reports that accommodative regulatory policies strengthen investors’ belief that large financial

firms will be supported in the event of a financial crisis. These beliefs manifest themselves in a wider

average risk-adjusted return spread to LMS. If the government had to issue substantial new sovereign

debt (SovDebtInc), or implement expansionary monetary policies (M onetaryExp), the LMS α widens

                                                      31
and becomes more negative.

   Tighter restrictions on the financial sector in response to a crisis, however, would reduce the possibility

that the next financial crisis would require outright support to debtholders and equityholders of large

financial firms, and hence diminish the difference in the risk-adjusted returns of large and small financial

firms. This is exactly what we find in the data. If financial sector supervision is tightened, if reforms are

enacted, and if restrictions are placed on financial sector activities in response to a recent financial crisis,

this reduces the likelihood that the next financial crisis would require large transfers from governments

and regulators to prevent liquidation of financial firms, and reduces the LMS α.

   As a last point, note that an increase in competition in the financial sector is associated with a

reduction (and not an increase) in the LMS α. When there are more private and public financial firms

in a country (non-government-owned), this is associated with a decline in LMS α by 7.04%, a result that

is statistically significant at the 1% level. This result is inconsistent with the conventional view that

“excessive competition” can lead to socially undesirable outcomes such as failures, financial crisis, runs,

and panics. Instead, this evidence is consistent with Boyd and De Nicolo (2005), who show that a more

competitive financial sector makes financial firms less (and not more) risky.


5.6   Placebo Test

We also carry out a placebo test by running all cross-sectional regressions for non-financials. In almost

all cases, the same variables are not significantly correlated with the non-financial LMS spread. In some

cases, these variables enter significantly with the wrong sign. For example, Disclose and Govern have

opposite signs when the non-financial spread LMS is on the left-hand side. There are some exceptions: the

common law dummy LU K and the Scandinavian law dummy LSC in Table 6; and the liquidity variable and

the concentration variable Conc5 in Table 8 – all enter with the same sign and are statistically significant

when the non-financial spread LMS is on the left-hand-side, but the coefficient on LSC and Conc5 is at

least twice as high for financials. Only the common law dummy LU K (Table 6) and liquidity (Table 8)

enter with the same sign and size.


5.7   Summary

We reiterate that if the size anomaly for financial firms is simply the equivalent of that already documented

for non-financial firms, ex ante, we should not see any connection between the extent of the anomaly and

                                                      32
the legal, business, and regulatory framework in a particular country. In untabulated results, we confirm

that these results also hold for just the largest financial firms in a country, and are robust to varying

specifications (such as including a dummy variable for just developed markets). Overall, a country’s

institutional framework captures a substantial fraction of the cross-sectional and time-series variation in

the size anomaly in the financial sector, which is tied to the time-varying probability of implicit or explicit

government guarantees to large (but not small) financial firms in a country.



6         The Cost of Equity Capital in a Bailout-Augmented Model with

          Financial Disaster Risk
We provide a simple model of financial crises and bailouts based on Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh

(2016). In the model, financial crises are periods of elevated risk of a financial disaster, modeled following

Barro (2006) and Rietz (1988). The critical difference between financial firms and non-financial ones

is their susceptibility to runs during financial crises. Historically, runs have been made by depositors,

but in the modern financial system they are made by other creditors such as investors in asset-backed

commercial paper, repos, and money market mutual funds (see Gorton and Metrick (2009)). This leads

us to take financial disasters as a source of aggregate risk. To model the asset pricing impact of financial

disasters, we use a version of the Rietz (1988); Longstaff and Piazzesi (2004); Barro (2006) asset pricing

model with a time-varying probability of disasters, as developed by Gourio (2008); Gabaix (2012); Wachter

(2013). The model features two sources of priced risk: Gaussian risk and financial disaster (tail) risk. We

model the collective government guarantee as a floor on the aggregate financial company losses that the

government will tolerate in a financial disaster. Through this truncation, the government eliminates part

of the sectorwide tail risk, but it does not eliminate idiosyncratic tail risk. Effectively, the government

provides a subsidy for insurance against the effects of systemic financial disasters. While non-financial

corporations are also subject to the aggregate risk generated by financial disasters, their exposure is more

limited and they do not enjoy the collective bailout guarantee that supports the financial sector.22

         We take the bailout-augmented dynamic asset pricing model of Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh

(2016).



    22
    Muir (2016) compares the implications of this class of models to data on financial crises, and finds that risk premiums
are not sufficiently responsive prior to these episodes.


                                                            33
6.1   Preferences

We consider a representative agent with Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences over non-durable consumption

flows. For any asset return Ri,t+1 , this agent faces the standard Euler equation:


                                         1 = Et [Mt+1 Ri,t+1 ] ,                                         (1)
                                                      − α
                                               α Ct+1
                                                           ψ
                                                                 α−1
                                      Mt+1 = β                Ra,t+1 ,                                   (2)
                                                   Ct

            1−γ
where α ≡      1
            1− ψ
                   , γ measures risk aversion, and ψ is the elasticity of inter-temporal substitution (EIS).

The log of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) m = log(M ) is given by:

                                                     α
                                  mt+1 = α log β −     ∆ct+1 + (α − 1)ra,t+1 .                           (3)
                                                     ψ

                                                                 α
All lowercase letters denote logs. We note and use later that    ψ   + 1 − α = γ.



6.2   Uncertainty

There is a time-varying probability of disaster, pt . This probability follows an I-state Markov chain. Let

Π be the 1 × I steady-state distribution of the Markov chain and P the I × 1 grid with probability states.

The mean disaster probability is ΠP. The Markov chain is uncorrelated with the other consumption and

dividend growth shocks introduced below, although, the volatility of Gaussian consumption and dividend

growth risk potentially varies with the Markov state. This allows us to capture higher Gaussian risk in

bad states associated with high disaster probabilities.

   In state i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , I}, the consumption process (∆ct+1 ) is given by a standard Gaussian component

and a disaster risk component:


                                ∆ct+1 = µc + σci ηt+1 ,      if no disaster                              (4)
                                                         c
                                ∆ct+1 = µc + σci ηt+1 − Jt+1 ,       if disaster,                        (5)


where η is a standard normal random variable, and J c is a Poisson mixture of normals governing the size

of the consumption drop (jump) in the disaster state. We adopt the Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011)

model of consumption disasters. The random variable J c is a Poisson mixture of normal random variable.

                                                       34
                                                        n
The number of jumps is n with probability e−ω ωn! . Conditional on n, J c is normal with mean (nθc ) and

variance nδc2 . Thus, the parameter ω (jump intensity) reflects the average number of jumps, θc the mean

jump size, and δc the dispersion in jump size. Finally, we allow for heteroscedasticity in the Gaussian

component of consumption growth: σci depends on the Markov state i.23


6.3      Dividends of Individual Firms in the Financial Sector

In state i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , I}, the dividend process of an individual financial firm is given by:


                      ∆dt+1 = µd + φd σci ηt+1 + σdi ǫt+1 ,        if no disaster                                   (6)
                                                             d         a
                      ∆dt+1 = µd + φd σci ηt+1 + σdi ǫt+1 − Jt+1 − λd Jt+1 ,          if disaster                   (7)


where ǫt+1 is standard normal and i.i.d. across time. It is the sum of an idiosyncratic and an aggregate
                                                          d − λ Ja
                                                                      
component, which we introduce below. The term exp −Jt+1          d t+1 can be thought of as the recovery

rate in case of a disaster event. The loss rate varies across financial firms. It has an idiosyncratic

component J d and a common component J a . The parameter λd governs the exposure of the financial firm

to aggregate tail risk. The cross-sectional mean of λd is 1. The idiosyncratic jump component is a Poisson

mixture of normals that are i.i.d. across time and financial firms, but with common parameters (ω, θd , δd ).

We set θd = 0, which implies that the idiosyncratic jump is truly idiosyncratic; during a disaster the

average jump in any stock’s log dividend growth is equal to the common component −λd E[J a ].


6.4      Collective Bailout Option

The key feature of the model is the presence of the collective government guarantee, which we model as

a ceiling J on the common component of the loss rate of the financial sector. The common component

of the loss rate becomes the minimum of the maximum tolerated sectorwide loss rate J and the actual

realized aggregate loss rate J r :
                                                 a          r
                                                Jt+1 = min(Jt+1 , J)                                                (8)

       We model J r as a Poisson mixture of normals with parameters (ω, θr , δr ). For simplicity, we assume

that the jump intensity is perfectly correlated among the three jump processes (J c , J i , J r ), but the jump
  23
    Note that when J c is activated, we have already conditioned on occurrence of a disaster. Therefore, the parameter ω
is not the disaster frequency but rather the mean of the number of jumps, conditional on a disaster. There is a non-zero
probability e−ω of zero jumps in the disaster state. In what follows we normalize ω to 1.


                                                            35
size distributions are independent. We can think of the no-bailout case as J → +∞, so that J a = J r .




6.5   Valuing the Market and Equity


We start by valuing the consumption claim. Consider the investor’s Euler equation for the consumption
                a ] = 1. This can be decomposed as:
claim Et [Mt+1 Rt+1

                                              α ND        ND                             α
      1 = (1 − pt )Et [exp(α log β −            ∆ct+1 + αra,t+1 )] + pt Et [exp(α log β − ∆cD      D
                                                                                               + αra,t+1 )],    (9)
                                              ψ                                          ψ t+1

where N D (D) denotes the Gaussian (disaster) component of consumption growth, dividend growth, or

returns. We define “resilience” for the consumption claim as:


                                   Htc = 1 + pt Et exp (γ − 1)Jt+1
                                                               c
                                                                    
                                                                     −1 .                                      (10)


   The Euler equation simplifies to:

                                                                                  
                                                    α ND
                     1=   Htd Et                                     ND       ND
                                       exp α log β − ∆ct+1 + (α − 1)ra,t+1 + rd,t+1    .                       (11)
                                                    ψ

   We define the log resilience as:


             hct ≡ log(Htc ) = log 1 + pt exp h̄c − 1 ,
                                                   
                                                                                                               (12)

             h̄c ≡ log Et exp (γ − 1)Jt+1c
                                              = ω exp (γ − 1)θc + 0.5(γ − 1)2 δc2 − 1 ,
                                                                                 
                                                                                                               (13)


where we used the cumulant-generating function to compute h̄c . It is now clear that resilience varies only
                                                                                                 d ] = 1,
with the probability of a disaster pt . The investor’s Euler equation for the stock is Et [Mt+1 Rt+1

which can be decomposed as:

                                                                                 
                                                α ND               ND        ND
                   1 = (1 − pt )Et exp(α log β − ∆ct+1 + (α − 1)ra,t+1 + rd,t+1 )                              (14)
                                                ψ
                                                                               
                                             α
                       +pt Et exp(α log β − ∆cD    + (α − 1)r D
                                                                    + r D
                                                                              ).                               (15)
                                             ψ t+1            a,t+1     d,t+1



                                                           36
If we define “resilience” for the dividend claim as:

                                        h    n                       oi   
                                                 c
                           Htd = 1 + pt Et exp γJt+1    d
                                                     − Jt+1       a
                                                            − λd Jt+1    −1 ,                             (16)


then the Euler equation simplifies to:

                                                                                   
                                                     α ND
                      1=   Htd Et                                     ND       ND
                                        exp α log β − ∆ct+1 + (α − 1)ra,t+1 + rd,t+1    .                 (17)
                                                     ψ

   The log resilience of the stock is defined as before, but is determined by the bailout:


                               hdt ≡ log 1 + pt exp h̄d − 1 ,
                                                          
                                                                                                          (18)
                                           h    n                       oi
                                                   c      d         a
                               h̄d ≡ log Et exp γJt+1  − Jt+1 − λd Jt+1    .                              (19)


   The dynamics of hdt are fully determined by the dynamics of pt , which follows a Markov chain. Denote

by hdi the resilience in Markov state i. By using the independence of the three jump processes conditional

on a given number of jumps, we can simplify the last term to:

                             ∞ −ω n
                             X e ω                          2 δ2 )                2
              h̄d = log                      en(γθc +0.5γ      c     en(−θd +0.5δd )                      (20)
                             n=0
                                        n!
                                                    J − nθr + nλd δr2
                                                                                         
                                         2 2                                         nθr − J
                        × en(−λd θr +0.5λd δr ) Φ        √              + e−λd J Φ    √          .        (21)
                                                           nδr                          nδr

   The derivation uses proposition 1 below. The last expression, while somewhat complicated, is straight-
                                                                                                            2 2
forward to compute. In the no-bailout case (J → +∞), the last exponential term reduces to en(−λd θr +0.5λd δr ) .

Hence, in the no-bailout case, the resilience is given by:


                        h̄d = ω exp γθc − θd − λd θr + 0.5(γ 2 δc2 + δθ2 + λ2d δr2 ) − 1
                                                                                       



An increase in bailout protection always makes the stock more resilient.

Proposition 1. Consider two stocks i and j with the same exposures to the Gaussian risk factors. The

expected return spread in a non-disaster sample is given by the differences in the resilience of these two

securities:
                      N D,i                 i,N D          j,N D                 i,N D
                 Et [rt+1   ] + (1/2)vart [rt+1   ] − Et [rt+1   ] − (1/2)vart [rt+1   ] = hd,j  d,i
                                                                                            t − ht .


                                                                 37
    The proof is in Appendix A. All else equal, an increase in the bailout (smaller J) tends to increase

the resilience of the stock and reduce the expected return in a non-disaster sample. In particular, a large

financial firm stock that benefits from a bailout has negative risk-adjusted returns when benchmarked

against small financial firm stocks that do not benefit directly from the bailout. To see why, fix the

Gaussian and tail risk exposures (ωd , θd , δd ; ωr , θr , δr , λ) for stocks i and j. If j benefits from a bailout but

i does not, then hd,j  d,i
                  t − ht > 0, and hence i will earn higher risk-adjusted returns in a normal sample.

Any variables that affect the likelihood of a bailout will in turn impact expected excess returns net of

standard risk through its effect on resilience.

    An increase in the probability of a disaster reduces the dividend yield on the stock with the greatest

resilience by less. This prediction of the model is confirmed in the data.


Proposition 2. Consider two stocks i and j with the same exposures to the Gaussian risk factors. When

the Markov states are highly persistent, the spread in dividend yields is given approximately by:

                                                              hd,i            hd,j
                                            pdit − pdjt ≈      t
                                                                        −      t
                                                            1 − κ1d,i       1 − κ1d,j

               epd
where κd1 =         .
              1+epd


    The proof is in Appendix A. Recall that the dynamics in hdt are completely driven by the probability

of a rare event. The model implies that the spread in dividend yields between large and small financial

firm stocks has predictive power for large drops in the stock market and GDP.24



7     Conclusion
There is an active debate about forcing banks to carry more equity capital as a buffer against large adverse

shocks to the financial system. If markets are efficient, then bank equity is not an expensive source of

funding, and imposing higher capital requirements does not reduce bank value. Our international evidence

does not support the notion that leverage-constrained investors inflate the share prices of large bank stocks.

Instead, we find evidence that equity has always been a cheap source of funding for the largest banks in

a country. In developed countries, only the largest banks’ stock earns negative risk-adjusted returns, but
   24
      In Section A.3 of the Appendix, we solve for the equilibrium price of individual and index stock returns. The appendix
derives the equity risk premium. Absent the bailout guarantee, the disaster risk premium would be γλd pi (2 − pi )θc θr , which
is always higher than the equity premium in the presence of a guarantee. Thus, the government guarantee reduces the cost
of capital to financial firms.


                                                              38
in emerging market countries, other large nonbank financial firms do. The large-minus-small, financial-

minus-non-financial, risk-adjusted spread varies across countries in ways that are consistent with the idea

that stock investors price in the implicit government guarantees that protect shareholders of the largest

banks in developed countries.




                                                    39
References
Acharya, V. V., Y. Amihud, and L. Litov. 2011. Creditor rights and corporate risk-taking. Journal of

  Financial Economics 102:150–166.


Acharya, V. V., D. Anginer, and A. J. Warburton. 2013. The end of market discipline? Investor ex-

  pectations of implicit state guarantees. Working paper, New York University Stern School of Business

  .


Acharya, V. V., I. Drechsler, and P. Schnabl. 2014. A Pyrrhic victory? Bank bailouts and sovereign credit

  risk. Journal of Finance 69:2689–2739.


Admati, A. R., P. M. DeMarzo, M. F. Hellwig, and P. C. Pfleiderer. 2011. Fallacies, irrelevant facts, and

  myths in the discussion of capital regulation: Why bank equity is not expensive .


Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang. 2009. High idiosyncratic volatility and low returns:

  International and further U.S. evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 91:1–23.


Atkeson, A. G., A. L. Eisfeldt, and P.-O. Weill. 2013. Measuring the financial soundness of US firms,

  1926-2012. Working paper, NBER .


Backus, D., M. Chernov, and I. Martin. 2011. Disasters implied by equity index options. Journal of

  Finance 66:1969–2012.


Baker, M., B. Bradley, and J. Wurgler. 2011. Benchmarks as limits to arbitrage: Understanding the

  low-volatility anomaly. Financial Analysts Journal 67:40–54.


Baker, M., and J. Wurgler. 2015. Do strict capital requirements raise the cost of capital? Bank regula-

  tion, capital structure and the low-risk anomaly. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings

  105:315–320.


Banz, R. W. 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks. Journal of

  Financial Economics 9:3–18.


Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer. 2015. X-CAPM: An extrapolative capital asset

  pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics 115:1–24.

                                                   40
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1998. A model of investor sentiment. Journal of Financial

  Economics 49:307 – 343.

Baron, M., and W. Xiong. 2017. Credit expansion and neglected crash risk. Quarterly Journal of Eco-

  nomics forthcoming.

Barro, R. 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly Journal of Economics

  121:823–866.

Basu, S. 1983. The relationship between earnings’ yield, market value and return for NYSE common

  stocks: Further evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 12:129–156.

Beaver, W., M. McNichols, and R. Price. 2007. Delisting returns and their effect on accounting-based

  market anomalies. Journal of Accounting and Economics 43:341–368.

Bebchuk, L. A., A. Cohen, and H. Spamann. 2010. The wages of failure: Executive compensation at Bear

  Stearns and Lehman 2000-2008. Yale Journal on Regulation 27:257.

Berk, J. 1997. Does size really matter? Financial Analysts Journal 53:12–18.

Bond, P., and I. Goldstein. 2015. Government intervention and information aggregation by prices. Journal

  of Finance 70:2777–2812.

Boyd, J. H., and G. De Nicolo. 2005. The theory of bank risk taking and competition revisited. Journal

  of Finance 60:1329–1343.

Caminal, R., and C. Matutes. 2002. Market power and banking failures. International Journal of Industrial

  Organization 20:1341–1361.

Cochrane, J. H. 2008. The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability. Review of Finance

  21:1533–1575.

Epstein, L., and S. Zin. 1989. Substitution risk aversion and the temporal behavior of consumption and

  asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57:937–968.

Fahlenbrach, R., R. Prilmeier, and R. M. Stulz. 2012. This time is the same: Using bank performance in

  1998 to explain bank performance during the recent financial crisis. Journal of Finance 67:2139–2185.

                                                   41
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French. 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal

  of Financial Economics 33:3–56.

Frazzini, A., and L. H. Pedersen. 2014. Betting against beta. Journal of Financial Economics 1:111–125.

Gabaix, X. 2012. Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-finance.

  Quarterly Journal of Economics 127:645–700.

Gandhi, P., and H. Lustig. 2015. Size anomalies in bank stock returns. Journal of Finance 70:733–768.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 2012. Neglected risks, financial innovation, and financial fragility.

  Journal of Financial Economics 104:452–468.

Gomez-Mejia, L., and S. Werner. 2008. Global compensation: Foundations and perspectives. Routledge.

Gorton, G., and A. Metrick. 2009. Securitized banking and the run on repo. NBER working paper 15223.

Gourio, F. 2008. Time-series predictability in the disaster model. Finance Research Letters 5(4):191–203.

Harvey, C. R., and A. Siddique. 2000. Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. Journal of Finance

  55:1263–1295.

Houston, J. F., C. Lin, P. Lin, and Y. Ma. 2010. Creditor rights, information sharing, and bank risk

  taking. Journal of Financial Economics 96:485–512.

Jordà, Ò., B. Richter, M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor. 2017. Bank capital redux: Solvency, liquidity,

  and crisis .

Kane, E. (ed.). 1991. Repairing defects in regulatory accountability, 102-23. U.S. Congress. House. Com-

  mittee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, Subcommittee on Financial Institution Supervision,

  Regulation, and Insurance.

Kane, E. J. 1989. The S & L isurance mess: How did it happen? The Urban Insitute.

Keim, D. B. 1983. Size-related anomalies and stock return seasonality: Further empirical evidence. Journal

  of Financial Economics 12:13–32.

Kelly, B., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh. 2016. Too-systemic-to-fail: What option markets imply

  about sector-wide government guarantees. American Economic Review 106:1278–1319.

                                                      42
Krishnamurthy, A., T. Muir, and S. Yale. 2015. Credit spreads and the severity of financial crises. Working

  paper, Stanford University .

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2002. Government ownership of banks. Journal of

  Finance 57:265–301.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 2000. Investor protection and corporate

  governance. Journal of Financial Economics 58:3 – 27.

Laeven, L. 2002. Bank risk and deposit insurance. The World Bank Economic Review 16:109–137.

Laeven, L., and F. Valencia. 2008. Systemic banking crises: A new database. IMF Working Paper 08/224

  .

Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. 1994. Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk.

  Journal of Finance 49:1541–1578.

Longstaff, F. A., and M. Piazzesi. 2004. Corporate earnings and the equity premium. Journal of Financial

  Economics 74:401–421.

Minton, B. A., R. M. Stulz, and A. G. Taboada. 2017. Are larger banks valued more highly? URL

  http://www.nber.org/papers/w23212.

Mishkin, F. S. 2006. How big a problem is too big to fail? A review of Gary Stern and Ron Feldman’s

  Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts. Journal of Economic Literature 44:988–1004.

Muir, T. 2016. Financial crises and risk premia. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.

Obstfeld, M. 1998. The global capital market: Benefactor or menace. Journal of Economic Perspectives

  12:9–30.

Office, U. G. A. 2014. Large bank holding companies: Expectations of government support .

Panageas, S. 2010. Optimal taxation in the presence of bailouts. Journal of Monetary Economics 57:101–

  116.

Reinganum, M. R. 1983. The anomalous stock market behavior of small firms in January: Empirical tests

  for tax-loss selling effects. Journal of Financial Economics 12:89–104.

                                                    43
Rietz, T. A. 1988. The equity risk premium: A solution. Journal of Monetary Economics 22:117–131.

Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer. 2015. New evidence on the impact of financial crises in advanced

  countries. Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley .

Sarin, N., and L. H. Summers. 2016. Have big banks gotten safer. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

  pp. 15–16.

Stern, G. H., and R. J. Feldman. 2004. Too big to fail: The hazards of bank bailouts. Brookings Institution

  Press.

Van Binsbergen, J. H., and C. C. Opp. 2017. Real anomalies. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic

  Research.

Wachter, J. A. 2013. Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market volatility?

  Journal of Finance 68:987–1035.




                                                    44
                                                                                                                                                                                        20.38
                                           10                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fraction of overall market capitalization
                                                 6.21
                                                (4.28)
                    Risk−adjusted return


                                            5                                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                 0.95                                                                                      3.55
                                                                 0.63           (0.90)
                                                                                                                                          0.27          0.38
                                                                (0.47)
                                                                                                                                         (0.32) 0.96   (0.41) 1.66
                                                                                                      0.28         0.42           0.61
                                                         0.07            0.13            0.19
                                            0                                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                 −0.71                       −0.69
                                                                                                (−1.09)       −1.09         (−0.79)                                   −1.34
                                                                                                             (−1.32)
                                                                                                                                                                     (−1.78)



                                                                                                                                                                                   −3.41
                                                                                                                                                                                  (−3.17)
                                           −5


                                                     1               2               3               4            5              6            7             8             9           10
                                                                                                                   Size decile




Figure 1. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms vs. non-financial firms for all
deciles.
This figure displays the average annualized risk-adjusted returns of all 10 size-sorted portfolios of financial versus non-financial firms by
country (black bars, in percentage, left-Y axis), together with the fraction of overall market capitalization accounted for by each decile
of financial firms (grey bars, in percentage, right-Y axis). In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and non-financial
firms, separately, into 10 portfolios by market capitalization. We regress excess returns of the decile portfolios on the Fama and French
(1993) risk factors. Figures in parentheses are t-statistics. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is
selected.




                                                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                                                      Risk−adjusted returns of size−sorted portfolios
                                                                         10



                                                                          5



                               Annualized Risk−adjusted return (in %)     0



                                                                        −5



                                                                        −10



                                                                        −15



                                                                        −20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        46
                                                                        −25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Taiwan
                                                                                                                                                                                                 France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                             Korea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Peru




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                              Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Japan
                                                                                                                          Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Israel




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Singapore




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                              Indonesia




                                                                                                                Belgium
                                                                                          India
                                                                                                  Philippines




                                                                                                                                                     Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Canada




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Chile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                       Germany
                                                                                                                                   Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           South Africa




Figure 2. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms vs non-financial firms
This figure presents the risk-adjusted returns of size-sorted portfolios of financial firms vs non-financial firms by country. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms
and non-financial firms, separately, into 10 portfolios by market capitalization. All returns are denominated in local currency for each country. The black solid line presents the
cross-sectional average risk-adjusted return and the red dashed line presents the cross-sectional median risk-adjusted return for the LMS portfolio. For each country, the longest
available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.
Table 1. Summary statistics.
Notes: Panel A presents summary statistics for the financial firms in our sample, by country. We report the number of distinct financial
firms (N ); the percentage of all publicly listed firms classified as financial firms (%N ), and the average market capitalization of financial
firms as a percentage of total market capitalization of all publicly listed firms (%M Cap) in each country. Year indicates the starting
year for the country in our sample. Panel B shows the summary statistics for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms. In each month, for
each country, we sort financial firms into 10 portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with the
highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. LMS denotes the monthly return of large minus small. We report the number
of distinct financial firms (N ); the average market capitalization as a percentage of the market capitalization of the entire financial
intermediary sector (%F Cap); the turnover rate – computed as the probability (in %) that a firm migrates to another portfolio in the
subsequent month (%T urn); the average value-weighted monthly return (Ret); and its t-statistic based on standard errors clustered by
time and country. All returns are denominated in local currency. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                                                       Panel A: By country
      Country                    Classification                       Y ear               N              %N                    %M Cap
      Australia                   developed                           1991               332            12.26                    24.99
      Belgium                     developed                           1995                82            29.30                    35.75
      Brazil                       emerging                           1998               101            15.98                    14.78
      Canada                      developed                           1989               472            12.81                    36.45
      Chile                        emerging                           1997                67            23.05                    32.10
      China                        emerging                           1995               180            13.39                    22.07
      Denmark                     developed                           1989               104            30.34                    22.15
      France                      developed                           1990               218            14.88                    15.60
      Germany                     developed                           1989               476            26.23                    28.85
      Hong Kong                   developed                           1987               294            33.85                    49.39
      India                        emerging                           1991               778            10.26                     9.35
      Indonesia                    emerging                           1995               174            26.63                    25.00
      Israel                      developed                           1987               252            34.96                    36.66
      Italy                       developed                           1987               135            32.41                    44.40
      Japan                       developed                           1980               481             8.75                    19.27
      Malaysia                     emerging                           1987               188            17.61                    19.45
      Mexico                       emerging                           1994                71            20.59                    11.91
      Peru                         emerging                           2005                55            28.13                    40.16
      Philippines                  emerging                           1992               122            31.23                    27.56
      Poland                       emerging                           2009               146            15.96                    39.42
      Singapore                   developed                           1987               116            25.88                    41.72
      South Africa                 emerging                           1991               180            16.30                    22.11
      South Korea                 developed                           1985               248            16.52                    20.78
      Spain                       developed                           1999                79            33.09                    40.81
      Sweden                      developed                           1995               109            19.01                    26.88
      Switzerland                 developed                           1990               111            29.08                    32.79
      Taiwan                       emerging                           1997               124             9.93                    24.52
      Thailand                     emerging                           1989               174            26.35                    34.05
      Turkey                       emerging                           2001                81            14.63                    31.29
      UK                          developed                           1980               778            14.04                    17.85
      USA                         developed                           1980            3, 201            21.00                    13.16

                                                                  Panel B: By size-sorted portfolio
                                           small                                   large                                 LMS

                         N          %F Cap         %T urn Ret           N    %F Cap %T urn Ret                     Ret          t-stat
      All countries     143          0.28           12.65 20.06         46    72.54   2.84 12.22                 −7.84   ∗∗∗     −2.98
      Developed markets 197          0.20           11.55 14.60         57    76.01   2.33 10.87                 −3.74   ∗∗∗       3.11
      Emerging markets 77            0.42           16.17 29.29         32    66.59   3.94 14.52                −14.77   ∗∗∗     −4.32




                                                                       47
Table 2. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms and non-financial firms.
Notes: This table presents estimates from pooled OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios on equity risk
factors. All returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and
non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with
the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, denoted LMS,
using Fama and French (1993) risk factors. The table displays the estimates for risk-adjusted return (α) and its t-statistic based on
standard errors clustered by time and country. Columns titled Fin refer to financial firms, columns titled Non-fin refer to non-financial
firms, and columns titled Fin Minus Non-fin refer to their difference. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients are annualized, multiplied by 100, and expressed in percentages. For each country, the
longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                               Fin                   Non-fin           Fin Minus Non-Fin

                                           α         t-stat         α        t-stat        α         t-stat

                                                          Panel   A: All countries
                                Large -2.41∗∗        -2.41         1.46∗∗∗     2.89      -3.86∗∗∗     -3.50
                                Small  8.07∗∗∗        3.75         3.98∗∗∗     3.01       4.09∗∗∗      2.93
                                LMS -10.47∗∗∗        -4.50        -2.52∗      -1.72      -7.96∗∗∗     -4.73

                                                       Panel B: Developed markets
                                Large    -3.40∗∗∗    -3.01       0.91∗      1.68         -4.31∗∗∗     -3.11
                                Small     6.07∗∗∗     2.65       4.12∗∗     2.34          1.95∗        1.79
                                LMS      -9.47∗∗∗    -3.83      -3.21∗     -1.69         -6.26∗∗∗     -3.54

                                                       Panel C: Emerging markets
                                Large -1.51          -1.04       2.19∗∗∗   2.94          -3.70∗∗      -2.44
                                Small 12.31∗∗∗        3.18       3.81∗∗∗   2.02           8.51∗∗∗      3.23
                                LMS -13.82∗∗∗        -3.26      -1.62∗∗∗  -0.76         -12.21∗∗∗     -4.25




                                                                     48
Table 3. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolio of largest financial firms by type.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the pooled OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios of financial
firms on standard stock risk factors for data. All returns and risk factors expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country,
we sort financial firms into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large denotes the portfolio of firms with the highest
market capitalization. We regress excess returns to large on the Fama and French (1993) risk factors. The table displays the estimates
for the risk-adjusted return (α) and its t-statistic based on standard errors clustered by time and country. The first two columns report
the results for the longest available sample for each country, the next two columns report the results over 1990-2013, and the last two
columns report the results over 2000-2013. The large portfolio is split into Banks & Financial Services, Insurance, and RE Investment
firms. Results are reported when pooling across countries (Panel A), across developed markets only (Panel B), and across emerging
markets only (Panel C). Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients
are annualized, multiplied by 100, and expressed in percentages. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31,
2013 is selected.


                                                   Full Sample               1990-2013              2000-2013

                                                    α          t-stat        α        t-stat        α        t-stat

                                                            Panel A: All countries
                        Banks & Fin Services     -2.01∗        -1.80       -2.17∗∗    -1.83      -3.16∗∗     -2.08
                        Insurance                -0.29         -0.25       -0.32      -0.27      -1.44       -1.06
                        RE Investment            -2.28∗∗∗      -3.42       -2.11∗∗∗   -3.01      -2.07∗      -1.66

                                                       Panel   B: Developed markets
                        Banks & Fin Services     -3.29∗∗       -2.28      -3.78∗∗   -2.44        -6.40∗∗∗    -3.48
                        Insurance                -0.21         -0.18      -0.30     -0.24        -1.35       -0.76
                        RE Investment            -1.87∗        -1.67      -1.60     -1.41        -1.30       -0.98

                                                       Panel   C: Emerging markets
                        Banks & Fin Services     -0.64         -0.47     -0.50     -0.37          0.20        0.13
                        Insurance                -2.06         -1.02     -1.93     -0.97         -1.93       -1.55
                        RE Investment            -3.72∗∗∗      -4.71     -3.64∗∗∗  -4.45         -3.72       -1.56




                                                                        49
Table 4. Forecasting regressions for the aggregate stock market and gross domestic product.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from a pooled conditional fixed-effect Logit regression. The dependent variable is a dummy
variable that takes a value of 1 when the country H-month ahead growth rate of gross domestic product (for Panel A) or the H-month
ahead return on the aggregate stock market index (for Panel B) is below its 10th -percentile, with H = {3, 6, 9, 12}. In each month, for
each country, we sort financial firms into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of
firms with the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. The independent variable is the monthly value-weighted dividend
yield of large over small financial firms, denoted by DYLM S . In each panel, the first row reports the loading on the DYLM S portfolio,
and the second row reports its corresponding t-statistic. The last row indicates the change in the odds of a drop in the H-period ahead
return of the aggregate stock index or gross domestic product growth rates below its 10th -percentile for a 1-standard deviation increase
in the monthly return to LMS. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. For
each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                                               Horizon (H) in months
                                                        3            6          9             12

                                                   Panel A: Gross   domestic product
                                      DYLM S         -2.73∗∗         -2.44∗     -2.51∗       -1.30
                                      t-stat         -2.27           -1.90      -1.91        -0.90
                                      ∆ Odds (%)    12.43           11.04       11.38         5.75

                                                   Panel B: Aggregate stock market
                                      DYLM S         -2.02∗∗∗     -0.57       -0.06          -0.55
                                      t-stat         -2.97        -0.76       -0.07          -0.73
                                      ∆ Odds (%)      9.12         2.49        0.24           2.42




                                                                    50
Table 5. Performance of the LMS portfolio for financial firms during economic crisis.
Notes: This table shows the value of $100 invested in a portfolio that goes long in large financial firms and short in small financial firms
during economic crisis. In each country, an economic crisis is defined as quarters in which the GDP is below the 10th −percentile level
for that country. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios
by market capitalization. Large and small refer to firms with the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. LMS is the
monthly excess return of large over small firms. In each country, $100 is invested in this portfolio at the start of the crisis. The column
labeled Value represents the risk-adjusted return on this portfolio at the end of the crisis. The columns labeled Delistings represents
the average number of financial firms classified as small at the start of the crisis that delist per month during the crisis in excess of the
number of firms that are in the large portfolio at the start of the crisis that delist per month during the crisis. The number of delisted
firms is expressed as a percentage of firms in the small and large portfolio at the start of the crisis, respectively.

                                                             Value            Crisis delistings

                                          Country                          small    large     LMS


                                                           Panel A: Country-level

                                          Australia          128.36         2.38     2.22     -0.16
                                          Belgium             81.42         2.22     0.00     -2.22
                                          Brazil              96.99         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Canada              80.46         0.62     0.00     -0.62
                                          Chile              123.12         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          China              111.95         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Denmark            136.95         0.95     0.00     -0.95
                                          France             167.22         1.11     0.38     -0.73
                                          Germany            104.78         0.41     1.79      1.38
                                          Hong Kong           99.13         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          India               85.84         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Indonesia           67.41         2.22     0.00     -2.22
                                          Israel              89.98         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Italy               91.60         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Japan              106.01         0.37     0.13     -0.24
                                          Malaysia            69.54         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Mexico             110.70         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Peru               101.23         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Philippines         93.91         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Poland             129.56         0.37     0.21     -0.15
                                          Singapore           80.67         1.85     0.00     -1.85
                                          South Africa       169.96         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          South Korea         69.82         6.06     0.00     -6.06
                                          Spain              114.07         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Sweden             169.61         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Switzerland        118.87         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          Taiwan             114.48         4.17     0.00     -4.17
                                          Thailand            80.50         1.18     0.49     -0.69
                                          Turkey              45.26         0.00     0.00      0.00
                                          UK                 138.87         2.05     0.86     -1.19
                                          USA                107.75         0.66     0.00     -0.66



                                                          Panel B: Group averages

                                          All countries     106.00          0.86     0.20     -0.66
                                          developed markets 116.19          0.90     0.38     -0.52
                                          emerging markets   97.61          0.82     0.04     -0.78




                                                                      51
Table 6. Legal environment and the size anomaly for financial firms.
Notes: This table reports the results for a panel regression of the risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio of financial firms on variables
capturing a country’s legal environment. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and non-financial firms separately
into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest market
capitalization, respectively. We regress the difference in the return to large minus small, denoted LMS, on the Fama and French (1993)
risk factors over 2-year non-overlapping windows. The dependent variable is the estimated risk-adjusted return on LMS for country j.
The regressors are: a dummy variable that equals 1 if country j follows UK law (LU K ); a dummy variable that equals 1 if country
j follows French law (LF R ); a dummy variable that equals 1 if country j follows German law (LGR ); a dummy variable that equals
1 if country j follows Scandinavian law (LSC ); an index measuring property rights in a country (P roperty); an index measuring how
left-leaning the Federal government is in a country (Lef t); and an index measuring the perception of integrity of the government in
a country (Integrity). Data for legal systems come from La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000); for P roperty and
Integrity from the Heritage foundation; for Lef t from the World Statesman (http:\www.worldstatesman.com). Each column reports
the results for a separate panel regression specification. In parentheses, we report robust t-statistics. Statistical significance is indicated
by *, **, and *** at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013
is selected. The regressors are standardized to mean zero and variance one. TFE denotes time fixed effects.


                            Variable      LU K        LF R       LGR        LSC     P roperty   Lef t    Integrity

                            Fin           -3.71∗∗∗     0.85       1.43   3.33∗∗∗       2.14∗      -1.27   4.09∗∗∗
                                        (-3.21)      (0.78)     (1.57) (3.89)        (1.78)     (-1.11) (3.29)
                            N               355         355        355    355           286         355    286
                            R2 (%)       12.15         9.44       9.72 11.66           8.32        9.61 11.08

                            Non-fin       -3.62∗∗∗     3.69∗∗∗   -0.74   1.30∗∗∗   -0.48          0.69 -0.30
                                        (-6.19)      (6.79)    (-1.09) (3.45)    (-0.69)        (1.21) (-0.44)
                            N               446         446        446    446        307           446     307
                            R2 (%)       19.11        19.35     12.12 12.76         3.58         12.09    3.47

                            TFE            Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes         Yes     Yes




                                                                       52
Table 7. Business environment and the size anomaly for financial firms.
Notes: This table shows the results for the panel regression of the risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio of financial firms on
variables capturing a country’s business environment. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and non-financial firms
separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest
market capitalization, respectively. We regress the difference in the return to large minus small, denoted LMS, on the Fama and French
(1993) risk factors over 2-year non-overlapping windows. The dependent variable is the estimated risk-adjusted return on LMS for
country j. The regressors are: an index that measures the strength of corporate disclosure (Disclose); an index that measures the
strength of corporate governance (Govern); the number of publicly-listed firms in the country as a percentage of market capitalization
in USD (N f irm); an index that measures the ability of the government to formulate and implement sound business regulations (Regln);
the strength of bankruptcy resolution measured by looking at average recovery rates, time taken to resolve bankruptcy cases, outcomes,
and cost of bankruptcy in a country (Bankrupt); an index that measures the extent of economic and political globalization (Global);
the overall market capitalization of all publicly-listed firms in the country as a percentage of GDP (M ktcap); an index that measures
the risk of appropriation by the government (ExpropRisk); the average annual volatility of the primary stock market index (StockV ol);
and the average annual return on an index of all publicly-traded firms in the country (StockRet). Data is from La Porta, Lopez-de
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000), Global Economic data (http:\www.globaleconomy.com), and Doing Business Database – World
Bank (http:\www.doingbusiness.org). Each column reports the results for a separate panel regression specification. In parentheses,
we report robust t-statistics. Statistical significance is indicated by *, **, and *** at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. For each
country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected. The regressors are standardized to mean zero and variance
one. TFE and CFE denote time and country fixed effects, respectively.


   Variable       Disclose     Govern     N f irm     Regln      Bankrupt     Global     M ktcap    ExpropRisk     StockV ol   StockRet
   Fin              2.84∗∗      3.10∗∗∗     -0.90      4.27∗∗∗   -17.69∗∗∗     15.01∗∗     -1.66      -5.30∗∗∗       -4.10∗∗     0.40
                  (2.35)      (2.76)      (-0.44)    (3.12)      (-2.75)      (2.58)     (-2.09)    (-0.75)        (-2.06)     (0.22)
   N                 332         332          315       265         153          332         316        355            322        327
   R2 (%)          10.12       10.44       32.03      10.10       59.74        37.77      31.93      15.15          37.66       36.64

   Non-fin          -1.22∗∗     -0.63       -0.05      0.34        -4.52       -2.94       -1.04      0.93           0.53        1.26∗
                  (-2.13)     (-1.21)     (-0.08)    (0.49)      (-1.09)     (-0.65)     (-0.91)    (1.19)         (0.54)      (1.93)
   N                  412         412         388       279          155         417         390       446            372         378
   R2 (%)          15.30       14.55       51.34       3.21       69.20       42.90       51.39      12.28          49.40       48.10

   TFE               Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes
   CFE               No          No          Yes       No           Yes         Yes         Yes        No             Yes        Yes




                                                                    53
Table 8. Financial environment and the size anomaly for financial firms.
Notes: This table reports the results for the panel regression of the risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio of financial firms on variables capturing a country’s financial
environment. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small
denote portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. We regress the difference in the return to large minus small, denoted LMS, on the Fama
and French (1993) risk factors over 2-year non-overlapping windows. The dependent variable is the estimated risk-adjusted return on LMS for country j. The regressors are: branch
network size per 100,00 inhabitants (Branches); demand deposits-to-GDP (Deposits); non-performing loans-to-total loans (N onperf orm); financial firm liquid assets-to-total
assets (Liquidity); financial firm profits-to-equity (P rof it); defaulted loans-to-total loans (Def aults); financial firm capital-to-assets (Leverage); total volume of bond markets
(BondDepth); financial claims held by non-residents (F oreign); a dummy that equals 1 if country has deposit insurance (Insurance); percentage of total financial firm assets held
by 3 largest financial firms (T op3); percentage of total assets held by 5 largest financial firms (T op5); credit to private entities as a percentage of GDP (P vtCredit); and credit
to government as a percentage of GDP (GovCredit). Data is from Global Economic data (http:\www.globaleconomy.com), Bankscope – Bureau van Dijk, Bank of International
Settlements, Global Findex – World Bank, International Financial Statistics, and International Monetary Fund. Each column reports the results for a separate panel regression
specification. In parentheses, we report robust t-statistics. Statistical significance is indicated by *, **, and *** at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. For each country,
the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected. The regressors are standardized to mean zero and variance one. TFE and CFE denote time and country fixed
effects, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                         54
            Variable Branches Deposits N onperf orm Liquidity P rof it Def aults Leverage BondDepth F oreign Insurance T op3                 T op5      P vtCredit GovCredit
            Fin       -11.20∗∗∗    -6.35∗    -6.47∗∗∗    3.31∗∗∗    4.50∗∗∗    -7.44∗∗∗     -0.54     2.97     3.18∗∗∗     1.45     -4.06∗   -8.32∗∗∗     0.54      -0.73
                      (-3.02)     (-1.83)   (-3.63)     (2.99)     (3.41)     (-4.46)     (-0.17)   (1.01)    (3.42)     (1.21)    (-1.91) (-3.10)      (0.28)    (-0.39)
            N            144         320       243         256        256        230          228      292       297        355       253      245         340        341
            R2 (%)     63.15       35.79     47.89        8.67      43.92      50.44       44.04     38.90     10.95       9.71     44.05     47.4       35.64     35.62

            Non-fin     1.69        -1.52     0.17        3.61∗∗∗ 0.29          0.04        -0.09     -0.36     0.51       -0.41     -1.00 -1.56          1.29      2.22∗∗
                      (1.28)      (-0.80)   (0.23)      (5.33)   (0.55)       (0.05)      (-0.09)   (-0.31)   (0.87)     (-0.14)   (-1.28) (-1.85)      (1.27)    (2.05)
            N            146          403      257         270      270          239          237       324      342         310       267    259          425       404
            R2 (%)     68.20       43.30     63.20       13.04    63.00        63.20       63.20     59.70     13.86        0.11    63.70 63.40          41.90     44.70

            TFE          Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes
            CFE          Yes         Yes       Yes        No         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes      No          No       Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes
Table 9. Sovereign environment and the size anomaly for financial firms.
Notes: This table reports the results for the panel regression of the risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio of financial firms on
variables capturing a country’s sovereign environment. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and non-financial firms
separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote portfolios of firms with the highest and
lowest market capitalization, respectively. We regress the difference in the return to large minus small, denoted LMS, on the Fama
and French (1993) risk factors over 2-year non-overlapping windows. The dependent variable is the estimated risk-adjusted return
on LMS for country j. The regressors are: the fiscal surplus (as a percentage of GDP) in the country (Surplus); the difference in
the yield-to-maturity on the long-term bond issued by a country and the yield-to-maturity on the long-term bond issued by the U.S.
Treasury (Spread); the ratio of central bank assets to GDP (CentBank); the value of the index of inflation at year end (Inf lation);
and the per-capita GDP (GDP ) in the country. Data is from Global Economic data (http:\www.globaleconomy.com), International
Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund, and World Development Indicators – World Bank. Each column reports the results
for a separate panel regression specification. In parentheses, we report robust t-statistics. Statistical significance is indicated by *, **,
and *** at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.
The regressors are standardized to mean zero and variance one. TFE and CFE denote time and country fixed effects, respectively.


                                     Variable    Surplus Spread CentBank Inf lation            GDP

                                     Fin           -0.92     4.17∗    -3.91∗∗       5.05∗∗   -25.60∗∗∗
                                                 (-0.48)   (1.86)    (-2.25)      (2.24)     (-3.13)
                                     N               281      324       307          341        346
                                     R2 (%)       35.59     27.86     36.96        37.73      38.13

                                     Non-fin       -0.77     0.97      0.32        -4.61∗∗      6.93∗
                                                 (-1.01)   (1.28)    (0.33)      (-2.31)      (1.75)
                                     N               281      387       390          425         434
                                     R2 (%)       60.86     39.14     44.50       45.50        43.30

                                     TFE            Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
                                     CFE            Yes       No        Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                                     55
Table 10. Regulatory environment and the size anomaly for financial firms.
Notes: This table reports the results for the panel regression of the risk-adjusted return to the LMS portfolio of financial firms on
variables capturing a country’s sovereign environment. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and non-financial firms
separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest
market capitalization, respectively. We regress the difference in the return to large minus small, denoted LMS, on the Fama and French
(1993) risk factors over 2-year non-overlapping windows, t + 1 to t + 2. The dependent variable is the estimated risk-adjusted return on
LMS for country j. The regressors are: the cost of each financial crisis as a percentage of GDP (Cost); the amount of liquidity support
provided to financial firms as a percentage of GDP (LiqSupport); the level of non-performing loans (N P Levels); the increase in sovereign
debt to support financial firms (SovDebtInc); a dummy variable that equals 1 if monetary expansion was undertaken in response to crisis
(M onetaryExp); a dummy variable that equals 1 if entry restrictions were placed on the financial sector (EntryBarrier); a dummy that
equals 1 if financial supervision was tightened (Supervision); the number of private and public (i.e. non-government owned) financial
firms (P rivatize); a dummy variable that equals 1 if reforms were enacted (Ref orm) and if restrictions were placed on financial firms
(Restrict) after each financial crisis. Data is from Laeven and Valencia (2008). Each column reports the results for a separate panel
regression specification. In parentheses, we report robust t-statistics. Statistical significance is indicated by *, **, and *** at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels, respectively. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected. The regressors are
standardized to mean zero and variance one. TFE and CFE denote time and country fixed effects, respectively.


  Variable      Cost      LiqSupport N P Level SovDebtInc M onetaryExp EntryBarrier Supervision P rivatize Ref orm Restrict

  Fin          -4.52∗∗∗     -2.75∗∗     -3.89∗∗∗   -4.24∗∗∗     -3.33∗∗∗        -1.88           5.35∗∗        7.04∗∗∗     5.64∗     0.41
             (-3.70)      (-2.42)     (-2.69)    (-3.43)      (-2.68)         (-0.76)         (2.11)        (2.81)      (1.78)    (0.27)
  N             355           355         355        355          355             355            355           355         355       355
  R2 (%)      38.94        36.95       38.00      38.58        37.35           35.77           36.68         38.08       36.30     35.71

  Non-fin       0.11        2.70        1.20       -0.16        1.63∗∗∗         0.55           -2.29          0.74        1.04      -0.48
              (0.16)      (1.32)      (0.91)     (-0.19)      (3.86)          (0.38)          (1.14)        (0.65)      (0.67)    (-0.84)
  N              446         446         446         446         446             446             446           446         446        446
  R2 (%)       42.60       46.00       43.20      42.60        43.70           42.70           43.20         42.70       42.70     42.70

  TFE           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
  CFE           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes




                                                                    56
                                          Appendix
                       Equity is Cheap for Large Financial Institutions

A      Model
Proof of Proposition 1: We start from the Euler equation in equation 17.
                                                                                                
                                                                  α
                                    0 = hdt + log Et exp α log β − ∆cND            ND       ND
                                                                     t+1 + (α − 1)ra,t+1 + rd,t+1    .                                     (22)
                                                                  ψ

Using log-normality, this in turn implies that the expected return in a non-disaster sample is given by:

                        i,ND                 i,ND                  α                i,ND                           i,ND       d,i
                   Et [rt+1  ] + (1/2)vart [rt+1  ] − rf = +         covt (∆cND                           ND
                                                                             t+1 , rd,t+1 ) − (α − 1)cov(ra,t+1 , rd,t+1 ) − ht .
                                                                   ψ

The result immediately follows.
     Proof of proposition 2: Solving the Euler equation for the dividend claim amounts to solving for the log price-dividend ratio in each
state i, pdi . We can solve a system of N equations for pdi :

                                                                                                1               1 2
                        pdi     =    hdi + α log β − γµc + (α − 1) (κc0 − κc1 wci ) + κd0 + µd + (φd − γ)2 σci
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                               + σdi                       (23)
                                                                                                2               2
                                                                                 
                                              N
                                              X          n                      o
                                     + log       πij exp (α − 1)wcj + κd1 pdj  ,                                                         (24)
                                            j=1


together with the linearization constants in (31) and (32), and the mean pd ratio:
                                                                              X
                                                                  pd     =          Πj pdj .                                               (25)
                                                                               j


Now take the limit πii → 1. That delivers the result.




A.1      Valuing the Consumption Claim

We start by valuing the consumption claim. Consider the investor’s Euler equation for the consumption claim Et [Mt+1 Ra
                                                                                                                      t+1 ] = 1. This
can be decomposed as:

                                                           α                                           α
                   1   =      (1 − pt )Et [exp(α log β −     ∆cND      ND
                                                               t+1 + αra,t+1 )] + pt Et [exp(α log β −   ∆cD       D
                                                                                                           t+1 + αra,t+1 )],               (26)
                                                           ψ                                           ψ

where N D (D) denotes the Gaussian (disaster) component of consumption growth, dividend growth or returns. We define “resilience”
for the consumption claim as:
                                            Htc = 1 + pt Et exp (γ − 1)Jt+1
                                                                        c
                                                                              
                                                                              −1 .                                           (27)
                                                    Wt+1
We log-linearize the total wealth return Ra
                                          t+1 =     Wt −Ct
                                                           as     follows: ra,t+1 = κc0 + wct+1 − κc1 wct + ∆ct+1 with linearization constants:

                                                                         ewc
                                                      κc1     =                                                                            (28)
                                                                       ewc −1
                                                                                   
                                                      κc0     =        − log ewc − 1 + κc1 wc.                                             (29)

The wealth-consumption ratio differs across Markov states. Let wci be the log wealth-consumption ratio in Markov state i. The mean
log wealth-consumption ratio can be computed using the stationary distribution:

                                                                             I
                                                                             X
                                                                   wc =            Πi wci                                                  (30)
                                                                             i=1



                                                                              1
where Πi is the ith element of vector Π. Note that the linearization constants κc0 and κc1 depend on wc. Using the log linearization for
the total wealth return, the Euler equation can be restated as follows:
                                                                                                         
                                                      α
                         1 = exp(hct )Et exp α log β − (µc + σci ηt+1 ) + α(κc0 + wct+1 − κc1 wct + ∆cND
                                                                                                      t+1 )   .
                                                      ψ

Resilience takes a simple form in our setting:

                             hct         log(Htc ) = log 1 + pt exp h̄c − 1 ,
                                                                          
                                   ≡
                             h̄c                               c
                                                                     = ω exp (γ − 1)θc + .5(γ − 1)2 δc2 − 1 ,
                                                                                                       
                                   ≡     log Et exp (γ − 1)Jt+1

where we use the cumulant-generating function to compute h̄c . It is now clear that resilience varies only with the probability of a
disaster pt . Therefore, it too is a Markov chain. Denote by hci the log resilience in Markov state i. Solving the Euler equation for the
consumption claim amounts to solving for the log wealth-consumption ratio in each state i. We obtain the system of I equations as
follows, which can be solved for wci , i = 1, . . . I:

                                                                                                XN
                                                                                   1
                     1   =   exp(hci ) exp α(log β + κc0 ) + (1 − γ)µc − ακc1 wci + (1 − γ)2 σci
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                      πij exp {αwcj }
                                                                                   2              j=1


where πij is the transition probability between states i and j. Taking logs on both sides we get a system of equations that can be solved
in conjunction with (28), (29), and (30):

                                                                                                      N
                                                                                1                    X
                         0 = hci + α(log β + κc0 ) + (1 − γ)µc − ακc1 wci +       (1 − γ)2 σci
                                                                                            2
                                                                                               + log     πij exp {αwcj } .
                                                                                2                    j=1




A.2      Valuing the Dividend Claim

The investor’s Euler equation for the stock is Et [Mt+1 Rdt+1 ] = 1, which can be decomposed as:
                                                                                                         
                                                                     α
                                   1   =    (1 − pt )Et exp(α log β − ∆cNDt+1 + (α − 1)r ND
                                                                                         a,t+1 + r ND
                                                                                                   d,t+1 )
                                                                     ψ
                                                                                                    
                                                                  α
                                            +pt Et exp(α log β − ∆cD                D         D
                                                                      t+1 + (α − 1)ra,t+1 + rd,t+1 )
                                                                  ψ

    If we define “resilience” for the dividend claim as:
                                                      h    n                       oi   
                                         Htd = 1 + pt Et exp γJt+1
                                                               c      d
                                                                   − Jt+1       a
                                                                          − λd Jt+1    −1 ,

then the Euler equation simplifies to:
                                                                                               
                                                               α
                                       1 = Htd Et exp α log β − ∆cND
                                                                  t+1 + (α − 1)r ND
                                                                                 a,t+1 + r ND
                                                                                           d,t+1    .
                                                               ψ

We log-linearize the stock return on bank i, Rdt+1 , as rd,t+1 = κd0 + κd1 pdt+1 − pdt + ∆dt+1 , with the linearization constants:

                                                                    epd
                                                        κd1   =             ,                                                        (31)
                                                                  1 + epd
                                                        κd0   =   log(1 + epd ) − κd1 pd.                                            (32)

To compute the resilience term, we proceed as before:

                                              hdt
                                                                              
                                                    ≡   log 1 + pt exp h̄d − 1 ,
                                                              h    n                       oi
                                                                      c      d         a
                                              h̄d   ≡   log Et exp γJt+1  − Jt+1 − λd Jt+1    .




                                                                       2
By using the independence of the three jump processes conditional on a given number of jumps, we can simplify the last term to:

                                                  ∞
                                                 X   e−ω ω n n(γθc +.5γ 2 δ2 ) n(−θd +.5δ2 )
                              h̄d       =     log            e              c e           d

                                                 n=0
                                                        n!
                                                                         J − nθr + nλd δr2
                                                                                                              
                                                              2 2                                         nθr − J
                                              × en(−λd θr +.5λd δr ) Φ        √              + e−λd J Φ    √          .
                                                                                nδr                          nδr

The derivation uses Lemma 1 below. The last expression, while somewhat complicated, is straightforward to compute. In the no-bailout
                                                                    2 2
case (J → +∞), the last exponential term reduces to en(−λd θr +.5λd δr ) . The dynamics of hdt are fully determined by the dynamics of
pt , which follows a Markov chain. Denote by hdi the resilience in Markov state i.
      Solving the Euler equation for the dividend claim amounts to solving for the log price-dividend ratio in each state i, pdi . We can
solve the following system of N equations for pdi :

                                                                                                       1               1 2
                        pdi         =       hdi + α log β − γµc + (α − 1) (κc0 − κc1 wci ) + κd0 + µd + (φd − γ)2 σci
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                      + σdi
                                                                                                       2               2
                                                                                        
                                                     N
                                                     X          n                      o
                                            + log       πij exp (α − 1)wcj + κd1 pdj  ,
                                                    j=1


together with the linearization constants in (31) and (32), and the mean pd ratio:
                                                                                      X
                                                                           pd    =            Πj pdj .                              (33)
                                                                                          j




A.3      Dividend Growth and Return Variance, Return Covariance, and the Equity Risk
         Premium

Preliminaries          Recall that dividend growth in state i today is

                                                           ∆di        =     (1 − pi )∆dND
                                                                                       i  + pi ∆dD
                                                                                                 i ,
                                                        ∆dND
                                                          i           =     µd + φd σci η + σdi ǫ,
                                                         ∆dDi         =     µd + φd σci η + σdi ǫ − J d − λd J a
                      √        √
where the shock ǫ = ξd ǫa + 1 − ξd ǫi is the sum of a common shock and an idiosyncratic shock, both of which are standard normally
distributed and i.i.d. over time. Stock returns in state i today and assuming a transition to state j next period are:

                                                           ri     =       (1 − pi )riND + pi riD ,
                                                        riND      =       µrij + φd σci η + σdi ǫ,
                                                          riD     =       µrij + φd σci η + σdi ǫ − J d − λd J a ,
                                                        µrij      =       µd + κd0 + κd1 pdj − pdi ,
                                                              a
                                                          J       =       min(J r , J).

We are interested in computing the variance of dividend growth rates, the variance of returns, and the covariance between a pair of
returns. This will allow us to compute the volatility of returns and the correlation of returns.
     Applying Lemma 4 below to the J a process and conditioning on n jumps, we get that

                                    E[J a |n]       =     E[min(J r , J)|n]
                                                    =     E[J r 1(J r <J ) |n] + JE[1(J r ≥J) |n]
                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                 
                                                                   J − nθr                   J − nθr          nθr − J
                                                    =     nθr Φ      √          − nδr φ        √       + JΦ    √        ,
                                                                       nδr                       nδr             nδr

and

                    E[J a2 |n]          =    E[min(J r , J)2 |n]
                                        =    E[J r 2 1(J r <J) |n] + J 2 E[1(J r ≥J) |n]
                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                         
                                                                   J − nθr                         J − nθr            nθr − J
                                              nδr2 + n2 θr2 Φ                                                + J 2Φ
                                                            
                                        =                           √          − nδr (J + nθr )φ    √                  √        .
                                                                      nδr                             nδr                nδr


                                                                                      3
Note that the corresponding moments for the J d process are:

                                                                             E[J d |n]       =       nθd
                                                                                 d2
                                                                           E[J        |n]    =       nδd2 + n2 θd2 .

We now average over all possible realizations of the number of jumps n to get:

                                                                                       ∞
                                                                                      X   e−ω ω n
                                                               E[J d ]        =                   E[J d |n] = θd ,
                                                                                      n=1
                                                                                            n!
                                                                                       ∞
                                                                       2              X   e−ω ω n      2
                                                             E[J d ]          =                   E[J d |n] = δd2 + 2θd2 ,
                                                                                      n=1
                                                                                            n!
                                                                                       ∞
                                                                                      X   e−ω ω n
                                                               E[J a ]        =                   E[J a |n] ≡ θa ,
                                                                                      n=1
                                                                                            n!
                                                                                       ∞
                                                                                      X   e−ω ω n
                                                             E[J a2 ]         =                   E[J a2 |n],
                                                                                      n=1
                                                                                            n!
                                                                                       ∞
                                                                                      X   e−ω ω n
                                                           E[J d J a ]        =                   nθd E[J a |n],
                                                                                      n=1
                                                                                            n!
                                                                                       ∞
                                                                                      X   e−ω ω n
                                                     E[J d,1 J d,2 ]          =                   (nθd )(nθd ) = 2θd2
                                                                                      n=1
                                                                                            n!

                                                                     P∞ e−ω ω n                P∞ e−ω ω n 2
where we used our assumption that ω = 1, which implies that            n=1    n!
                                                                                  n = 1 and       n=1    n!
                                                                                                             n = 2. The last but one
expression uses the fact that the two jumps are uncorrelated, conditional on a given number of jumps. The last expression computes the
expectation of the product of the idiosyncratic jumps for two different stocks. Note that the correlation between these two idiosyncratic
jump processes is zero if and only if θd = 0, an assumption we make in our calibration.



Dividend Growth and Return Volatility                                                   The variance of dividend growth of a firm can be computed as follows
                                                           2               2     h                                     i2
                    V ar[∆di ]    =      (1 − pi )E[ ∆dND
                                                        i      ] + pi E[ ∆dDi     ] − (1 − pi )E[∆dND i     ] + pi E[∆dD
                                                                                                                       i ]    ,
                                                   2     2 2      2
                                                                     
                                  =      (1 − pi ) µd + φd σci + σdi
                                                                          2
                                             h                                                                                           i
                                         +pi µ2d + φ2d σci
                                                        2      2
                                                           + σdi  + E[J d ] + λ2d E[J a2 ] + 2λd E[J d J a ] − 2µd (E[J d ] + λd E[J a ])
                                           h                                           i2
                                         − (1 − pi )µd + pi [µd − E[J d ] − λd E[J a ]] ,

                                  =      φ2d σci
                                              2     2
                                                 + σdi + pi (δd2 + 2θd2 + λ2d E[J a2 ] + 2λd E[J d J a ]) − p2i (θd + λd θa )2

Similarly, mean dividend growth is given by E[∆di ] = µd − pi (θd + λd θa ). If θd = 0, as we assume, mean dividend growth is simply
µd − pi λd θa .
    The variance of returns can be derived similarly, with the only added complication that we need to take into account state transitions
from i to j that affect the mean return µrij .

                                          2          2        h                        i2
        V ar[ri ]     =   (1 − pi )E[ riND ] + pi E[ riD ] − (1 − pi )E[riND ] + pi E[riD ] ,
                                                               
                                      I
                                      X
                                             2      2 2      2 
                      =   (1 − pi )    πij µrij + φd σci + σdi
                                         j=1
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                     I                                                                                              I
                                                                                       d2
                                     X                                                                                              X
                          +pi           πij µ2rij   +   φ2d σci
                                                              2
                                                                   +    2
                                                                       σdi   + E[J          ]+   λ2d E[J a2 ]                 d a
                                                                                                                + 2λd E[J J ] − 2                     d          a
                                                                                                                                          πij µrij (E[J ] + λd E[J ])
                                  j=1                                                                                               j=1
                                                                                      2
                                 I
                                 X
                                                               d                  a
                          −           πij µrij − pi (E[J ] + λd E[J ]) ,
                                 j=1

                      =   ζri + φ2d σci
                                     2     2
                                        + σdi + pi (δd2 + 2θd2 + λ2d E[J a2 ] + 2λd E[J d J a ]) − p2i (θd + λd θa )2 ,

where                                                                                                                 2
                                                                             I
                                                                             X                           I
                                                                                                         X
                                                                   ζri ≡           πij µ2rij     −            πij µrij  ,
                                                                             j=1                         j=1



                                                                                                 4
is an additional variance term that comes from state transitions that affect the price-dividend ratio. The volatility of the stock return
is the square root of the variance.



Covariance of Returns                           The covariance of a pair of returns (r 1 , r 2 ) in state i is:

        Cov[ri1 , ri2 ]   =   (1 − pi )E[ri1,ND ri2,ND ] + pi E[ri1,D ri2,D ]
                                h                                   ih                               i
                              − (1 − pi )E[ri1,ND ] + pi E[ri1,D ] (1 − pi )E[ri2,ND ] + pi E[ri2,D ] ,
                                                                         
                                          I
                                          X
                          =   (1 − pi )     πij µ2rij + φ2d σci
                                                              2     2
                                                                 + σdi ξd 
                                              j=1
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                        I
                                        X                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                   X
                              +pi            πij µ2rij   +   φ2d σci
                                                                   2
                                                                        +    2
                                                                            σdi ξd   + E[J   d,1 d,2
                                                                                                J      ]+   λ2d E[J a2 ]               d a
                                                                                                                           + 2λd E[J J ] − 2             πij µrij (θd + λd θa )
                                        j=1                                                                                                        j=1
                                                    2
                                    I
                                    X                                                        I
                                                                                             X
                              −          πij µrij  − p2i (θd + λd θa )2 + 2                       πij µrij (θd + λd θa ),
                                    j=1                                                      j=1

                          =              2
                              ζri + φ2d σci    2
                                            + σdi ξd + pi (2θd2 + λ2d E[J a2 ] + 2λd E[J d J a ]) − p2i (θd + λd θa )2 ,

where we recall that ξd is the fraction of the variance of the Gaussian ǫ shock that is common across all stocks. The correlation between
two stocks is the ratio of the covariance to the variance (given symmetry).



Equity Risk Premium                            By analogy with the derivations above, we have

                                                                                      ∞
                                                                                     X   e−ω ω n
                                                                 E[J c ]      =                  E[J c |n] = θc ,
                                                                                     n=1
                                                                                           n!
                                                                                      ∞
                                                                                     X   e−ω ω n
                                                              E[J d J c ]     =                  (nθd )(nθd ) = 2θc θd ,
                                                                                     n=1
                                                                                           n!
                                                                                      ∞
                                                                                     X   e−ω ω n
                                                              E[J a J c ]     =                  nθc E[J a |n]
                                                                                     n=1
                                                                                           n!

    We also have

                                                    mND            =        µmij − γσci η,
                                                      mD           =        µmij − γσci η + γJ c ,
                                                     µmij          =        α log β + (α − 1)(κc0 + wcj − κc1 wci ) − γµc ,

    The equity risk premium is −Cov(m, r), which can be derived similarly to the covariance between two returns. In particular:

        Cov[mi , ri ]     =   (1 − pi )E[mNDi   riND ] + pi E[mD   D
                                                                i ri ]
                                h                                 ih                               i
                              − (1 − pi )E[mND  i   ] + pi E[mD
                                                              i ]    (1 − pi )E[riND ] + pi E[riD ] ,
                                                                     
                                          I
                                          X
                                                                    2
                          =   (1 − pi )      πij µrij µmij − γφd σci 
                                              j=1
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                        I
                                        X                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                             X                     I
                                                                                                                                                   X
                                                                           2              d c                   a c
                              +pi            πij µrij µmij −         γφd σci   − γE[J J ] − γλd E[J J ] + γ                       πij µrij θc −         πij µmij (θd + λd θa )
                                     j=1                                                                                     j=1                   j=1
                                                                                                              
                                    I
                                    X                                   I
                                                                        X
                              −         πij µmij + pi γθc                   πij µrij − pi (θd + λd θa )
                                  j=1                                   j=1
                                         2
                          =   ζmi − γφd σci − pi γ(2θd θc + λd E[J c J a ]) + p2i γθc (θd + λd θa ),

where                                                                                                                             
                                                                I
                                                                X                             I
                                                                                              X                      I
                                                                                                                     X
                                                    ζmi ≡             πij µrij µmij    −            πij µrij            πij µmij  .
                                                                j=1                           j=1                    j=1




                                                                                               5
A.4      Auxiliary Lemmas

Lemma 1. Let x ∼ N (µx , σx2 ) and y ∼ N (µy , σy2 ) with Corr(x, y) = ρxy . Then
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                     c − µy − bσy2 − aρxy σx σy
                                            E[exp(ax + by)1c>y ] = Ψ(a, b; x, y)Φ                                                                                (34)
                                                                                                                        σy

                                                                                           
                                                      a2 σx
                                                          2        b2 σy
                                                                       2
where Ψ(a, b; x, y) = exp aµx + bµy +                   2
                                                              +      2
                                                                            + abρxy σx σy       is the bivariate normal moment-generating function of x and y
evaluated at (a, b).




                                                                                                      
                                                                    ρxy σx
Proof. Lemma 1 First, note that x|y ∼ N µx +                          σy
                                                                           [y   − µy ], σx2 (1 − ρ2xy ) , therefore

                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                        aρxy σx
                                                                       E[exp(ax)|y] = Q exp                     y
                                                                                                          σy
                                                                  
                           aρxy σx µy           a2 σx
                                                    2
                                                      (1−ρ2
                                                          xy )
where Q = exp aµx −           σy
                                            +          2
                                                                       . Denote Γ = E[exp(ax + by)1c>y ], then:


          Γ   =    E[E{exp(ax)|y} exp(by)1c>y ]
                                                
                                aρxy σx
              =    QE exp y             +b      1c>y
                                  σy
                     Z c                   
                                  aρxy σx
              =    Q     exp y            +b      dF (y)
                      −∞             σy
                                (                    )               !
                                                          y2    µ2y
                     Z c
                                  aρxy σx         µy                     dy
              =    Q     exp y            +b+ 2 −           2
                                                              −    2
                                                                         √
                      −∞             σy           σy     2σ y   2σ y   σy 2π
                   Complete the square
                                                                                                                                                 2 
                                                                                              2   aρxy σx                                      µy
                                                                          ! Z c        y − σ             +b+
                             σy2
                                                     2                                    y      σy                                          2
                                                                                                                                               σy
                                            aρxy σx             aρxy σx                                                                                dy
              =    Q exp           σy               +b   + µy           +b       exp −                                                                    √
                                                                                                                                                      
                              2               σy                  σy                                 2σy2
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                              −∞                                                                       σy 2π

                                                                                  
                                                          aρxy σx             µy
                                            y − σy2         σy
                                                                       +b+     2
                                                                              σy
                   Substitute u =                                                      , duσy = dy
                                                              σy
                                                                                              !                                            !
                                    a2 σx2 (1 − ρ2xy )            σy2                                         c − bσy2 − aρxy σx σy − µy
                                                                                     2
                                                                            aρxy σx
              =    exp     aµx +                              +                     +b   + bµy Φ
                                                2                  2          σy                                             σy




Lemma 2. Let x ∼ N (µx , σx2 ), then
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                              b0 − t1       c − t2
                                    E [Φ (b0 + b1 x) exp (ax) 1x<c ]                    =   Φq            ,        ; ρ exp(z1 )                                (35)
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                               1 + b21 σx2     σx


                                                          a2 σx
                                                              2
where t1 = −b1 t2 , t2 = aσx2 + µx , z1 =                         + aµx , ρ =          q−b1 σx ,    and Φ (· , · ; ρ) is the cumulative density function (CDF) of a
                                                            2                           1+b2   2
                                                                                            1 σx
bivariate standard normal with correlation parameter ρ.


                                                                                            6
Proof. Lemma 2 Denote Ω = E [Φ (b0 + b1 x) exp (ax) 1x<c ], then:
                                       Z   c     Z   b0 +b1 x
                           Ω     =                              exp (ax) dF (v)dF (x)
                                           −∞        −∞
                                                                                                      !
                                           c         b0 +b1 x                       v2   [x − µx ]2       dv dx
                                       Z         Z
                                 =                              exp       ax −         −
                                           −∞        −∞                             2       2σx2          σx 2π
                                       Substitute v = u + b1 x, dv = du
                                                                                        !
                                                             (u + b1 x)2     [x − µx ]2 du dx
                                       Z c Z b0
                                 =               exp ax −                  −
                                        −∞ −∞                     2             2σx2       σx 2π
                                                                              2
                                                         u2                                                        µ2x
                                       Z c Z b0
                                                                             b
                                                                                                                   
                                                                      1                                    µx             du dx
                                 =               exp −       − x2       2
                                                                           +  1
                                                                                  −  b1 ux + 0u  + x  a +    2
                                                                                                                 −    2
                                        −∞ −∞             2         2σ x      2                            σx      2σx    σx 2π
                                       Complete the square in two variables using Lemma 3
                                       Z c Z b0                 ′                                
                                                          u − t1          s1 s2          u − t1           du dx
                                 =               exp                                               + z1
                                        −∞ −∞             x −  t2         s2   s3        x − t2           σx 2π
                                       Z c Z b0                                           
                                                         1                                   du  dx
                                 =               exp − (U − T )′ (−2S)(U − T ) + z1
                                        −∞ −∞            2                                   σx 2π
                                                             !
                                                       b1  1                 1 + b21 σx2                               −b1 σx2
                                                                                                                                
where U = (u, x), T = (t1 , t2 ), −2S =                   1
                                                   b21 + σ 2   , (−2S)−1 =                                                           . This is the CDF for U ∼ N (T, (−2S)−1 ).
                                                          b1                  −b1 σx2                                   σx2
                                                        x      
                                                          1 ρ
Let w1 = q u−t21 , w2              = x−t 2
                                           , and Σ =               with ρ = q−b1 σ2x .                                 We have that W ′ = (w1 , w2 ) ∼ N (0, Σ).         Also,
           1+b1 σx2                   σx                  ρ 1                 1+b1 σx2
        q
              2
du = dw1 1 + b1 σx2 and dx = dw2 σx .

                                                                                                               
                                                           c−t2   Z √b0 −t1                        
                                                     Z                                      1 ′ −1    dw1 dw2 
                                                            σx
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                         2 2                                                   p
                          Ω      =     exp(z1 )                            1+b1 σx
                                                                                        exp − W Σ W     p           1 + b21 σx2 1 − ρ2
                                                         −∞          −∞                     2        2π 1 − ρ2 
                                                                                   
                                         b0 − t1      c − t2
                                 =     Φq           ,        ; ρ exp(z1 )
                                                                 
                                                2  2
                                           1 + b1 σx     σx


                         q                 p
where we used that           1 + b21 σx2       1 − ρ2 = 1, and where completing the square implies t1 = −b1 t2 , t2 = aσx2 + µx , s1 = −.5, s2 = −.5b1 ,
                 1                    a2 σx
                                          2
s3 = −.5b21 −   2σx2 ,   and z1 =       2
                                                + aµx by application of Lemma 3.


Lemma 3. Bivariate Complete Square
                                                                                                          ′                              
                                                                                                x − t1            s1      s2         x − t1
                                   Ax2 + By 2 + Cxy + Dx + Ey + F =                                                                               + z1
                                                                                                y − t2            s2      s3         y − t2

where

                                                           t1     =       −(2BD − CE)/(4AB − C 2 )                     s1 = A
                                                           t2     =       −(2AE − CD)/(4AB − C 2 )                     s2 = C/2
                                                                                    BD 2 − CDE + AE 2
                                                           z1     =       F−                                            s3 = B.
                                                                                         4AB − C 2

    The following lemma will be useful in deriving the variance and covariances of stock returns.

                                                                                                       
                                                                          b−µ                       b−µ
Lemma 4. Let Z ∼ N (µ, σ2 ) and define φ = φ                               σ
                                                                                    and Φ = Φ        σ
                                                                                                           . Then

                                                                  E[Z1Z<b ]             =   µΦ − σφ,                                                                      (36)
                                                                 E[Z 2 1Z<b ]                σ2 + µ2 Φ − σ(b + µ)φ
                                                                                                    
                                                                                        =                                                                                 (37)

Proof.
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                     σφ
                                                E[Z1Z<b ]         =        E[Z|Z < b]P r(Z < b) =               µ−            Φ = µΦ − σφ
                                                                                                                     Φ


                                                                                                7
The second result is shown similarly:

                                      E[Z 2 1Z<b ]   =   E[Z 2 |Z < b]P r(Z < b)
                                                     =   (V ar[Z 2 |Z < b] + E[Z|Z < b]2 )P r(Z < b)
                                                                                                 !
                                                                                 φ2          σφ 2
                                                                                      
                                                                 σ(b − µ)φ
                                                     =     σ2 −             − σ2 2 + µ −             Φ
                                                                      Φ          Φ            Φ
                                                          σ2 + µ2 Φ − σ(b + µ)φ.
                                                                    
                                                     =




B      Thomson Reuters Business Classification
Thomson Reuters (TR) has developed a market-based business classification system for firms. The system classifies more than 72,000
firms, spread across 130 countries, into one of 837 business activities or 136 different industries. The TR business classification system
is widely used. More than 8,000 different indices use the TR business classification system for benchmarking, index computation, and
ETF construction.
     To classify firms, TR looks at the markets a firm serves. This system is used to classify firms as a whole. If a firm has different
business segments, then the business activity of the dominant segment determines the firm’s classification. Dominant business segments
are identified using revenue, assets, or operating profit thresholds. TR regularly reviews and revises its business classification system
to ensure that the business classification assignment for a particular firm remains valid. In this process, over 60,000 firms are reviewed
every year.
     Further details regarding the business classification system can be obtained from http://financial.thomsonreuters.com/en/
products/data-analytics/market-data/indices/trbc-indices.html


C      Additional Results
In this section, we present additional results and robustness tests.


Results by country: Table A1 and the Figure report the risk-adjusted returns of the Large-minus-Small (LMS) portfolio of
financial firms by country. In the Figure, the black solid line presents the cross-sectional average risk-adjusted return and the red line
plots the cross-sectional median risk-adjusted return for the LMS portfolio. The risk-adjusted returns are annualized and expressed in
percentage.


Banks and financial services firms:                      Table A2 reports the risk-adjusted returns for the size-sorted portfolios of banks
and financial services firms in each country. The table shows the risk-adjusted return for the top and bottom deciles of banks and
financial services firms as well as the results separately for emerging and developed markets. Table A3 shows the risk-adjusted returns
for the top three commercial banks in each country.


Size effect in financial stock returns:                    Table A4 compares the performance of large and small financial firms with
similar loadings on standard risk factors. For each country, for each financial intermediary in our sample, we estimate loadings on the
three Fama-French factors in a given month. For any month, the loadings on the standard risk factors are estimated using data for the
prior 12 months. We roll the regression one month at a time to obtain a time series of factor loadings for each financial intermediary in
each country in our sample. Next, in each month, for each country, we sort all financial firms into 10 portfolios by loadings on the SMB
factor. At this time, we also compute the firm Z-score as Z = std(βMarket ) + std(βHML ), where std denotes cross-sectional standardization,
for each financial intermediary. Next, in each month, we match a financial firm in the large portfolio to the financial firm in the small
portfolio in the same SMB decile and with the closest Z-score possible. We form value-weighted returns for all financial firms in the large
portfolio and in the small portfolio of matched firms. When there are no small firms in a given SMB decile, we assign the risk-free rate.
At the end of this exercise, we have monthly value-weighted returns for large and small portfolios of financial firms that differ by market
capitalization but have similar loadings on the Fama-French size factor, SMB.


Comparison with non-financial firms:                          Table A5 compares size-sorted portfolio of financial and non-financial firms.
Panel A of the table analyzes the relative performance of financial and non-financial firms over different subsamples. Panel B of Table
A5 reports the results when financial and non-financial firms are sorted into portfolios using the same decile breakpoints. Finally, Panel
C of Table A5 presents the results of financial and non-financial firms sorted by book value of assets. Finally, Table A6 runs a standard
characteristics regressions separately for financial firms, banks, and non-financial firms for all countries in our sample.


Results after adjusting for delisting: Table A7 shows the risk-adjusted returns for the size-sorted portfolios of financial
and non-financial firms after adjusting for delisting returns. To identify delisted firms in TRD, we use the fact that even after a firm
delists, TRD continues to report its monthly total equity return and market capitalization as a stale value that does not vary. We then
impute a -100% return to the stock return of all delisted firms so identified. The imputation of a -100% to all delisted firms is equivalent
to assuming that all delistings are on account of financial distress or bankruptcy. Finally, we use the data, adjusted for delisting returns,
to form the size-sorted portfolios (separately) for financial and non-financial firms in each country.


                                                                       8
Alternative portfolio formation schemes:                         Table A8 shows the risk-adjusted returns for the size-sorted portfolios
of financial and non-financial firms after using alternative portfolio formation schemes. In our baseline results we winsorize raw data
for stock returns from TRD at the 5th and 95th percentile to remove problematic outliers. There is a chance that winsorization at
these levels may exclude a lot of valid return observations which could substantially impact the results. Therefore, in Panel A of Table
A8 we rerun the baseline regression for data pooled across all countries after winsorization at the 0.1th and 99.99th percentile levels.
Reinganum (1983) shows that small firms experience large returns in Janary and exceptionally large returns during the first few trading
days in January. To ensure that the January effect does not drive the fact that large financial firms underperform small financial firms,
in Panel B we present the risk-adjusted returns for data pooled across all countries but after excluding all returns for January in each
year over our sample period. Finally, in Panel C we confirm that our analysis is unaffected by the use of either value-weighted or
equal-weighted portfolio returns.


Sub sample analysis, USD Returns, Additional risk factors, Largest financial firms: Panel A of
Table A9 reports the average risk adjusted returns computed using the three-factor Fama-French model over different subsamples. The
first two columns report the estimates for the longest available sample for each country. The next two columns restrict to the 1990-2013
sample, while the last two columns restrict to the 2000-2013 sample. Panel B of Table A9 shows the results for returns denominated in
U.S. Dollars. When we analyze returns denominated in U.S. Dollars, we use the U.S., the Regional, or the Global Fama-French factors.
The U.S. factors are from the model of Fama and French (1993). We also use data for regional Fama-French factors available from
Kenneth French’s website. The regional factors are available for 4 regions namely, Asia, Japan, Europe, and North America. We apply
the corresponding regional factors when we analyze returns denominated in U.S. Dollars for countries located in each of the 4 regions
above. Finally, we also use the Global Fama-French factors, data for which is also available from Kenneth French’s website. Panel C
of Table A9 includes additional risk factors. In addition to the three Fama-French factors, we also include the “Betting against Beta”
(BAB) factor from Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), a co-skewness factor from Harvey and Siddique (2000), and the idiosyncratic volatility
factor of Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2009). We follow the procedure in Harvey and Siddique to construct the traded co-skewness
factor for each country in our sample. Finally, we construct and control for a volatility factor defined as the return to a portfolio that
goes long in stocks of financial firms in the bottom decile of idiosyncratic volatility and short in the stocks of financial firms in the
top decile of idiosyncratic volatility. Panel D of Table A9 reports the results for the top n financial firms in each country. Each row
corresponds to a distinct value of n being 3, 5, or 10, respectively.


Total subsidy to the cost of capital of large financial firms: Table A10 reports the average of this normalized
quantity across different groups and time periods. Panel A contains estimates averaged across all countries. In Panel B, we report averages
separately for developed and emerging markets. Finally, Panel C collects averages when grouping countries by geographical region.




                                                                    9
10
                                                                                                                                            Risk−adjusted returns of size−sorted portfolios
                                                           10


                                                            5


                                                            0


                                                          −5
                        Annualized Risk−adjusted return



                                                          −10


                                                          −15


                                                          −20


                                                          −25


                                                          −30
11




                                                          −35


                                                          −40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                         Taiwan
                                                                                                                                                                France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Poland
                                                                                                                   Hong Kong
                                                                                             Korea




                                                                                                                               Australia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Israel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Singapore


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      USA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UK
                                                                                                                                                      Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                            China
                                                                        Canada
                                                                                 Indonesia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Chile
                                                                India




                                                                                                     Philippines




                                                                                                                                           Thailand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                  Denmark


                                                                                                                                                                                                    South Africa




     Figure A1. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms by country.
     This figure presents the risk-adjusted returns of size-sorted portfolios of financial firms by country. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms into 10 portfolios by
     market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. The figure plots LMS, i.e., the annualized
     risk-adjusted return of large over small financial firms. All returns are denominated in local currency for each country. The black solid line presents the cross-sectional average
     risk-adjusted return and the red dashed line presents the cross-sectional median risk-adjusted return for the LMS portfolio. For each country, the longest available sample ending
     December 31, 2013 is selected.
Table A1. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms and non-financial firms by
country.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the pooled OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios on equity
risk factors. All returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and
non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with
the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, denoted LMS,
on the Fama and French (1993) risk factors. The table displays the estimates for risk-adjusted return (α) and its t-statistic based on
standard errors clustered by time and country. Columns titled Fin refer to financial firms, columns titled Non-fin refer to non-financial
firms, and columns titled Fin Minus Non-fin refer to their difference. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients are annualized, multiplied by 100, and expressed in percentages. For each country, the
longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                                   Fin                   Non-fin           Fin Minus Non-Fin

                            Country            α         t-stat        α        t-stat         α         t-stat
                            Australia      -14.66∗∗∗      -3.63    -11.46∗∗∗     -6.17      -3.19         -0.79
                            Belgium        -13.12∗∗∗      -3.78      5.31∗∗∗      3.88     -18.43∗∗∗       -5.00
                            Brazil          -9.68∗        -1.80      8.02∗∗∗      3.33     -17.70∗∗∗       -2.69
                            Canada         -34.63∗∗∗      -5.38    -26.63∗∗∗    -10.28      -8.00         -1.30
                            Chile            0.58          0.19      2.10         1.37      -1.52         -0.39
                            China          -10.20∗∗∗      -2.41     -9.95∗∗∗     -4.50      -0.25         -0.05
                            Denmark        -10.62∗∗∗      -3.69      4.80∗∗∗      3.37     -15.41∗∗∗       -4.46
                            France         -12.32∗∗∗      -3.65     -2.17∗       -1.75     -10.14∗∗∗       -2.80
                            Germany         -6.71∗∗∗      -2.42      3.51∗∗∗      2.58     -10.22∗∗∗       -2.93
                            Hong Kong      -15.30∗∗∗      -2.96     -6.74∗∗∗     -2.60      -8.56∗∗        -1.97
                            India          -44.84∗∗∗      -6.43    -18.89∗∗∗     -5.66     -25.94∗∗∗       -4.66
                            Indonesia      -30.59∗∗∗      -4.17     -0.87        -0.44     -29.72∗∗∗       -3.50
                            Israel          -8.52∗∗       -1.96     -2.78        -1.27      -5.75         -1.38
                            Italy           -1.61         -0.46      4.54∗∗∗      3.30      -6.14∗         -1.68
                            Japan           -0.29         -0.09     -4.66∗∗∗     -4.56       4.38           1.44
                            Malaysia        -5.06         -1.50     -1.02        -0.49      -4.04         -1.03
                            Mexico          -6.96         -1.48      4.46∗∗∗      2.50     -11.42∗∗        -2.12
                            Peru            -5.51         -0.68      4.17∗∗       1.99      -9.68         -1.19
                            Philippines    -25.84∗∗∗      -4.16     -1.84        -1.14     -24.00∗∗∗       -3.73
                            Poland          -0.23         -0.02      4.20         0.99      -4.43         -0.35
                            Singapore       -9.48∗∗∗      -2.63     -0.85        -0.47      -8.63∗         -1.94
                            South Africa   -10.04∗∗∗      -2.47     -2.33        -1.27      -7.71         -1.57
                            South Korea    -26.80∗∗∗      -4.36    -13.04∗∗∗     -4.89     -13.76∗∗        -2.14
                            Spain           -0.85         -0.18      4.42∗∗∗      2.52      -5.28         -1.00
                            Sweden          11.74∗∗        2.17      1.08         0.56      10.66∗          1.75
                            Switzerland     -9.40∗∗∗      -3.87      2.22         1.60     -11.62∗∗∗       -3.74
                            Taiwan         -11.85∗∗∗      -2.47     -3.55∗∗      -2.07      -8.30         -1.37
                            Thailand       -13.66∗∗       -2.06     -0.67        -0.46     -12.99∗∗        -2.00
                            Turkey          -6.34         -0.88      0.50         0.18      -6.84         -0.85
                            UK              -3.75         -1.35      1.42         1.10      -5.17∗         -1.92
                            USA             -8.87∗∗∗      -2.41     -4.07∗∗      -2.14      -4.80∗         -1.68




                                                                    12
Table A2. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of banks and financial services firms only.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios of banks and
financial services firms and non-financial firms on equity risk factors. All returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency. In
each month, for each country, we sort banks and financial services firms and non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios
by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively.
We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, LMS, on the Fama and French (1993) risk factors. In Panel A, for each
country we display the estimates for abnormal return (α) for LMS and its t-statistic. In Panel B, we report estimates of α from pooled
regressions for: large; small; LMS across all markets; LMS across developed markets; LMS across emerging markets. Pooled standard
errors are clustered by time and country. Columns titled Fin refer to banks and financial services firms, columns titled Non-fin refer
to non-financial firms, and columns titled Fin Minus Non-fin refer to their difference. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and
∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients are annualized, multiplied by 100, and expressed in percentages. For each

country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                                      Fin                   Non-fin         Fin Minus Non-Fin

                             Country              α          t-stat         α      t-stat       α        t-stat

                                                          Panel A: Country-level LMS
                             Australia        -17.58∗∗∗      -3.21    -11.44∗∗∗    -6.15     -6.14        -1.19
                             Belgium          -17.27∗∗       -2.32      5.42∗∗∗     3.97    -21.47∗∗∗     -2.47
                             Brazil            -6.96         -1.30      7.96∗∗∗     3.30    -14.92∗∗      -2.27
                             Canada           -39.92∗∗∗      -5.30    -26.73∗∗∗   -10.33    -13.19∗       -1.86
                             Chile             -4.88         -1.31      1.92        1.27     -6.41        -1.44
                             China             -9.49         -0.89     -9.77∗∗∗    -4.36      0.23         0.02
                             Denmark          -16.89∗∗∗      -4.40      4.71∗∗∗     3.32    -21.71∗∗∗     -4.80
                             France           -14.58∗∗∗      -3.20     -2.07∗      -1.67    -12.50∗∗∗     -2.61
                             Germany           -7.54∗        -1.76      3.28∗∗∗     2.45    -10.88∗∗∗     -2.51
                             Hong Kong        -10.33∗        -1.75     -6.85∗∗∗    -2.63     -3.54        -0.60
                             India            -56.52∗∗∗      -6.12    -18.89∗∗∗    -5.66    -37.62∗∗∗     -5.53
                             Indonesia        -22.54∗∗∗      -2.40     -0.76       -0.38    -22.15∗∗      -2.00
                             Israel            -8.97         -1.37     -2.78       -1.27     -6.19        -1.00
                             Italy             -4.67         -1.22      4.55∗∗∗     3.30     -9.19∗∗      -2.20
                             Japan             -0.33         -0.10     -4.66∗∗∗    -4.56      4.29         1.18
                             Malaysia          -8.57         -1.26     -1.06       -0.52     -4.69        -0.65
                             Mexico            -9.87∗        -1.74      4.19∗∗∗     2.35    -13.57∗∗      -2.13
                             Peru             -16.30∗        -1.93      4.15∗∗      1.98    -21.26∗∗∗     -2.45
                             Philippines      -22.85∗∗∗      -2.83     -1.83       -1.13    -21.44∗∗      -2.32
                             Poland             4.46          0.30      4.00        0.94      0.46         0.03
                             Singapore         -5.60         -0.93     -0.94       -0.52     -4.52        -0.67
                             South Africa      -3.10         -0.38     -2.35       -1.27      0.39         0.05
                             South Korea      -26.95∗∗∗      -4.23    -13.04∗∗∗    -4.89    -13.86∗∗      -2.05
                             Spain             -9.96         -1.49      4.54∗∗∗     2.61    -16.39∗∗      -2.11
                             Sweden             3.37          0.30      0.91        0.47      2.63         0.28
                             Switzerland       -9.34∗∗∗      -2.88      2.02        1.45    -11.36∗∗∗     -2.99
                             Taiwan            -5.52         -0.63     -3.30∗      -1.91     -2.96        -0.24
                             Thailand         -16.39         -1.25     -0.67       -0.46    -14.89        -1.31
                             Turkey            -4.59         -0.60      0.65        0.23     -5.13        -0.60
                             UK                -3.72         -1.08      1.42        1.10     -5.14        -1.48
                             USA              -10.88∗∗∗      -2.72     -4.07∗∗     -2.14     -6.81∗∗      -2.08

                                                            Panel B: Pooled estimates
                             Large          -2.02∗            -1.81      1.44∗∗∗     2.84    -3.45∗∗∗     -2.84
                             Small           9.48∗∗∗           3.58      3.99∗∗∗     3.02     5.24∗∗∗      2.86
                             LMS           -11.37∗∗∗          -4.24     -2.55∗      -1.75    -8.65∗∗∗     -4.51
                             LMS developed -11.24∗∗∗          -4.23     -3.25∗      -1.71    -7.76∗∗∗     -3.97
                             LMS emerging -14.00∗∗∗           -2.52     -1.65       -0.78   -12.43∗∗∗     -3.30




                                                                       13
Table A3. Risk-adjusted returns for top-3 banks only.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the OLS regression of monthly excess returns of top 3 banks (as measured by market
capitalization) on standard stock risk factors by country. All returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency. In each month, for
each country, we select the top 3 banks by market capitalization. The table presents the estimates from the OLS regression of monthly
excess returns of a value-weighted portfolio of the 3 largest banks on the three Fama and French (1993) stock risk factors i.e. the market,
small minus big, and high minus low, respectively. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. Coefficients are annualized and multiplied by 100 and expressed in percentages. For the pooled regressions, standard errors
are clustered by time and country. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                                    Country               α       t-stat

                                                          Panel A:   Country-level
                                                    Australia         -4.57∗       -1.87
                                                    Belgium          -12.77∗∗      -2.07
                                                    Brazil             1.69         0.38
                                                    Canada            -0.22        -0.13
                                                    Chile             14.21∗∗∗      3.24
                                                    China             -0.17        -0.03
                                                    Denmark          -14.15∗∗∗     -4.96
                                                    France            -6.23∗∗      -2.09
                                                    Germany           -8.09∗∗∗     -3.51
                                                    Hong Kong          3.43         1.24
                                                    India              3.40         0.87
                                                    Indonesia         -3.37        -0.71
                                                    Israel            -0.77        -0.18
                                                    Italy             -3.98        -1.33
                                                    Japan             -2.11        -0.48
                                                    Malaysia           4.71∗        1.85
                                                    Mexico             9.73∗∗       2.02
                                                    Peru               2.57         0.61
                                                    Philippines       -0.63        -0.23
                                                    Poland             7.29∗∗       2.12
                                                    Singapore          0.34         0.16
                                                    South Africa       7.66∗        1.93
                                                    South Korea       -7.09        -1.34
                                                    Spain             -2.46        -1.05
                                                    Sweden            -2.47        -0.68
                                                    Switzerland       -5.96∗∗      -2.41
                                                    Taiwan            -9.30∗∗∗     -2.67
                                                    Thailand           0.09         0.02
                                                    Turkey             1.19         0.26
                                                    UK                -3.54∗∗∗     -4.38
                                                    USA              -10.51∗∗∗     -3.42

                                                       Panel B: Pooled estimates
                                                    developed      -5.16∗∗∗   -4.47
                                                    emerging        3.81∗∗     2.55




                                                                     14
Table A4. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms matched by risk-factor
loadings.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the pooled OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios of financial
firms on equity risk factors. All returns and risk factors expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country, we sort financial
firms into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest
market capitalization, respectively. We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, denoted LMS, on the Fama and
French (1993) risk factors. The table displays the estimates for risk-adjusted returns (α) and its t-statistic based on standard errors
clustered by time and country. The first two columns report the results for the longest available sample for each country, the next two
columns report the results over 1990-2013, and the last two columns report the results over 2000-2013. In Panel A, large financial firms
are matched to small financial firms in the same SMB decile. In Panel B, large financial firms are matched to small financial firms in the
same Market decile. In Panel C, large financial firms are matched to small financial firms with closest Idiosyncratic Volatility. Statistical
significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients are annualized, multiplied by 100,
and expressed in percentages. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                            Full Sample              1990-2013               2000-2013

                                             α        t-stat        α         t-stat         α        t-stat

                                           Panel A: Financial firms matched   on loadings on SMB
                                Large     -2.38∗∗     -2.39      -2.52∗∗      -2.39      -2.99∗∗      -2.16
                                Small      5.20∗∗      5.20       5.38∗∗       2.43       5.92∗∗       2.15
                                LMS       -7.59∗∗∗    -7.59      -7.91∗∗∗     -3.15      -8.91∗∗∗     -2.82

                                      Panel B: Financial firms matched on loadings on Market
                                Large -2.38∗∗     -2.39       -2.52∗∗    -2.39      -2.99∗∗           -2.16
                                Small  7.85∗∗∗     3.20        8.19∗∗∗    3.04       9.46∗∗∗           2.85
                                LMS -10.24 ∗∗∗    -3.84      -10.71∗∗∗   -3.60     -12.45∗∗∗          -3.32

                                        Panel C: Financial firms matched on Idiosyncratic Volatility
                                Large     -2.20∗∗     -2.17       -2.46∗∗    -2.25      -3.00∗∗      -2.13
                                Small      5.83∗∗∗     3.03        5.65∗∗∗    3.03       5.26∗∗       2.30
                                LMS       -8.04∗∗∗    -3.75       -8.11∗∗∗   -3.62      -8.26∗∗∗     -3.38




                                                                    15
Table A5. Risk-adjusted returns for size-sorted portfolios of financial firms and non-financial firms,
alternative sorting.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the pooled OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios on equity
risk factors. All returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and
non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with
the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, denoted LMS,
on the Fama and French (1993) risk factors. The table displays the estimates for risk-adjusted returns (α) and its t-statistic based on
standard errors clustered by time and country for the LMS and large portfolios for the group of Fin, Non-Fin, and their difference.
The first two columns report the results for the longest available sample for each country, the next two columns report the results over
1990-2013, and the last two columns report the results over 2000-2013. In Panel A, decile breakpoints are specific to each group of firms
(i.e. financial and non-financial firms). In Panel B, decile breakpoints are the same across the two groups. In Panel C, decile breakpoints
are based on book value. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients
are annualized, multiplied by 100, and expressed in percentages. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31,
2013 is selected.


                                                  Full Sample               1990-2013              2000-2013

                                                  α         t-stat          α        t-stat        α        t-stat

                                               Panel A: Different Decile Breakpoints
                                                               LMS
                          Fin               -10.47∗∗∗   -4.50      -10.84∗∗∗   -4.63           -10.83∗∗∗    -4.32
                          Non-fin            -2.52∗     -1.72       -2.81∗     -1.78            -3.01∗      -1.69
                          Fin minus Non-fin -7.96∗∗∗    -4.73       -8.04∗∗∗   -4.97            -7.82∗∗∗    -4.35

                                                                     Large
                          Fin                   -2.41∗∗∗    -2.41         -2.54∗∗∗   -2.41      -3.00∗∗     -2.17
                          Non-fin                1.46∗∗∗     2.89          1.33∗∗     2.49       1.37∗∗      2.06
                          Fin minus Non-fin     -3.86∗∗∗    -3.50         -3.87∗∗∗   -3.41      -4.37∗∗∗    -2.89

                                                 Panel B: Same Decile Breakpoints
                                                              LMS
                          Fin               -14.22∗∗∗   -5.19    -15.14∗∗∗    -5.41            -14.71∗∗∗    -6.04
                          Non-fin            -5.05∗∗∗   -3.07     -5.24∗∗∗    -3.08             -4.77∗∗     -2.61
                          Fin minus Non-fin -9.17∗∗∗    -5.49     -9.89∗∗∗    -5.79             -9.94∗∗∗    -5.81

                                                                     Large
                          Fin                   -3.27∗∗∗    -3.30         -3.59∗∗∗   -3.44      -4.57∗∗∗    -3.78
                          Non-fin                0.34        0.79          0.28       0.68       0.75∗       1.77
                          Fin minus Non-fin     -3.61∗∗∗    -3.23         -3.88∗∗∗   -3.35      -5.33∗∗∗    -3.95

                                                      Panel C: Book value sort
                                                               LMS
                          Fin                -8.93∗∗∗    -3.83     -9.18∗∗∗    -3.93           -11.42∗∗∗    -5.52
                          Non-fin             5.51∗∗∗     6.32      5.65∗∗∗     5.92             6.16∗∗∗     5.16
                          Fin minus Non-fin -14.44∗∗∗    -6.68    -14.83∗∗∗    -6.85           -17.58∗∗∗    -8.15

                                                                     Large
                          Fin                   -4.44∗∗∗    -4.01         -4.62∗∗∗   -4.05      -4.83∗∗∗    -3.70
                          Non-fin                1.53∗∗      2.46          1.44∗∗     2.23       1.69∗∗      2.18
                          Fin minus Non-fin     -5.97∗∗∗    -4.56         -6.06∗∗∗   -4.49      -6.52∗∗∗    -3.92




                                                                      16
Table A6. Characteristics regression for financial and non-financial firms.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the pooled OLS regression of annual returns on log of total book value of assets and
log market capitalization for each individual company in our sample. The regression includes firm and time fixed-effects. Columns
titled Fin refer to financial firms, while columns titled Non-fin refer to non-financial firms. Panel A reports the results for the longest
available sample for each country, Panel B reports the results over 1990-2013, and Panel C reports the results over 2000-2013. N denotes
the number of observations. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 and expressed in percentage.




                                Fin                                         Banks                                     Non-fin



                                                            Panel A: Full Sample
 Book              -5.20∗∗∗                    -3.62∗∗         -8.56∗∗∗                     -8.14∗∗        -4.18∗∗∗                     -1.95
                 (-4.03)                     (-2.45)         (-3.31)                      (-2.28)        (-3.19)                      (-0.87)
 Market cap                      -5.16∗∗∗      -2.45                         -5.80∗∗∗       -0.45                         -5.28∗∗∗      -3.73
                               (-2.68)       (-1.01)                       (-3.71)        (-0.26)                       (-3.02)       (-1.31)
 N               60,585        60,585        60,585          21,370         21,370        21,370        306,132        306,132       306,132
 R2                2.32           2.22          2.39            4.95          4.27           4.94          1.90            1.98          2.03

                                                             Panel B: 1990-2013
 Book              -5.56∗∗∗                    -4.37∗∗∗        -9.19∗∗∗                     -7.84∗∗        -4.31∗∗∗                     -2.64
                 (-3.70)                     (-2.72)         (-2.91)                      (-2.01)        (-2.78)                      (-1.07)
 Market cap                      -5.00∗∗       -1.97                         -6.55∗∗∗       -1.56                         -4.94∗∗∗      -2.94
                               (-2.24)       (-0.75)                       (-3.71)        (-0.26)                       (-3.02)       (-1.31)
 N               56,389        56,389        56,389           19,883       19,883         19,883        285,790        285,790       285,790
 R2                2.21           1.93          2.16            4.92          4.34           4.94          1.63            1.62          1.70

                                                             Panel C: 2000-2013
 Book              -4.81∗∗                     -4.26∗          -8.62∗                       -8.53          -5.27∗∗                      -1.94
                 (-2.42)                     (-1.74)         (-1.67)                      (-1.36)        (-2.07)                      (-0.52)
 Market cap                      -3.69         -1.09                         -3.71∗         -0.13                         -5.70∗∗       -4.71
                               (-1.29)       (-0.32)                       (-1.74)        (-0.05)                       (-2.27)       (-4.71)
 N               41,515        41,515        41,515           13,570       13,570         13,570        219,689        219,689       219,689
 R2                0.77           0.58          0.77            0.75          0.14           0.75          0.79            0.82          0.82




                                                                    17
Table A7. Adjusted for delisting returns.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios on equity risk
factors. All returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and
non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with
the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. In all cases, we adjust for delisting returns by imputing a return of -100% for
all firms that delist during our sample for whatever reason. We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, denoted LMS,
on the Fama and French (1993) risk factors. Columns titled Fin refer to financial firms, columns titled Non-fin refer to non-financial
firms, and columns titled Fin Minus Non-fin refer to their difference. In Panel A, we report the estimates for risk-adjusted return (α)
for LMS and its t-statistic for each country. In Panel B, results are reported when pooling across all countries, across developed markets
only, and across emerging markets only. For pooled data, t-statistic based on standard errors clustered by time and country. Statistical
significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients are annualized, multiplied by 100,
and expressed in percentages. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                                      Fin                   Non-fin         Fin Minus Non-Fin

                               Country            α          t-stat         α      t-stat      α        t-stat

                                                           Panel A: Country-level LMS
                               Australia       -12.49∗∗∗      -3.03    -12.08∗∗∗    -6.52    -0.41       -0.10
                               Belgium         -10.94∗∗∗      -2.36      2.30        1.43   -13.25∗∗∗    -2.65
                               Brazil          -11.76∗∗       -2.00      4.09∗       1.63   -15.85∗∗     -2.15
                               Canada          -33.83∗∗∗      -5.25    -25.66∗∗∗    -9.80    -8.17       -1.32
                               Chile             2.47          0.51      1.47        0.85     1.00        0.20
                               China           -10.20∗∗∗      -2.41    -10.26∗∗∗    -4.62     0.06        0.01
                               Denmark         -12.38∗∗∗      -3.61      3.64∗∗      2.10   -16.02∗∗∗    -3.83
                               France           -9.79∗∗∗      -2.94     -1.65       -1.24    -8.15∗∗     -2.14
                               Germany          -6.38∗        -1.83      3.39∗∗      2.14    -9.77∗∗∗    -2.58
                               Hong Kong       -15.55∗∗∗      -2.99     -6.71∗∗∗    -2.55    -8.84∗∗     -2.04
                               India           -43.03∗∗∗      -6.01    -17.60∗∗∗    -5.56   -25.44∗∗∗    -4.38
                               Indonesia       -31.29∗∗∗      -4.18     -0.32       -0.16   -30.97∗∗∗    -3.58
                               Israel           -8.25∗        -1.86     -3.48∗      -1.62    -4.76       -1.10
                               Italy             1.42          0.39      3.53∗∗∗     2.47    -2.12       -0.52
                               Japan            -0.61         -0.19     -4.28∗∗∗    -4.04     3.67        1.15
                               Malaysia         -5.40         -1.59     -1.95       -0.91    -3.44       -0.86
                               Mexico           -4.40         -0.62      1.16        0.61    -5.56       -0.77
                               Peru              7.62          0.75     -1.21       -0.40     8.82        0.85
                               Philippines     -25.50∗∗∗      -4.04     -2.93∗      -1.74   -22.57∗∗∗    -3.46
                               Poland            0.57          0.05      4.45        0.93    -3.88       -0.30
                               Singapore        -8.59∗∗       -2.31     -2.49       -1.31    -6.11       -1.33
                               South Africa     -4.78         -0.98     -4.14∗∗     -2.15    -0.64       -0.12
                               South Korea     -23.39∗∗∗      -3.55    -13.10∗∗∗    -4.89   -10.29       -1.52
                               Spain             2.49          0.31      1.03        0.49     1.46        0.20
                               Sweden           11.46∗∗        2.20     -2.15       -0.92    13.61∗∗      2.19
                               Switzerland     -10.13∗∗∗      -3.96     -0.52       -0.32    -9.60∗∗∗    -2.90
                               Taiwan          -11.77∗∗∗      -2.40     -3.57∗∗     -2.07    -8.20       -1.32
                               Thailand        -12.88∗        -1.95     -1.14       -0.77   -11.73∗      -1.80
                               Turkey           -4.94         -0.65      0.28        0.10    -5.22       -0.63
                               UK               -0.13         -0.05      3.78∗∗∗     2.62    -3.91       -1.36
                               USA              -6.39∗        -1.82     -1.63       -0.86    -4.76∗      -1.67

                                                            Panel B: Pooled estimates
                               Large         -4.01∗∗∗         -3.86     -0.40       -0.78    -3.61∗∗∗    -3.08
                               Small          5.10∗∗           2.29      2.71∗∗      2.03     2.39∗       1.73
                               LMS           -9.11∗∗∗         -3.85     -3.11∗∗     -2.29    -6.00∗∗∗    -3.53
                               LMS developed -8.14∗∗∗         -3.28     -3.58∗∗     -1.99    -4.56∗∗∗    -2.66
                               LMS emerging -12.38∗∗∗         -2.81     -2.63       -1.42    -9.75∗∗∗    -3.00




                                                                       18
Table A8. Alternative portfolio formation schemes.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the pooled OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios on equity
risk factors. All returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country, we sort financial firms and
non-financial firms separately into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with
the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, denoted LMS,
on the Fama and French (1993) risk factors. The table displays the estimates for risk-adjusted return (α) and its t-statistic based on
standard errors clustered by time and country. Columns titled Fin refer to financial firms, columns titled Non-fin refer to non-financial
firms, and columns titled Fin Minus Non-fin refer to their difference. Results are reported when winsorizing raw returns data from
TRD at 0.1th and 99.99th percentile levels (Panel A), excluding all data for January in each year (Panel B), and using equal-weighted
portfolio returns (Panel C). Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients
are annualized, multiplied by 100, and expressed in percentages. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31,
2013 is selected.


                                                 Fin                   Non-fin            Fin Minus Non-Fin

                                             α          t-stat        α        t-stat         α         t-stat

                                       Panel A: Winsorization at 0.1th and 99.99th percentile levels
                                 Large -2.41∗∗      -2.41        1.46∗∗∗     2.89      -3.86∗∗∗      -3.50
                                 Small    8.07∗∗∗    3.75        3.98∗∗∗     3.01       4.09∗∗∗       2.93
                                 LMS -10.47∗∗∗      -4.50       -2.52∗      -1.72      -7.96∗∗∗      -4.73

                                                       Panel B: Excluding January returns
                                 Large    -2.32∗∗        -2.11       1.49∗∗∗   2.68       -3.81∗∗∗       -3.16
                                 Small     6.46∗∗∗        3.29       3.36 ∗∗∗  2.67        3.10∗∗∗        2.39
                                 LMS      -8.78∗∗∗       -4.01      -1.86     -1.31       -6.91∗∗∗       -4.29

                                                        Panel C: Equal-weighted returns
                                 Large -1.81∗∗          -2.01       1.29∗∗∗    2.54        -3.10∗∗       -3.16
                                 Small 10.00∗∗∗          4.47       4.59∗∗∗    3.23         5.41∗∗∗       3.81
                                 LMS -11.81∗∗∗          -4.89      -3.30∗∗    -2.10        -8.51∗∗∗      -5.22




                                                                      19
Table A9. Robustness tests.
Notes: This table presents the estimates from the pooled OLS regression of monthly excess returns of size-sorted portfolios of financial
firms on equity risk factors. All returns and risk factors expressed in local currency. In each month, for each country, we sort financial
firms into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms with the highest and lowest
market capitalization, respectively. We regress excess returns to large, small, and their difference, denoted LMS, on the Fama and French
(1993) risk factors. The table displays the estimates for risk-adjusted return (α) and its t-statistic based on standard errors clustered by
time and country. The first two columns report the results for the longest available sample for each country, the next two columns report
the results over 1990-2013, and the last two columns report the results over 2000-2013. Panel A reports the results for the baseline
model. In Panel B returns and risk factors expressed in USD and the risk factors are either the US, or Regional, or Global Fama-French
factors. In Panel C, returns and risk factors are expressed in local currency, and the risk factors are the standard Fama and French
(1993) factors augmented by either the “Betting against Beta” factor from Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), the co-skewness factor from
Harvey and Siddique (2000), and a Volatility factor that goes long financial firms in the bottom decile of idiosyncratic volatility and
short financial firms in the top decile of idiosyncratic volatility, or all three together. In Panel D, the large portfolio is constructed using
the top n financial firms. Statistical significance is indicated by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Coefficients
are annualized, multiplied by 100, and expressed in percentages. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31,
2013 is selected.


                                                    Full Sample               1990-2013               2000-2013

                                                     α          t-stat        α        t-stat         α        t-stat

                                                             Panel A: Baseline model
                          Large                   -2.41∗∗∗      -2.41       -2.54∗∗∗    -2.41      -3.00∗∗      -2.17
                          Small                    8.07∗∗∗       3.75        8.30∗∗∗     3.81       7.83∗∗∗      3.35
                          LMS                    -10.47∗∗∗      -4.50     -10.84∗∗∗     -4.63     -10.83∗∗∗     -4.32



                                                Panel B: USD-denominated returns
                          USD, U.S. FF3     -11.75∗∗∗    -4.75   -11.72∗∗∗   -4.50                 -9.74∗∗∗     -3.66
                          USD, Regional FF3 -11.06∗∗∗    -4.56   -11.26∗∗∗   -4.57                -11.14∗∗∗     -4.26
                          USD, Global FF3   -10.88∗∗∗    -4.37   -11.13∗∗∗   -4.40                 -9.79∗∗∗     -3.90

                               Panel C: Additional risk factors: BAB, Co-Skewness, and Volatility Factor
                          BAB                 -10.40∗∗∗     -4.13    -10.67∗∗∗   -4.20     -10.51∗∗∗            -3.91
                          Co-Skew             -10.40∗∗∗     -4.46    -10.63∗∗∗   -4.54     -10.74∗∗∗            -4.28
                          Vol                 -11.08∗∗∗     -4.46    -11.51∗∗∗   -4.51     -11.57∗∗∗            -4.33
                          BAB, Co-Skew, Vol -10.94   ∗∗∗    -4.11    -11.14∗∗∗   -4.16     -11.03∗∗∗            -3.91

                                                       Panel    D: Top n financial firms
                          n=3                     -1.62∗        -1.77       -1.78∗      -1.74      -2.72∗∗∗     -2.74
                          n=5                     -1.77∗∗       -2.18       -1.85∗∗     -2.06      -2.41∗∗∗     -2.89
                          n = 10                  -1.94∗∗       -2.22       -1.99∗∗     -2.07      -2.16∗∗∗     -2.41




                                                                         20
Table A10. Total subsidy to the cost of capital for large financial firms
Notes: This table presents the estimates for the total subsidy to the cost of capital for Large financial firms. In each month, for each
country, we sort financial firms into 10 size-sorted portfolios by market capitalization. Large and small denote the portfolios of firms
with the highest and lowest market capitalization, respectively. We regress the difference in the return to large minus small, denoted
LMS, on the Fama and French (1993) risk factors separately for each country. The risk-adjusted return (α) from this regression is
multiplied by the average market capitalization of firms in the large portfolio and is normalized by the gross domestic product of the
country as of December 2013. The first column reports the results for the longest available sample for each country. The next column
reports the results over 1990-2013, and the last column reports the results over 2000-2013. Panel A reports the average subsidy across
all countries. Panel B reports the average subsidy for developed and emerging markets. Panel C reports the average subsidy across
geographic regions. For each country, the longest available sample ending December 31, 2013 is selected.


                                         Market          Full Sample   1990-2013    2000-2013

                                                         Panel A: All countries
                                         All countries     -2.68         -2.76        -3.45



                                                     Panel B: MSCI Classification
                                         developed         -3.64       -3.82          -5.39
                                         emerging          -1.52       -1.47          -1.08



                                                          Panel C: By Region
                                         Americas          -2.28        -2.44         -3.36
                                         Asia-Pacific      -5.11        -5.23         -6.22
                                         Europe            -0.49        -0.48         -0.84
                                         Middle East       -1.10        -1.10         -1.18




                                                                  21
