                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION
                                  IN SERVICES




                               Rachel McCulloch




                           Working Paper No. 2235




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1987




Prepared for Martin Feldstein, ed., The United States in the World Economy,
to be published by the University of Chicagb Press. The author is indebted
to Robert E. Baldwin and J. David Richardson for helpful suggestions, to
Robert E. Lipsey and Irving B. Kravis for detailed comments on an earlier
version of the paper, and to the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper *2235
                                            May 1987
                International Competition in Services

                              ABSTRACT

      Production of services now dominates economic activity in
 the United States and most other nations. It is thus natural to

 find increasing attention on the part of U.S. policymakers to

 international competition in service activities. Yielding to
 strong pressure from the United States, members of the General
 Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) agreed in September 1986 to
 include services in the new "Uruguay Round" of multilateral trade

 negotiations. But there remains widespread
                                              skepticism regarding
 the prospects for these negotiations.

     This paper surveys the main issues and evidence relating to
U.S. international competition in services. It reviews the forces

that have catapulted services to the top of the agenda for the new
GATT round; the conceptual issues raised by international
competition in services; the growing importance of services in U.S.
production and in international transactions;
                                              the relationship of
services growth to "deindustrialjzatjon" of the U.S. economy;
the nature and motivation of barriers to international competition
in services and their relationship to nontariff distortions of

merchandise trade; and the choices awaiting U.S. officials in
forthcoming bilateral and multilateral negotiations.

                                         Rachel McCulloch
                                         Department of Economics
                                         University of Wisconsin
                                         Madison, WI 53706
                                         (608) 262-9891
                                                     March 1987
                INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION IN SERVICES

                            Rachel McCulloch

              University of Wisconsin-Madison and NBER


 I.    Introduction

      Production of services now dominates economic activity in
 the United States. Whether hailed as the dawn of a new

 "information economy" or deplored as the key symptom o American
 industrial decline, the trend in employment is itself beyond

 dispute. By the 1980s, only one U.S. worker in four was employed
 in the sectors of the economy producing tangible outputs --

 manufacturing plus mining, construction, and agriculture. But
 the increasing role of service-sector employment is by no means

unique to the United States. Similar trends have been
                                                         reshaping
the economies of the other industrialized nations and even many

less-developed countries.
      Given this dramatic economic transformation at home and

abroad, it may seem natural to find increasing attention on the
part of U.S. policymakers to international competition in service

activities. However, unlike domestic production, trade among
nations is still dominated by exchange of tangible goods.
Moreover, while the role of international service transactions is

already significant and while some sectors show potential for
rapid growth, the service transactions prominent in international

commerce are quite different from the activities typical of the
domestic "service economy."
                                2

     In recent decades, national markets for tangible goods have
become increasingly integrated, nd virtually all U.S. goods-

producing industries have experienced significant growth in both

exports and competing imports. However, the rapid domestic
expansion of service industries reflects the rising importance of

health, education, housing, public administration, and other
largely untraded service categories in final demand. The current
U.S. interest in international service competition is focused on
an entirely different group of industries, especially those
supplying information-based business services.   These industries

are small relative to total domestic service-sector employment.
And, although some part of their domestic output is "traded"
internationally, Le, produced by residents of one nation for

purchase by those of another, U.S. firms serve international
markets primarily via local sales of foreign affiliates rather

than exports..



1.   Services on the Policy Agenda
     Long ignored by trade officials as a generic issue,
international competition in services has achieved high

visibility on the global policy agenda just a few years after the
subject was first raised by the United States.   At the November

1982 ministerial meeting of the General Agreement on Tariffs and

Trade (GATT), the United States Trade Representative called for
inclusion of service transactions in forthcoming multilateral
                                        3

  negotiations1 But the developing countries were strongly
  opposed, and the Ministers merely
                                    recommended that members with
  an interest in service issues undertake their own national

  studies, exchange information, and report their results at the
  1984 GATT session.2

             Under continuing pressure from the United States, GATT
  members agreed in September 1986 to include services in the
                                                              new
  "Uruguay Round" of multilateral trade
                                              negotiatio Yet there
 remains widespread skepticism regarding progress on service
 issues. Abroad, the early and persistent enthusiasm of the
 United States for negotiatjo5 on services has caused u.s.

 trading partners to assume, perhaps
                                            incorrectly, that the United
 States will emerge as the major beneficiary of any liberalization
 achieved in this area.

         The developing nations, led by Brazil and India, actively
 resisted inclusion of services on the GATT agenda. This
 resistance was overcome through a compromise that will keep
 services on a separate negotiating track from merchandise
                                                           trade,
         1
         With a few minor exceptions, the rules of the GATT
currently apply only to merchandise trade. Outside the GATT
framework, long-established regimes govern international
competition in some specific service
shipping and air transport. However, activities, such as ocean
                                       cartelization rather than
liberalization has been the dominent theme.   In a few other
cases, such as telecommunications, there
                                          are sector-specific
bodies dealing primarily with regulatory and technical issues and
only incidentally with barriers to trade. Also see Stalson
(1985, 30-36).
     2
        See United States Trade
                                Representative (1983). This is
the national study submitted to the GATT by the United States in
December 1983.
                                  4

but the developing nations are nonetheless suspicious of the
outcome. While the other industrialized nations did eventually

support the U.S. initiative on services, few trade officials
abroad appear to view the prospects with any degree of-
enthusiasm. And even among the U.S. policymakers who pressed so
vigorously for GATT negotiations on services, opinion remains

divided on the best way to bring conflicting national policies
toward services under the discipline of GATT rules.

     Analysts in some U.S. government agencies worry that the
GATT initiative on services may be premature. An extreme example
is a recently issued report of the Office of Technology
Assessment that openly suggests U.S. officials may have erred,

perhaps because their decisions were based on inadequate data.

The report's summary section gives this evaluation of the U.S.
decision to promote negotiations on services (Office of

Technology Assessment 1986, 7):
     "Consider, specifically, the decision by the United States

prior to the 1982 GATT Ministerial to place a high priority on
services in the next round -- a decision taken in the midst of a
period of deterioration in the ability of the world trading

system to management the impacts on trade in goods of nontariff
barriers, bilateralism, and the national industrial policies that

have become standard in many parts of the world.   Would a better

grasp of the prospects for U.S. exports of services have led to a
different approach to the new round? Certainly the poor quality

and coverage of the data impair the ability of policymakers to
                                   5

 gauge the importance of services trade -- as a whole, on a

 sector-by-sector   basis, or bilaterally."

 2.  Analysis of Competition in Services
      Although there is broad agreement on the poor quality of
 services data, progress in clarifying the nation's policy goals
 has been hampered also by lack of analytical guidance. Given the
 huge theoretical and empirical literature on international

 competition in goods, surprisingly little attention has been
 devoted until recently to international competition in services.

 In most empirical research on international trade, services are

 simply ignored or are treated as nontradable goods. Theorists,

in contrast, often imply or state without elaboration that trade

in services is conceptually no different from trade in goods, so
that standard analyses in areas such as comparative advantage and

gains from trade apply equally to international commerce in
services.

      Each approach has some economic justification.   For the
classic textbook example of haircuts and for many other types of
services important in domestic production, foreign competition is

indeed a negligible influence. Yet some important services,

including shipping, transportation, and a variety of financial
services, have been actively traded for centuries; for these, the
determinants of trade and the gains from trade are fundamentally
similar to those for merchandise trade.

      But given the evident heterogeneity of the activities
                                6

included in the category, does "services" even constitute a
useful analytic classification, or is it merely a convenient

label for a statistical residual?3 The political and economic

issues raised by international competition among producers of
tangible goods have in practice proved far from simple to
resolve, despite ample theoretical and empirical guidance;
consideration of services introduces additional layers of

complexity. These reflect the intangible nature of the outputs
of many service activities, the locational and temporal
constraints linking service providers to consumers, and the

extensive role of domestic regulation in service activities.

Analysts have only begun to grapple with the implications of
these special features. In terms of both measurement and
interpretation, analysis of service issues is still in its

infancy.
     All this raises obvious questions about the new GATT
negotiations. Do policymakers have a sufficient knowledge base

to shape international rules that will promote global efficiency?
And do U.S. trade officials have a sufficient knowledge base to

        In U.S. statistics for the domestic economy, "services"
are usually defined to include all sectors except manufacturing,
construction, mining, and agriculture. Balance-of-payments
accounting conventionally divides current-account transactions
into merchandise trade and "invisibles". The "services" added to
merchandise trade to form the broader "goods and services"
balance in the U.S. international accounts are income from
foreign investments, military transactions, travel and
transportation, and "other services." (The remaining category of
"invisible" transaction is unilateral transfers.) The U.S.
Department of Commerce uses the term "business services" to refer
to travel, transportation, and "other services" as recorded in
the U.S. international accounts.
                                  7

  identify and pursue the nations own economic interests in the
  area of service competition? If not, what can be gained by

  putting U.S. influence and prestige on the line to bring services
  into the GATT framework? Is the services item on the GATT agenda

  truly a generic issue, or is it fundamentally an attempt to
  improve the international position of a small set of U.S.-based
 multinational firms in a few industries?
      The purpose of this paper is to survey the main issues and

 evidence relating to U.S. international competition in services.
 The next section reviews the forces that have catapulted the

 services issue to the top of the U.S. agenda for forthcoming GATT
 negotiations.

      Section III addresses the question of what is meant by
 services and by trade in services, focusing on key ambiguities of
 definition. The discussion emphasizes similarities and
differences within the service sector as conventionally defined
and between "services" and tangible "goods."

     Sections IV and V interpret evidence on the growing

importance of services in U.S. production and in international

transactions This evidence indicates the extent to which
internationally traded services are unrepresentative of the

         In a footnote to a statement by the Committee on Changing
International Realities of the National Planning Association
endorsing Stalson's generally favorable assessment of the
prospects for U.S. negotiations on service issues, John C.
Carroll of the Communications Workers of America writes, ".
                                                            . .1
sometimes feel that it is a disservice to the public interest to
use the code words of 'barriers to trade in services' to fight
for the foreign interests of a handful of large construction,
banking, and insurance firms" (Stalson 1985, 7).
                                   8

services in domestic production.
     The sixth section evaluates the influence of various types

of national policies on international competition in services and

compares barriers to services competition with nontariff
distortions of merchandise trade.
     Section VII analyzes some of the choices facing U.S.

officials and evaluates the advantages of alternative negotiating
approaches in dealing with services issues.

     The final section sums up principal conclusions emerging
from the survey and emphasizes the links between international
competition in services and other international issues on the

policy agenda.
                                 9

 II. Services in the Policy Spotlight
      For more than a generation, the majority of U.S. workers

 have been employed in service—producing sectors; for well over a

 century, employment in the service—producing sectors has been

 growing steadily as a share of the U.S. labor force.5    Thus,
 while the U.S. can accurately be described as a "service

 economy," this is hardly a recent development.   Why then has the
 issue of services, barely mentioned in earlier GATT negotiations,

 emerged suddenly as a top U.S. priority for the Uruguay Round?
 The burgeoning interest on the part of policymakers and the U.S.

 business community reflects several independent developments,
 each of which has generated some domestic support for market-

opening measures in this area.

     The first development is increasing concern in the United
States about the nation's performance in international markets.
Until the end, of the 1960s, the technology gap between the United
States and other industrialized nations appeared to provide a

permanent advantage over foreign competitors, especially in the

high-technology industries. Through massive research and
development (R&D) expenditures, U.S. firms created a steady
stream of new products and processes. These innovations allowed

American manufacturing to remain internationally competitive even
given labor costs far higher than those abroad. But the
technology gap narrowed with a speed that few anticipated.

Through their global investments, American companies played a

       See Tables 3-5 below.
                               10

major role in the process.
     In 1972, the United States recorded its first postwar
deficit on merchandise trade. While the 1972 trade deficit of $2
billion seems insignificant relative to those of recent years, it

stimulated questions about the course of the U.S. economy and its

future position in world markets. The accompanying employment
shift toward services, while not a new development, suggested the
possibility that U.S. international comparative advantage was

shifting from goods to services
     This impression was strengthened by U.S. balance-of-payments
data that revealed a growing surplus in the "services" component
of the current account. As U.S. merchandise trade performance
deterioriated rapidly in the first half of the 1980s, services

continued to make a significant positive contribution. As
recently as 1982, the U.S. surplus on service transactions was
large enough to reverse a sizable deficit on merchandise trade,

so that the United States still showed a global surplus in the
broader category of "goods and services" trade (see Table 1).
From this, some analysts inferred that increased market access
abroad for U.S. service industries could further enhance their

contribution to overall U.S. current-account performance.6
     Ironically, the healthy growth in the U.S. surplus on

     6  Optimism about the outcome of trade negotiations almost
always reflects a belief that the nation's exports will increase
more than its imports. Progress toward liberalization thus
typically rests on the shaky foundation of mercantilistic goals
and inconsistent expectations, rather than an accurate perception
of mutual gains to be achieved through expansion of both exports
and imports along lines of comparative advantage.
                                 11

  services was due mainly to increases in net earnings on foreign
  investments at a time of unusually high interest rates. Since

  then, interest rates worldwide have fallen dramatically.
  Moreover, the U.S. net investment position has
                                                 reversed, with the
 United States emerging as the leading borrower in international

 capital markets. Accordingly, the contribution of investment
 income to U.S. current account performance is likely to become

 negative in the near future.

      In contrast, as detailed in Table 2, the types of service
 exports most likely to rise as a consequence of improved market
 access abroad constitute a very minor portion of the relevant
 totals. Thus, even highly favorable conditions can be expected
 to have only a modest effect on the aggregate international

 position of the United States, although such conditions would

 provide substantial benefits to a number of U.S. firms.
      While some proponents of GATT negotiations on services have
 stressed the expansion of service trade as a potential
replacement for lost market share in manufactured products,
others have emphasized complementarity with merchandise trade.

In a variety of service activities that include distribution,

training, repair, telecommunications, computer software,

construction, and leasing, market access in services enhances
market opportunities in related merchandise transactions. This


        See, for example, United States International Trade
Commission (1982). The Office of Technology Assessment regards
prospective direct benefits from expanded service exports as
modest but acknowledges the possibility that exports  of goods may
follow from sales of services such as engineering and
                                 12

linkage implies that barriers to international competition in

services may in effect constitute an important category of
nontariff barrier to international competition in goods,

especially manufactured goods.
     An additional stimulus for attention to services arises from

the national debate on "deindustrialiZation" of the American

economy. At a time when u.s. manufacturing employment shows
little promise of growth, expansion of the service industries
represents an alternative means to improve the nation's economic
prospects. Yet the forecast that newly created service jobs will
replace jobs lost in manufacturing is itself controverial.
     Optimists focus on a relatively narrow set of knowledge-

based service activities, including ones closely linked to high-

technology manufacturing. While some of these sectors have
indeed enjoyed rapid growth in recent years, their size relative
to the broad aggregate of services is quite small, both in the
domestic market and in international transactions. Moreover,
further decline in the size of the U.S. manufacturing sector is

likely to slow or even reverse the growth of associated service
activities as well. And U.S. labor unions, which are

concentrated in manufacturing industries, point ominously to the

low average earnings in many types of service employment and to

the lower average rate of productivity increase in services




construction contracts (OTA 1986, 5).
                                   13

 relative to that in the goods-producing sectors.8

         Support for including services in future GATT negotiations
 has also come from the U.S. public officials charged with forming

 and implementing the nation's policies toward trade. To many

 policymakers, services represent a promising area for continuing
 U.S. efforts to maintain open world markets. Negotiations on

 services could extend the discipline of GATT rules to a new and

 important category of transactions and might also help to
 maintain the forward momentum of the liberalization process at a
 time when the prospect of further progress on merchandise trade

 issues appears dim. Anticipated trade and employment gains from

 increased service exports could help to revitalize flagging
political support at home for maintaining open markets.9

     Finally, a major part of the impetus for the recent U.S.
emphasis on service issues has come directly from the industries
and specific firms with an important economic stake in serving

international markets. Large international firms in insurance
and other financial-services activities and in business-support
services such as accounting, law, telecommunications, and data

     8
          Based on an analysis of recent job creation in the United
States, the Industrial Union Department of the AFL-CIO concluded
that service occupations "experiencing the largest net growth in
the number of jobs demand little skill, are only weakly organized
into unions, and usually offer little pay -- ranging from
building custodians to fast food workers. .. .prospects for upward
mobility out of these lower rung jobs. . . are slight" (AFL-CIO
1984, 11-12). However, other researchers view growing service-
sector employment in a much more favorable light. For example,
see Lawrence (1984) and Urquhart (1984).

          Feketekuty and Krause (1986, 89).
                              14

processing have actively promoted U.S. initiatives in the area of

services. In many cases, U.S firms expect their best customers
abroad to be the foreign affiliates of major domestic clients.
Thus, the global expansion of competition in services is in part

a reflection of the earlier globalization of U.S. manufacturing

industries.
     In pressing their case for increased access to foreign

markets, the interested firms and industry associations usually
make no distinction between services exported from the United

States and those provided locally to customers abroad by foreign
affiliates of U.S. companies. Yet the two modes of serving

foreign markets need to be separated for purposes of policy
formation. Both types of transactions can provide substantial
benefits to the U.S. economy. They will, however, generate quite
different effects on domestic employment and income distribution.
     Moreover, improved access for international sales via
foreign subsidiaries is fundamentally not a trade issue at all,

but, rather, a matter of national policy abroad toward direct
foreign investments by U.S. firms. While consideration of trade

in services already represents a significant extension of the
GATT mandate beyond its current domain, the inclusion of service
activities of foreign affiliates of U.S. firms would entail still

a further expansion of GATT jurisdiction.10 This initiative


     10 However, trade-related investment policies have also
been ranked high on the agenda for the new GATT round by U.S.
trade negotiators, along with a third "new" issue, protection of
intellectual property.
                                15

 comes at a time when the GATT has been less than notably
successful in its traditional work of maintaining open world
markets for merchandise trade.

      In sum, while a number of firms
                                        evidently anticipate
substantial benefits from U.S. action on services, the national

stake in the issue, whether in absolute terms or relative to

other issues confronting members of the GATT, is less clear.
Also, at least part of the broader enthusiasm for expanding u.s.
market access in services reflects
                                   a superficial understanding of
the role and importance of services in U.S. domestic production
and in the nation's international transactions. Has liberalizing

international competition in services been ranked too high on the
nations policy agenda? We return to this question at the end of
the paper.
                               16

III. Analytical Issues
    Despite continuing discussion of the nation's metamorphosis

into a "service economy" and, more recently, of the growing
importance of U.S. international competition in services, only

meager attention has been paid to precisely what activities are
entailed or exactly how these activities enter into international
commerce. This section focuses on the fundamental issue of what

is meant by services, emphasizing similarities and differences
within the industries conventionally grouped together as
"services" and between the categories of "services" and tangible

"goods."


1. How Services Differ
     To begin with, which are the industries included within the

broad category of services? In terms of domestic employment,
government (federal, state, and local) is by far the largest

among U.S. service industries, obviously one for which
international competition is not a pressing concern. Other major
domestic service-producing sectors include transportation and
public utilities, wholesale and retail trade, health, and
financial and business services.11 It is in the last category

that the U.S. apparently hopes to make major gains via access to
foreign markets. But in terms of international trade, travel and


         See Table 3. Construction, considered a service
activity in the international accounts of the United States, is
included in the goods—producing sectors in the tabulation of
domestic employment by industry.
                                17

 transportation currently account for the lions share of total
 U.S. receipts from all "service" transactions (excluding income

 from direct foreign investment; see Tables 1 and 2).
      Although a number of scholars have attempted to identify the

 essential features that separate services from other economic
 activities, the inherent heterogeneity of the category implies
 that there will be important exceptions to any allegedly common

 feature. Heterogeneity may be on the rise, with the increasing
 importance of services that are "knowledge-based" or "information-

 based." These closely related categories include services that
provide access to proprietary information (from mailing lists to
industrial patents and trade secrets) and the services of

individuals with specialized knowledge (from nursing to law). In

practice, the two categories overlap; for example, an increasing
range of services can be provided directly to the customer by
skilled individuals or offered indirectly in the form of

proprietary computer software packages.

     Fundamentally, service activities may be distinguished either
by the nature of their products or by the way in which those
products are supplied.12 Most service industries produce outputs
that are intangible and nonstorable, although the rapidly growing
category of information-based services offers important exceptions.
For sectors such as telecommunications and computers, services and


     12
         For more extensive discussion of the distinguishing
properties of services as economic activities, see Bhagwati (1984),
Deardorff (1985), Gray (1983), Kravis (1983), Sampson and Snape
(1985), and Stern and Hoekman (1986).
                                18

tangible goods are often provided together as part of a single
transaction. Another characterizing feature of service products is

high value-added relative to gross output. Again, however, there
is a major exception, wholesale and retail trade, if the value of

goods sold is included as an input.

     Looking at the production process, services often require
physical proximity of the producer and the consumer, a distinction

that is particularly relevant for international competition in
these sectors, although new communication technologies are changing
the importance of this production constraint. For some knowledge-
based services, a salient characteristic is strong economies of
scale in production. Scale economies may reflect large fixed costs
of physical equipment, as in telecommunications; large fixed costs

of research and development, as for patented industrial knowledge;
or large fixed costs of acquiring managerial or technical expertise
which can then be extended inexpensively to additional customers,

as in management consulting. Especially in financial service
activities, scale offers the further cost advantage of internal

risk diversification.



2.   International Competition in Servic
     In general, international trade may be regarded as the
indirect exchange of productive inputs embodied in the goods

traded, i.e. , as a substitute for the direct movement of inputs
                                 19

 across national boundaries.13 Opportunities for and gains from
 international trade in services thus depend on the extent to which

 this indirect exchange is feasible. Since services are

 distinguished from tangible goods in part by greater constraints on
 the physical location of producer and consumer, it is helpful to

 classify services with respect to such constraints. There are four
 possible cases:4

      (1) No required15 movement of providers or demanders. These
           have been called "separated" services (Sampson and Snape,

            1985) and "disembodied" or "long-distance" services

            (Bhagwati, 1985). Such services are fundamentally
           similar to tangible goods with respect to opportunities
           for trade and gains from trade.

      (2) Required movement of providers (demander-located

           services). Where physical proximity to the market is
           essential, international competition necessarily entails
           movement of capital or labor to the production site, as
           in construction. However, the production process may
           also involve some inputs in another location (e.g.,

     13
          A large part of the theoretical literature on
international trade deals with the extent to which indirect
exchange of factors via trade can achieve the same efficiency
benefits in production and consumption as free international
movements of the factors
themselves.
     14   The following discussion is based on Stern and Hoekman
                                                                 (1986).
         What is technologically required needs to be distinguished
from what is cost-efficient or profitable. This distinction is
elaborated in the examples below.
                              20

          research and development or management). Deardorff
          (1985) calls these additional inputs "absent factors."

     (3) Required movement of demanders (provider-located
          services). The obvious example is tourism, but in
          practice health and education are also important

          categories. Free "trade" in such services requires
          unrestricted international movement of potential

          demanders.
     (4) Required movement of either providers or demanders. In

          this case, production requires proximity, but the
          activity is "footloose" and can occur in the importing
          nation, the exporting nation, or even in a third

          location.
     Another relevant classification of services is with respect to

their relationship to merchandise trade. Some internationally
provided services are complementary to trade in tangible goods

(e.g., transportation, insurance, computer software), some offer
alternatives to goods trade (e.g., licensing, computing services),

while a third group are unrelated to goods trade (e.g., health and

education).
     Both classification schemes can be useful in sorting out

issues of international competition (and barriers to international
competition) in the broad range of activities usually lumped
together in the category of services. However, any such taxonomy
is necessarily arbitrary, and rapid changes in technology may in

any case shift a particular activity from one niche into another.
                                   21

        U.S. firms may offer their services (and also tangible
 products) for sale abroad through direct exports or through local
 domestic transactions of a foreign affiliate.16    In standard usage,
 a U.S. service "export" entails production by U.S. residents of a
 service purchased by a resident of another nation.    It is thus the
 country of residence of the producer and buyer, rather than the

 site of production, that distinguishes trade in services. While
 the same definition applies for tangible goods, most trade in goods

 is accomplished by the movement of the goods themselves across
 national boundaries. But except for separated services (case 1
 above), trade in services involves the movement of the producer
and/or the buyer of the service.

        As an alternative to exporting, a U.S. firm may establish a
foreign subsidiary or enter into a joint venture with a foreign
firm.     In this case, the affiliate abroad can provide the service.
Most of the affiliates labor requirements will be met locally,
although. some skilled workers or managers may also move for a time

period from the United States to the site of the foreign affiliate.
In both trade and affiliate sales, there is a link to the U.S.

firm, but sales abroad of U.S. affiliates do not necessarily entail

a specific transaction between a U.S. resident and a resident of

another nation and thus may not enter directly into the U.S.
balance-of-payments accounts.

     However, exporting and affiliate sales are not mutually

     16 Most analyses of international competition in services
exclude factor services, i.e., the employment abroad of a country's
labor or capital by a foreign firm.
                                22

exclusive modes of participation in foreign markets. In fact, they
are often complementary activities of multinational corporations.17
Likewise, trade and factor movements, or exports of goods and

exports of services, have significant complementarity in actual
transactions. The potential links among alternative modes of
competition in foreign markets are highlighted in the following
comparison, adapted from Feketekuty and Krause (1986), of the

foreign sale of an automobile (tangible good) and of insurance
(service). In both instances, movement abroad of U.S. factors,
establishment of a foreign affiliate, and exporting are all

potentially present.
     To sell automobiles abroad, the U.S. producer usually
establishes a dealer network in the foreign market. The U.S. firm
need not own the dealerships, but in practice often does so. The
firm also sends sales representatives to the foreign market to
negotiate the. terms under which the cars will be sold, government

relations representatives to persuade foreign governments that
safety and environmental standards have been met, and engineers to
train and advise local mechanics. The automobiles themselves may
be exported from the United States or produced by a local

subsidiary. Often, market penetration begins with exporting and
may be followed by establishment of a local subsidiary. Even then,
the local operation may simply assemble automobiles from parts
imported from the United States.

    The U.S. insurance company wishing to sell policies abroad

     17   See Bergsten, Horst, and Moran (1978, Chapter 3).
                                23

 will likewise require a dealer network of local insurance brokers
 or agents to sell and service the policies. Again, the U.S.

 company need not own the brokerages but may do so. The U.S.
 insurance company will likewise need to send government relations

 managers to satisfy the foreign government that local regulatory
 requirements have been met, sales representatives to deal with
 local brokers, and perhaps management consultants to help train the
 local brokers.

      For both automobiles and insurance, what is "exported"

 conceptually to the foreign market represents just a fraction of
 the value of the purchase made by the final consumer. Value added

by local inputs, including sales and service personnel and

transportation, make up the difference. In the case of insurance,
what is exported by the U.S. company is mainly risk-bearing and

related industry know-how, as well as other "headquarter services"
of the parent corporation.

     Attempting to classify any given transaction as either an
export or an affiliate sale may thus produce a distorted overall
picture of international competition. A more appropriate question
concerns the relative importance of the two modes of foreign
competition. The extent to which a given foreign transaction is
carried out through affiliate sales rather than exporting obviously
depends on technology but is also influenced by a variety of

government policies toward trans-border flows of products and data,
movements of people, and direct foreign investment.   Such policies
at home and abroad may have a minor influence on the global market
                              24

share of a given firm but a major influence on the firms primary

mode of participation in foreign markets.


3. Comparative Advantage in Services
     Comparative advantage is the basic determinant of the

direction of trade and of the gains from trade among nations:

nations export the goods they can produce relatively cheaply and
import goods that are relatively more costly to produce at home.

Trade can thus be viewed as a superior indirect technology for
producing certain goods. A given supply of primary inputs yields a
greater total value of outputs when resources are concentrated in

activities that are relatively more efficient.
     Conceptually, comparative advantage may rest on differences in
relative factor abundance, differences in technology, or the
existence of scale economies. Most of the literature on
merchandise trade has focused on the role of relative factor
abundance. When countries have similar tastes and technologies,

each will tend to export goods making relatively intensive use of
its abundant factors and import goods requiring large amounts of

its scarce factors.18

     18 The theory of comparative advantage explains the source of
mutual gains to nations from international trade and, in
particular, shows that a nation can gain from trade even if it is
at an absolute disadvantage in all productive activities. The
theory of comparative advantage does not suggest that every
resident of a given nation will be made better off by trade.
Actual trade flows are determined by international competitiveness,
of which comparative advantage is just one element, along with
exchange rates and national policies. Comparative advantage is a
reliable predictor ofa nation's trade flows only when exchange
rates are consistent with globally balanced trade and the influence
                                25

      Accordingly, U.S. comparative advantage should lie in the
 high-technology areas, as these employ large amounts of skilled
 labor, the nation's abundant resource. Extending the same approach
 to services, there is a similar presumption that U.S. comparative
 advantage will lie in the high-technology end of the spectrum, and

 particularly in the production and export of knowledge itself.
      However, recent theoretical research has emphasized the
 potential role of economies of scale in determining trade flows and
 the gains from trade. With restricted trade, large countries will

 tend to have lower prices for goods and services subject to

important economies of scale.'9 But these lower prices do not

necessarily predict the direction of trade when barriers are

removed; with integrated markets, a firm located in a small nation
no longer operates at a cost disadvantage.

     Moreover, while scale economies increase the potential

benefits from. liberalization, they also complicate the issue of how
these benefits are shared.   In particular, the possibility that a
given nation may lose by expanding trade even though global
efficiency is improved is more difficult to rule out when scale
economies are important. Mutual gains are assured only if each
country is able, on average, to expand production in industries



of trade-distorting policies is minor.
     '   Large refers here to the size of the market for a given
product. This tendency has been termed "false comparative
advantage" by Lancaster (1980). Also see Helpman and Krugman
(1985, 152).
                               26

with scale economies.20
     Information-based and knowledge-based services are the areas

in which U.S. firms and U.S. policymakers seem most confident of
expanding global sales. These services are likely to exhibit
strong economies of scale. The theoretical analysis of comparative
advantage and gains from trade suggests both that the apparent U.S.

advantage in these industries (as measured by domestic prices) may
be overstated under current conditions and that the cautious
approach of other nations toward the liberalization of trade in

services may have a firm economic basis.




     20 This problem was discussed by Frank Graham more than half
a century ago. For a modern treatment, see Helpman and Krugman (1985).
                                      27
  IV.    Services in the Domestic cpm
         This section reviews evidence on the growing importance of

 services in U.S. employment and production, and compares U.S trends
 with experience of other nations. Tables 3-8 indicate the division

 of U.S. economic activity into service and non-service components
 according to two alternative criteria. As discussed below, the
 most important categories of internationally traded services (see
 Tables 1 and 2) are not the same ones that are most important in
 terms of recent growth of domestic employment.


 1.     Services in U.S. Employment

        Sectoral employment is the yardstick that demonstrates most
 clearly the extent to which the United States has become a "post-

industrial" or service economy. Tables 3 and 4 show recent
nonagricultural employment of U.S. workers by type of industry.
The service-producing sectors are distinguished here by the
intangible nature of their output and include both final-demand and

intermediate-input categories.
        As Table 3 shows, U.S. employment is now heavily concentrated
in the industries broadly described as service-producing:

transportation, public utilities, wholesale and retail trade,
finance, insurance, real estate, miscellaneous business services,
health, and government. This broad range of activities comprises
all industries that are not included in the goods-producing sector,'

i.e., manufacturing, construction, mining, and agriculture. The
employment classification in Table 3 is on the basis of the
                               28

industrys main output, which may be sold to final consumers

(health, education), used as an intermediate input (business

services), or both (restaurants).
     Tables 4 and 5 indicate the nation's labor-force allocation in
longer-term perspective. Table 5 shows the division of U.S.

employment among three major sectors: agriculture, goods, and
services. Here agriculture includes forestry and fisheries; goods-
producing employment includes mining and construction. Government
employment is allocated according to industry, with only public
administration listed as a separate service category.

     Table 5 reveals that the growth of service-sector employment
as a share of the U.S. labor force is a trend going back to 1850,

the earliest year for which data are available. However, until
recent years that growth was accommodated mainly through the
secular contraction of agriculture's share. Agriculture accounted
for about two-thirds of U.S. employment in 1850 but less than four

percent by the 1980s.
     In contrast, the share of goods-producing employment increased
steadily until the turn of the century and moved cyclically around

the one-third mark for many years thereafter. Only in the past
twenty years has growth of employment in service-producing
industries come mainly at the expense of manufacturing and the

other non-agricultural goods-producing sectors.
     Even so, it is primarily the share of the goods-producing
sectors in total employment, rather than the level of such

employment, that has fallen in recent years. As Table 6 indicates,
                                29

 the number of workers in goods-producing employment actually rose

 between 1967 and 1979, even though the share of these sectors fell
 from 34.7 percent to 30.2 percent of the U.S. labor force. But a

 sharp recession in 1980-1982 produced a substantial fall in goods-

 producing employment. Although employment growth resumed in 1983,
 by 1986 the total number of workers in the goods-producing

 industries was still well below previous peaks. Of course,

 employment in manufacturing and other goods-producing sectors fell
 even more relative to the levels that would have been attained had
 the distribution of the larger labor force among the major sectors

 remained unchanged from the 1967 pattern.


2. Services in Gross National Product

     A similar pattern emerges from an examination of U.S. gross

national product (GNP) by industry, as shown in Table 7.   In
current dollars, the service-producing sectors now account for over
two-thirds of U.S. GNP, up from about 55 percent immediately after
World War II. The industrial classifications used in Tables 3-7
include both intermediate and final products, and both government
and private activities.

     An alternative measure of the economic importance of services
is their share in final demand as measured by consumer spending.

As shown in Table 8, expenditure for services now accounts for
about one-half of total personal consumption expenditures, up from

about 40 percent in 1929 and as little as one-third in 1950. The
main categories of service expenditures in final demand are
                                30

housing, utilities and other services used in household operation,

transportation, and medical care. 2   However, these data tend to

understate the relative importance of services in final

consumption, since they do not include important government-
financed consumption services such as education and recreation.



3. Why and How Services Grew
     The summary tables presented above document the evolution of

todays "service economy" but give little insight into the causes

of these dramatic changes. In brief, the employment and output
shifts reflect the combined impact of three basic forces: changes
in the sectoral allocation of final demand (in turn reflecting

rising per-capita income and systematic changes in relative prices

as well as demographic shifts), relative rates of productivity
improvement, and changes in the organization of economic activity.

     Looking first at the long-term shift of employment out of
agriculture offers some perspective on the more recent movements

from goods-producing to service-producing employment. In the case
of agriculture, low income and price elasticities of demand,
changing dietary preferences, and sustained high rates of
productivity improvement have all contributed to agriculture's

declining share of total employment, even over the periods when the

United States was increasing its penetration of foreign markets.
     Changes in the organization of economic activity reinforced

     21 Housing services in Table 8 include the imputed rental
value of owner-occupied housing, but transportation services does
not include a similar imputed value for motor vehicles.
                                  31

 the effects of demand and productivity changes, with specialized

 processing, transportation, distribution, and business-services
 units gradually taking over many functions once handled by workers
 classified as agricultural employees. But the nation is by no
 means losing its "agricultural base" in terms of production. On
 the contrary, agricultural outputs have continued to grow with

 dismaying rapidity despite the steady decline in the number of
workers employed in the sector.

     While the shift from goods-producing to service-producing

employment is more complex, some of the same forces were important.

Changes in the age composition of the population and in the labor-
force participation of women have fueled increases in the demand
for some services that have experienced high rates of growth.

These include health and education among professional services, and

eating and drinking establishments, a major component of retail
trade. Moreover, the goods-producing sectors have maintained
relatively high rates of productivity increase, so that outputs of
most sectors have continued to rise even when employment has

stabilized or dipped. Finally, changes in the degree of vertical
integration of goods-producing firms has led to a reclassification
of many workers from other industrial categories as service

employees although the work performed by these employees is
basically unchanged.

     In recent years "business services" has been the most rapidly
growing sector of the U.S. economy in terms of employment. The
                               32

business services sector comprises seven major industries:22
advertising; consumer credit reporting and collection; mailing,

reproduction, and stenographic services; services to buildings,

including cleaning, maintenance, and exterminating services;

personnel supply services, including both temporary-help suppliers
and employment agencies; computer and data processing services; and
miscellaneous business services, which include research and

development, management and consulting, and protective services.
     Firms in this industry provide a variety of business services
on an ongoing contractual basis (e.g., janitorial services, data
processing, advertising) or to accommodate temporary or cyclical
requirements (e.g., office personnel, unskilled labor). While some
of the included activities are new (computer services), the growth
of others reflects, changes in the way U.S. firms are doing business

and particularly in employer-employee relationships in the goods-
producing sectors of the economy.23



4. Services, Labor Supply, and Productivity
     Changes in the composition of the labor force may affect

     22 This definition is the one used in the employment data
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Business services" is
sometimes defined more broadly to include all services purchased
mainly by businesses rather than households, adding in particular
business-oriented financial and communcation services. Also, the
U.S. Department of Commerce uses the term "business services" in
its balance-of-payments reporting to refer to all nonfactor
services traded internationally.
     23  Like the broader services category, employment in business
services includes workers at every level of skill. See Howe (1986)
for a detailed assessment of employment growth in the business
services industry.
                                33

 growth of service employment through changes in productivity as
 well as through changes in the pattern of final demand.   The recent
 bulge of new entrants into the labor force was absorbed in large

 part through expansion of employment in the services sector, with
 slow or negative increases in compensation. One recent study found
 that women hired in the service sector were much more likely not to
 have worked at all in the previous year than to have worked

 previously in the goods sector.24 The rapidly growing retail-trade
 sector (which includes the infamous fast-food outlets) experienced
 the largest relative decline in average hourly earnings between

 1977 and 1983 of any major employment sector.25

      With fewer new entrants to the labor force, or with greater

downward rigidity of wages and employee benefits (as in the
European Community), a smaller number of new jobs would have been
created in services, while the higher cost of employing additional
workers would have induced employers to adopt more capital-

intensive (i.e., more "productive") technologies.26

     The relatively strong productivity performance and accordingly

     24 Urquhart (1984). Men hired in the service sector were
more likely to have worked in the goods-producing sector rather
than not working at all during the previous year.
     25 U.S. Department of Labor, Handbook of Labor Statistics,
June 1985, Table 78.

     26 A related issue is the extent to which firms in service
industries earn rents, which are shared with workers through higher
wages. Using micro data, Krueger and Summers (1986) show that most
service industries are low-paying even when the usual adjustments
are made for worker characteristics. The exceptions include banking
and insurance, industries that are characterized by substantial
barriers to entry.
                                 34

low employment growth of the goods-producing sectors may have a
similar explanation. With more extensive unionization and less

flexibility in compensation and work rules, faster adaptation of

new labor-saving technologies would typically mean slower
employment growth but higher measured increases in labor

productivity for any given growth rate of output. Thus, for both
tangible goods and for services, sectoral patterns of labor

productivity growth are appropriately viewed as endogenous,

reflecting the interaction of such forces as technological advance,

labor-market developments, and tax policy.



4.   International Comparisons
     The relative importance of the U.S. service sector in total

employment has increased over time with the nation's rising per-
capita income. Cross-country evidence also points to a strong
positive correlation between service employment and per-capita GNP.
As Table. 9 shows, in 1981 service employment absorbed just 15
percent of the labor force of the world's poorest countries, while
agriculture occupied nearly three workers of every four -- a

pattern not too different from the United States in the mid-

1800s.27

     27   Final demands are typically met by a combination of goods
and services selected on the basis of both income and relative
prices. Intermediate-input service needs are met by direct
employment or by purchases from specialized service-providers.
Again, the choice depends on relative prices. The observed long-
term correlation between per-capita income growth and the
importance of service employment necessarily reflects changes in
relative prices as well as systematic effects of rising income
(Kravis 1983; Kravis, Heston, and Summers 1983). The same is of
                                 35

      Among the industrialized nations, the average share of service

 employment was 58 percent, with the United States eight percentage

 points higher. Moreover, between 1965 and 1980, every
 industrialized country showed an increase in the share of services
 in total employment. The same was true also for the nonmarket
 economies of Eastern Europe and of almost all other nations,
 whether rich or poor. In most cases, the increase in the share of
 services has come at the expense of agricultural employment,

 presumably reflecting the dissemination worldwide of modern
 agricultural technologies as well as the industrialization goals of
many nations.28

     A similar pattern emerges for the percentage share of services

in gross domestic product (GDP). As Table 10 indicates, the
percentage share of services in GDP averaged 62 percent in 1984 for
the industrialized nations but only 29 percent for the world's

poorest nations. The table also shows that the share of services
has been increasing over time for every industrialized nation,

while that of industry broadly and of manufacturing specifically
has been declining.

     These shares are calculated on the basis of local domestic
prices. However, prices of services tend to be higher relative to
those of tangible goods in countries with higher per—capita GNP.


course true for cross-country comparisons in a given year.
     28 Some developing nations are belatedly recognizing their
strong comparative advantage in agricultural production as well as
the concentration of poverty in rural areas. A few are attempting
to alter domestic policies that have favored industrial production
at the expense of agriculture.
                               36

When a common set of international prices is used to value outputs,
the percentage shares of services in GDP differ less markedly over
time for a given country or between rich and poor nations in a

given year. Using real-quantity indices in place of value shares,
Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1983) show that in real terms, low-

income countries may actually consume services in higher
proportions than wealthier nations. This finding presumably
reflects the very low relative prices of services in poor

countries.
                                 37
 V.    International Service Transactions
       The high priority placed by the United States on
                                                        negotiations
 on trade in services is frequently justified by assertions that
 this trade is currently or potentially very important to the

 nations overall international position. Yet the data on U.S.
 trade in services provide only weak support for such a claim.

 Globally and also for the United States, the aggregate size of
 services trade as reflected in balance-of-payments data is roughly

 one-fourth that of merchandise trade. Moreover, that proportion
has been relatively stable in recent years. Thus, neither the
absolute size nor the rate of growth of trade transactions in

services by themselves make a compelling case for its recent

promotion to a top position on the trade policy agenda of the
United States.

      Although there is ample reason to believe that official trade
data seriously underestimate the true value of both U.S. service

exports and imports, even improved and expanded services data do
not provide credible support for a major push on services trade.
If there is a strong argument for broad-based negotiations on

services, it appears to lie less in trade than in the alternative
mode of international competition, sales abroad of U.S. affiliates.
      Tables 1]. and 12 show the value and composition of

international service exports in 1980 for the 25 leading service-
exporting nations. The United States is indeed largest in terms of
services exports, as well as of merchandise exports and income from

foreign investment. However, the relative importance of services,
                               38

as measured by the ratio of service exports to GDP, is less for the
United States than for most of the other nations. This should

perhaps not be surprising, given the very large absolute size of
the U.S. market. But the ratio of service exports to merchandise
exports is also far below that of other major service exporters.

     Still, these data provide only a partial indication of the
importance of international competition in services to the U.S.

economy. As described in Section III, a U.S. firm may compete in
markets abroad through direct exports or through a foreign

affiliate. A service export entails production by U.S. residents
of a service purchased by the resident of another nation. At least
in principle, the total value of service export sales appears in
the services section of the U.S. balance-of-payments accounts.29
As shown in Table 12, the most important service export categories
by value for the United States and most other nations are travel

and transportation.
     Unlike export sales, sales abroad of U.S. affiliates do not

enter directly into the U.S. international accounts, as such sales
do not necessarily entail a specific transaction between a U.S.
resident and a resident of another nation. Affiliate sales


     29  In practice, many service exports are misreported or
unreported. Some service exports are bundled together with
merchandise exports (e.g., computer equipment and software). For
these, the total value of the bundle is reported as a merchandise
export. In others including tourism, reported amounts are based on
voluntary surveys with low response rates. Some categories of
service exports are estimated from conceptually flawed or
incomplete data, while still others are simply omitted. For
further details on measurement issues, see Office of Technology
Assessment (1986) and references cited there.
                                    39

 probably have important indirect effects on two items in the
 services section of balance—of-payments accounts, earnings of U.S.

 investments abroad and intra—firm payments of royalties and

 licensing fees. But neither item provides a reliable measure of
 the U.S. stake in the foreign market, as payments between the

 parent and foreign affiliates are shaped by tax considerations and
 other dimensions of national regulation.

      For the firms and industries that have shown the greatest
 interest in a U.S. initiative on services trade, sales abroad by

 foreign affiliates are substantially larger than exports from U.S.
operations, although the industries' own discussions typically do
not distinguish these two types of foreign operations or divide

revenues from foreign markets into exports and affiliate
transactions.

     The importance of subsidiary sales in total foreign sales of
U.S. service firms is qualitatively similar to the situation of

international competition in tangible goods.     In the manufacturing
industries, U.S. firms have maintained a roughly constant share of
world exports in recent decades. But exports from the United

States have constituted a declining share of total U.S. sales in
international markets, with exports from U.S. affiliates abroad
increasing to maintain overall constancy of the total market
share. °

     In    the case of services, available data are sketchy for both
exports and foreign sales. One estimate suggests that revenues

    °      Kravis   and Lipsey (1985, 1986).
                               40

from sales abroad of U.S. affiliates exceed those from U.S. exports

on average by about fifty percent (Office of Technology Assessment,
1986). Since profit rates of foreign subsidiaries are usually
higher than those of domestic operations, this would mean that, in

terms of profits to U.S. firms competing internationally, affiliate
sales probably account for well over half of all profits generated
by operations abroad. However, affiliate sales translate into a
smaller demand for domestic labor input than the same dollar volume

of export sales.
     The importance of affiliate sales relative to direct exporting

varies substantially across those industries with important
international transactions. For some major service industries,

including travel, educational and legal services, and technology
licensing, direct exports account for nearly all revenues from

international transactions. In a second group, including
insurance, advertising, and accounting, affiliate sales provide the
bulk of foreign revenues. For a third group, including
transportation, construction, consulting, and computer software,
both direct exports and affiliate sales are significant. Table 13
shows Office of Technology Assessment estimates of 1983 revenues in

both categories for U.S. service firms. Banking, an important
service industry both domestically and in international

transactions, was treated separately because of the special problem
of distinguishing investment income from the service component of

foreign revenues.
    Given that affiliate sales greatly exceed exports for many
                                 41

  service providers, a broader measure of the importance of
 international transactions to U.S. service industries is the size
 of total foreign revenues from both sources relative to overall
 sales. For the major U.S. service industries as ranked on the
 basis of domestic employment, including health services and

 education, foreign revenues from exporting plus affiliate sales are
 small relative to the value of total output. Moreover, as with

 merchandise trade, a few large firms account for the lions share
 of all U.S. international service transactions in a given industry.

      While there is no "typical" service sector, the insurance

 industry can provide an illustration of the relative magnitudes.

 According to Stalson (1985, 94), there are about 10,000 insurance
 companies worldwide, with half of those in the United States alone.
But only a few hundred have significant foreign sales, Of this

group, about 50 are U.S. firms; among the U.S. firms, five are very
large and operate in many countries. Revenues from foreign sales
constitute about one-tenth of total revenues for the U.S. industry,
with most of that going to five firms.

     Although the data for many service industries are seriously

deficient, a more significant problem is in interpretation. None
of the available measures can give an accurate indication of the

contribution of foreign sales to profits. For information-based

service industries, including telecommunications and most business
services, fixed costs may account for a very large portion of total
costs. Expansion into foreign markets (whether through exports or
sales of affiliates abroad) may thus make a contribution to profits
                               42

far in excess of the proportion of foreign sales to total
revenues.31 Of course, the actual or potential contribution to
profits of U.S. firms is still far from a measure of the national

stake in pursuing multilateral liberalization of barriers to
international competition in the service sector. This is
particularly relevant at a time when attaining U.S. goals will

surely require trade concessions affecting the prospects of other

domestic industries.




     31  The existence of scale economies is, of course, not unique
to for—profit activities. Both health and education, largely
organized on a not—for-profit basis, offer similar examples of
potential benefits from "exporting" services in excess of the share
in total revenues.
                                      43
  VI.     Barriers to International_Competition
          The U.S.   move to promote inclusion of services in   the new
  round   GATT negotiations reflects the belief not only that
          of

 international service transactions are important to the American
 economy but also that significant barriers hamper the access of
 U.S. firms to foreign markets. This section considers the types of

 barriers that might be included in efforts to maintain open markets
 for services transactions, and prospects for success based on

 experience in negotiating limits on barriers to merchandise trade.


 1. Barriers to Merchandise Transactions
         Even for the relatively straightforward case of tangible

 goods, barriers to trade are anything but straightforward.

 Tariffs, the classic trade barrier, have not entirely disappeared,
 and high tariffs are still present for some products. However, in

recent decades focus has shifted to "non-tariff       barriers" (NTBs)
to trade., meaning all other national policies that potentially

affect the volume of and gains from international trade. The

Kennedy Round of GATT negotiations succeeded in slicing most tariff
rates to postwar lows. The subsequent Tokyo Round was the first to
tackle the much broader issue of nontariff barriers, but with only
modest results.

        At least four major reasons account for the slow progress.
First, NTBs are not one problem but fifty or three hundred separate

problems, ranging from relatively straightforward quantitative
trade restrictions to such complex mechanisms as product standards,
                                 44

government procurement procedures, and labor—market policies. In
most cases, the impact on foreign competition is not the primary

motivation of the policy, although in practice such policies are
nonetheless administered in a way that puts foreign firms at a

disadvantage in serving the local market.

     A second reason for slow progress in limiting the
proliferation of nontariff barriers is that their use arises partly

from basic deficiencies of the GATT structure in handling problems

of adjustment to changing international •conditions. For example,

the widespread use of "voluntary" export restraints (VERs) reflects
general dissatisfaction with the provisions of Article XIX, which

in principle governs members response to unanticipated changes in

international competition.
     Third, the GATT was designed under the assumption that
national policies can be viewed as having both "domestic" and
"international" components. The GATT rules focus primarily on the

latter -   i.e.,   policies applied at the national border. But the

increased integration of national markets has made this dichotomy

almost obsolete.
     Finally and perhaps most important, both the GATT negotiation
process and the GATT rules are predicated on a mercantilistic view
of the gains from international trade, i.e., that the "gains" from

open markets are expanded exports and that any increased imports
represent the price paid for the opportunity to expand exports. By
failing to emphasize the real mutual gains from integrated global
markets, GATT member nations have shifted negotiating efforts in
                                    45

  inappropriate directions, even to the point of forcing GATT to
  become a party to global cartelization of the markets for textiles
  and apparel.32

       Unfortunately, the factors that apply to merchandise trade are
  at least equally relevant for international competition in

  services, where movement of "traded" products across national

 borders is the exception rather than the rule. This does not

 necessarily imply that inclusion of services in forthcoming
 negotiations is unprofitable. It does, however, mean that the
                                                                  very
 basic problems now confronting the GATT are likely to be
 exacerbated rather than eased by broadening its mandate to include
 services.



 2.   Barriers   to Competition in Services

      Diverse in many respects, the service industries do not share
common objectives with respect to expansion abroad. Indeed, some
industries with well-established foreign operations are hesitant to

participate in a generic sectoral push to expand market access
abroad lest their own firm-specific and industry-specific needs

receive less favorable attention from foreign governments. Even

information on the relative importance of particular types of

barriers is not easily collected. Some U.S. firms are reluctant to
divulge information that might indicate their competitive position
to foreign or domestic rivals, and the service firms as a group are'

     32 The small CATT secretariat has remained an important voice
for liberal policies, but these efforts have had scant influence on
the actions of major nations.
                              46

less accustomed than those in the goods—producing sectors to
providing detailed information about their business operations to

government agencies on a regular basis (International Trade

Commission 1982, 1).
     To provide better support for U.S. efforts, the International

Trade Commission conducted a voluntary survey of 479 international
service firms in fourteen service industries. Only about one-
fourth of the firms responded to the survey, and the response rate
was much lower in some industries. In communication services, only
one firm out of eight responded to the questionnaire.
     Respondents identified the degree to which specific nontariff
barriers were encountered in foreign markets. Most important were
restrictions affecting the basic "right of establishment" in the

foreign market (63% of all respondents), specific barriers to
provision of a service by foreign firms (62%), and foreign-
exchange controls (54%). Other barriers in order of frequency

included government procurement (30%), technical issues (27%),
restrictions on related trade in goods (21%), subsidies and

countervailing duties (21%), licensing requirements (18%),

standards and certification (17%), inadequate protection of

intellectual property (12%), and professional qualification

restrictions (10%).
     Despite the ubiquitous nature of these barriers, one-fourth of

the firms did not anticipate any increase in foreign revenues from

their removal. Presumably profits would rise, however.   Half of

the firms surveyed did expect revenues to increase, but the
                                  47

  anticipated increase was surprisingly small -- $1 billion in total,
 plus another $2 billion in associated merchandise trade exports.33


 3. Why Liberalization Is Opposed

        Looking at specific barriers and speculating on the prospects
 for limiting their future use ignores the more basic question of
 why most countries have responded coolly to U.S. proposals for

 liberalization of trade in services.    If the experience with
 merchandise trade is indicative, agreeing to eliminate specific

 barriers without regard to their domestic objectives usually means

 that other policies, possibly less desirable from an efficiency
 perspective, will be substituted in short order.
      Obviously, all the same kinds of economic and political
 considerations -- employment,
                               adjustment, regional effects, etc. --
that   arise with liberalization of merchandise trade are equally
relevant for trade in services. But some additional domestic

considerations appear to be more important for services as a group
than for goods.

       First, many types of services, from banking and
telecommunications to haircuts and restaurants, are subject to

extensive local regulation, either because they are considered
essential to national welfare and security or because they have

important potential effects on consumer health and safety.

Whatever their motive, regulatory barriers typically ensure above-

         International Trade Commission (1982, 47). This document
also provides information by industry for each of the fourteen
service industries.
                               48

normal profits for successful entrants, making current domestic
providers particularly reluctant to share the market and potential

foreign providers particularly keen to enter.
     Moreover, local regulation is likely to act as a barrier to

international competition even when the regulation is applied
evenhandedly to both domestic and foreign firms; the same

requirement is often more difficult and costly for a foreign firm

to meet because of language barriers or general unfamiliarity with

local legal and administrative procedures. But regulation often
does discriminate explicitly between domestic firms and foreign-

controlled suppliers.
     For some particular sectors deemed "essential," a foreign

presence is considered undesirable or even unacceptable. For
example, the United States prohibits foreign ownership of radio and
television stations, while Brazil and Japan exclude foreign firms
in some telecommunications sectors. Many countries provide
essential services via a public monopoly. Even the United States

maintains a government monopoly in postal service.
     For such sectors there are really two different cases for
excluding foreign firms. In some instances a nation may desire to
maintain permanent local control over a particular sector, even if
this control comes at a cost in terms of efficiency. Presumably a
national-security motive is present in most such cases.     For a

second group, the need "temporary" protection is justified by a

variant of the usual infant-industry argument.
     The perceived need to protect infant service industries is an
                                49

 important factor underlying the strong resistance of some
 developing nations to GATT negotiations on services. Financial
 services as well as telecommunications and associated information-

 based services are frequently protected, with the goal of nurturing
 a domestic provider not yet able to confront international

 competition. However, because these services are important
 intermediate inputs, protection raises costs and lowers efficiency

 for all the using industries, thus lowering the odds of survival
for other, perhaps more promising, infants.
     But as noted in Section III, it is theoretically possible for

liberalization to reduce national welfare unless a country is able

on average to expand its outputs in activities with scale
economies. This condition is unlikely to be met for most
developing nations, so that the theoretical case for developing-
country liberalization of service sectors is not airtight.

     Finally,, some countries generally concerned about foreign
influence within their borders see liberalization of "trade" in
services as the start of a general assault on national policies

restricting direct foreign investment. Their alarm has some
justification, since U.S. firms pressing for expanded markets

abroad rarely distinguish between opportunities for trade and
opportunities for affiliate sales.

     Overall, as in the case of merchandise trade, a variety of

arguments may be used to justify barriers against foreign

competition in service sectors. But, as in the case of merchandise
trade, the "national interest" arguments for continued protection
                               50

are put forward mainly by those whose own commercial interests
would be threatened by liberalization.
                                 51
 VII. Where and How to Negotiate_on_Services

       Although the United States has succeeded in putting the
 services issue on the agenda for the new GATT round, many questions

 concerning future U.S. negotiations in this area remain to be
 answered. This section considers two. First, what are the merits
 of pursuing the services issue in other bilateral or multilateral
 forums, in addition to or instead of the GATT?    Second, what are
 the alternative strategies that might be used to make progress on
 this admittedly difficult issue?


 1.   Whereto Negotiate on Services
      As a practical matter, it is too late to wonder whether the
United States is prepared to lead international negotiations on
service issues in the GATT.34 For better or worse, the decision
has been made and cannot be reversed without substantial loss of

credibility for the United States. Gaps in knowledge, both

analytical and empirical, remain significant but are beginning to
be filled. However, the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations is
expected to extend over a number of years.     In the meantime, what
might be accomplished by pursuing some of the same issues with
selected trading partners in other forums?
      Since progress on service issues will require countries to
grapple with a whole new set of nontariff distortions of

international commerce, bilateral negotiations offer an opportunity



         Krommenacker (1984) provides an insider's evaluation of
the potential role of the GATT in liberalizing trade in services.
                               52

to explore these issues with just one partner. In the case of
Canada, where broader bilateral negotiations on a free-trade area
are already in progress, there is a natural opportunity to test out

possible negotiating strategies. One special complication in this
case is Canada's provincial regulatory structure. However, given
the generally cordial relationship between the United States and

Canada and the high degree of integration of the two economies, any
approach that fails in this test case can probably be scrapped
without trying it out in the GATT.
     A second possibility is to work initially within a group of

countries with a particular interest in pursuing liberalization in
the services area. This has been termed a "mini-lateral" approach
or a "GATT of the like-minded." Since the developing nations have
expressed the greatest reservations about services, such a group
would presumably be drawn from the OECD, or the OECD might become

the formal sponsor of a parallel negotiation.35 Agreements reached
within the group would have a conditional most-favored-nation (F4FN)
status, applying only to the nations agreeing to abide by the
terms.36 However, others could join the group later by agreeing to
the same terms.


         The OECD has already sponsored considerable consultative
work on services. See Schott (1983) for an evaluation of OECD
initiatives and the relative merits of proceeding within the OECD
rather than the GATT.
         Such conditionality represents a departure from the
central GATT principle of MFN treatment (nondiscrimination), under
which tariff concessions made by any member apply to all other
members. However, a similar appraoch was used in the Tokyo Round
for the codes of conduct on specific types of nontariff barriers.
                                53

      While the benefits of learning-by-doing in a smaller

 negotiation are real, there are some risks as well.       Bilateral or
 minilateral negotiations create preferential trading arrangements
 that become vested interests. This may reduce the motivation of

 some GATT members to press for broader and more inclusive
 agreements later on (Aho and Aronson, 1985). Another danger is
 that the terms of a bilateral agreement with, say, Canada, may be

 difficult to extend to other trading partners with stronger

 comparative advantage in certain sectors (e.g.   ,   transport,
 construction).


2.   How to Negotiate on Services37

     Here the basic choice is whether to organize the discussions
along sectora]. lines (e.g., insurance, telecommunications) or to

attempt as in the Tokyo Round to develop codes that cover

particular types of policies (e.g., subsidies, government

procurement policies) for all or most types of traded services.
Given the vast universe of policies that impinge on international

services competition, it is not possible to handle all relevant
issues through the second approach, so the question is really about
the degree of emphasis accorded to each.

     One strategy to prevent the task from becoming unmanageable
is to begin by extending as far as possible the current GATT
framework on merchandise trade to services transactions.       This

         Strategies for negotiating on services are discussed in
greater detail by Aronson and Cowhey (1984), Brock (1982), Gray
(1983), Malmgren (1985), Stalson (1985), and Sapir (1985).
                              54

approach would identify any "easy" liberalization gains from moving
negotiating efforts into virgin territory. At the same time,

information would be gained about the important specific issues

that do not fall easily into a framework paralleling that for

goods.
     Another important issue is the extent to which liberalization

in service trade is linked to issues on goods. The two-track
compromise agreed on at Punta del Este suggests that linkage will
be minimal, at least at the start. Unfortunately, complete
separation places limits on the efficiency gains attainable through

multilateral negotiations, and especially potential North-South
agreements to make liberalization in labor-intensive manufactured

goods in the North the quid pro quo for high-technology and
services liberalization in the South.

     One final strategic issue concerns timing. The conventional
wisdom is that the pressure of deadlines and media attention can

help negotiators to reach mutually beneficial compromises that
might otherwise prove elusive. With perhaps a decade of slogging
through difficult issues ahead, there is need for some short-term

goals where progress can be made, and announced, sooner.
                                 55

  VIII. Summing Up
       The United States has indeed become a "service economy" --
                                                                  and
  so have most U.S. trading partners, both
                                           industrialized and
  developing. But although domestic employment at home and abroad is
 now heavily concentrated in the service
                                              industries, tangible goods
 still dominate international trade.     Moreover, the services that
 absorb most of the labor force at home are not the same services
 that account for most international
                                        service transactions nor even
 the ones ripe for global expansion in the near future.

      Thus, the need to press forward on liberalization of services

 must be justified along other lines   ---
                                             e.g.,   to maintain the
 forward momentum in multilateral negotiations, or to restore

 domestic support in the United States for open international
 markets. Yet these arguments seem shaky if services are allowed to

displace important unfinished business in the traditional areas of
GATT efforts, especially safeguards. Also, if U.S. service firms

are interested mainly in expanding sales abroad of their foreign
affiliates rather than exports, as the greater importance of the
former in total revenues suggests, then the resulting base for

domestic support may be rather narrow.
     But there are important positive
                                         aspects to bringing services
into the GATT. Despite its
                            sometimes disappointing record, the
GATT remains the only international organization where rules are

taken seriously.38 Because services would be a new issue in the

     38 Not necessarily followed, but at least taken
                                                      seriously. A
good example is the prolonged effort by the United States to find a
"GATT--able" variant on its Domestic International Sales Corporation
                                56

GATT, there could be some easy gains to be made initially; in
merchandise trade, only the hard things are left to tackle.

Consideration of services would necessitate greater attention to
the links between trade and direct investment and between trade and

international movements of labor --   further   complicating the task

of GATT, but in a way likely to serve its ultimate objective of

pushing the world economy toward greater efficiency. And, finally,
because goods and services are inextricably (and increasingly)

intertwined in real transactions, progress on merchandise trade
will surely be slowed unless trade negotiators begin to think

seriously about services too.




(DISC) device for subsidizing exports.
                              REFERENCES
 Aho, C. Michael, and Jonathan David Aronson.    1985. Trade Talks.
      New York: Council on Foreign Relations.

 AFL-CIO, Industrial Union Department. 1984.     Deindustrjaljzation
      and the Two Tier Society: ChaUges for an Industrial
      Policy. Washington: Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO.
 Aronson, Jonathan, and Peter Cowhey. 1984.     Trade in Services:
      A Case for Open Markets. Washington, D.C.: American

      Enterprise Institute.

 Bergsten, C. Fred, Thomas Horst, and Theodore H. Moran. 1978.
     American MultinationalsanrjAmicIntes                Washington,
     D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1984. Splintering and Disembodiment of
     Services and Developing Nations. The World Economy. 7:133-144.
Brock, William A. 1982. A Simple Plan for Negotiating on Trade

     in Services. The World Econly 5:229-240.
Deardorff, Alan V.   1985. Comparative Advantage and International
     Trade and Investment in Services. In Trade and Investment in

     Services: Canada/US Perpectives, ed. Robert M. Stern.
     Toronto: Ontario Economic Council.
Feldman, Robert A., and Allen J. Proctor.   1983. U.S.
     International Trade in Services. Federal Reserve Bank of
    New York Quarterly Review 8, no. 1, 30-36.
Feketekuty, Geza, and Lawrence B. Krause. 1986. Service and
    High Technology Goods in the New GATT Round. In Pacific
    Trade Policy Cooperation: Goals and Initiatives.      Korea
    Development Institute, 87-99.
Gray, H. Peter. 1983. A Negotiating Strategy for Trade in
     Services. Journal of World Tr _La 17:377-387.
Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul R. Krugman. 1985. Market_Structure
     and Foreign Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Howe, Wayne J.   1986. The Business Services Industry Sets Pace
     in Employment Growth. Monthly Labor Review 109 (April) 29-
     36.

Kravis, Irving B. 1983. Services in the Domestic Economy and in
     World Transactions. National Bureau of Economic Research

     Working Paper no. 1124, May.
Kravis, Irving B., Alan W. Heston, and Robert Summers. 1983.
     The Share of Services in Economic Growth.   In Global

     Econometrics: Essays in Honor ofLeç_j(Je, ed.             F.

     G. Adams and B. Hickman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 188-
     218.

Krommenacker, Raymond J. 1984. World-Traded Services: The
     Challenge for the Eighties. Dedham, MA: Artech House.
Krueger, Alan B., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1986. Reflections on
     the Inter-industry Wage Structure. Harvard Institute of
     Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 1252, July.
Kutscher, Ronald E., and Valerie A. Personick. 1986.
     Deindustrialization and the Shift to Services. Monthly
     Labor Review 109 (June) 3-13.

Lancaster, Kelvin. 1979.                         Efficiency. New
     York: Columbia University Press.
Lawrence, Robert Z.   1984. Can America Comp Washington,
     D.C.: Brookings Institution.
 Lipsey, Robert E., and Irving B. Kravis.     1985. The Competitive
      Position of U.S. Manufacturing Firms.     BancaNazionaledel
      Lavoro Quarterly Review 153: 127-154.
 Malmgreri, Harald B. 1985. Negotiating International Rules for
      Trade in Services. The World Econojy 8:11-26.

 Office of Technology Assessment, United States Congress. 1986.
      Trade in Servi ce s:

      Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
 Price Waterhouse. 1985. Exporting Services: A Fortune 500

     View. Export Today 1:53-57.
Sampson, Gary P., and Richard H. Snape. 1985.      Identifying the
     Issues in Trade in Services. The World Econony 8:171-182.

Sapir, Andre. 1985. North-South Issues in Trade in Services.
     The World Economy 8:27-42.
Schott, Jeffrey J.      1983. Protectionist Threat to Trade and
     Investment in Services. The World Economy 6:195-214.
Stalson, Helena. 1985. U.S. Service Exports      and
     Barriers:   An Agenda for Ngotiations. Washington, D.C.:
     National Planning Association.
Stern, Robert M. 1985. Global Dimensions of International Trade
     and Investment in Services. In Trade and Investment in

    Services: Canada/US Perspectives, ed. Robert M. Stern.
    Ontario Economic Council.

Stern, Robert M., and Bernard M. Hoekman. 1986. GATT
    Negotiations on Services: Analytical Issues and Data Needs.
    Research Seminar in International Economics, University of

    Michigan, Seminar Discussion Paper No. 189.
United States International Trade Commission. 1982. The
    Relationship of Exports in Selected U.ç_Industries
    to U.S. Merchandise Exports. USITC Publication 1290.
    Washington, D.C.: United States International Trade

    Commission, September.
United States Trade Representative. 1983. U.S. National Study
     on Trade in Services: A Submissip         Jriited States

    Government to the General AgreementçIffS and Trade.
    Washington, D.C.: Office of the United States Trade

    Representative.
Urquhart, Michael. 1984. The Employment Shift to Services:
    Where Did It Come From? Monthly Labor Review 107 (April)

     15-22.
Whalley, John. 1986. Some Reflections on the Current Trade in
     Services Debate. University of Western Ontario.
                                                                                                                                                    373          International Competition in Services
                                                                                                                                                    Table 6.2             U.S. Business Services Trade by Component, 1977-85 (billions
                                                                                                                                                                          of dollars)
                                                                                                                                                                             1977       1980    1981     1982       1983     1984        985
                                            —                          ror                       r                             C'QON                Thtal business services
                                            r
                  c6 ,                                                 C'                     C'                         (l    Cl        N            Exports               23.4        37.0     41.7     41.7      41.8      43.8       45.1
                 —rrN
                 Si N
                                                                       c'ccri                 ——                  OS
                                                                                                                                    — —
                                                                                                                                                                            20.9        29.4     32.1     32.6       35.3     41.5       44.9
                     —                                                                                                                                Imports
                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                           Balance                2.5     7.6     9.6        9.3     6.4       2.3        0.2
                                                                                              NC'N                C'C'OSt
                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                    3   ravel
                                                                                                                                                                              6.2        10.6    12.9     12.4       11.1)    11.4       11.7
                 —
                                            rr,
                                            -'    —
                                                  -t       r           N cc C'
                                                                       cc cc —
                                                                                              C —
                                                                                              — '1- -'c           (N cc
                                                                                                                  'C           OS
                                                                                                                                    —
                                                                                                                                    —
                                                                                                                                         *CN             Exports
                                                                                                                                                                                                          12.4       34.0     16.0        7.0
                       c-'-,
                                                                                                                                                         Imports              7.5        10.4    31.5
      cc                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                             Balance         —1.3        0.2      1.4        0.0    -2.6     -4.6        -5.4
                                                                                                                                                    l'assenger fares
                       Cr1                  ccr'c-'t                   C'C                    CNN—                iCc©OSC
                                                                                                                      — r— cc                          Exports                    1.4     2.6     3.1        3.2      3.0          3.0     3.0
                                                                       cc     C                 -1-               a- N  'C
                 C'    cc cc                      N                    N      IC   CI         — —                 ('c    ('c             'St
                                                                                                                                                       Imports                    2.7     3.6     4.5        4.8     5.5           6.5     7.4
                 ri    S-i
                                            —t                                                                     'c 'N
                                                                       r                                                                                                                -1.0             —   1.5    —2.4     --3.5       - 4.4
                                                                                                                                                             Balance          —   1.4           —1.4
                                                                                              .ccC                —C——                              Shipping and other
                 Ci.C
                                                                                              'ci -'1 'ci         © © ©             cc cc             transportation
                                            —tsr C
                    - cc                    —                            c-
((I   i-i
      cc
                 —
                 —.tr'c                                                ccc-'ci
                                                                       V-i-        Cs
                                                                                              ——
SC
      C'         CiCi                                                                                             SS-!   S.c                          Exports                7.3         31.6    32.6     32.3       12.6          3.8    4.3
N                                                                                                                                                     Imports                8.0         11.8    32.5     11.7       12.3      14.7       6.3
                                                                       Ctr'c                  ''Th                tSCC1                  ri              Balance            —0.9        —(1.2     0.3        0.6      0.3    ---   0.9   -2.1)
                                            — Ci C'                    cc 'c a-               —
                                                                                              C'  s.c   Cl        'C     C s.c cc        cc
                                                                                                                                                    Proprietary rights
                 '-
                               cc
                                            -c-s.c                     ccc-r.c
                                                                                                                                                      Exports                4.9          7.1     7.3        7.1      7.9          8.1     5.5
                                                                                                                                                      Imports                0.5          0.7     0.7        t).2     (1.2         0.5     0.2
 E
 C
                                            cc-t                              —-t             55'C                                             -t        Balance             4.4          6.4     6.6        6.9      7.6          7.6     5.3
 C
                 -tI
                 C
                 s-i Cl
                       t
                       3'      'C.
                               C   I
                                            N
                                            N     OS
                                                  S    I
                                                           N           s-I 5
                                                                       5-- a- s.c
                                                                                   0             c-I s.c
                                                                                              cc —                't
                                                                                                                  c-I s.c
                                                                                                                  'c.
                                                                                                                      s.c
                                                                                                                      s.c
                                                                                                                               cc   N    —
                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                               cc
                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                    Other business services
                                                                                                                                                                             3.8                  5.9        6.6      6.9          7.5     7.6
                                            't'                                                                                                       Exports                             5.2
                                                                                                                                               cc     Imports                2.2          2.9     3.0        3.5      3.4          3.8     4.0
                                                                                                                  r.cC1OS'C"                   cc
                                                                       51510                  CS'cIN                                                         Balance              1.7     2.2     2.9        3.1      3.5          3.7     3.6
                                               C'          s-I         S-I 'C cc
                                                                       N——                    5- N C'             't     'C 0' '1-        'C
                                                                                                                                          —
                                                                                                                                               CS
                                            S-Is-I                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                               aa
 C
                                                                                                                                                a   Source: U.S. Department of Commerce 1986, table 41.
                                                                                                                                                    Note: Details may not sum to totals due to rounding.
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                   a                                                                           C
                                                                   a                                                                           U
                                                                                                                                               I-
U
                                                                   a
                                                                   a                                                                           0    constitute a very minor portion of the relevant totals. Thus, even highly
                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                                a   favorable conditions can be expected to have only a modest effect on
cc                                                                 =
                                                                   a                     a                   aV                     -c     a
                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                   E
                                                                                        •c-
                                                                                                                                               —
                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                    the aggregate international position of the United States, although such
                                                                        c-a
            C                          SI
                                                                   V
                                                                   a    a                                                                       I   conditions would provide substantial benefits to a number of U.S. firms.
                                                                                                                                                       While some proponents of GATT negotiations on services have
                                a                                     c.                 c               a   a                  a c.a               stressed the expansion of service trade as a potential replacement for
                                                                   aa
            ci                                                 a                                                                               cc
                                                                                    a
                                                                    0 c-c-
                                LI
            a                                                                       a
            'cOCa c-COa                                               coo a <
                                                                   aa a.       a.                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                    lost market share in manufactured products, others have emphasized
                                                                                                             —                                      complementarity with merchandise trade. In a variety of service ac-
            cc a.   a.
             ac-a                      CU—                          a     C'LL                     E
                                       a
                                       C'                           a     o                                  H                      ZUIc-c          tivities that include distribution, training, repair, telecommunications,
                                                                                                                                                    computer software, construction, and leasing, market access in ser--
                                                                                                                                                    vices enhances market opportunities in related merchandise transac-
                                                                                                                                                    lions.6 This linkageimplies that barriers to international competition
                                                                                                                                                       servIces may in effect constItute an Important category 0! foul II!
                                                                                                                                                        fl                                                                                LI
 381         International Competition in Services

 Table 6.3            U.S. Employment on Nonagricultural Payrolls b% lndustrs,
                      1984—86 (thousands)

 Industry                                         1984           1985             1986
 Total                                            94496          97,614          99,918
 Pnvate sector
                                                  78.472        81.199           83,198
Goods producing                                  24.727         24.930           24,965
   Mining                                           966            930              790
  Construction                                    4.383          4.687            4,974
  Manufacturing                                  19.378         19.314           19.201
Service producing                                69.769         72.684           74.953
  Transportation and public utilities             5.159          5.242            5,265
    Transportation                                2.917          3.006            3.037
    Communications and public utilities           2.242          2.236            2.228
  Wholesale trade                                 5.555          S.74u            5.872
  Retail trade                                   16.5'S          17.360          t7,464
    General merchandise stores                    2,26'          2,20             2,344
    Food stores                                   2.637          2.779            2.917
    Auto dealers and service Stations             I ,'99          1.892           1.944
    Eating and drinking places                    5.388          5.715            5,889
 Financial, insurance, and real estate            5.689          5.953            6,261
    Finance                                       2,854          2.979            3.137
    Insurance                                     1.757          1.830            1.918
    Real estate                                   1.078          1.144            1.206
 Services                                        20.797         21,974           22.924
   Business Services                              4.057          4,452            4.755
   Health services                                6,122          6.3 10
Government                                                                        6,543
                                                 16,024         16.415           16.720
 Federal                                          2,807          2.875            2.889
 State                                            3.734          3.848            3.936
 Local                                           9.482           9.692            9.885
Source: Mont/i/v Labor Reijen, October 1986. table 13
Note: Data for 1984 and 1985 are annual averages: 1986 data are for May.




sectors are distinguished here by the intangible nature of their output
and include both final-demand and
                                      intermediate-input categories.
   As table 6.3 shows. U.S. employment is now heavily concentrated
in the industries broadly described as service producing: transporta-
tion, public utilities, wholesale and retail trade, finance, insurance, real
estate, miscellaneous business services, health, and government. This
broad range of activities comprises all industries that are nor included
in the goods-producing sector, that is. manufacturing, construction,
mining, and agriculture. The employment classification in table 6.3 is
made on the basis of the industry's main output, which may be sold
to final consumers (health, education), used as an intermediate input
(business services), or both (restaurants).
         Rachel McCulloch/MauriCe R. Greenberg/Lionel I-I. Olmer                                  383     International Competition in Services
382

                                                                                                  Table 6.5
'Fable 6.4         U.S. Employment on Nonagricultural Payrolls by Industry,                                            U.S. Employment by Major Sector, 1850—t982 (percentage
                   l919—83 (millions of workers)                                                                      of total)

                           1919   1930     940       1950     1960         970    1980    1983                                                    Goods                    Service
industry                                                                                          Year                  Agriculture               Producing                Producing
                          27.1    29.4    32.4     45.2       54.1        70.9    90.4    90.1
Total
Private sector            24.4    26.3    28.2       39.2     45.8        58.3    74.2    74.3                                                                             17.8
                           2.8    12.0     3.2       18.5     20.4        23.6    25.7    23.4    1860                 59.9                      20.1                     20.0
Goods producing
                                   1.0     0.9       0.9       0.7         0.6     1.0     1.0    1870                 50.8                      25.0
  Mining                    1.1                                                                                                                                           24.2
                            1.0    1.4     1.4        2.4       3.0        3,6     4.3     3.9    1890                 43.1                      28.3                     28.6
  Construction
                                   9.6    11.0       15.2      16.8       19.4    20.3     8.5    1900                 38.0                      3t).5
  Manufacturing            10.7                                                                                                                                           31.4
                           14.3    17.5   19.1       26.7     33.8        47.3    64.7    66.7    1910                 32.1                      32.1                     35 9
Service producing
                            3.7    7.7     3.0        4.0       4.0        4.5     5.1     4.9    1920                 27.6                      34.6                     37.7
  Transportation and
                                                                                                  1930                 21.8                      31.7                     46.6
    public utilities
                            na.    na.     1.8        2.6       3.1        4.0     5.3     5.3    1940                 18.3                      33.1                     48.6
  Wholesale trade
                            na.    na.     4.9        6.8       8.2       II.))    5.1)   15.5    1952                                           35.5                     s3
  Retail trade
                            1.1     1.5    1.5        1.9       2.6        3.6     5.2     5.5    1957                  9.8                      34.3                     56.0
  Financial, insurance.
                                                                                                  1962                  7.8                      33.1                     59.1
    and real estate
                            2.3    3.4     3.7        5.4       7.4       11.5     7.9     9.7    967                   5.3                      34.7                     6t).l
  Services
                            2.7    3.1     4.2        6.0       8.4       12.6    16.2    15.9    1972                  4.4                      31.4                     642
  Government
                            na.    0.5     I .1)      1.9       2.3        2.7     2.9     2.8   1977                   3.7                      29.7                     66.6
      I"ederal
                            na.    na.     na.        na.        .5        2.7     3.6     3.7   1979                   3.6                      30.2                     66.3
      State
      Local                 na.    na.     na.        na.       4.5        7.2     9.8     9.4   1982                   3.6                      27.2                     69

Source: U.S. Department of' Labor 985. table 63.                                                 ,Souree: lirqi,hart 984, table I.
Note: Data incIuelc Alaska and Hawaii beginning ii    196(1. I )etails   may not sum to totals
due to rounding.
                                                                                                 fallen in recent years. As table 6.6 indicates, the number of workers
  Tables 6.4 and 6.5 indicate the nation's labor force allocation ii'i                           in goods-producing employment actually rose between 1967 and 979.
                                                                                                 even though the share of these sectors fell from 34.7 percent to 30.2
longer-term perspective. Table 6.5 shows the division of U.S. employ-
ment among three major sectors: agriculture, goods, and services. Here                           percent of the U.S. labor force. But a sharp recession in 1980—82
agriculture includes forestry and fisheries; goods-producing employ-                             produced a substantial fall in goods-producing employment. Although
ment includes mining and construction. Government employment is                                  employment growth resumed in 1983, by 1986 the total number of
allocated according to industry, with only public administration listed                          workers in the goods-producing industries was still well below previolls
as a separate service category.                                                                  peaks. Of course, employment in manufacturing and other goods-
   Table 6.5 reveals that the growth of service-sector employment as a                           producing sectors fell even more relative to the levels that would have
share of the U.S. labor force is a trend going hack to 1850, the earliest                        been attained had the distribution of the larger labor force among Ihe
                                                                     that                        major sectors remained unchanged from the 1967 pattern.
year for which data are available. However, until recent years
                                                          contraction  of
growth was accommodated mainly through the secular                                               6.4.2 Services in Gross National Product
agriculture's share. Agriculture accounted for about   two-thirds of U.S.
                                                                                                    A similar pattern emerges from an examination of U.S. gross tiational
employment in 1850 but less than 4 percent by the l980s.
   In contrast, the share of goods-producing employment increased                                product (GNP) by industry, as shown in table 6.7. In current dollars.
steadily until the turn of the century and moved cyclically around the                           the service-producing sectors now account for over two-thirds of U.S.
one-third mark for many years thereafter. Only in the past twenty years                          GNP, up from about 55 percent immediately after World War Il. The
has growth of employment in service-producing industries come mainl                              industrial classifications used in tables 6.3—6.7 include both interme-
at the expense of manufacturing and the other nonagricultural goods'                             diate and final products, and both government and private activities.
                                                                                                   An alternative measure of the economic importance of services is
producing sectors.
   Even so, it is primarily the ,cliare of the goods-producing sectors ii                        their share in final demand as measured by consumer spending. As
total employment, rather than the level of such employment, that has                             shown in table 6.8, expenditure for services now accounts IOI' ahOtIl
                                                                       H. Olmer
384        Rachel McCulloch/MaurieeR. Greenberg/Lionel
                                                                                                                        -     r         c')    SC         5   N N N                 '       N N
                                                                                    1967—79                        cc                                                                                      '1
hible 6.6                   Estimated Employment Shifts by Sector and Industry,                                    0'
                            (millions)
                                                                     '979
                                                                                        Relative                                               SC '3 '3 3'     "                               —
                                                                     with                                               © ('.1 i'i c". h 3'
                                                                                                                   3'   ri    rN   C   N    'C                                              'i rI
                                                                     1967               Gain or                    Sc   N   3' i'- 3'  N Sc N N N 3' N                                         Ci
                                               1967       1979                                                     C'   N   C      ' — i', —N Ci '1' "i' c',                                   C",
Sectorand                                                            Distribution       Loss                            C-i
                                               Actual     Actual
Industry
                                               74.4       98.8
fatal                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1)
                                                                      5 2                  1.7                                         N N N N N as       N
                                                3.9        3.5                                                          N N N N                                                                -
Agriculture                                                                              - 4.5                             — '0 — '3 N N — N — 3' 3'         N
                                                                                                                                                        — 'I —
                                               25.8       29.8       34.3                                               Oc c', r, 'f N 'C- N '1- N C C'
Goods producing                                                                          —5 ()                          vs a-,         N C — c-i ri — C-i                                                             0
                                               20.7       22.5       27.5
   Manufacturing                                                     59.4                1    62                                                                                                                      '-I
                                               44.7       65.5
Service producig
   [ransp. , communication. and                                                               0.0                       N N C                  N N c',         —   N                SC      C' C           N          .0
                                                4,9         6.5       6.5                                                                         -                             r
      public util,                                        20.1       18.5                  1.6                          a-,ri0'3_r.iNCCSca-©tN
                                                                                                                        —         em
                                                                                                                            Ci — c '7, '3 — ('I N
                                                                                                                                          N —                  'C- Sc
                                                                                                                                                                                —                                     H
                                                13.9                                                               C'   3' N                              Ci '0
                                                            3.9       .4                 + 0.5
      Wholesale                                  26                                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                     15.1                +             .2
                                                 l.3       16.2                                                                                                                                                       'Si
     Retail                                                                                                                                                                                                           C
       Eating and drinking                                                                i        I    2               —               Cl
                                                                                                                               C N N N -C C                                         C'      N ci      ri C            '3
                                                 2.3        4.2        3.0                                                 N
          establishmentS                                                                                                c'   N N N cc C' I ",                          C'           SC      N Sc      — 5',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      'C
                                                                                                                        N ri       — '1'   —                                                                           C
   Finance, insurance, and real                                        4,7                F-       1.2
                                                            5,9                                                                                                                                                       SC
      estate                                                          24.1                         37
                                                18.2       27.8                                                                                                                                                       C-i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C-'
   Services                                                            2.7                *        IA)
                    ii id                        21         3.7                                              C          N         Cl    N N               N 'C N N                  SC'     N Ci N '7
      ISo siness            'c pan
                                                                       5.9                                                                                                                                            5)
                                                 4.4        3.9                                              C     'C   c-SN—ri--t'C"—N ,c,ri"-Nrir",
      i'ersoiial                                                                          -1-0.2             C     C'   'r,        —
                                                                                                                                  C-i                          N
                                                                       0.9                                                                                                                                            C
      l'snterlainiiieflt ,inil recreitloIi                                                   f 4,6
                                                11.0       19.2       14.
      Professional                                                     5.1                -+1.9                                                                                                                        U
                                                            7.0
         Health                                                                                        I.!                                                                                                            CS
                                                  52        IF. (1     6.9                                                                                                      —                                     '55
         Education                                                                                                      SC        N  3' 0'          cc-   '3 '3        N            'i                .0 —
                                                                       (I'S               -*0.2                         SC        Ci CI             — '1'
                                                                                                                                                      Sc V', Ci 'C r", Cl                       ri
                                                  0.3       (('7                                             Cs
         Legal                                                          I .0                  F-
                                                                                            0.6                                                                                                                       'C
                                                            1.6                                                                                                                                                   -    C
         Welfare arid religious                                                              - ((.4
                                                  42        5.2        5.6
       Public administration                                                                 — ((.3           C
                                                            0.7         I .0
           Postal                                                                                            'C
                                                                                              --0.4          C                                      0' — N N 3' 3'                                    —    —
                                                  1.5        I .6      2.0                                               ,,             3' '3 0' '3                                                             .55   -
                                                                                                                                  C Ci
           Other federal
                                                             0.9       0.8                    *0. I                      N        i              '3 Ci ('i 'I- CI C-i C'i                                       —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SI
           State                                                                              it). I                                                                                                            C—     =
                                                                .9      1.8
           1 .ocal                                                                                           C                                                                                                  C'
                                                                                                             C                                                                                                        .0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -s
                                                                                                                                                                                                 U
  Source: U rquhart 984 1 able 2.                                                                                                                                                                                      '3
  Note. Details may not add to totals due to rounding.                                                                                                                                  U        0.
                                                                                                             C                                                                                                   -     E
                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                         •0                                                      C
                                                                                                                                          U                                                      U
                                                                                                                                         -5
                                                                                                                                         .0
                                                                                                                                                                                        -        S
                                                                                                             C                                                              -
                                                                                                                                         -                                                       E
                                                             from about 40                                                                                                                       E                      a
  one-half of total personal consumption expenditures, up                                                                                                                                        5)
                                             in 1950. The main categories                                    ill
                                                                                                                                                                                E
  percent in 1929 and as little as one-third                                                                                                                                                           C
                                            are housing, utilities and othef                                                                                                                                            'CS
                           in final demand                                                                                                I)                                    )       a       -      a
  of service expenditures                                                                                                                                                                                               'a
                                                                   careH5                                                                                                                        S
  services used in household operation transportation, and medical      ot                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                       i.E'0                                     'E         P
                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                   C                       C'3                  SE-
  However, these data tend to understate the relative importance                                                                                                                                                        C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '0C
                                                                                                                                                     ga2E'0u
  services in final consumption, since they do not include importalil                                        N           z                                 =                '"—         =•— V
                                                                                                             'C
                                                                                                                                   E      o          ,i                                 a>
                                       services such as education and                                                                                C                      a.C
  government-financed consumption                                                                                        __3              0.•— C
  icc reat loll -                                                                                                        HL2                                    5'-)
partic- force labor the in and population the of composition age the in
Changes important. were forces same the of some complex, more is ment
employ- service-producing to goods-producing from shift the While
              sector. the in employed workers of number the in decline
steady the despite rapidity dismaying with grow to continued have
outputs agricultural contrary, the On production. of terms in base" tural
"agricul- its losing means no by is nation the But employees. cultural
agri- as classified workers by handled once functions many over ing
tak- gradually units business-services and distribution, transportation.
processing. specialized with changes, productivity and demandof fects
ef- the reinforced activity economic of organization the in Changes
                                                      markets. foreign of
penetration its increasing was States United the when periods the over
even employment, total of share declining agriculture's to contributed
all have improvement productivity of rates high sustained and
                                                                   ences,
prefer- dietary changing demand, of elasticities price and income low
agriculture. of case the In employment. service-producing to producing
goods- from movements recent more the on perspective some offers
agriculture of out employment of shift long-term the at first Looking
                        activity. economic of organization the in changes
 and improvement, productivity of rates relative shifts), demographic
 as well as prices relative in changes systematic and income capita
 per rising reflecting turn (in demand final of allocation sectoral the in
 changes forces: basic threeof impact combined the reflect shifts output
 and employment the brief, In changes. dramatic these of causes the
 into insight little give but economy" "service today's of evolution the
 document sections previous the in presented tables summary The
                                     Grew Services How and Why 6.4.3
                                                                              preliminary.
 are 1986 for Data housing. owner-occupiedof value imputed includes Housing \otes:
                           14. B— table 1987 President, the of Report 'onoinic Pc Source:
 412.6    227.9    129.3   82.5     38.0     18.8   8.2    9.9                   Other
                   84.2    46.1     16.4     6.9    2.2    2.2             care Medical
                   35.7    23.7     11.2     6.2    2.1    2.6           Transportation
 178.4  113.9  63.5         .337.7   20      9.5    4.0    4.0    operation Household
 438.5 261.5   148.4       94.0     48.2     21.7   9.7    .7                Housing
 1441.3 831.9               284.0   134.1)   63.2   26.2   30.4                Services
               416.2        270.3   153.2 98.2      37.0   37.7          goods Nondurable
 388.3         135.4        85.7    43.5  30.8      7.8    9.2              goods Durable
 2762.4 1732.6 1012.8       640.0   330.7 92.!      71.0   77,3                     Total
   1986     1980     975    970      1960    1950   1940   929
                                                           dollars) of
                                                                                 6.8 Table
             Olmer H. Greenberg/Lionel R. 1cCulloch/Maurice Rachel                    386
                                                                                           •
                                                                                               •:.




 389        International Competition in Services                                          I
   These
       shares are calculated on the basis of local domestic prices.
 However, prices of services tend to be higher relative to those of
tangible goods in countries with higher per capita GNP. When a com-
mon set of international prices is used to value outputs, the percentage
shares of services in GDP differ less markedly over time for a given
country or between rich and poor nations in a given year. Using real-
quantity indexes in place of value shares, Kravis, Heston. and Summers
(1983) show that in real terms, low-income countries may actually
consume services in higher proportions than wealthier nations. This
finding presumably reflects the very low relative prices of services in
poor countries.

6.5 International Service Transactions
   The high priority placed by the United States on negotiations on
trade in services is frequently justified by assertions that this trade is
currently or potentially very important to the nation's overall inter-
national position. Yet the data on U.S. trade in services provide only
weak support for such a claim. Globally and also for the United States.
the aggregate size of services trade as reflected in balance ofpayments
data is roughly one-fourth that of merchandise trade. Moreover, that
Table 6.9           Distribtjon of Labor Force b Industn, 1965 and 1980
                    (percentage of total labor force)

                                    Agriculture           Industry            Services
Country Group                     1965      1980      1965      1980     1965        980
Loss-income economies             77        73        9         13       14         15
Middle-income economies           57       44        17         22      26          34
  Oil exporters                   61       49        14         19      24          32
  Oil importers                   53       40        19         23      28          36
High-income oil exporters         56       36        IS         2!      28          44
Industrialized market
  economies                       14         7       38         35      48          58
  Canada                          10         5       33          9      57          65
  France                          17         9       39         35      43          56
  Germany                         10         6       48         44      42          50
  ltal                            24         2       42         41      34          48
 Japan                            26        II       32         34      42          55
  United Kingdom                   3        3        47         38      50          59
  United States                    S        4        35         3!      60          66
Eastern European nonmarket
 economies                        35       21        34        40       3!          39
Sourre: t4'o,-/d Dt ielopment Report, 1986. table 30.
,yotc.s: Country groups are as defined hs the World Bank. Group averages are sscighted
h population.
lable 6.10         Structure of Production by Major Sector, 1965 and 19K4 (percentage of total gross
                   domestic product)
                                      Agriculture             Industry       Manufacturing              Services
Country Group                        1965      1984      1965       1984     1965       984       1965         984
Low-income economies                 43        37        29         34       14        14        28           29
Middle-income economies              2         IS        31         36       20        21        47           49
  Oil exporters                      22        16        28         39       16        18        50           46
  Oil importers                      2         13        33         35       22        25        46           S2
High-income oil exporters             5         2        65         61        5         7        30           37
Industrialized market economics       S         3        39         3S       29        25        56           62
  Canada                              S         3        34         24       23        —         71           72
  France                                       4         —          34      —-—        25                     62
  Germany                           -—-        2         —          46                 36        •---         52
  Italy                              II        5         41         40      —          —         48           55
  Japan                               9        3         43         41       32        30        48           56
  United Kingdom                      3        2         41         36       30        22        56           62
  United States                       3        2         38         32       29        21        59           66
Source: World Derelopment Report, 1986. table 3.
Notes. Country groups are as defined by the World Bank. Group averages are weighted by population. iapancsc
data are for 1965 and 1983.
                                                       H. Olmer                              393      International Competition in Services
392      Rachel McCulloch/MauriCe 14. Greenberg/LiOnel

                                                                                             Table 6.12          Major Categories of Service Exports,   1980 (billions    of
                                                           in 1980 (billions of U.S.
lable 6.11          Twenty-five Largest Services Exporters                                                       U.S. dollars)
                     dollars)
                                                                          Services
                                                                                                                                          and Passenger        and             Private
                              Value of                    Services        Exports to                                                                           lourisni        Services
                                                                                                               Total       Shipment       Fares
                                          Value  of       Exports  to     Merchandise
                 Value of     Foreign
                              Investment  Merchandise     GOP   Ratio     Exports Ratio
                 Services
                              Income      Exports         (%)             (%)                                   37.1       5.8             11.2                 6.9            13.3
Country          Exports                                                                     U.K.
                                                                                             France             33.0       1.3             lt).7                8.2            12.8
                                           224.3             .4          15.6
U S.             34.9       70.2                                                                                33.8       5.3              6.5                 6.6            15.5
                                                            6.5          30.9                Germany
                 34.2        17.1          110.9                                                                                            3.4                 8.9             7.8
U   K                                                                                        Italy              23.5       3.3
                              8.4          11)7.6           5.1          30.7                                                                                   0.6             5.3
France           33 0                                                                                           19.4       7.4              6.1
                                                            3.9           7.2                Japan
                 22.4         8.5          185.5                                                                           3.7              7.2                  (.7            6.t
Germany                                                                  30.2                Netherlands        18.6
                              5.3           76.8            5.7                                                                                                  1.8            8.4
Italy            22.4                                                                                           14.9       2.4              2.3
                                                            1.8           14.9               Belgium
                 18.9         7.2          126.8                                                                                            2.4                 67)             1.7
Japaii                                                                                                          12.2         .2
                                            67.5           10.5           26.2               Spain
Netherlands       17.7       10(1                                                                                10.8      (1.7             0.1                 6.5             3.6
                                                           12.1           26.3                Austria
                  4.5        17.6           55.2                                                                                            na.                 4.1             37)
Belgium                                                                   56.9                Switzerland         8.4      0.4
                 11.7         (1.2          20.5            5.6                                                                             1.9                  1.1)           3.4
 Spain                                                                                       Sweden               8.0      1.8
                                             7.2           14.0           62.6                                                                                                   .8
                  ((.8        2.5                                                                                          na.              (1.7                 5 2
 Austria                                                                  28 9               Mexico               7.7
                              na.           29.3            8.3                                                                                                  11.8           1.4
 Swit,erland      5.4                                                                                             9.2      5.0              2.1
                                             3().7          6.0           24.3               Norway
 Sweden           7 5         ((.8                                                                               7.0       0.8              0.7                  2.9            26
                                                            4.0           45.8               Canada
                   7 4         1.1)          16.2                                                                                           2.))                 1.4            1.9
 Mexico                                                                                                           5.9      (1.6
                                              8.7           12.7          39.2               Singapore
                  7.3         ((.5                                                                                                           1.0                 11.4           2.5
 Norway                                                                   10.3               Korea               4.8        1.0
                  7(1         2,9            67.6            2.7                                                                            1.0                   1.6           (.5
 (anada                                                                                      Yugoslavia           4.6      0.4
                                             (8.2           54.1          32.7                                                                                                  1.2
 Singapore        59           na.                                                                                4.0      11.1             ((.9                     .7
                                                             7.7          26.1                Greece
                  4.5          t),3          17.2                                                                                           2.2                  I    3         ((.7
 Korea                                                                    49.9                Saudi Arabia        4.3       na.
                  4,5          0.2            9.0            7.1                                                                                                 t .11          1) 3
 Yugoslavia                                                                                   Australia           3.5       0.5              1.8
                                              4.1            9)           97.6
 Greece           4.0          0.0                                                                                3.1       0.6             0.7                  ((.9           0.9
                                                             3.2           3.7                Israel
 Saudi Arabia      .7          na.           00.7                                                                                            1.2                 ((.6            1.1
                                                                          16.2                South Africa        3.2       0.3
                               0.7           21.7            2.5                                                                                                 ((.7           I .1)
 Australia         3.5                                                                        Finland             3.0       0.5             ((.8
                                              5.8           15.9          55.8                                                                                                  ((.5
  Israel           3 2         ((.7                                                                                         na.              1.4                 0.6
                                                                          11.8                Egypt               2.5
                   3.0         ((.4          25.5            3.8
  South Africa                                                            19.6
                   28          (1.2          14.1            5.6
  Finland                                                                 60.2                         U.S. Trade Representative 1983, table 3.
                   2.3         0.3             3.9           9.8                                                                                                       private sersIes
  Egypt                                                                                       Notes: Valuesconverted to U.S. dollars at current exchange rates. Other
                                                                                                                                                                  and income,
                                                                  -                           include IMF balance of paymenis categories "other gooels. services
                                               2.                                                                                                                       not match d,it.i
  Source: U.S. Trade Representative 1983 table                                                income, n.j c.'' and 'property income. n.i.e.'' Totals on this table niy
                                                                 rates. Services exports
 Notes: Values converted to U.S. dollars at current exchange investment earnings in-          in table 6.11 because of intervening revisions in the IMF data tapes used.
                               and investment earnings.  Foreign
 exclude official transactions                                hut exclude foreign official
 clude private direct investment income and portfolio income
 income.
                                                                                                In the case of services, available data are sketchy for both exports
                                                                                                                                                                   abroad
                                                                 these two types              and foreign sales. One estimate suggests that revenues Ironi sales
    industries' own discussions typically do not distinguish                                                                                         on
                                                                                              of U.S. affiliates exceed those from U.S. exports average by about
                                                    from  foreign   markets into                                                                                    198(i).
    of foreign operations or divide revenues                                                  50 percent (U.S. Congress. Office of Technology Assessment,
    exports and affiliate transactions.                                                       Since profit rates of foreign subsidiarIes are usually higher    than  those
                                                                   sales of U.S.
        The importance of subsidiary sales in total foreign                                   of domestic operations, this would mean that,        in terms  of  profits to
                                             to  the  situation of  international
    service firms is qualitatively similar                                   U.S.             U.S. firnis competing internationally,   affiliate sales  probably accounl
                                     In  the  manufacturing     industries,
    competition in tangible goods.                                              in            for well over half of all profits generated by operations abroad. Hov.--
     firms have maintained a roughly constant share of world exports                          ever, affiliate sales translate into a smaller demand l'or domestic lahot
                                                                      constituted
     recent decades. But exports from the United States have
                            total U.S.  sales  in  international   markets.  wilh             input than the same dollar volume of export sales.
     a declining share of
                                   L     I ,,''oiifl(T to maintain overall con-                 The importance of affiliate sales relative to direct exporting varies
                 5. table 1986, Assessment Technology   of Office Congress. U.S.   Source.
  161—178              n.a.               n.a.
                                                                                   Total
    9.4                n.a.               na.
  152—169
                                                                                Banking
                    87.5—97.3          1.0—75.1 6           banking) (excluding Subtotal
    11.3               6.0                5.3                              Miscellaneous
    14.1               0.0                14.1                                     Travel
    28.0              10.9                17.1                             Transportation
    2.6                1.3               1.3                          Telecommunications
  5.7—7.0            3.2—4.4           2.5—2.6
    25.4                                                                        Software
                       25.4              0.0                                    Retailing
   3.9                 2.0               1.9
  1.8—2.6
                                                                      pictures Motion
                      1.2              0.6—1.4
   5.2                                                          Managementiconsultjng
                      0.0                5.2
  0.1—2.1
                                                                            Licensing
                      0.1              0.0—2.0                                     Legal
  4.5—5.6           3.7—5.4            0.2—1.2
  8.9—9.7
                                                                               Leasing
                      7.7              1.0—2.0            banking/brokerageInvestment
 12.8—15.7          10.1—12.1          2.7—3.6
   2.9                                                                       Insurance
                    0.0—2.9            0.0—2.9                            Information
  2.1—3.6             1.1              1.0—2.5
  0.2—1.1
                                                                                Health
                      0.0              0.2—1.1                            Franchising
  5.1—5.6             4.0              1.1—1.6
  1.6—2.4
                                                                          Engineering
                    0.0—0.1            1.6—2.3
 2.6—4.9                                                                    Education
                    2.5—3.7            0.1—1.2                        processing Data
 7.7—8.1            2.9—3.3              4.8
 1.8—2.2
                                                                         Construction
                      1.7              (1.1—0.5
 3.9_4.5                                                                  Advertising
                    3.7—4.0            0.2—0.5                            Accounting
 Revenues               Sales          Exports
  Foreign                                                                       Activity
                     Affiliate          Direct
    Total
                                              dollars) of (billions
  1983 Firms, Service U.S. of Revenues Foreign of Estimates OTA
                                                                             6.13 Table
 revenues foreign total  of size the is industries  service   U.S. to actions
trans- international of importance the of measure
                                                       broader a providers,
 service many for exports exceed      greatly  sales  affiliate that Given
                       revenues. foreign of component service the
                                                                        from
income investment distinguishing of problem special the of because
separately treated was transactions,     international  in  and domestically
both industry service Important an Banking, firms. service U.S.
                                                                          for
categories both in revenues 1983 of     estimates Assessment      Technology
of Office shows 6.13 Table significant. are sales affiliate and      exports
direct both software, computer and consulting, construction, portation,
trans- including group, third a For revenues.
                                                foreignof bulk the provide
sales affiliate accounting, and advertising, insurance, including group,
second a In transactions. international from revenues all nearly for count
ac- exports direct licensing, technology and
                                                 services, legal and tional
educa- travel, including industries, service major some For actions.
             Olmer H. Greenberg/Lionel R. McCulloch/MaurjceRachel
                                                                                   394
