                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         COUNTRY RISK AND CONTINGENCIES




                                 Joshua Aizenman




                             Working Paper No. 2236




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #2236
                                                             May 1987



                             Country Risk and Contingencies



                                         ABSTRACT



         The purpose of this paper Is to study the role of
                                                      credit market policies in the
 presence of country risk from the nationalistic and the
                                                          global point of view, to
 address the role of endogenous default
                                               penalties that are contingent upon the
 intensity of default on the part of the borrowing nation, and to evaluate the effects
 of contingency plans that make the interest rate dependent upon variables that are
 correlated with the default penalty. This is done
                                                 by considering an economy where a
 default will trigger a penalty, in the form of either a trade embargo or effective
 exclusion of the defaulting nation from future
                                                             borrowing. Assuming costly
 enforcement of the   penalty we show   that the optimal borrowing    tax from the global
 point   of view exceed the optimal
                                  borrowing tax from the nationalistic point of view.
 The economic principle guiding the borrowing tax is that in the presence of country
 risk an activity that changes the
                                         probability of default generates thereby an
externality. This principle applies also for investment: if
                                                               a given investment reduces
(increases) the probability of default it
                                            generates positive (negative) externality.
Consequently, the social interest rate associated with this
                                                             activity is lower (higher)
than the private one, calling for a
                                      subsidy (tax) on borrowing used to finance that
 Investment. Next, we evaluate the role of endogenous penalties. We design alternative
 incentive schemes by varying the responsiveness of the penalty to the
                                                                          intensity of
default, without changing the total cost applied in
                                                      case of a complete default. We
turn then to an assessment of the welfare effect of
                                                     plans that make the interest rate
contingent upon realization of shocks. We conclude
                                                    by deriving the optimal borrowing
plan for an exampie where the source of uncertainty is a stochastic terms of trade. It
is shown that allowing for contingent payment has the effect of raising the credit
ceiling, raising the expected income, and stabilizing income across states.

                                                             Joshua Aizenman
                                                             1101 E. 58 St.
                                                             G.S.B., University of Chicago
                                                             Chicago, IL 60637
                                                             (312) 702 7260
                                     ft
  1.. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

          In the 1980's various countries have engaged In debt
                                                               rescheduling, whereas

 others have found that new borrowings involve a significant risk premium1.

 Consequently,     attention has been focussed on the design of credit        policies and the
 role    of institutions in the   presence    of country risk. Recently we have observed
 initial attempts to design payment plans that will make the effective interest rate
 paid by the borrowing nation contingent upon its terms of trade2. These
 circumstances have raised important questions regarding the design of incentive

 schemes for the borrowing nations. Such schemes should enhance the borrowing

 nations' incentives to service their debt, thereby reducing the risk
                                                                             premium charged
 for a given credit volume and allowing smoother operation of                the international
 credit   market. The purpose of this     paper is to address   three policy Issues related to

 the design of incentives. We start by evaluating the optimal borrowing tax from the

 global and the nationalistic point of      view   for a non-contingent loan. We continue by

analyzing the role of endogenous default penalties that are contingent upon the

 intensity of default undertaken by the        borrower   nation,   and then we evaluate the

effects of contingency plans that make the interest             rate dependent upon variables
that are   correlated with the default penalty.

        Section   2 starts by formulating the bench mark case, where there Is only an
exogenous default penalty. We consider a two-periods example. Borrowing takes place
in   period zero; debt repayment is scheduled for period one. in case of default, a fixed

default penalty Is InfLicted upon the borrower. This penalty has the form of either a

trade embargo or effective exclusion of the defaulting          nation from future borrowing.
There    is uncertainty in period zero regarding the magnitude of the effective default

penalty, and debt issuance occurs before the resolution of uncertainty. We consider

risk-neutral lenders, who charge an interest rate that results In an expected yield

equal to an exogenously given risk-free interest rate. We review the derivation of

the supply of credit, which may include a backward-bending portion. As was shown in

Aizenman (1986), the presence of country risk Introduces a distortion, calling for an

optimal borrowing tax. Among other effects, the optimal tax eliminates the
                                           -2-
possibility   of an equilibrium on the backward-bending portion of the supply of credit.

We assume that such a tax is applied, allowing us to focus our analysis on equilibria

on the upward—sloping portion of the supply of credit.

         This tax Is derived first for the nationalistic case, where it is designed to

maximize the expected welfare of the borrowing nation. We turn then to the other

relevant case, designing the tax that will maximize global expected welfare. We

consider the case where enforcing the default penalty on the borrowing nation require

direct enforcement costs that are external to the lenders (like enforcing the trade

embargo),     It   is shown that the presence of these costs imply that the optimal

borrowing tax from the global point of view exceed the optimal borrowing tax from

the nationalistic point of view. This result Imply that there is potentially a conflict

between the global and the nationalistic point of view. While both call for a

borrowing tax, global considerations may call for a higher tax than the nationalistic

optimum.    This in turn imply that there is a potential need for institutions like the
IMF and the World Bank to coordinate the borrowing tax policies between the lenders
and the borrowers. it is      noteworthy that one can view this result as a modified

extension of the optimal tariff to country risk case. A classic            result In trade

theory is that a country with market power can enhance its welfare by an optimal

tariff, but this will reduce the global welfare. The extension of 'optimal tariff' to

country risk Is that in the presence of default risk the borrowing nation will enhance

its welfare by an optimal borrowing tax. The modification is that optimal borrowing

tax is   applicable   even if the country is small in the international capital market,

and that unlike the optimal tariff case, both the domestic and the global welfare are

enhanced    by the borrowing tax.
     The economic principle guiding the borrowing tax is that in the presence of

country risk and price taker agents an activity that changes the probability of default

generates thereby an externality. If the activity   raises   the probability of default (as

is the case with marginal borrowing to finance higher consumption in period zero) the

externality is negative, Implying tnat the social interest rate associated with this

activity is higher than the private one, calling for a tax on borrowing used to finance
                                               -3-
  consumption. The last part of Section 2 extends this principle for investment: If a

  given investment reduces (increases) the probability of default it generates positive

  (negative)    externality. Consequently, the social interest rate associated with this
 activity      is   lower (higher) than the private one,   calling for a subsidy (tax) on

 borrowing used to finance investment. The magnitude of the appropriate subsidy is

 determined by the intensity of the induced drop in the probability of default. If, for

 example, an investment in tradables reduces this probability by more than investment

 in non—tradables, the optimal subsidy for investment in the traded sector exceeds

 the Investment subsidy in      the non-traded sector. If the investment in the non-traded
 sector increases the probability of default             (by making the country more
 self—sufficient,     thereby reducing the default penalty) then such an investment will be
 taxed.

      In section 3 we modify the assumptions of section 2 by allowing for a default

 penalty that is contingent upon the default intensity. In general, the supply of credit

 is determined by the nature of the expected default
                                                           penalty. A default may trigger

 two types of penalties. The first is exogenously fixed, and its magnitude Is

 independent of the intensity of default. The second is variable, and its magnitude is

determined by the intensity of default. We start section 3       by addressing a positive

issue-—assessing the dependency of the supply of credit on the elasticity of the

penalty   with respect to the default intensity. This sets the stage for the normative
discussion. The first policy issue addressed            is the welfare implications of

contingent default penalties. We turn then to an assessment of the welfare effect of

contingentinterest rates in the presence of country risk. To permit a comparison
across regimes we design alternative incentive schemes by varyin9 the
responsiveness of the penalty to the intensity of default, without changing the total

cost applied in case of a complete default. At the limit our incentive scheme

converges to an exogenous default cost regime. The characteristics and the random

nature of the full default penalty (i.e. the
                                               penalty associated with complete default)

are the same as In section 2. These assumptions allow us to derive the dependency of

the supply of credit on the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default
                                            -4-
intensity.     In general we will observe incidences of partial default whose magnitude

rises with the Level of borrowing relative to the cost of a complete default. A rise

in the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity is shown to

induce a higher default rate and and to raise the country risk as reflected in the

interest rate associated with a given borrowing, causing a leftward shift in the

supply    of credit. Using the expected welfare of a   representative consumer it is shown

that     the   introduction of partial defaults due to a variable penalty has adverse

effects.

       We turn then to an assessment of the welfare effect of plans that make the
interest rate contingent upon realization of shocks. Section 4 shows that a plan that
will index the Interest rate such as to correlate It perfectly with the default penalty
will eliminate the adverse effects of country risk on the            expected income. An

optimal contingency plan that will index the effective              interest rate to the
realization     of the terms of trade will raise the credit ceiling and the expected

income, and will stabilize Income across states. Section 5 closes the discussion

with interpretative remarks that tie the discussion in section 4 to recent attempts

to make the effective interest rate paid by the borrowing nation contingent upon its

terms of trade.

       It Is noteworthy that the       gain resulting from making the interest rate
contingent on the terms of trade can be viewed as the result of moving         closer to a

complete     markets environment, where prices are state contingent. Making the default

penalty contin9ent upon the intensity     of   default fails to improve welfare because it
depends on the endogenous behavior of the borrower Instead on the exogenous state of

nature.
                                            -5-
  2. COUNTRY RISK WITH EXOGENOUS DEFAULT PENALTIES

            The purpose of this section is to characterize country risk for the case of a
 fixed   default penalty. This case will define the bench mark for            the subsequent

 discussion. We start by modeling the supply of credit in the presence of country risk.

 Next, we discuss the demand for credit and optimal policies for the
                                                                        borrowing nation.

 The discussion in this section sketches the analysis in Aizenman (1986),           whereas
 section 3 extends the framework for the case of endogenous default penalties3.

         2.1 The Default Decision

         Consider a two-periods small economy. Borrowing B takes place in period zero

 at an interest rate rN. Debt repayment (1+r) is scheduled for period one. In case of

 default, a stochastic penalty N is inflicted upon the borrower,
                                                                   given by




      (1)
                      NN0/'P

The term 'P represents a stochastic disturbance, whose density function is g. Debt
issuance occurs in period zero, before the resolution of uncertainty regarding 'P. The

information regarding 'P Is summarized by a distribution of 'P. which is known to
both the tenders and the borrowing nation. This information is
                                                                    applied to determine

the supply of credit. We consider the case where the default decision is arrived at by

a centralized decision maker, like the central bank. While consumers are assumed to

be price takers in the credit market, they are fully aware of the default rule guiding

the central bank. The penalty considered here represents economic toss that is not

captured by lenders. Equation (1) can reflect various economic environments. For

example, let the default penalty be the result of adverse commercial policies (like

banning trade in goods and services). In such a case the term 'P          may reflect a

stochastic term measuring the effectiveness of the trade embargo. Alternatively, the

default penalty can be the result of exclusion from future borrowing. Let N be the

future cost of being excluded from the credit market (in terms of period two) due to a

default in period one; and 'P be the effective discount factor       that translates the
                                            -6-

future penalty (N) Into N/P in terms of period one. Thus, 'P can be viewed as a

myopia measure, where a higher 'I' corresponds to a smaller weight attached to the

future by the decision maker in period one. In such a case the uncertainty regarding 'P

may reflect political uncertainty regarding the horizon of the future decision maker.

     Default will take place if the debt exceeds the penalty, or if




     (2)             (i+r) >    N     /'P




Alternatively,   the default rule can be summarized by:




              default if       'P >   Z
     (3)
              no default if    'P <   Z


where      Z N0/B(1+r") denotes the marginal value of 'P associated with default,




     2.2 The Supply of Credit

     we assume a credit market that is dominated by risk—neutral lenders, fully
informed regarding the nature of the decision rule 9uidin9 the borrower, as well as
regarding the borrower's Indebtedness position4 (s). A risk-neutral lender will extend
credit B at a rate r* such that the expected yield on the risky loan equals the
risk-free return:

     (4)         (i+r) P 1+rf


where r1 Is the exogenously given risk-free interest rate, and P is the probability of

no default, From (4) we infer that
                                                     -7-

                             z
          (5)            P5g('P)d'P



  where g is the density function corresponding to ',                defined   for 'P >    0. Thus, P is

 a function of (1+r*) P P((1+r*))                ,   with   P' <   0.   Equations (4) and (5) defIne the

 credit supply curve, which is determined by the distribution 9. We summarize the

 reduced form of the supply of credit by:




         ('r)        r   =




 Notice that a rise in the interest r* rate has two
                                                    opposing effects on the expected

 income yield. The direct effect is reflected in the rise                    of the yield for a given

 probability of no default (P). But It also Implies a drop In P. This second                     effect

 works to depress the expected yield, implying that under certain conditions (derived

 in   Aizenman (1986)) the supply is backward-bending5.
         2.3    The Demand for Credit
         The demand f or credit is derived from the underlying consumer preferences. We
assume that consumers' utility is given by


        (6)          U u(X0) + pu(X1)


where           Is   the consumption in period I, and p stands for the subjective rate of time


preference. A representative consumer maximizes his expected utility subject to his

budget   constraints. He is facing an       interest rate r,       that may differ from the external
interest rate r* due to the presence of borrowing taxes. The social role of these
taxes will be examined in the               sequel.    The representative consumers budget
constraints are given by
                                                          -8-
       (7)             X0X0+8
                                  +        -
       (Ba)                           R1
                                               B(1       r)



       (8b)                       -


where         stands   for the endowment in period I, R1 for lump-sum transfers in period

one,          is the consumption in case of no default,                     is the consumption in states

of default     and    B is the borrowing by the consumer. Equation (7) defines the budget
constraint for period zero, whereas                  for period one we observe two possible budget

constraints,     corresponding        to   the possibility of no default        (Ba) and default (8b). To


simplify      exposition, we start by assuming an endowment model (adding production and
investment would not change the main results, as will be shown In section 2.5).
Applying      the budget      constraints to (6) we can characterize the consumer problem as

choosing      B so as to maximize expected utility V:




                                      z
       (9) V = u(X0 + B) + pJu(1+ A1- BO + r))g('P) d'P + pJu(1 - N0/'P)g('P) d'P
                                                                                z


opt imizing     (9) yields the following first-order condition:




       (10)       v(x0)/V'(X1)             1+r

where v'O<1)     stands for the expected marginal utility of consuming

                                                     z
       v'(X0)        u'(X0)    ; V'(Xjn) = f u(1              + R1- B(1 + r))g('P) d'l'.




Optimal borrowing B is chosen by the consumer so as to support a consumption path
                                               -9-                                     'I


 that yields equality      between the ratio of the corresponding expected marginal

 utilities   of consumption and the interest rate. The assumption that the consumer is a
 price    taker is reflected in    the fact that each consumer treats aggregate borrowing B
 (and the corresponding Z and r) as exogenousty given.




         2.4 ODtlrnal Policy   for a Borrowing Nation
      To gain insight into the potential role of optimal policies let us evaluate the

 solution of the optimal consumption path by a centralized decision maker. Potential

 deviations between the planner's and the consumer's solutions will          justify policies

 needed to support optimality. These policies will be shown to be In the form of

optimal    borrowing taxes. We assume that the transfer R1 is used to rebate consumers

such that the net present value of the planner's revenue is zero (when the relevant
 interest rate from the planner's perspective is the external interest rate, r). Subject
to this   requirement   the budget constraints facing the planner can be shown to be



     (7)            X0=X0+B


     (8a')                     —
                                   (i r)
                                       +



     (8b')                     -




with the help of these budget constraints the planner's problem is reduced to a choice
of B that will maximize


                                   z                              00
     (9) V: u(0 +              + pfu(1 - (i    +
                                                   r))g('P) d'P + pfu(1 - N0/'P)g('P) dq'
                                                                  2
                                                  - 10-

        A key difference between the consumer's and the planner's problems is that the
centralized planner is not a price taker in the credit market, and he is aware that the
choice of borrowing B will impact on the interest rate via the supply of credit (4').
Consequently. (9') implies that the condition for optimal borrowing is



                                                         d 109(1 + rw)
        (10')         V'(Xo)/V'(Xin) = (1 + r*) (1 +                        )
                                                           d logs


                                                   z
                                      ; v(x1)           u(1 (1
                                                           —         +
where6          V'(X0)     u'(X0)                 p 5                    rM))g(P) d'P.




Optimal     borrowing B is chosen by the planner so as to support a consumption path

that yields equality between the ratio of the corresponding expected marginal

utilities        of      consumption        and   the     'social'       interest      rate (   defined by

d iog(1 +       r*)/     d log B ).   A   comparison between the planner's and the consumer's

solutions reveals that the two differ in that the planner applies                   the 'social' interest
rate,   whereas the consumer applies the 'private' one. In the absence of borrowing

taxes    the presence of country risk implies           that there is a distortion, and that from

the social point of view the equilibrium is associated with excessive borrowing

because the private fails short of the social interest rate. This situation provides

the rationale for government intervention. The distortion arises from the fact that

individual borrowers treat the rate of interest as given even though from the

perspective of the country as a whole the rate of interest rises with the volume of

borrowing because of the rise in the probability of default. Note that each small

consumer overlooks the marginal rise in the probability of default induced by his

marginal borrowing. This rise implies that the welfare of all consumers will drop

because of the rise in the frequency of defaults and the consequent rise In the

expected default penalty inflicted on all domestic consumers. Thus, we observe an
                                                — 11—



 externality,    and the role of policies is to internalize it. An optimal borrowing tax is

 needed to yield equality between the social and the private interest rates7. As is

 shown in Aizenman (l98), the optimal borrowing tax has an important consequence
 --
      ruling   out inefficient equilibria on the backward-bending portion of the supply of

 credit.   Henceforth, we will assume that the optimal borrowing tax is                   applied and
 therefore     we will neglect the backward—bendin9 portion           of the supply of credit. This

 argument      is summarized in Figure One. Curve DD is the demand for credit, KLMN
plots the supply curve, and KLM corresponds to the social supply' curve (the
marginal to KIM). Optimality calls for a borrowing tax, defined by the vertical
distance between r and F(Figure One)8.
       Our discussion in    this   section has focussed on welfare from the perspective of
the small economy. A relevant question is the degree to which the optimal borrowing

tax Is also optimal from global perspectives, As Appendix A demonstrates, the
answer depends on the nature of the cost of defaults. If the cost of default N is borne
only by the borrowing country, then the policy derived in this section also represents
the global optimum. If, however, there is a spillover effect on other nations, then the
global optimum differs. For example, if        the    penalty N represents the cost of         a   trade
embargo which is costly to implement, it will require further 'waste of real
resources on the part of lenders to enforce it. Suppose that enforcing a penalty N
requires lenders to spend resources kN, where k is a proportionality factor, In
formulating the problem we assume that the default enforcement costs are borne
collectively by the lendin9 nations (as is the case, of enforcing the trade embargo).
and not by the direct lenders. Appendix A demonstrates that the optimal tax from
global perspective satisfies the following first order condition

                                                            d Iog(i   +   r*)
      (10)           V'(x0)/v(x1) = (1     +   r')   (1 +                       ) / (1 — kX)
                                                              d 1096

                                    d 109(1 + rw)
      where X       N0 g(Z) (1 +                     )/ Eë(1 + rf)J
                                       d logB
1+r*
1+r


          N




                    M




K



                        B



       FIGURE ONE
                                                - 12-


        Notice that the small consumer in the borrowing nation associates borrowing
 with   a cost of only (1 +       rw). Thus, the last two terms multiplying (1 + r) in (101
measure the externality and also define the optimal tax. Equations (10') and (ir)

define the optimal borrowing tax from the nationalistic and global perspective.

denoted by      t and t9, respectively:

               (1 + r)    d 109(1 + rw)
             = _________ _______________
        tn

                   r             d 10gB


               (1 + rI*)       d 109(1 ÷ r)
        tg
                           I                  ÷kXJ/E 1-kJ
                                 d (0gB



         If the penalty enforcement costs are zero k         0 and t9   t. In this case the
optimal borrowing tax from the point of view of the borrowing nation Is also the tax
that   maximizes global welfare, because of the lack of spillover effects, If k >     0 then
the externality from the global point of view exceeds the domestic externality. In

terms   of    equation (101, a higher k Is associated with a rise of the left hand side of

(lel    for   a given r. Consequently. glob'al    welfare   considerations call for a higher

optimal borrowing tax than the optimal nationalistic tax. This result reflects the

fact that costly enforcement of the trade embargo raises the global externality

generated by marginal borrowing, calling for a higher borrowing tax. Thus, we

conclude with the observation that costly enforcement of the default penalty works to

increase the optimal borrowing tax from the global perspective. This result imply

that there is potentially a conflict between the global and the nationalistic point of

view. While both call for a borrowing tax, global considerations call for a higher tax

than the nationalistic optimum. This in turn imply that there is a potential need for

institutions like the IMF and the World Bank to coordinate the borrowing tax policies
                                                - 13-

between the lenders and the borrowers.

       It is noteworthy that one can view our           analysis    as a modified extension of the

optimal tariff to the country risk case. A classic result in trade theory is that a

country with market power can enhance its welfare by an optimal tariff, but this will

reduce the global welfare. The extension of 'optimal tariff' to country risk is that in

the presence of default risk the borrowing nation will enhance its welfare by an

optimal borrowing tax. The modification is that optimal borrowing tax is applicable

even if the country is small in the international capital market, and that unlike the

optimal tariff case, both the domestic and the global welfare are enhanced by the

borrowing tax.




       2.5    ODtimal Policies and Investment
       Our previous analysis considered an endowment model, neglecting the
possibility of investment. The         analysis can be easily extended for the case where

borrowing       is used to support both consumption and Investment In period zero. The

econorpic     principle guiding the previous discussion Is          that in the presence of country
risk   an activity that changes the probability of default generates thereby an

externality. if the activity raises the probability of default (as is the case with

marginal borrowing to finance higher consumption in period zero) the externality is

negative, implying that the social interest rate associated with this activity is

higher than the private one, calling for a tax on borrowing used to finance

consumption. This principle can be extended for investment: if                      a given investment
reduces      the probability of default it   generates positive externality. Consequently, the
social interest      rate associated with this activity is lower than the private one,

calling for a subsidy on borrowing used to finance Investment. The                    magnitude of   the

appropriate      subsidy is determined by        the    intensity    of    the induced drop in the
probability     of default, If, for   example, an investment        in    tradables will reduce this
probability by more than investment in non-tradables,                      the optimal    subsidy for
investment in the traded sector should exceed the investment subsidy in the
non-traded sector. Using this logic, if           the    investment in        the    non-traded sector
                                                  - 14-

 increases the probability of default (by making the country more self-sufficient,

 thereby reducing the default penalty) then such an investment should be taxed.

         To exemplify this result consider a simple example of an economy producing a

 commodity. Let future output be a function of present Investment. The default penalty

 is   proportional to GNP, and the           source of uncertainty Is       that the term of trade
 converting the commodity to consumption goods is stochastic. Specifically, suppose
 that   the commodity output at time one depends positively on investment I undertaken

 in   period zero:         = <I(I). Let the term of trade be 1/'P, implying that the GNP at

 period one In terms of consumption goods Is X1/P. The default penalty is assumed

 to   be a fraction °a of the GNP : N = a X/P. We preserve aU the other                 assumptions of

 our previous discussion (including that 'P is the only source of uncertainty). Applying

 the methodology of section 2.4 we can Infer that the social Interest rate applicable

 for borrowing for consumption and investment (denoted by
                                                                         rsC and r51)
                                                                                        are:


                     I +                      + rw)
                                                             d log(1 +    r) + I
               a.
                            rsC         (j            (i +                              )
                                                               dlogB               B
        (ir)


                                                             dlog(1+r*) 5+1
               b.    I +
                           r51         (I +    r*) (I   +                               )
                                                              d 1091


where B now measures the borrowing to finance consumption, I the borrowing to

finance Investment. Note that the aggregate borrowing that is relevant for

determining P and Z is now the sum of the two components: B +                 I.

        The interpretation of the social interest rates In (10) is the following: the

central planner will choose optimal consumption and investment using (10"a) and

(101,) as the appropriate interest rates. The private sector, however, Is                      applying

I+rN as the relevant interest rate in the absence of policies. The divergence between

the social   and the private Interest rates stems from the externality due to the change
                                              - 15-

in the   probability of default (and the ensuing change in the interest rate) induced by

marginal   borrowing. The second term on the RHS of (10") corrects the private interest
rate for this externality. Optimal policies require policies that will equate the
private and the social interest rates. For example, if investment will reduce the
probability of default (i.e. if   d   Iog(1 + r)/ d log I < 0) optimality                 will call for an

investment    subsidy at a rate defined by the RHS of (1O"b), and similarly for a
consumption    tax at a rate defined by (lOa).




3. COUNTRY RISK WITH ENDOGENOUS DEFAULT PENALTIES

     The   purpose of this section is to study the role of endogenous penalties, and to
assess their desirability. In section 2 we considered the case of a fixed default
penalty. independent of the magnitude of the default. In that case, the borrower faced
an all-or-nothing choice, In this section we allow for a penalty tied to the default
rate. Let us denote by r the default rate ( 0          L           LI   ).   With   a default 'r only a

portion I-v of       1+rw) is paid in period one. We assume that a default r imposes

costs of




     (U)                               for    1       0        ;     where     h     I.




Notice   that h Is the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity. It
measures the convexity of the penalty with respect to the default rate -— a higher                      h

implies higher responsiveness of the penalty to the default intensity. By definition,

the effective       penalty does        not    exceed N; and it approaches N as v '                     I
(complete default). The specification in (1!) Is flexible enough to allow assessment

of the positive and normative aspects introduced by the presence of an endogenous

penalty scheme. Varying h will allow us an assessment of                      the role of endogenous
penalties, where h -,    I will bring convergence to the bench mark case of fixed

penalties of section 2 (it can be shown that h <           1       yields the same equilibrium as
                                             - 16-

 h       1). With the exception of the specification of the variable cost in (ii),        we
 preserve all the other assumptions of section 2. including the distributional

 assumptions regarding N (see (1)).

         The supply of credit in the presence of endogenous penalties is derived in

 several stages. First, we derive the cost minimizing default rate t from the

 borrower's perspective for a given (1r). Next, armed with the solution for i we

 solve for the interest rw      charged by the lenders for credit volume B. We then study
 the dependency of the supply of credit on the penalty scheme, as summarized     by Ii.




         3.1 The Default Rate

         The borrowing nation chooses In period one the default rate '   so as to maximize
 the gain in net income attributed to default. The 'default income', denoted by 1t(v), Is:




         (12)    ir(t) =    r (1+r)   - .rh N0 /'      for           0 'r   1




It   is composed of the benefit of partial default hB(1+r)J minus the cost associated

with     the default EN0/PJ. Let us denote by        the default rate that maximizes the

default income. Direct optimization reveals that for P       1




                                                             - 1)
       (13)                Mm { 1, [( + r)/(hN)J                 )

To gain further Insight we plot In Figure Two the marginal cost and the mar9inal
benefit associated with default 'r. Optimal default is obtained at the intersection of
the two curves. Appendix B shows that for an internal solution ( 0 <        < 1) a rise in
a (the   elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default Intensity) will increase

the default rate. In terms of Figure Two the rise in P is associated with a rightward

shift of the relevant portion of the MC curve. Similarly a drop in the default penalty

will shift the MC curve rightward. thus raising the default rate. Alternatively, a rise
MB =
MC




                    MC
            MC

                             MB




                                  V
                         1




       FIGURE TWO
                                                  -17--

 in the gross indebtedness (1 +             r)     will shift the MB curve upwards, being

 associated with a rise in the default rate.

         Let    us denote by Z the marginal value of 'P associated with a complete default
 Ct      1). From (13) we infer that



         (14)            Z       hN0/{(1 + ru)).


 it is noteworthy that in the         case of h      I    the default decision degenerates to a

 simple    rule:



                             0         if          'P < N0/[B(1+r')J
         (15)
                             I         if          'P >




EquatIon (15) corresponds to the case of a fixed default penalty. Applying (13)
allows us to conclude that as we approach the case of exogenous penalties (h -, 1) the
optimal default rate for an internal solution converges to zero. Thus, as Ii - 1 we
approach the bench mark case of section 2, where                 Is either zero or one. We turn
now to the the derivation of the supply curve, which augments the information
regarding the default rate that has been derived in this section.


      3.2 The SUDDly of Credit with Endogenous Penalties

      Risk neutral lenders will require interest rate rM such that:


      (16)           (1+r)( I— E(]1+r* )) 1+ rf


where E(JI+r ; ) stands for the expected default intensitg. Debt issuance occurs
before    the resolution of the uncertainty regarding 'P.       Thus, the lenders will set the
                                                   - 18-

interest   rate according to (16), by applying the expected values of                     obtained from

(13). yielding:




                           z                     1/(h-1)
        (17)    E()        J I(1   +   r')/{hN}1       g('P)   d'P     + f g(*) d'P
                           £                                             z



and the implied supply of credit Is given by




                       a                           1/(h-I)
        (18) (1r)E f{i —       [(1     +   r*)/{hN)]           )g(P)   dP I   =
                                                                                   1+rf




Appendix B evaluates the dependency of the supply schedule on the elasticity of the

penalty with respect to        the default intensity (h). It is shown that a rise in h shifts
the   supply curve leftwards, implying that a given volume of credit will require a
higher interest rate. This result stems from the fact that for a given interest rate a
higher convexity      of   the penalty scheme ( d h > 0)             implIes a    higher default rate,
reducing thereby the expected yield on a given volume of indebtedness, and thus
necessitatin9     a rise in the interest rate.

        To gain further insight,           we now turn to a comparison between the welfare
obtained subject to endogenous versus fixed penalties.                 This comparison will enable

us to   conclude with normative statements regarding the desirability of                  each scheme.
                                                 - 19-

        33   Endogenous Default Penalties and Welfare

        Our discussion implies that allowance for endogenous default penalties is

 associated with a rise in the country risk, as is reflected by the rise in the interest

 rate   associated with a given indebtedness. It is noteworthy that this observation
 alone does not suffice to determine the welfare effects of endogenous default
 penalties. That is because the adverse effects of the induced rise            in the   interest rate
 will   be partly offset by the rise in the incidence of partial defaults that are

 associated with 'default IncomeS.

        We evaluate the welfare consequences of endogenous penalties by analyzing

 their expected utility. Formally, the expected utility associated with a given level of
borrowing B Is given by



                                      z                                   00

        (19) V = u()0   +   B)   +p   fu(X1 - B(l + r) + n)g(q') d*   +
                                                                          pfu1
                                                                                  -
                                                                                      N0/P)g(P) d'P
                                      C                                   z


where it and    Z are obtained from (12)-(14). Applying (19) we get that9




              av        z                      a(1+r*)
        (20) — - Ju(x1)( (i -                            )g(P) d'P
              ah        S




Consequently, a greater responsiveness of the penalty scheme to the default rate

results in a drop In expected welfare. This is because the added degree of freedom

introduced by a variable default cost has the consequence of raising the expected

default for a given credit volume, necessitating a higher interest rate. The rise In

the interest rate dominates any indirect gains associated with the greater flexibility

of the default structure.
                                                     - 20-

4. THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF CONTINGENT INTEREST RATES

          It   is useful to distinguish between contingencies tied the the borrowers'

behavior and contingencies that tie prices to observed states of nature. As the

previous section demonstrates, the first type of COntifl9eflCy may not enhance welfare.

This,   however, does       not imply that contingent prices are not beneficial. In fact,

welfare     can be enhanced if the effective interest rate is made contin9eflt Upon the
default penalty (i'). To gain further insight, we now turn to evaluate the role of
contingent     interest rates.




        4.1 The Role of Contingencies

         For example, consider the case of exogenous default penalties (h                1). Suppose

that the value of P is public information in period one, and that we normalize N0


such that the expected value of l/'1' is one. Let us define a contingent interest rate

r*(11) by




        (21)      1 +   r   =   (1 +




Recalling      that the default penalty is N0/'4',          It is evident that I + r   is defined to


be perfectly correlated with the default penalty. Applying the decision rule (3) it is

evident that for B <
                                N0/(1
                                        +
                                            r)   the contingent interest rate (21) eliminates the


                                                                                             +
consequences of country risk. To verify this point, note that for B <
                                                                                     N0/(1       rf) we
observe that for all 'P. (1 +           r)   <
                                                 N0/4'.   With such a contingency pricing no default


will occur. The proposed scheme is also feasible because the expected yield is equal

to the risk—free interest rate (ERI+r)/'PJ                 l+rf )10 The expected welfare in such a


system is given by
                                                  -'21-
                                    00

         (22) V u(0 +           + p fu(1 -             rn)) 9(P) d4'
                                    S



 To gain further insight into the welfare effect of this scheme consider the case

 where       consumers are risk     neutral, i.e. where the periodic utility u(X) is linear
 (u(x)   =
             x). For such an economy a welfare ranking is a comparison of expected Income.
 A comparison of (22) and (w) reveals that the gain In expected Income associated
 with    the   contingent    interest-rate scheme         is equal to the expected penalty
 in the non—contingent, exogenous penalty
                                                                  system                (given by
 00


 f1N0/PJ9('P)ft). The effect of making the Interest rate perfectly correlated               with   the
 z

 penalty     is to eliminate the adverse effects of country risk on the          expected income,

 With risk-averse agents the optimal contingency pricing Is more complicated, because

 it involves also optimal reallocation of the income risk among the various parties in

an attempt to reduce the volatility of income           across states.   But even In this case we

will    observe welfare gains generated by contingent        interest rates. Furthermore, if the

default      cost is lower in bad states of        nature, making the interest rate contingent

upon variables correlated with the default penalty can work favorably to reduce the

adverse income effects of country risk as well as to Improve the allocation of

income risk. Thus, the two objectives can be complementary. This point can be

Illustrated by a simple example,



         4.2 ODtImal     contingencies   In   the presence of stochastic terms   of trade




         Consider   an economy where the second period endowment (X1) is stochastic



                     =
         (23) ?j



This will be the case, for example, if the country sell a natural resource whose
                                              - 22-

supply   at period one is          and where    'P is the terms of trade (i.e. the relative


price   of consumption goods in terms of the natural resource). Suppose that the default
penalty is proportional to income



         (F) N= aX0/*          ;      a< 1.


This specification captures the notion that bad states, where there is deterioration of
the terms of trade, are associated with lower default penalty               As before, we
assume that by the appropriate normalization E(1/P)           1. We would like to compare
two regimes. In the first the interestrate is non-contingent upon 'P. as was the case
in section 2. In the second the Interest rate Is made contingent upon the terms of
trade, as defined In (21). This implies that in bad states (i.e. high '1') the country
will face a lower Interest rate. Note that whenever borrowing satisfies
  < a0/(1r) no default will occur In the contln9ent regime. Figure 3 plots the

dependency of the second period consumption on the realized values of the terms of
trade. The solid line corresponds to the contingent regime, whereas the broken line
corresponds to the non-contingent regime. Point Z corresponds to the level of 'P
associated with default in the first regime, whereas          is the value of 'P where the
consumption Is equal across regimes. ft can be shown that                 < Z and that for

'P < Z the income profile Is steeper in the non-contingent regime. Consequently, a
contingency plan that indexes the interest rate to the terms of trade has the effect of
reshuffling Income from good to bad states.12 In 9eneral, the optimal contract will
provide the optimal income insurance subject to the compatibility constraint that
default will occur if the penalty is lower than the debt. The above example implies
that if the default penalty is lower in bad states, the objectives of minimizing
country risk and stabilizing Income across states tend to be complementary.
         To exemplify this point it is useful to derive the optimal contingent scheme
for a simple two states model. Suppose that the terms of trade (i/'i') are either i+q
4'
 4'




          4 .4 4 4S4 4
                     SS SS




      I
                                                                 - 23-

or 1—q with probability .5, and the natural resource endowment                                               is normalized to

one. We assume risk averse consumers, and we would like to compare the equilibrium
with         optimal contingencies and the equilibrium in the absence of a contingent

interest rate. The non-contingent supply of credit is derived in the same way as in

Sachs (1984). and is given by curve SS in Figure 4 (in drawing this curve we assume

that q >           .33 in   order to allow borrowing with default                    in the bad state).

              Whenever         It   is a feasible solution, a risk averse consumer will prefer a

contingent             pricing system that will equate his income across states. Let us denote by

     and L1 the payment on indebtedness B in the good and the bad states, respectively.

They are defined by the condition that the expected payment is 8(1 + rf) and by the

requirement that net income is equated across states:



              (21)          .5 (Lh + L1)   =
                                               (1   +
                                                        rf)
              (25)           Iq—L=1-q-L1

Thus.        L1
                       8(1 +   rf) - q and Lh = 8(1               +
                                                                      r1)
                                                                            +   q. Thisscheme will work whenever

                                                                                                         -             —
the penalty exceeds the payment, i.e.                                                      8(1 +
                                                                                                   r1)       q < a(1       q) and

         +
             rf)
                   +
                       q < a(1 + q). These consistency requirements                     imply that the above scheme

is   feasible only for               < (a - q(1     -
                                                        aYI/(i + rf).           For credit above this level we would


not observe equality of income                    across states. In              good states the payment Lh will be


marginally below the default penalty, Lh                                a(1 + q). in bad      states the debt payment

wilt         be such that the expected payment requirement (24) is met,                                       implying      that

     =       2 (i + r) — aO          + q) for           <   a!   (1 +
                                                                         r1). The last condition is obtained from

the consistency requirement                             (i.e.     that          payments      cannot          exceed         the

penalty;          L1 <   a(1-q)). Once indebtedness reaches the expected penalty a/U + rf). we
                                         -,4-

 reach the credit ceiling. Figure 4 summarizes this information by plotting the

 effective interest rate paid in the good and bad states as a function of indebtedness.

 where the effective interest is defined by L1/B and Lh/B in the bad and in the good

 states,   respectively. Curve HH corresponds to the interest rate in good states,
 whereas curve LL corresponds to the interest rate in bad states. Comparison with the
 non-contingent supply of credit reveals that in the contingent scheme we pay more En
 good states (relative to the non-contingent scheme). At the same time whenever we
do not reach the credit ceiling in the non—contingent scheme, the contingent scheme
allows net transfer of income from good to bad states. This is reflected in the fact
that   LL is in the negative region   for B below the non-contingent scheme credit
ceiling. Note that for    intermediate volumes of credit In the non—contingent
regime      (i.e.   for credit below the ceiling satisfying > a(1—q)/(1+rf) ) the
borrowers 'pay' the penalty in bad states, while they receive net income in the
contingent scheme. An important advantage of the contingent scheme is in allowing
the credit ceiling to rise from a(1+q)/(2(1+rf)J to the net present value of the


penalty (a/(1+rf)). For   credit volume above the non—contingent ceiling this is

accomplished by keeping payment in the good state marginally below the penalty, and
shifting part of the burden to the bad state while still keeping it below the penalty.
Consequently, the net consumption in bad states is uniformly higher in the contingent
regime (relative to the non-contingent regime); and allowing for optimal
contingencies has three beneficial    effects (relative to the non—contingent case):

raising the credit ceiling, raising the expected income, and stabilizing income across

states.
        1+r*
                'ii




                                               'p
                                                    'I,,



2 ( 1 + rr) -


                                                                            H
            S
   1 +r
                                                               :
                                                                            I

                a(1—q)/(1+i)
                                                            a(1q)
                                                            _____        a/(1+r)
                                          4S                2(1÷r)
                                      4
                                     4
                                     S
                                 S
                            4
                           I,'


                      '4




                                                           FIGURE FOUR
                                          - 25-

 5. CONCLUDING REMARKS

          Our discussion has focussed on the analysis of the potential welfare effects

of contingency plans In tfle presence of country risk. The analysis shows         that

allowing for optimal contingencies has three effects (relative to the non—contingent

case): raising the credit ceiling, raising the expected income, and stabilizing income

across states. In our example optimal contingencies eliminate default (for credit

volume below the ceiling). Thus, with optimal contingencies there is no need for

credit market policies (like borrowing and investment taxes/subsidies). This result

corresponds to the principle that there is a trade-off between the usefulness of

policies and the optimal use of contingencies. Whenever incidences of default are not

eliminated    there may be an important role for credit market policies, and greater
reliance on contingencies wilt tend to reduce the importance of these policies.
         An example of the use of contingencies is the recent Mexican rescheduling

plan    (Summer 1986), where several aspects of debt servicing were made contingent
upon the future price of oil. This arrangement may enhance welfare if the default
cost is low in bad states of nature, when the price of exportables is low. For such an
economy a contingency plan that will index the effective interest rate to the
realization of the price of exportables will reduce the incidence of default and will
raise   the credit ceiling.
                                         -,)-
                                     APPENDIX A


       The purpose of this Appendix is to derive the condition for the optimal

borrowing tax that will maximize global welfare (equation (10")). To accomplish it

we should enrich the model so as to describe the lending nations. We consider the

case where lenders are risk neutral, having a risk free investment technology that

yields l+rf on past investment I. Let the endowment of the lenders in periods zero


and one be given by Y0 and V1. respectively. We assume that inflicting a penalty

upon the borrowing nation is costly, and that enforcing a penalty N will require

lenders to spend resources kN, where k is a    proportionality factor.       For simplicity of

exposition we will assume that k is a constant. The assumption that lenders are risk
neutral allows us the use of expected income as a measure of lenders' welfare:


                                                      Co

     (Al)   V0—i— +LV1+(1+)(1+rf)—fkNg(1')dVJ/(1+rf)
                                                      2




where I represents domestic investment and where we adjust welfare by the expected

default enforcement cost. In formulating the problem we assume that the default
enforcement costs are borne collectively by the lending nations, and not by the direct
lenders. We proceed by   deriving the borrowing tax that will maximize global welfare.

We do so by maximizing        the welfare of the borrowing nation subject to a
compensation scheme that transfers income to lenders in such a way as to keep their
welfare at a given level that is independent of the borrowers' policies. A way of

designing such a scheme is to impose a lump sum transfer from borrowers to lenders

in period zero equal to the net


                                                 00

present value of enforcement costs, given by     f k N g('P) d'I' I   / (1   +
                                                                                 rf).   Optimal
                                                 2
                                                    - 27-

borrowing   is obtained by maximizing



                            00

      (A2) V          +    - fk N g(P) d'P 1 1(1 + rf)) +


       z                                       00

     pfu(1 -       + r))g('i')   d'' +
                                              pfu(1
                                                      -
                                                          N0/'P)g('P)   d'P

                                              z
Applying (A2) we get that optimal borrowing satisfies the following first order
condition

                                                          d   log(1 + rN)
     (A3)     VO8)/V'(X1)
                                 =   (1   +   r') (1 +                        ) / 0 - k))
                                                              d 1098


                                     d 109(1 + r)
     where X = N0 g(Z) (I +                               )/ I(i +     rf)J
                                          d 10gB
Equation (A3) corresponds to (10").
                                                  -,-
                                             APPENDIX B
       The purpose of this Appendix is to prove that for an internal solution for                                    a

rise in n (the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity) will

increase the optimal default rate and will shift the supply of credit leftward.

       Direct derivation of (13) reveals that for 0 <                      <1




     (Bi)
                         —
                             [ti log [(j   + r')/{hN)]    +   h   —
                                                                      1]
             an                                                            (n- 1)2



thus, the sign of (Al) is determined by sign{—[h log [(1 +                      r)/{hN}I        +   h   -
                                                                                                              ii). Note
that because 0 <              <1      equation (13) implies that log [(i +                      r)/{hN)]          < 0.

Consequently, for fl         1 sign(-[h log [(i +        rw)/(hN}l + h          —    ill is   positive. we can

prove that (B!) is positive if we can demonstrate that the expression determining the

sign of (BI) rises with h (because h           1). ThIs proof follows from the fact that




     (B2)    a   - [ti   log [g(1 +    r)/{hN}J   +   l - il/an - log               ((i +     r)/{hN))        > 0.




     We turn now to the derivation of the effect on the supply curve of a rise in h.


We do so by evaluating the horizontal displacement of the supply schedule induced by


a rise In h. From (18) we get that for a given (1+r*)


                    8[(1r)(1- E(I1+r ;)J                                        z     a
     (B3)                                                     th (1+r') f                      gee)     dq'

                              aB                                                      ah



The term multiplying t8 corresponds to the change in expected yield induced by a
                                          - 29-

rise   in indebtedness. Direct inspection of (18) reveals that this change is negative,
due to the induced rise in the expected default rate. The term multiplying ,.h is

positive, because we showed that a      ia h >    @. Combining that information implies

that holding (1 + rN)   given



       (84)




Therefore,    we conclude that a rise in h shifts the supply schedule leftward.
                                            - 30—


                                          FOOTNOTES

             I would like to thank Jacob Frenkel, Shmuel Kandel, Nissan Liviatan, Assaf

Razin,       Rene Stulz and Sweder van Wljnbergen for useful comments; all            errors,
however,       are mine, Financial support by the   Graduate School of Business, University
of   Chicago and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. This paper extends a

previous study (entitled Countrg risk and incentive scheme", NBER WP no. 2031).

        1. For a useful study on the debt problem see the World Bank Report (1986). For

studies on country risk, see Harberger (1976. 1980); Eaton and Gersovitz (1981);

Sachs (1981); Kietzer (1984); Edwards (1984, 1985); Dornbusch (1985); Eaton (1985);

Krugman (1985). Alzenman (1986) and Bulow and Rogoff (1985).

        2.   A recent example is the July 22 ,1986 agreement between Mexico and the
1MF, where several aspects of debt servicing         were made contingent upon     the future
price    of oil.


        3. For related studies regarding the determination of the supply of credit with

exogenous default penalties see Sachs (1984) and Krugman (1985). for a study on

endogenous      rescheduling see Gennotte, Kharas and   Sadeq (1985).

        4.   EquilibrIum in a   market with partial information regarding the volume of

indebtedness is the topic of Kletzer (1984).
        5. It can be shown that d log B/d log (1+r)              (1-11)/ri; where TI is the
elasticity of P with respect to gross Indebtedness [T            -d log P/ d log ë(i+r)J.
Consequently, the supply curve Is       backward bending if i    >1     (for more details see

Aizenman (1986)).

        6. In deriving this result we use the fact that V =    0.

        7. The percentage optimal borrowing tax can be shown to equal

(1 +   rO/{r d log B/d log (t+rN)).
        8. It is noteworthy that as the borrowing nation approaches the Inelastic

segment of the supply of credit (where d B/ d (1+rw) -, 0). optlmality calls for the

imposition of a dual exchange rate system. This system is equivalent to the

imposition of a quota on borrowing (equal to the borrowing ceiling) and a tax on

borrowing equal to the spread between the domestic interest rate and the supply price
of the credit ceiling. These are the optimal policies if the equilibrium occurs                 at   the

credit ceiling level (for further details see Aizenman (1986)).

      9. In deriving (20) we are using the                fact that V 0 and around                   the


equilibrium a     it/8   (1 +   rw)       B and a 1T/8
      10.It   is noteworthy that the credit ceiling with the contingent Interest                 rate

exceeds the non-contingent ceiling.                To verify this point, note that             in the

non—contingent regime for any B the following inequalities hold:




                     z                             z                    00

     (1+r)           f   (1÷r)        9(P) d'P <   f(N0/'P) g(q') d'P < f(N0/') g('P) d'P        N0
                                                   6                     6


Implying that the credit ceiling in        a non—contingent regime is below N0! (1+rf).




     11. Several     factors can account for low         default   costs in   bad   states of nature.
First, the cost of   a trade embargo can be lower because of the drop In the                 value of
exports. Second, bad states may be associated with higher myopia in the p01 icy maker,
whose survival may be     at    risk.
     12. Note that in    the    contingent regime the debt     service   drops In     bad   states to
avoid default. Implying   higher      consumption (relative to the non—contingent regime).
                                             - 32-

                                          REFERENCES
 Aizenman, Joshua. "Country Risk, incomplete infOrmation Taxes on international

      Borrowing" (August, 1986); a previous draft appeared as "Country Risk,
      Asymmetric Information and Domestic Policies," NBER Working Paper Series No.
      1880, 1986,
Bulow Jeremy I. and kenneth Rogoff. "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign

      Debt". NBER Working Paper Series No. 2088, 1986.

Dornbusch,   Rudiger.Pol icy and Performance Links between LDC Debtors and

      Industrial Nations," Brookings Papers          on    Economic     Activity, Volume
      2, 1985.
Eaton, Jonathan."Lending with Costly Enforcement of Repayment and
      Potential Fraud," NBER Working Paper Series No. 1697 .1985.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz. "Debt with Potential Repudiation:
      Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,"       Review of Economic Studies 48,1981.
Edwards, Sebastlan."LDC's Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical
      invest igat ion,Amer ican Economic Review 74, 1981.

                  Country   Risk, Foreign Borrowing and the Social Discount Rate

      in an Open Developing Economy," NBER Working Paper Series No.

      1651,1985.

Oennotte, Gerard and Homi J. Kharas and Sayeed Sadeq." A Valuation Model f or LDC
     Debt With    Endogenous Rescheduling", The World Bank, 1985,

Harberger,   Arnold C."On Country Risk and the Social Cost of Foreign

     Borrowing by    Developing COuntries," manuscript, 1976,

               ."Vlgnettes on the World Capital Market," American Economic

     Review 70, 1980.

Kietzer,   I(enneth M. "Asymmetries of Information and LDC borrowing with Sovereign
     Risk," Economic Journal 94, 1984.
Krugrnan, Paul. "international Debt Strategies in an Uncertain World," in Smith, W.G.
     and Cuddington, J. T., eds., "International Debt   and the Developing Countries", A

     World Bank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 1985.
                                        - 33-

Sachs, Jeffery D. "Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing." Princeton
     Studies in International Finance 54, 1984.
World Development Report 1986, published for the World Bank by Oxford
     University Press, 1986.
