NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBAL SERVICE EFFICIENCY AND THE ROLE OF SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL
BASED NEGOTIATION
Daqing Yao
John Whalley
Working Paper 22362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22362

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We are grateful to the ORF (Ontario Research Fund) and CIGI (Centre for International
Governance Innovation) for financial support. The first author also thanks to the Chinese
National Social Science Foundation for financial support with the grant No. 15BJL076. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Daqing Yao and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Global Service Efficiency and the Role of Special and Differential Based Negotiation
Daqing Yao and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 22362
June 2016
JEL No. F13,F42,F55,F61
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that the pursuit of special and differential treatments (SDT) by developing
countries has hampered the liberalization of global service trade, which is one of the causes of the
only slowing improving of service efficiency globally. We use value added per worker as a proxy
of production efficiency, and show the growth rate of service efficiency is much lower than
agriculture and industry. Despite the progress in world commodity market integration in past half
century, the world service market remains highly segmented, which can be seen clearly from the
World Bank’s STRD index and CHB index. We argue that the SDT negotiation contributes to the
service market segment, and give three reasons on why it is difficult for developing countries to
be granted SDT in service. In the last part we present some suggestions on trade negotiations in
the future.

Daqing Yao
Institute of World Economy
Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences
622 Huaihaizhong Rd.
Shanghai, 200020
China, P.R.
yaodaqing@sass.org.cn
John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
Western University
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

Global Service Efficiency and the Search for Special
and Differential Treatment

1. Introduction

The past three decades have witnessed a transition in the global economy from an
industry to a service economy. In terms of value added at current prices and
exchange rates, the service sector was already dominant in 1970, accounting for
52 percent of world production and 68 percent in 2005. The respective shares of
agriculture were 10 percent in 1970 and 3.6 percent in 2005, and those of industry
38 and 29 percent (Memedovic, 2009). These proportions have been stable since
2005.

But global service efficiency does not improve much. As a report by the World
Bank (2009) stated: “As incomes continue to rise, people’s needs become less
“material” and they begin to demand more services—in health, education,
entertainment, and many other areas. Meanwhile, labor productivity in services
does not grow as fast as it does in agriculture and industry because most service
jobs cannot be filled by machines. The lower mechanization of the service sector
also explains why employment in the service sector continues to grow while
employment in agriculture and industry declines because of technological
progress that increases labor productivity and eliminates jobs.”
2

In this paper we argue that, in addition to the reasons mentioned by the World
Bank, the segmentation of global service market contributes to the slow improving
of service efficiency. Services may be more labor-intensive than agriculture and
industry, but this does not mean that there are no economies of scale in services,
and an integrated service market will increase the service efficiency, especially in
core business services such as banking, insurance, transportation and
telecommunications.

Why is the service market segmented? Traditionally, service products are
classified as non-tradable goods and the market will be confined to local suppliers,
for example in the case of hair-cutting, and also in retailing and government
services. But this cannot explain most of modern services, such as the Call-Center
industries in India. According to trade theory the difference between tradable and
non-tradable lies in the trade cost, which mainly depends on technology. As
science and technology advanced in the past decades, many services are now not
only tradable, but also can be traded more quickly than goods, such as online
banking services. There must be some institutional elements which impede the
integration of world services.

In this paper we argue that the pursuing of special and differential treatment (SDT)
by developing countries has hampered the liberalization of global service trade. As
3

the rounds of negotiations in the GATT made tariffs on goods very low, from the
GATS and Doha Round in the WTO countries are busy on negotiations for service
liberalization. The developing economies are eager to be granted SDT from
developed countries, but this is far more complex than the SDT in goods trade in
1960s. The Doha Round has been an impasse and some members are resorting to
regional agreements such as the TPP. There are substantial benefits in terms of per
capita income for developing nations if they are included in the world service
market.

2. Evaluation on Global Service Efficiency in Past Decades

In economics, production efficiency implies that an economy is producing as
much as possible without wasting precious resources. Theoretically, production
efficiency will include all of the points along the production possibility frontier,
but this is difficult to measure in practice. Data envelopment analysis (DEA) is a
nonparametric method often used in productive efficiency, and there are also
parametric approaches which can be used for the estimation of production
frontiers. These frontier analysis methods may be more suitable for estimating
efficiency in industry sectors, since there are more difficulties to applying them to
service sector. Service products are not material and sometimes even difficult to
specify, for example whether loans are output of banks or the input of them.

4

Although fixed assets can be critical inputs in several service sectors, such as
transportation and telecommunications, most service sectors rely heavily on
human capital rather than material capital, for example business services and
professional services. The data availability on other inputs is another problem,
because at the aggregate level of country or world service data, it can hardly give
a clear definition on capital input in service. Therefore, many literatures on service
efficiency use labour as the sole input in analyzing service efficiency. As Bjurek,
Hjalmarsson and Forsund (1990) pointed out, in service sector capital in the form
of office space and computer terminals is almost proportional to labour input. We
will follow this tradition, and use the ratio of service value-added to employment
in services as a proxy for service efficiency 1.

Figure 1: The Value-added per Worker in World Service and Agriculture
Source: Author computed based on WDI data.

1

In theory it would be difficult to compute value-added in a service sector, for example the value-added of a
bank. We omit this problem and take the service value-added data from the WDI database.
5

Figure 1 depicts the trend of efficiency (proxy by value-added per worker) in
service and agriculture of the world. We can see that efficiency in world services
is about ten time higher than agriculture efficiency, and also more fluctuated than
it. Although absent detailed sector data, we can expect the efficiencies of different
service sectors should be very diverse, higher in modern services and lower in
traditional services. As to the growth rate of efficiency, service efficiency growth
in an average annual rate of merely 0.44%, while that of agriculture growth more
quickly, with average annual rate of 1.85%.

It is impossible to study the world service efficiency over a long time horizon,
since there are no service employment data for the world before 2000. We then
turn to country data to see how service efficiency changes relative to agriculture
and industry efficiencies. We use China and South Korea, two most successful
developing economies in the past decades. The data period is 1980-2010.

Figure 2: China’s Growth Rate of Efficiency in Three Sectors
6

Source: Author computed based on WDI data.

Figure 2 is the annual growth rate in China’s three sectors, agriculture, industry
and services in three decades since its reform and opening up. We can see in the
early 1980s, agriculture efficiency growth was higher than service, and service
growth higher than industry. This may be due to the fact that industry is more
capital intensive, and thus need more time to update its fixed capital to acquire
higher efficiency. In contrasts agriculture and service are more labour intensive in
China and the institutional change from central planning to market economy bring
efficiency improvement more quickly. But since 1987 China’s industry efficiency
growth has been higher than that of service in most years, and agriculture
efficiency growth at a similar speed as service. From 1980 to 2010, China’s
agriculture efficiency increased 429.7%, industry efficiency increased 1096%, and
service efficiency increased 568.3%, with the average annual growth rate 5.7%,
8.6% and 6.5% respectively.

7

Figure 3: Korea’s Growth Rate of Efficiency in Three Sectors
Source: Author computed based on WDI data.

The lower growth rate in service efficiency is more significant in the case of South
Korea, as Figure 3 shows. During the three decades the increase rate of service
efficiency nearly never higher than industry efficiency. Korea’s agriculture
efficiency, although more fluctuated than service, is also higher than it in most
years. During this period, Korea’s agriculture efficiency increased 601.5%,
industry efficiency increased 1040%, and service efficiency increased 99.9%, with
the average annual growth rate 6.7%, 8.4% and 2.3% respectively.

It seems in the past decades service efficiency does not compete that of agriculture
and industry in growth rate, especially in the economies enduring higher
increasing. The developed economies might encounter such situation earlier. In a
report by US Department of Commerce in 1996, it concluded that “Since the
8

1960s, most G-7 countries have experienced a gradual slowing in average output
growth, coupled with steady expansion in the services share of economic activity
and, especially in the United States, a sharp decline in service-industry
productivity growth. 1” Table 1 is taken from this report.

Table 1: Service Sector Productivity Growth Rates
(Output per employee)
Canada

Germany

France

Italy

UK

Japan

USA

1971-80

1.5

2.6

2.6

0.6

1.7

2.3

0.2

1981-90

1.0

2.0

1.9

1.4

0.8

1.9

0.1

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce (1996)

This cast some shades on the prospect of world economy, of which service sector
comprise two thirds in output and one half in employment. If service efficiency is
doomed to be lower to growth, this would become another kind of Limits to
Growth, not by environment and resource. Why is it?

3. Service Efficiency and Market Segmentation

a) Literature on low service efficiency

1

U.S. Department of Commerce, Service Industries and Economic Performance, 1996.
9

Economists have attributed the sluggishness of service sector productivity growth
to a range of influences, for example workers’ skill levels, capital-labor ratios,
unproductive IT investments, sub-optimal scale, and government policies. Here
we discuss several elements before we present our own explanation.

Some blame that as an accounting category, “the service sector” may be an
impediment to understanding, and the service economy is at least two economies,
one characterized by high rates and the second by low rates of (measured)
productivity growth. High-productivity-growth service industries including
transportation, communication and business services, which are exploited more
from advances in information technology. Service industries with consistently
slow productivity growth tend to be very labour intensive, for example health
services. Mukherjee (2013) classified service sector into three groups based on
their productivity growth: traditional services such as retail and wholesale trade;
hybrid of traditional and modern services, for example education; and modern
services (financial, computer services, etc.). If take all the service industries
together, the efficiency growth tends to be lower.

Another stream of thought is under-estimation of service productivity growth due
to measurement biases, which mainly include three areas. The first component of
measurement bias relates to the choice of inputs. The actual hours worked per
employee in service sector usually more dispersed than in industry sector, for
10

example a barber may not has many consumers in a small community. The second
measurement component relates to the choice of outputs. In some service
industries there is no even a well-acceptable definition of output, e.g. financial
services, and the quality changes of service are difficult to isolate from price
changes. The third component of potential measurement bias relates to the
estimation of aggregate productivity growth, e.g. the role of specific services as
intermediate inputs for other industries 1.

Although the above explanations for the slow growth of service efficiency are
illuminating, in this paper we emphasize the effect of market structure. The basic
rationale of international trade is that market integration can bring each country
concentrated on the sectors it has most advantages, and thus improve the
efficiency and welfare of the whole world. From Adam Smith’s famous example
of pin-making in England in 18th century, there have been volumes of theory and
empirical literature on this field. It is the underlying philosophy of the World
Trade Organization, as well as the GATT that preceded it, that open markets,
transparency and nondiscriminatory trade policies are conducive to the national
welfare of all countries.

Despite the progress in world commodity market integration in past half century,
the world service market remains highly segmented. We will first make an

1

Maroto-Sanchez (2010)

11

evaluation of world service segment, and then discuss how such market segment
contributes to the low efficiency growth rate in service sector.

b) How the world service market is segmented?

We first use aggregate data to show there is a kind of “home bias” in service sector.
If world service market were as integrated as world commodity market, we should
expect the share of service trade in total trade equals the share of service
value-added in GDP, and thus the ratio of them should be near one. The smaller
this ratio is, the less service trade relative to service value-added, and thus the
more home bias. Table 2 reports the service trade relative share thus computed of
seven main economies, two country groups and the world as a total.

Table 2: Service Trade Relative Ratio in Selected Economies
(%)

China
France
Germany
India
Japan
LDC
OECD
UK
US
World

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

29.3
32.0
26.2
54.3
27.4
44.7
30.5
40.6
26.4
30.0

29.5
32.1
25.1
53.5
26.9
45.5
31.6
42.5
27.7
30.9

31.0
35.3
27.3
51.2
30.2
48.5
34.3
43.8
32.0
32.8

26.1
33.7
25.0
53.8
23.7
49.2
30.3
38.4
28.4
28.6

28.0
37.3
27.2
54.0
24.4
44.0
31.4
40.2
29.3
29.6

Notes: Computed as the ratio of service trade to total trade of a given economy, as a percent of the
ratio of the ratio of service value-added to GDP.
12

LDC is the least developed countries as UN classification; OECD represent all OECD members.
Source: Authors’ Computation based on the data from World Bank’s WDI database.

In Table 2 we can see the world average ratio is about 30%, which means the
share of service trade in total trade is only one third of service’s share in GDP. As
to the seven main economies selected, the ratio of US is very close to the world
average as well as the ratio of OECD countries. The ratio of India, UK and France
are higher than world average, and the ratio of Japan, Germany and China are
lower than it. This supports the argument that manufacturing countries (China,
Germany and Japan) are relative lower in service trade ratio, while service
countries (UK, India) have higher service trade ratio. The abnormally high ratio of
LDC countries in service is due to their low share of service sector in GDP, rather
than a higher share of service trade. Although the ratio less than one is
understandable considering some service industries are really “untradeable”, e.g.
construction, it is still strange that there is not even a slight trend of increasing of
this ratio in the decade. In fact, the world ratio is slightly lower in 2013 as
compare to that of 2005.

Table 2 provides an indirect evidence that world service market is segmented as
compared to the commodity market. A direct method to prove it is study the
restriction on service trade, as done by the development economics research group
of the World Bank. They collected information on applied services trade policies
across 103 countries, 18 service sectors (covering telecommunications, finance,
13

transportation, retail and professional services) and three modes of delivery
(cross-border, commercial presence, presence of natural persons) to set a database
on services trade restrictions (STRD).

Table 3: Service Trade Restriction Index, Selected Economies (2008-2011)
Country
China
France
Germany
India
Japan
UK
US
EU-20
Ethiopia
Ghana

Overall
36.6
26.4
17.5
65.7
23.4
14.3
17.7
26.1
88.2
18.4

Financial

Telecom.

34.8
1.3
1.3
48.1
1.9
0.6
21.4
4.2
89.7
24.6

50
12.5
0
50
25
0
0
0
100
25

Retail
25
25
0
75
25
0
0
25
100
0

Transport
ation.
19.3
43.9
24.4
62.4
15.6
23.1
7.9
37.1
72.9
5.8

Professio
nal
66
46
59
87.5
56
45
54
54
84
44

Notes: this index use a 5-point scale, with “Completed closed” scaled as 100 and “Open without
restrictions” as 0. The data are averaged in different sectors.
Source:

The

World

Bank’s

STRD

database.

http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/services-trade-restrictions

In Table 3 we list the Service Trade Restriction Index of selected economies.
Generally speaking, advanced economies tend to have a lower restriction index in
service trade, while developing economics have more restriction. Some least
developed countries have the highest restriction in service trade, for example
Ethiopia. But service trade restriction index does not always negative related to
economic development, e.g. Ghana is among the lowest restriction economies.
Among the five service sectors, trade in financial, telecommunications and retail
services are relatively open, while trade in transportation and professional services
14

are restricted more strictly. From Table 3 we can see the world service trade
market is far from integrated.

A more technical method to access the market segment in service trade is used in
Barattieri (2014). Based on Anderson and Yotov (2010), Barattieri (2014)
computed a Constructed Home Bias Index (CHB) to quantify the extent of service
market segment. The CHB index is the ratio of the realized internal trade in a
given sector relative to the internal trade that would prevail in a frictionless world.
Since this index is a pure number, it can be compared across different sectors, and
by appropriately weighted average in all service sectors it can capture the
liberalization of world service market across times.

The CHB index of country 𝒾 in sector k is defined as:
𝑡𝑘

1−𝜃𝑘

𝐶𝐻𝐵𝑖𝑘 = �𝑃 𝑖𝑖Π �
𝑖 𝑖

𝑘
where 𝑡𝑖𝑗
represents the bilateral trade cost of shipping a unit of sector k gooks

from country 𝒾 to country j, 𝑃𝑖 and Π𝑖 represent the inward and outward
multilateral resistance terms 1 as defined in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003).

Table 4: CHB Index, Selected Economies
Country
US
1

Manuf.
1995
3.68

Manuf.
2008
4.37

%Change
0.19

Service
2001
2.40

Service
2008
3.05

%Change
0.27

“Multilateral resistance” refer to the average trade barrier of a country with all of its trade partners. It not only
includes the “remoteness” between two countries such as distance, but also includes border barriers and other
obstacles to trade.
15

China
Japan
Germany
UK
France
India
Korea
Greece
Finland

14.31
4.41
9.45
20.53
15.31
44.69
26.45
194.63
126.36

4.34
8.33
10.23
21.86
14.73
23.79
21.47
139.88
94.44

-0.70
0.89
0.08
0.06
-0.04
-0.47
-0.19
-0.28
-0.25

21.90
7.10
15.42
17.02
20.07
62.82
66.48
237.89
246.34

10.85
12.07
14.60
14.63
16.41
38.34
61.15
153.82
183.12

-0.50
0.70
-0.05
-0.14
-0.18
-0.39
-0.08
-0.35
-0.26

Source: Barattieri (2014)

We do not discuss more on the computation details, and list selected economies’
CHB index in manufacturing and service sectors as Table 4. We can see that the
US is the most open country with the lowest CHB index in both sectors, and also
the only one whose service sector is more open than manufacturing sector. The
world average CHB index in service sector fluctuated between 30 and 32 during
this period, about one half higher than that of manufacturing sector, and had no
trend to decrease. Therefore, the service sector shows more home bias than
manufacturing sector, and thus world service market is more segment than
manufacturing market.

c) How a segmented service market contributes to low efficiency growth?

We then discuss how the service market segment contribute to low growth rate of
service efficiency, or in other words how service market integration leads to
higher efficiency improvement. The rationales are similar to that of commodity
markets and we just list several here.
16

Firstly, an integrated world service market can lead to better exploitation of
comparative advantage of each country. Rather than “untradeable” in traditional
views, some categories of service industry are traded with a much lower trade cost
than commodities. One example is the contact centers flourishing in India. A
contact center is referred to as a customer interaction center from where all
customer contacts are managed. It includes online call centers and other types of
customer contact such as email newsletters, website inquires, chats and the
collection of information from customers. Thanks to the development of
information and communication technology, such contact service can be provided
by contact centers thousands miles away from the actual consumers. This magnify
India’s comparative advantage of low labour cost and high language skills, and
bring Indian contact market one of the fastest growing and competitive markets in
the world with a compound annual growth rate of 45% over the past five years.

Secondly an integrated service market exploits economies of scale. Some service
industries are characterized with high fixed cost and low variable cost, for
example hotel and banking services. An empty hotel does not consume much less
than another hotel without a single room being available. Similarly, a bank branch
with few customers all day cost almost the same as another branch with a long
queue.

17

The third reason is network effect. Many service industries have network effects,
for example computer software industry. If every country had a unique kind of
software system, maybe most software engineers were busy translating one
software into another system rather than designing new software. Service market
integration makes most countries use the same software system, and thus a Word
document compiled in China can readily be read in America.

There are many other reasons that can explain why service market integration
contributes to higher efficiency growth, e.g. knowledge diffusion through
learning- by-doing mechanism, competition effects among service providers, etc.
We do not discuss further on this, and now turn to the next part: why world service
market is more segmented than commodity market?

4. Service Market Segment and SDT Negotiations

Among the four modes of service trade defined by the WTO, only Mode 1
(services that are traded internationally across borders) shares some similarity
with commodity trade, and the other three modes are distinct from traditional
concept of “trade” in that they require the movement of consumer or supplier,
instead of the “service” itself. Therefore, the Mode 2 (services that require the
consumer to be in the location of the producer), Mode 3 (services that require
commercial presence in the form of foreign direct investment), and Mode 4
18

(services that require the temporary cross-border movement of worker) of service
trade are highly related on the cross-border movement of human or capital, and
thus under stricter supervision by governments. This is the fundamental reason
that world service market is more segmented than commodity market.

There have been negotiations on service trade liberalization since the period of the
GATT, and these negotiations continued in the frame of WTO. But the progress in
service trade cannot be compared to that in commodity trade. We briefly
document the history of service trade negotiation before explaining the effect of
special and differential treatment (SDT) on this.

a) Service Trade Negotiations

From the creation of the GATT in 1947, trade negotiations had focused on tariffs
issues in commodity trade. But as service sector accounts for 70 percent or more
of economic activity in high-income countries, services become essential inputs
into the production of all industries, as well as new technologies emerge that
allowed competition emerge in markets that were traditionally regarded as natural
monopolies, it turns out to be a necessary for advanced economies to begin
undertake regulatory reforms to increase the contestability of service markets.

It was the United States, who perceived it had a comparative advantage in services,
19

launched the initiative to consider rules for trade in services in the early 1980s.
The US made an initial attempt to put services on the GATT negotiating agenda
during the 1982 GATT ministerial meeting, but only met with vigorous resistance
from many contracting parties and even an agreement on negotiating in this field
could not be reached. However, the meeting did result in establishing a GATT
work program on services to undertake studies on service sectors.

The US and other developed economies continued their efforts during the 1986
ministerial meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay to put service on the GATT agenda.
This was defended most vigorously by the so called G10, a group of ten
developing countries including Argentina, Brazil, India, Nigeria and others, which
rejected launching talks on services. At last both made some concession: the
services negotiations would proceed as a part of the Uruguay Round, but on a
parallel track from talks on goods.

Since there does not exist a common set of border barriers such as tariffs in
service trade, it is quite difficult for the negotiators to agree on what field of
service barriers they should negotiate about. It seems a GATT-type approach of
exchanging equivalent “amounts” of trade liberalization simply impossible to
emulate in service negotiations. As a result, subjective notions of sectoral
reciprocity became the focal point of negotiations.

20

After 15 years of discussion in service liberalization, a major result of the
Uruguay Round was the creation of the General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS), which entered into force on January 1, 1995, established rules and
disciplines on policies affecting access to service markets, and greatly extended
the coverage of the multilateral trading system. The GATS rules can be seen as
operating on two levels. First there is a set of general rules that apply across the
board to measures affecting trade in services, of which the most important are
transparency and the most-favored nation (MFN) principle. Then there are
sector-specific commitments made by members on market access and national
treatment that are the core of the GATS, and determine the liberalizing impact of
the agreement 1.

Article XIX of GATS required members to launch new negotiations on services no
later than 2000, and periodically thereafter. These talks became part of the 2001
Doha Development Agenda and conducted in Special Sessions of the Council for
Trade in Services. But the negotiations proved fruitless. The Doha dilemma has
brought countries like the US turn to regional trade agreement such as the TPP,
rather than negotiating in the WTO. As a result, the world service market is far
from integrated after 20 years’ practice of the GATS.

b) Special and Differential Treatment in Negotiations in Services

1

See Hoekman and Kostecki (2009), p.337.

21

One of the reasons for the little progress in services negotiations in GATS is the
pursing of Special and Differential Treatment (SDT) by the developing countries,
which have taken the SDT in goods trade as granted. The initial premise
underlying GATT 1947 was essentially parity of obligations, which make no
distinction between rich and poor trading nations. In the mid-1950s, with a large
number of colonies approaching independence, the concept of giving SDT to
developing countries arose on the justification that this would help them protect
infant industries to foster development, and have preferential access to their export
markets to realize economies of scale. In 1965, developing countries’ demand for
special status in the multilateral trading system lead to a new Part IV of the GATT,
which formalized the concept of SDT as the developing countries were not
expected to grant reciprocal tariff concessions and bind tariffs. This led to the so
called Enabling Clause in the Tokyo Round Framework Agreement, which
provided for departures from MFN and other GATT rules. The following Uruguay
Round was a single undertaking in the means that all agreements were to apply to
all members, and all members were to submit schedules of concessions and
commitments, but it also included the SDT for developing countries with various
transition periods for the different agreements and the more limited extent of tariff
cuts they needed to make.

Since service topic entered the Uruguay Round talks, developing countries also try
22

to be granted SDT in service trade. In 1995 the preamble to the GATS states that
the Agreement aims “to facilitate the increasing participation of developing
countries in trade in services”. GATS Article IV takes this further by requiring
WTO members to negotiate specific commitments relating to (1) strengthening the
domestic services capacity of developing countries; (2) improving their access to
distribution channels and information networks; and (3) liberalizing market access
in areas of export interest to these countries, giving “special priority” to
least-developed countries (LDCs). It states that these objectives are to be
implemented through a process of progressive liberalization, and developing
countries are given flexibility to (1) open “fewer sectors” than those opened by
developed countries; (2) liberalize fewer types of transactions; and (3) extend
market access in line with their development situation. It also requires members to
establish for each round of services negotiations how they will provide special
treatment for LDCs, which are known as “modalities”. The modalities for the
special treatment of LDCs in the service negotiations was adopted in September
2003, which require members to provide “effective market access” in sectors and
modes of supply of export interest to LDCs when making specific commitments.
At the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference in 2005, members recognized the
economic difficulties LDCs face and acknowledged that they are not expected to
undertake new commitments in trade in services in the Doha Development
Agenda.

23

Despite all these principles from advanced members to provide SDT to
developing countries, especially to the LDCs, the developing countries have in
reality acquired nothing more than some goodwill to show for their efforts. And
the service negotiation itself has become a problem for negotiators spending years
on it without even an agreement on what to negotiate. Negotiations to liberalize
market conditions for trade in services are conducted mainly through a
“request-offer” procedure. Members send requests directly to each other
indicating what improvements they are seeking for their services and service
suppliers; members specify in their initial offers how and to what extent they are
willing to take binding commitments in response to these requests.

The timelines for this “request-offer” procedure had been postponed again and
again. The Doha Declaration in 2001 introduced target dates for the circulation of
initial requests on 30 June 2002, and initial offers on 31 march 2003, and a single
undertaking was to be concluded not later than 1 January 2005. But as the Cancun
Ministerial Meeting in September 2003 failed to make any progress, it was not
until mid-2004 that the so called July 2004 Package set a new target date of May
2005 for the submission of revised offers. This was again postponed. The Hong
Kong Ministerial Declaration of December 2005 only reaffirmed key principles
and objectives of the services negotiations, and set out a new timeline of 31 July
2006 for the submission of offers. Just one week earlier than this date, all
negotiations under the Doha Development Agenda were suspended, due mostly to
24

a stalemate over agricultural and non-agricultural market access. When these
negotiations were resumed in 2007, there was at last a conclusion that no timelines
should be made.

It was until December 2011 that a progress in SDT was made, when the WTO
Ministerial Conference adopted a waiver which allows WTO members to deviate
from their most-favoured nation obligation of non-discrimination in order to
provide preferential treatment to services and service suppliers from LDCs. Of the
155 WTO members, 32 are LDCs who stand to benefit from preferential treatment
designed to promote their trade in those sectors and modes of supply that are of
particular export interest to them. This could be a good news to these LDCs.
Unfortunately, there was no member made use of the LDC services waiver
between 2001 and the Bali Ministerial Conference in December 2013. The LDCs
submitted a collective request on 21 July 2014, and over 25 developed and
developing countries indicated sectors and modes of supply where they intend to
provide preferential treatment to LDC services and service suppliers in a
high-level meeting took place on 5 February 2015. When will these LDCs get the
actual SDT in services? Maybe there is still a long way to go.

c) SDT negotiation contributes to service market segment and service
inefficiency

25

From above analysis we can see that the negotiation approach of SDT has
contributed to service market segment. In principle the developed economies
agree to provide SDT to developing countries, as the GATS Article IV stated, but
in practice there are lots of disparities among them on what to grant, how to grant
and to whom to grant such SDT. Why the SDT negotiation in service so difficult?
We analyze this in the next part.

5. The Opportunities in global SDT Negotiations

The pursues of SDT by developing countries is one of the reasons which make the
WTO negotiations in the Doha Round to go nowhere. Why it is so difficult for the
developing countries to be granted SDT in service? Here we give three reasons.

a) Is there a car to free-ride on?

Firstly, the mechanism of SDT may not suit for today’s trade. From its original
design in 1960s the SDT is a mechanism for free-riding, which aims at granting
developing countries special entrance to the market of developed countries
without a reciprocal opening of their own. These may some of the reasons in the
early period of SDT when a lion’s share of world trade is goods trade among
developed countries, which were eager to abate tariffs between each other to form
26

a world market. But in the current service negotiations, there is a large difference
among developed countries that there is simply no car for developing countries to
free-ride on.

For example, Chapter Fourteen of the NAFTA Agreement lists rules on financial
service liberalization among the US, Canada and Mexico, including National
Treatment, Most-Favored-Nation Treatment, as well as the permit on new
financial services and data processing, forbidden of requirement on senior
management and boards of directors, among others. Given the geographic,
historical, cultural and linguistic similarities between the US and Canada, it would
seem natural for their financial markets to be integrated together after two decades
of NAFTA. But there are only a few banks and bank branches from the US which
operate in Canada.

According to official Canada statistics, there are 24 foreign banks and 29 foreign
bank branches in 2015, of which only 3 banks and 5 bank branches are from the
US. They can hardly compete with the 29 domestic banks with thousands of
branches all over the country. 1 As the Canadian Bankers Association note, most
international banks in Canada specialize in corporate and investment banking
business and only have one or two offices or branches. The only exception is
HSBC Bank China, which has a strong retail presence with branches across

1

http://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/Eng/wt-ow/Pages/wwr-er.aspx?sc=1&gc=1#WWRLink11
27

Canada. 1

b) Is the space enough for new free-riders?

SDT as designed in 1960s was aimed to provide special market access to
developing countries which were characterized with trade problems such as poor
export ability and huge balance of payments deficit. After half a century’s
development, the role of developing countries in world service trade now is not
similar with what it was in goods trade in the 1960s. In 2013 the four BRIC
countries export 473 billion US$ in service, account for 9.7% of the world’s total.
China and India are among the top 10 service exporters in the world. In 2013
China was the fifth, only behind the US, UK, Germany and France, and India was
the sixth largest exporter. Granting SDT to so large developing countries would
bring large impact on developed countries.

Detailed world service trade data is not available, so we take the US service
imports as an example. In 2014 the US service import is 477.4 billion US$, of
which import from advanced economies (Canada, Europe, Japan, Australia, New
Zealand) is 272.3 billion, the others from developing economies 2 . If all the
developing economies were granted SDT in US service imports, it would be a
problem to the developed exporters.
1
2

http://www.cba.ca/en/component/content/category/61-banks-operating-in-canada
http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=62&step=1#reqid=62&step=9&isuri=1&6210=4
28

c) Are the free riders belonging to the same coalition?

The group of “developing countries” are so diversified that it is difficult for them
to agree on what SDT they should pursue from the developed countries. As
Whalley (1990) pointed out, over the years the differences between developing
countries have grown to the point that in the Uruguay Round a grand coalition of
all developing countries did not exist in any active sense. The current divergence
of so called developing countries in service trade is no less obvious as it was three
decades ago in goods trade.

Since there are more than a hundred developing countries in the world, it is
difficult to make a complete analysis on their difference in services. We list
several main indicators of five largest developing countries (Brazil, China, India,
Mexico, and Russia), and the group of LDCs in Table 6. There are obvious
differences between these indicators. The service sector has different importance
to different countries. Service value-added accounts for nearly two thirds in GDP
in Mexico, while it only accounts for 43% in China. Service trade as a share of
GDP is almost 15% in India, while it is only 4.14% in Mexico. India has service
trade surplus, while other economies have service trade deficits. If we compare the
four service industries, the country difference is more distinct. For example,
computer and communication exports accounts for 70% of India’s service export,
29

while it only accounts 12.8% in Mexico. In the travel industry, the picture is just
mirrored, which accounts 70% in Mexico’s service export but only 12.4% for
India.

Table 6: Service Trades in Selected Developing Economies, 2013
Brazil

Country

China

India

Mexico

Russia

LDCs

% of GDP
Serv. value

53.8

43

55.4

62.6

54

46.3

Serv. trade

5.24

5.76

14.77

4.14

9.55

13.37

Serv.

-1.9

-1.2

1.2

-0.7

-2.7

-4.6

Computer

58.5

54.9

70.4

12.8

49.4

22.8

Financial

9.0

3.4

5.7

13.9

3.2

0.0

Transport

14.6

17.6

11.4

4.0

30.0

14.1

Travel

17.9

24.2

12.4

69.3

17.3

62.6

Computer

47.7

24.7

35.7

8.3

39.8

26.9

Financial

4.0

7.8

9.4

17.3

3.8

7.3

Transport

18.3

28.6

45.6

43.3

13.9

51.9

Travel

30.0

38.9

9.2

31.1

42.5

14.0

surplus
% of s. export

%

of

s.

import

Source: Author’s computation based on WDI data

Service imports are also diversified. Computer and communication imports
account nearly one half of Brazil’s service imports, while in Mexico these are only
8.3%. More than a half of LDCs’ service imports are transportation, but for Russia
they only account for 13.9%. It seems impossible for so different economies to
agree on what kind of SDT they should ask for in the service negotiations.
Confined the coalition to the 48 LDCs may not help much, because although those
LDCs share a similarity of low GDP per capita, they are quite different in many
30

other characters e.g. comparative advantages, resources, etc.

6. Does SDT really help?

We have thus far shown that the pursuing of SDT in service trade by developing
countries contributes to the delay of Doha Round negotiations and the
segmentation of world service markets, which then leads to the slow efficiency
growth of service sector. Is it rational for the developing economies to ask for
SDT despite the price of market segmentation? Since there is currently no SDT in
service, we will use the SDT in goods trade as a reference and show it actually
had no remarkable benefit to the developing countries granted it.

The rationale of SDT in trade is based on a fundamental fallacy that opening one’s
market to others involved “concessions” that needed to be “paid” for. The OECD
countries can open markets to each other because each wish to gain better access
to the markets of the others. By SDT developing countries were excused from the
need to pay for new export opportunities to developed economies. For example,
the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme in 1968 allowed all
developed countries voluntarily grant tariff preferences to developing countries.
But as successive rounds brought down tariffs among developed economies, the
margin of preference to developing countries was diminishing. Such preference
was also becoming less secure since it was tied to the level of economic
development with a “graduation” clause. A number of products most important to
31

developing countries were excluded from GSP, such as agriculture and textiles
products. Therefore, the gain from SDT was not large.

But the price from SDT was larger than the gain. The developing countries did not
open their markets to more competition, which may be politically attractive, but
also hampered their protected industries to increase efficiency. A notorious
example was the so called infant industry protection. Pursuit of SDT by
developing countries also contributed to their status as second-rank players in
trade negotiations with little influence, and becoming potential targets of other
discriminatory policies such as “voluntary” export restraints and “orderly”
marketing arrangements. Powerful entities such as the US and the EU could
convince smaller countries to restrain exports of politically troublesome low-cost,
standard-technology exports.

SDT policy could also be circumvented in a globalized economy without helping
those countries it aimed to. This can be seen clearly in the experience of the
African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) countries. Began in 2001, the
AGOA enabled some less developed African countries to export hundreds of
apparel products quota-free and duty-free to the United States, which was a kind
of SDT to specific developing countries. As pointed out by Rotunno (2013), a key
feature of the AGOA preference was the absence of rules of origin (ROOs), which
are usually imposed under regional trade agreements to avoid transshipment.
32

Therefore, the easiest way for these underdeveloped countries to export to the US
is to import directly from other countries and transship them. Take Botswana,
Namibia and Uganda as an example, as in Figure 4. Their export to the US
jumped significantly when they entered the AGOA, but fall sharply following the
expiration of the MFA quota system in 2005. Since a country’s industry structure
and export ability cannot fluctuate so dramatically, a reasonable explanation for
this pattern change is that these countries largely transshipped other countries’
exports to the US, and their own production and export ability was not
strengthened by the SDT.

Figure 4. Clothing Exports to USA, Selected AGOA Countries
Source: UN’s Comtrade Database

From above analysis we can see negotiations on SDT in service has trapped Doha
Round into an impasse and continued put world service market segmented as ever.
33

If an integrated service market is the goal, what can we do in the future of world
service negotiation? "There are several policies that might be considered going
forward. They include making SDT and exception, grouping developing nations,
and developing a tiered negotiation system. We leave these to the future studies.

34

Bibliography

[1]. Anderson, James E. and Yoto V. Yotov. The Changing Incidence of Geography.
American Economic Review 100 (December 2010): 2157–2186
[2]. Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
Border Puzzle. American Economic Review 93(1) (2003): 170-192.
[3]. Barattieri, Alessandro. Comparative advantage, service trade and global imbalances.
Journal of International Economics 92 (2014) 1-13.
[4]. Bjurek,Hans; Lennart Hjalmarsson and Finn R. Forsund, Deterministic Parametric and
Nonparametric Estimation of Efficiency in Service Production A Comparison, Journal of
Econometrics 46 (1990) 213-227.
[5]. Hoekman, Bernard M. and Michel M. Kostecki. The Political Economy of the World
Trading System. Oxford University Press, 2009, 3rd edition.
[6]. Maroto-Sanchez, Andres. Growth and Productivity in the Service Sector, Institute of
Social and Economic Analysis, Universidad de Alcala (2010)
[7]. Memedovic, Olga. Structural Change in the World Economy: Main Features and Trends.
UNIDO, Working Paper 24/2009
[8]. Mukherjee, Arpita, The Service Sector in India. ADB Economics Working Paper Series,
No. 352 June 2013
[9]. Rotunno, Lorenzo. The Rise and Fall of (Chinese) African Apparel Exports. Journal of
Development Economics. 105 (2013) 152-163.
[10]. U.S. Department of Commerce, Service Industries and Economic Performance, 1996
[11]. Whalley, John. Non-Discriminatory Discrimination: Special and Differential Treatment
Under the GATT for Developing Countries. The Economic Journal, Vol. 100, No. 403
(Dec., 1990), pp. 1318-1328.
[12]. The World Bank. Growth of the Service Sector. In Beyond Economic Growth, 2009.

35

