                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               NO PAIN, NO GAIN:
             THE EFFECTS OF EXPORTS ON EFFORT, INJURY, AND ILLNESS

                                           David Hummels
                                            Jakob Munch
                                            Chong Xiang

                                        Working Paper 22365
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22365


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2016




We thank the Danish Council for Independent Research/Social Sciences for funding. For helpful comments
we thank Osea Giuntella, Nils Gottfries and seminar participants at NHH Bergen, University of Oslo,
University of Oxford, ESWC Montreal, University of Lund, Singapore Management University, University
College Dublin, Copenhagen Business School, Aarhus University, IFN Stockholm, University of Chicago,
Uppsala University and University of Oxford Trade and Health Workshop. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Hummels, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
No Pain, No Gain: The Effects of Exports on Effort, Injury, and Illness
David Hummels, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 22365
July 2016, Revised August 2019
JEL No. F1,F6,I1,J2,J3

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper we address two questions. First, how do changes in demand for work affect workers’
health? Second, how do we translate these health effects into meaningful economic terms so that we
can compare the income gains associated with increased demand for work with the pain of adverse
health? We combine Danish data on individuals’ health with Danish matched worker-firm data. Within
job-spells, we find that as firm sales increases, workers work longer hours and suffer higher incidences
of adverse health events, including work-related hospitalizations and increased use of prescription
drugs for depression and heart diseases. Tracking worker cohorts over time, we show that the effects
of prescription drug uses persist beyond shocks to work demand. We then develop a novel framework
to compute the marginal disutility of diseases, and to quantify the average worker’s ex-ante utility
loss due to higher rates of sickness. Our approach accommodates moral hazard and does not require
the values of structural parameters as inputs. It also provides a straightforward and intuitive extension
of VSLI, from mortality and work injury to morbidity. Our marginal-disutility values have sensible
and intuitive variation across diseases, and we find that the average worker’s utility loss accounts for
almost one fifth of her wage gains from rising firm sales.


David Hummels                                       Chong Xiang
Krannert School of Management                       Department of Economics
403 West State Street                               Purdue University
Purdue University                                   403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310                       West Lafayette, IN 47907-2506
and NBER                                            cxiang@purdue.edu
hummelsd@purdue.edu

Jakob Munch
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen
Øster Farimagsgade 5
Building 26
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Jakob.Roland.Munch@econ.ku.dk
1. Introduction

        In this paper we address two questions. First, how do changes in demand for work affect workers’

health? Higher demand likely raises income, and many studies show that higher income or wealth leads

to better health. Reinforcing this view, the recent literature on “deaths of despair” suggest a connection

between declining economic opportunities and worsening health, as do papers that implicate mass

layoffs, plant closures and import competition.1 Yet, the evidence is mixed. Increasing demand for labor

that requires greater effort and longer hours may increase work stress, and a medical literature has shown

that self-reported work hours and stress are correlated with coronary heart diseases, strokes, and even

mortality.2 In addition, at the population health level, mortality and correlates of bad health (e.g. smoking,

excess weight, physical inactivity) have been shown to be pro-cylical, even though the exact channels

remain an open question.3

        Second, how do we translate these health effects into meaningful economic terms so that we can

compare the income gains associated with increased demand for work with the pain of adverse health?

While estimates for the marginal disutility of mortality and injury, or VSLI (value of a statistical

life/injury), have been well-established and widely used by U.S. regulatory agencies4, similar estimates

for diseases remain elusive.5

        To answer the first question – how do changes in demand for work affect worker health – we

draw on Danish administrative data that match the universe of private-sector Danish firms to the




1
  See Case and Deaton (2015) on “deaths of despair”, Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) for mass layoffs, Browning and
Heinesen (2012) for plant closure and McManus and Schaur (2015) for import competition.
2
  E.g. Kivimaki et al. (2012), Fransson et al. (2016), Virtanen et al. (2012), and O’Reilly and Rosato (2013).
3
  See Ruhm (2000, 2003, 2005) for pro-cylicality of US mortality and specific channels, Stevens, Miller, Page and Filipski
(2015), argue that Ruhm (2000)’s result for mortality is driven by staffing changes at nursing homes. See also Lindo (2013),
Tekin, McClellan and Minyard (2013), and Coile, Levine and McKnight (2014).
4
  See Viscusi (1993) and Viscusi and Aldy (2003).
5
  For example, Jones and Klenow (2016)’s well-being index incorporates mortality but leaves out morbidity Recent studies
have also examined the implications of mortality, but not morbidity, for GDP (e.g. Murphy and Topel 2003, Becker, Philipson
and Soares 2005), macro-economic fluctuations (e.g. Egan, Mulligan and Philipson 2013) and economic growth (e.g. Jones
2016).
                                                                                                                          1
population of Danish workers. We examine how changes in firm sales translate to changes in hours

worked for each individual and to changes in worker health. The latter is possible because for each

individual, we observe her socio-economic characteristics and rich details about every interaction with

the Danish healthcare system. For example, we observe all prescription drug purchases (including cost

and drug type) made by each individual, along with doctor visits and hospitalization (with corresponding

diagnostic codes). This rich data on individuals’ health is available to us because Danish health care is

free and universal, and every individual has access to health care, regardless of income and employment

status. This distinguishes our work from previous research on health and labor market using U.S. data,

where workers’ access to health care is correlated with income and employment status.6

          We face several challenges in taking our first question to the data. One, individuals’ health may

be affected by many idiosyncratic and time-invariant factors, such as pre-natal and early-life

environment, birth weight, and genetic differences.7 Two, it can be difficult to observe effort levels

exerted by individual workers and to determine whether individual health outcomes are related to effort

levels at work, or other external factors. Three, short-term changes in work demand may have longer-

term effects on workers’ health that persist even after workers move between jobs or employers.

          The comprehensive and panel structure of our Danish data allow us to deal with these challenges.

First, we consistently track each worker and each firm over time, and so in our main specification we

condition on job-spell fixed effects; i.e. the source of our variation is the change over time within a given

worker-firm relationship. Second, the richness of our data allows us to directly measure both effort levels

and work-related health outcomes for each worker. For effort we observe each worker’s total hours

worked, including over-time hours. For health outcomes we are particularly interested in those connected

to workplace stress. Here we observe the universe of anti-depressant purchases, visits to psychiatrists,




6
    See, e.g., Currie and Madrian (1999) for a survey.
7
    See Maccini and Yang (2000) and Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2007).
                                                                                                           2
and hospitalization records of every worker. The diagnostic codes of our hospitalizations data are

particularly helpful as they specifically identify the hospitalizations that are caused by work effort. We

can then estimate how work-effort related hospitalizations respond to changes in firm sales. Third, we

are able to estimate the longer-term effects of changes in work demand even as workers transition

between jobs, between locations, or to unemployment, because our data allow us to track workers over

extended periods of time.

       Our main findings, based on within-job-spell variation, are as follows. First, workers log longer

hours and obtain higher earnings as their employers experience sales increases. Second, increases in firm

sales also lead to higher probabilities that workers purchase anti-depressants or visit psychiatrists

(elasticity 0.024-0.025). Third, workers suffer higher incidences of work-effort related hospitalizations

as firm sales increases (elasticity 0.43-0.45), and they also experience higher rates of hospitalizations due

to stress and depression, heart attacks and strokes, and severe liver diseases, an indicator of alcoholism

(elasticity 0.054-0.29).

       Finally, these within job-spell findings are corroborated by our multi-period difference-in-

difference estimates (e.g. Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan 1993, or JLS) that follow workers across job-

spells. To be specific, large sales increases have significant contemporaneous effects for the

hospitalization variables we study, and significant longer-tem effects for our prescription-drug variables

(2-5 years post-shock). Our within-job-spell and JLS results are novel to the literature, and strongly

suggest that economic shocks affect individuals’ health through the effort-and-stress channel.

       To quantify the economic consequences of disease, we develop a novel theoretical approach. The

average worker derives expected utility from one healthy state and multiple sick states. The welfare loss

due to positive sickness rates is the compensating variation that equates this expected utility to the utility

level in the completely healthy state. The marginal disutility of disease g, then, is the partial derivative

of this compensating variation with respect to g’s frequency, and the average worker’s expected utility


                                                                                                            3
loss due to higher rates of multiple diseases is the total derivative of compensating variation.

        One approach for computation is to identify the full set of structural parameters, such as the utility

functions in the healthy and sick states, which may differ due to state dependence. The literature has not

reached a consensus about how to identify these parameters.8 We take a more reduced-form approach,

and relate the change in compensating variation to several reduced-form parameters that can be estimated

or observed in the data. The comparison between our approach and the full structural approach has the

flavor of Chetty (2008). On the one hand, we are unable to calculate the ex-post utility losses, or quality

of life, for those who actually get sick. On the other hand, we can be agnostic about state dependence

and the values of the other structural parameters, because different combinations of these parameters may

correspond to the same values of the reduced-form parameters that we need for computation.

        Our first set of reduced-form parameters is utility share weights, or the weights that the average

worker attaches to diseases in the change of expected utility. We show that the utility share weight of

disease g is high if g happens with a high frequency or if it is severe. We show, next, that relative to

disease l, the marginal disutility of disease g is high if g happens with a low frequency but has a high

utility share weight. This result is intuitive, because a low frequency tends to reduce utility share weight,

other things equal. The fact that utility share weight is high despite low frequency indicates high severity,

or high marginal disutility.9

        Because the severity of diseases is hard to quantify,10 we take a revealed-preference approach,

and show that if individuals optimally choose treatment, then the expenditure shares of diseases are




8
  For example, Viscusi and Evans (1990) and Finkelstein, Luttmer and Notowidigdo (2013) report negative state dependence,
Lillard and Weiss (1998), Edwards (2008) and Ameriks, Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro and Tonetti (2016) report positive state
dependence, while Evans and Viscusi (1991) report no state dependence.
9
  In our framework, severity is post-treatment, and so our marginal disutility takes medical technology for treatment into
account.
10
   A literature measures quality of life, or ex-post utility loss in sickness, using survey data. Examples include QALY, or
Quality-Adjusted Life Years, (e.g. Torrance 1986, Cutler, Richardson, Keeler and Staiger 1997), and DALY, or Disability-
Adjusted Life Years (e.g. Murray and Acharya 1997). Quality of life is related to, but distinct from, severity and marginal
disutility of diseases in our framework (see subsection 6.4).
                                                                                                                         4
informative about their utility share weights. This result is intuitive, because expenditure shares reflect

disease frequency and severity, which also affect utility share weights.11 In deriving this result, we allow

the private- and social-cost functions to differ, and so we accommodate moral hazard, a very important

feature of the healthcare system.12 This result then allows us to compute the marginal disutility of diseases

by using their frequencies and expenditure shares.

        We find that marginal disutility has intuitive variation across diseases. For example, the marginal

disutility of stress that can be treated with anti-depressants is DKK 31,370, but the marginal disutility of

stress that requires hospitalization is sharply higher, DKK 403,530, and reaches DKK 3.47 million for

hospitalization due to heart attacks and strokes (1 DKK = 0.18 USD in our sample). Using these values

of marginal disutility, we find that as firm sales increases, the average worker’s ex-ante expected utility

loss from adverse health effects is equal to 16.9% of her wage gains.

        We now discuss how our work complements previous research. A line of work uses cross-

sectional variation to estimate how economic shocks affect health (e.g. Marmot, Rose, Shipley and

Hamilton 1978, Marmot et al. 1991, Case and Deaton 2009, Black, Devereux and Salvanes 2012) by

drawing on health-diagnostics data (e.g. blood pressure). We use panel data that allow us to both control

for unobserved worker characteristics that affect health, and to assess a wide range of health outcomes

and track them over time.

        We also contribute to a literature that assesses the pro-cyclicality of health and mortality,

including Ruhm (2000, 2003, 2005), Lindo (2013), Tekin, McClellan and Minyard (2013), and Coile,

Levine and McKnight (2014). As this literature uses population health data, an important question is

whether the economic shocks affect individuals’ health directly, or through other external economic



11
   A literature examines aggregate healthcare spending, focusing on the U.S. (e.g. Newhouse 1992, Hall and Jones 2007,
Chandra and Skinner 2012). We focus on the expenditure shares of individual diseases within aggregate health spending, and
propose the conditions under which expenditure shares relative to frequency provide useful approximations for marginal
disutility.
12
   See Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000
                                                                                                                        5
activities (e.g. Miller, Page, Stevens and Filipski 2009, Stevens et al. 2015).13 Our use of matched

worker-firm data and identification of shocks within job spells enables us to specifically isolate the

mechanism linking increased firm sales to longer hours and adverse health outcomes specifically related

to work stress.

        For the income channel of economic shocks, a literature shows that negative shocks, including

mass layoff (e.g. Sullivan and von Wachter 2009), plant closure (e.g. Browning and Heinesen 2012), and

import competition (e.g. McManus and Schaur 2015), tend to have adverse effects on health.14 Our

highlighted finding shows a seemingly opposite effect -- increases in firm sales lead to increases in

earnings and adverse health outcomes for individual workers. However, we reconcile our results with

this literature in specifications that examine asymmetric effects. We show that sharp decreases in sales

decrease hours worked but lead to some adverse health outcomes. Because of universal medical coverage

in Denmark, this is not caused by lack of access to the healthcare system. Rather, it appears that both

sharp increases and sharp decreases in firm sales stress workers out!

        Bauer, Lakdawalla and Reif (2018) use the values of state dependence and quality of life as inputs

in a structural model, and extend VSL to multiple diseases by examining the effects of these diseases on

mortality risk. This framework provides exact values of marginal disutility. Our approach remains

agnostic about the values of structural parameters, accommodates moral hazard, and delivers

approximate values of marginal disutility. Our approach also applies to non-fatal diseases. On the other

hand, Viscusi (1993) extends VSLI to specific types of diseases by surveying individuals for the

compensation they would like for hypothetical sickness. Our approach covers multiple diseases,


13
   For example, changes in nursing home staffing can lead to decreased quality of care and increased mortality. There can be
more traffic-accident deaths during economic expansion because (1) time-pressed and stressed drivers pay less attention to
safety; or (2) there are more vehicles on the road.
14
   See also Browning, Danø and Heinesen (2006), Eliason and Storie (2007, 2009), Colantone, Crinò and Ogliari (2015),
Schaller and Stevens (2015), Pierce and Schott (2016), and Adda and Fawaz (2017). Some studies of import competition
examine health-related outcome, such as marriage (e.g. Autor, Dorn and Hanson 2015) and crime (e.g. Dix-Carneiro, Soares
and Ulyssea 2015). Goldman-Mellor, Saxton and Catalano (2010) survey the studies at the intersection of economics and
epidemiology that focus on mental health.
                                                                                                                          6
incorporates the representative consumer’s optimization, and utilizes expenditure data that reflect

individuals’ actual choices.

        More broadly, the VSLI estimates have been widely used to quantify the gains or losses in the

changes of mortality and injury rates, to conduct cost-benefit analyses of government regulations and

policies, and to provide a target for the calibration of structural parameters (e.g. Murphy and Topel 2003,

Hall and Jones 2007). We hope that our marginal-disutility estimates may also be of use in these areas,

since they extend VSLI to diseases.15

        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data. Section 3 presents our main

hypothesis and identification strategy. Section 4 shows our main results, identified from within-job-spell

variation. Section 5 presents our results for asymmetric effects and those based on propensity-score

matching. Section 6 develops our theoretical framework for marginal disutility, and section 7 implements

the computation using our data and estimation results. Section 8 collects our robustness exercises, and

section 9 concludes.



2. Data

        In this section we discuss the main features of our data and our variables for stress, efforts and

illness. We report more details of data construction in Data Appendix 1.

        We start with Danish administrative data that matches workers to firms and the domestic

production of these firms. The data are annual, cover the period 1995-2012, and match the population of

Danish workers to the universe of private-sector Danish firms. The primary data sources are the Firm

Statistics Register, the Integrated Database for Labor Market Research (“IDA”), the link between firms




15
  For example, studies have shown that the housing vouchers program by the U.S. HUD and the expansion of Medicaid in
Oregon both improve program participants’ mental health (e.g. Ludwig et al. 2012, Baicker et al. 2013). How do the health
benefits compare with the program costs?
                                                                                                                       7
and workers (“FIDA”), Account Statistics and the Prodcom database16, which breaks down each firm’s

production by product.

        To construct our main sample, we start from all the private-sector firms and workers in the

Prodcom sales data/registry. We keep the firms with positive imports and exports, since we use

offshoring and the numbers of export products and export destination countries as controls. We select

larger firms (those with at least 50 employees) to get high quality data on capital, and to limit the impacts

of individual workers’ health on firm sales. We also drop the observations with missing information

about key firm variables (sales, capital-labor ratio and the share of high-skilled workers). We select 20-

60 year old full-time workers, and we drop all observations where the employment relationship lasts a

single year.17 Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the firm- and worker-characteristics variables that

we use in our analyses.

        We then bring in additional administrative datasets that contain comprehensive information about

individuals’ health care utilization during 1996-2012. We observe the universe of transactions for every

person within the Danish healthcare system, including prescription drug purchases, doctor visits, and

hospitalization. These datasets are organized by the same worker identifiers as our worker-firm data,

allowing us to merge them. In the literature, a common concern for data on the utilization of health care

is that access to care could be correlated with individuals’ socio-economic conditions (e.g. income and

employment status), and that this correlation could contaminate the care-utilization data (e.g. Currie and

Madrian 1999). This concern is unlikely to be a main issue for us, because the Danish healthcare system

is almost entirely funded by the government, available to all Danish residents regardless of employment

status, and virtually free to all.18


16
   The Prodcom database is a survey used by Eurostat to provide comparable production statistics for EU countries. Bernard
et al. (2019) is a recent example using the Belgian version of the database.
17
   We have experimented with different sample cuts, and obtained similar results (see section 8).
18
   There are two main exceptions. 1. Dental care is not covered. 2. Patients bear some co-payments for prescription-drug
expenses. We do not consider dental visits in our study, and the prescription co-pays are small enough (roughly 0.13 percent
of median income) that income constraints on access are unlikely to be binding.
                                                                                                                          8
         Many studies of mental health use self-reported survey data and measure stress by the Center for

Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CESD). Our administrative data allows us to construct

indicator variables for stress- and efforts-related diseases, which are higher thresholds than CESD.19

Table 1 shows the summary statistics of our sickness variables. The first set includes prescription drugs,

doctor visits and hospitalizations due to stress/depression.20 The second set includes hospitalizations that

are diagnosed as efforts- and work-related, and we will discuss them in detail in sub-section 4.2 below.

The last set includes prescription drugs and hospitalizations due to heart diseases and strokes, as well as

hospitalizations due to liver diseases, a commonly used measure for alcoholism. We include these

variables because studies in epidemiology and cardiology have shown that work stress and job strain are

risk factors for coronary heart diseases (e.g. Kivimaki and Kawachi 2015), and it is common for studies

of mental health to examine alcoholism (e.g. Goldman-Mellor et al. 2010).21

         Finally, we complement these annual data with monthly payroll records with information about

worker-level earnings and hours worked as well as monthly firm-level sales for the years 2008-2012.

The worker-level data is based on the “eIncome” register, which holds third-party reported information

about monthly earnings and hours worked for all employees in Danish firms. The firm-level data comes

from “FIKS”, which has information total sales and total purchase of materials for all firms liable for

value added taxation on a monthly basis. To be consistent with the sample restrictions above, we select

in this dataset all 20-60 year old fulltime workers employed by firms with non-missing Prodcom sales

and at least 50 employees. Table 1 shows the summary statistics of our monthly variables.

          To summarize, our dataset covers the population of Danish workers and firms, and the universe


19
   This implies that our results likely provide conservative estimates of the effects of work demand on general mental health
(e.g. an individual with no stress-related disease may still feel unhappy and lonely), and that the effects of work demand we
identify are economically significant (see sections 6 and 7).
20
   In medical research, Olsen et al. (2007) show that the prevalence of depression is 3-4% in the Danish population, which is
comparable to the mean rate of anti-depressant uses in our sample.
21
   We do not look at sleep disorder for two reasons. One, there is a U-shaped relationship between self-reported stress and
hours of sleep in some survey data (e.g. De Quidt and Haushofer 2016). Two, Goldman-Mellor et al. (2010) survey a large
number of studies on mental health, and none of them examines sleep disorder.
                                                                                                                           9
of healthcare transactions. It allows us to measure worker-level stress, sickness, and efforts, and to

consistently track their changes over time. These features help us identify the causal effects of sales on

health and efforts, as we explain below.



3. Main Hypothesis, Specification, and Identification

        In this section, we clarify our main hypothesis, derive our main specifications, present our main

identification assumption, and discuss threats to identification.



3.1 Main Hypothesis and Specification

        Assume that firm j has a continuously differentiable and concave production function (e.g. Cobb-

Douglas, CES), and uses labor, capital and materials as inputs. The quantity of the labor input depends

on the number of workers, and individual workers’ effort. Assume that the effort-cost function is

continuously differentiable and convex. Worker i optimizes by equalizing the marginal cost of effort to

the marginal benefit.

        We assume that the marginal cost of effort captures the marginal disutility from the adverse health

effects induced by that effort. (Below, for brevity, we term the adverse health effects “stress”, in the

broad sense of increased pressure on the mental and physical health of the worker.)22 The marginal

benefit of effort, on the other hand, derives from firm j’s demand for labor. Suppose that j experiences a

positive demand shock for its output, or a positive shock to its TFP. Then j’s demand for labor increases,

and the marginal benefit for effort also increases if j faces an upward sloping labor supply curve (e.g.

Manning 2011, Hummels, Jørgensen, Munch and Xiang 2014). As a result, worker i chooses to increase

effort in response. This rise in effort level also raises i’s total effort cost, since the effort-cost function is




22
  Our assumption is motivated by the strong correlation between work hours and stress documented in medical research (e.g.
Virtanen et al. 2011).
                                                                                                                       10
increasing, and so worker i’s stress increases as well.

        To formalize this intuition, let eijt denote worker i’s effort in year t for her employer j, Eijt denote

i’s total effort cost, and Wijt denote her earnings.         jt   is a composite term that includes j’s output demand

and TFP in year t. In Theory Appendix 1, we use a multi-lateral bargaining model (e.g. Stole and Zwiebel

1996, Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding 2010) to show that shocks to output demand or TFP result in

eijt /  jt > 0, Eijt /  jt > 0 and Wijt /  jt > 0. These results imply that workers’ stress (i.e. adverse

health events) increases with  jt as well, given our assumption that effort cost represents disutility from

stress. Summarizing, we have

Proposition 1 Following an increase in output demand or TFP for firm j, j’s employees increase their

effort and experience higher effort cost, higher stress and higher earnings.

        In Theory Appendix 2, we derive the following expressions for eijt, Eijt, and Wijt, under additional

assumptions about the functional forms of the production function and effort-cost function

        ln X ijt  constant  1 ln jt  z jt b , Xijt = eijt, Eijt, or Wijt.                                 (1)

In equation (1),   1 > 0 by Proposition 1. The vector zjt includes the variables for firm j’s inputs in year t,

and it enters (1) because j’s input uses may affect the marginal benefit of effort.

        Motivated by equation (1), we first use our monthly data from 2008-2012 to estimate the

dependence of hours (effort) and earning on firms sales

        ln(Zijm )   ln Yjm  xit b1  z jt b2  ij  R  D  m  t  ijt , Zijm = Hijm or Wijm         (2)

        In equation (2), m indexes calendar month, and t continues to index year. Hijm is the total number

of hours, including over-time hours, of worker i for firm j in month m, Wijm is i’s total earnings with j in

m, and Yjm is firm j’s total sales in m. Relative to equation (1), we have added the vector xit of time-

varying worker characteristics as controls in (2). We have also added αij, αR, αD, αm, and αt, which

represent, respectively, job-spell, region, industry, month and year fixed effects.

                                                                                                                     11
        The monthly data on hours and sales are available for only 5 of the 17 years of our sample but

we can use the full 17 years of annual data to relate changes in workers’ health outcomes to changes in

firm sales. The longer time series is important for identifying within job-spell changes in health because

reported adverse events occur infrequently. We estimate

        Sijt   ln Yjt  xit b1  z jt b2  ij  R  D  t  ijt .                                (3)

In equation (3), we measure effort cost and stress level, Eijt, using Sijt, an indicator variable for whether

worker i suffers adverse health events in year t while working for firm j. Yjt is j’s total sales in year t. In

equations (2)-(3), Proposition 1 implies that  > 0.

        Note that our job-spell fixed effects pose a computational challenge for non-linear specifications

of (3), such as Probit or Logit, because the marginal effects there depend on the values of all the fixed-

effects parameters (e.g. Wooldridge 2002), and we have over 700,000 of them in our estimation. As a

result, we use the linear specification for (3), and think about our results as a linear approximation around

the sample means of the indicator variables for stress-related diseases.



3.2 Main Identification Assumption and Comparison with Literature

        We now present our main identification assumption and compare it with the literature. There are

two main elements in the comparative static exercises in Proposition 1, and equation (1). One, a shock

to output demand or firm TFP, ψjt, affects demand for work effort. Two, the workers take the change in

ψjt as exogenous. The estimation equations (2) and (3) employs firm sales rather than ψjt since ψjt is

difficult to measure. However, they closely match Proposition 1 and equation (1), because sales changes

net of changes in input uses are likely due to changes in output demand or TFP. Therefore, our main

identification assumption is that firm sales affect demand for work effort and they are exogenous to

individual workers, conditional on the control variables in our estimation.

        We now compare our identification assumption with the literature. In the studies on the pro-

                                                                                                              12
cyclicality of health (e.g. Ruhm 2000, Coile et al. 2014, Stevens et al. 2015), the main explanatory

variable is unemployment by U.S. state by year, which is clearly exogenous to individual workers. This

literature does not distinguish whether state unemployment is caused by state productivity or aggregate

demand, because they have similar effects on demand for work effort. The literature on the health effects

of mass layoffs and plant closures (e.g. Eliason and Storie 2007, Sullivan and von Wachter 2009,

Browning and Heinesen 2012) takes these variables as exogenous to workers.23 This literature does not

distinguish whether mass layoffs and plant closures are caused by firm productivity or output demand,

because they have similar effects on workers’ income and employment status. The studies in both

literatures typically do not control for worker fixed effects.24,25

         In summary, our main identification assumption is similar to the literature. Our rich data allow

us to include a rich set of control variables in our estimation.26



3.3 Threats to Identification

         We next describe six threats to identification and our strategy to address each in turn. The primary

threat to our identification is that workers’ adverse health events may be triggered by many hard-to-

measure individual characteristics and worker-firm characteristics. Examples of individual

characteristics include pre-natal factors (e.g. Maccini and Yang 2009), birth weight (e.g. Black et al.

2007), and genetic differences. In addition, unobserved individual characteristics may interact with

unobserved firm characteristics, if workers selectively sort into the firms that lead to high matched


23
   E.g. Quoting Sullivan and von Wachter (2009), “Firm-level employment declines should be exogenous to individual
workers’ health developments.”
24
   They are also unable to do so if the dependent variable is mortality.
25
   The Framingham heart sample has panel data, and is used in cardiology to study the physiological and behavioral risk
factors of heart diseases, such as obesity (e.g. Hubert et al. 1983). These studies do not focus on economic shocks. The
Whitehall sample is also panel data, and is used in epidemiology to study the psychosocial and behavioral risk factors of
health, such as job control (e.g. Bosma et al. 1997). The main explanatory variables in these studies are typically self-reported.
26
   Our identification comes from the rich variations of firm sales over time relative to the job-spell mean (e.g. note 27). This
distinguishes our approach from the difference-in-difference estimation strategy, where there is little meaningful variation in
the periods before and after the policy changes (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004).
                                                                                                                              13
worker-firm productivity (e.g. Helpman et al. 2010). This match specific productivity, in turn, may

correlate with both firm sales and worker stress; e.g. type-A-personality individuals may be more likely

to work with firms with good growth potential. We control for both individual characteristics and worker-

firm characteristics using the job-spell fixed effects, αij, in equations (2)-(3). With αij, our identification

comes from variation within job spells, over time. Conditioning on the match, we ask whether individual

workers suffer an increased risk of adverse health outcomes when their firms experience increased sales.

        Second, firm j may face a perfectly elastic supply curve for employment, in which case the

marginal benefit of effort would not rise in response to an increase in work demand, and Proposition 1

would not hold. This conjecture is inconsistent with our data, for two reasons. One, sales have more

variation over time, within job spells, than employment.27 Two, we will show, in section 4 below, that

hours and earnings tend to increase with firm sales within job spells.

        Third, firm sales may not be exogenous to worker health. Suppose that a worker gets sick for

reasons unrelated to work. They become less productive, which might lower firm sales, and so reverse

causality biases the estimation against our main hypothesis. This channel will be strongest when an

individual worker represents a larger share of employment, or if the worker is in a key position to

influence the effectiveness of the firm as a whole. We explore robustness to including/excluding small

firms and including/excluding managers in Section 8.

        Fourth, other changes in firm structure can alter sales or worker stress but not act through the

effort-stress channel. Two examples include organizational changes (e.g. Dahl 2011) that can lead to

worker stress, and the adoption of new technology in the firm. It is unclear how these would operate, as

organizational change may be either positively or negatively correlated with firm performance, and new

technology might increase or decrease worker stress depending on its nature and implementation.




27
  We calculate the absolute values of the deviations from within-job-spell means for log sales and log employment. On
average, log sales deviates from its job-spell mean by 0.24 log points, while log employment deviates by 0.12 log points.
                                                                                                                      14
Nonetheless, we address these by including organizational change variables in our regression, and by

using an instrumental variables strategy to predict exogenous changes in sales, in Section 8.

        Fifth, our identification examines changes within job spells, and leaves out the effects of sales

changes on stress for the workers who separate. An increase in firm sales is a positive shock, and so

unlikely to lead to layoffs. Workers may quit in response to adverse health outcomes, but this biases

against our main hypothesis. On the other hand, a decrease in sales could lead to layoffs. Our main

hypothesis implies that sales decreases lead to less worker stress, and this prediction might be threatened

by firms selectively laying off unhealthy workers in response to sales drops. We address these issues in

Section 5 in two ways. We explore whether sales decreases and sales increases have asymmetric effects

on worker stress and we address the problem of selection out of the firm using cohort analysis and

propensity-score matching.

        Finally, some previous work (e.g. Moran and Simon 2006) shows that demand for prescription

drugs varies with income using data from the U.S., where income is correlated with access to healthcare.28

We have shown, in section 2, that prescription-drug copays in Denmark are very low relative to annual

earnings. Still, high-income patients may choose branded drugs while low-income ones stay with generic

drugs. As a result, we use indicator variables of prescription-drug purchases in our estimation, even

though we observe individuals’ prescription-drug expenses in our data.



4 Results with Log-Linear Specifications

4.1 Hours and Earnings

        Table 2 reports the results of estimating equation (2) using our monthly data. The dependent

variable is the log of total hours, or earnings, by worker i for firm j in month m, and the main explanatory




28
 This correlation is important for many studies using U.S. data. Sometimes it is a key mechanism (e.g. Sullivan and von-
Wachter 2009, Coile et al. 2014), and other times it is an important threat to identification (e.g. Ruhm 2003).
                                                                                                                     15
variable is the log of j’s sales in month m. We cluster our standard errors by firm by calendar month by

year, since sales has no variation across workers within a firm-month-year group. From columns (1)

through (4), we sequentially expand the set of control variables in the estimation. In column (1), we start

with job-spell fixed effects. In column (2), we add calendar month fixed effects and control for the time-

varying worker characteristics of union status, marital status and experience, and the time-varying firm

characteristics of log offshoring, log employment, log capital/labor ratio, and the share of college-

educated workers in employment. In column (3), we add the log of firm j’s total material purchases in

month m. In column (4), we replace the worker and firm characteristics with worker-by-year fixed effects

and firm-by-year fixed effects. The elasticity of hours with respect to sales is significant in all

specifications, and ranges from 0.013 to 0.041. In the second panel of Table 2, we drop the observations

where the workers’ monthly hours are imputed. This reduces the number of observations from about 8.8

million to 8.5 million, but we obtain similar results. These results are likely conservative estimates of the

response of worker effort, since work intensity (i.e. how much a worker produces during a given hour on

the job) may also increase with firm sales.

       In the third panel of Table 2, we examine log monthly earnings, dropping the observations with

imputed hours. The elasticity estimates of earnings with respect to sales are significant in all

specifications, and they are similar in magnitude to the elasticity of hours.

       Overall, Table 2 shows that, within job-spells, workers increase effort and obtain higher earnings

when their employers experience positive economic shocks. These results provide evidence for the

underlying mechanism of our main hypothesis.



4.2 Stress, and Hospitalization related to Effort and Work

       We now examine how changes in firm sales affect individual workers’ adverse health events, by

using our annual data. As compared with our monthly data, our annual data span a longer horizon, which


                                                                                                          16
is important for isolating relatively infrequent adverse health events within the job-spell. Our main

explanatory variable is the log of j’s sales in t. We control for job-spell fixed effects, as well as industry,

year and region fixed effects, and we cluster our standard errors by firm by year. We also control for the

same set of worker and firm characteristics as in column (2) of Table 2.

        We first measure stress by the use of anti-depressant drugs, with the dependent variable taking

the value of 1 if a worker purchases anti-depressants in year t, and 0 otherwise. We report the coefficient

estimates normalized by the mean rate of anti-depressant use to express the effect as the elasticity of

stress with respect to sales, in column (1) of Table 3. We obtain an elasticity estimate of 0.024, which is

statistically significant. In column (2) of Table 3, we broaden our measure for stress to take a value of 1

if workers purchase anti-depressants or visit a psychiatrist in year t. We abbreviate this variable as ADPV

(Anti-Depressant or Psychiatrist Visit). Our elasticity estimate is positive and significant and similar in

magnitude to column (1).

        Taking stock of our results so far, we see that increases in firm sales lead to longer hours and

more stress. Is the increase in stress work related? Survey data consistently show that the leading cause

of self-reported stress is financial problems, followed closely by work.29 External factors, such as death

or sickness of family members, and trauma from violent crime, are also common causes of stress. We

can exclude financial problems because earnings increase (Table 2), and the other external factors are

unlikely to correlate with sales increases in the worker’s firm. This leaves us with work.

        Still, we can take another step in pinning the increase in stress on work effort by drawing on

diagnostic information in our hospitalization data. Specifically, the Danish health system provides

diagnostic codes for hospitalization associated with “burn-out”, “lack of relaxation and leisure” and

“stressful work schedule”. We call this group narrow burnout. We then broaden our inquiry to include




29
  A recent example is https://www.cbsnews.com/news/the-biggest-cause-of-stress-in-america-today/. Some survey data put
work ahead of financial problems; e.g. https://www.webmd.com/balance/guide/causes-of-stress#1.
                                                                                                                   17
other work-related hospitalizations, such as “discord with boss and workmates” and “uncongenial work

environment”, while excluding those that are clearly related to job insecurity, such as “threat of job loss”

and “change of job”. We refer to this second group as broad burnout.

           We report the results for narrow and broad burnout in columns (1)-(2) of Table 4. The R2 is low

because hospitalization due to burnout is rare, with mean rates of 0.05 per thousand for narrow burnout

and 0.06 per thousand for broad burnout.30 Despite this, we obtain large elasticity estimates ranging from

0.43 to 0.45, and they are all statistically significant. These results establish a tight connection between

effort and stress, because narrow burnout is related to effort by construction, and broad burnout is both

related to work by construction and is likely related to effort as well.

           In column (3) of Table 4, we broaden our dependent variable and assign a value of 1 if workers

experience hospitalizations due to either broad burnout or stress. This more than triples our sample mean,

to 0.20 per thousand. In column (4) we broaden our scope further to burnout, stress, or depression, and

obtain an even higher sample mean of 0.26 per thousand. The elasticity estimates are all statistically

significant, and range from 0.21 to 0.30, and they provide additional evidence that workers suffer higher

incidences of stress as their employers experience positive economic shocks.



4.3 Other Stress Related Outcomes: Heart Diseases and Alcoholism

           We now further expand the scope of our inquiry, to examine whether changes in firm sales affect

workers’ rates of heart diseases, and hospitalization due to heart attacks, strokes, or alcoholism.

           Our first dependent variable is whether workers purchase prescription drugs for heart diseases

and strokes in year t. We obtain a significant elasticity estimate, 0.036 in column (3) of Table 3. In

column (5) of Table 4, our dependent variable is whether workers are hospitalized because of heart

attacks or strokes in year t. Our elasticity estimate is again significant, 0.054. In column (6) of Table 4,


30
     Many individuals are never hospitalized, for any reason, during our sample period, and we include them in our analyses.
                                                                                                                          18
our dependent variable is hospitalizations due to liver diseases, a commonly used measure for alcoholism.

We obtain a significant elasticity estimate of 0.12.

       Summarizing, our results in Tables 2-4 focus on within job-spell changes that condition on worker

and worker-firm characteristics. They show that when a firm experiences a positive economic shock,

the workers work longer hours and obtain higher earnings while experiencing higher usage of anti-

depressants and visits to see psychiatrists. They also suffer an elevated chance of hospitalization due to

effort-related burnout, stress and depression, heart attacks and strokes, and alcoholism. These results

provide evidence that increases in work demand affect individuals’ health through the effort-and-stress

channel.



5 Results with Non-Linear Specifications

       In this section, we explore whether changes in firm sales have non-linear effects on stress-related

diseases. We start with the contemporaneous effects of sales changes, and then explore the effects of

large sales increases over time.



5.1 Effects of Increases vs. Decreases in Sales

       As we discussed in Introduction, a literature links increased worker stress and adverse health

outcomes to worsening economic conditions at the state or firm-level. Yet we have shown, in section 4,

that improvements in economic conditions, within job spells, also lead to adverse health outcomes. To

reconcile our results with this literature, we consider the following non-linear specifications of equations

(2) and (3). We calculate the deviations of log firm sales relative to their job-spell means, then obtain the

deciles of this distribution. We then construct 10 decile dummies, D1 though D10. D1 indicates large

decreases in sales, while D10 indicates large sales increases (see Data Appendix 2 for the cut-off points).




                                                                                                          19
We then replace log firm sales in (2) and (3) with the decile dummies, leaving out the median dummy,

D5.

           These non-linear specifications are more flexible than (2) and (3), and allow us to examine

whether increases and decreases in firm sales have asymmetric effects on hours and stress. However,

they also involve more parameters, and we may not have enough variation in the data to precisely

estimate all the additional parameters when our dependent variable occurs with low frequency. (see Table

1). Finally, since our main explanatory variables are now dummies, we follow Bertrand et al. (2004) and

cluster our standard errors one-level up (see also note 26).

           We first estimate the decile-dummy regression for hours using our monthly data, and plot the

coefficient estimates and their 95% confidence intervals in Figure 1. Decile 5 is the omitted category,

and so its coefficient is 0 by construction. Figure 1 shows a pattern familiar from the linear regressions

in Table 2: the coefficient estimates are negative when sales decreases (deciles 1-4), and they are positive

when sales increases (deciles 6-10) and are significant for most deciles. These results suggest that

changes in firm sales have nearly monotonic effects on work hours.

           We next estimate the decile-dummy regression for health outcomes using our annual data,

plotting coefficients and 95% confidence intervals. Our first dependent variable is workers’ ADPV

(corresponding to column (4) of Table 3), shown in Figure 2.31 Here we see a very different pattern.

The use of anti-depressants and visits to psychiatrists is U-shaped, increasing for both large sales

decreases and sales increases. A similar pattern is found in Figure 3 using alcohol-related

hospitalizations.

           Figures 2-3 suggest that the health benefits of reduced hours are offset, and dominated, by the

direct effect of decreases in firm sales. 32 This direct effect can arise because sales decreases lead to lower




31
     Note that the magnitudes of these estimates are not comparable to the elasticity estimates in Tables 3-5.
32
     It is beyond the scope of our paper to quantify the exact magnitudes of these two channels.
                                                                                                                 20
earnings (see Table 2 and Figure 1), or because they are correlated with the potential for the more severe

and stressful shock of job losses. That is to say, while these results are estimated within job-spell, a sharp

decline in firm sales may sharply increase worker stress because they indicate job losses to come. We

show (Data Appendix 2) that decreases in firm sales are significantly correlated with mass layoff, a

commonly-used and well-studied adverse economic shock in the literature. In short, our results from

Tables 3-4 do not contradict findings in the literature showing adverse health outcomes from worsening

economic conditions. Rather, they show that workers’ health suffers from both sharp increases and sharp

decreases in sales.

           Finally, we examine effects across deciles for prescription drugs for heart diseases in Figure 4,

and broad burnout in Figure 5. In these cases we do not see the pronounced U-shaped patterns but we

do see nonlinearities such that the effects are strongest in the upper deciles. These results suggest that

large increases in sales have especially large effects on stress, since a large increase in workload may be

especially hard to cope with. The insignificant results for sales decreases are consistent with the direct

effect of sales drops offsetting the effect through reduced hours. We offer this interpretation cautiously

since we may not have enough variation in the data to obtain precise estimates of all the decile dummies

when our dependent variables are rare events (e.g. broad burnout).33



5.2 Effects of Large Sales Increases Over Time

           So far we have focused on the contemporaneous effects of firm sales on worker stress, and used

changes within job spells for identification. An important question is whether the contemporaneous

effect of these shocks persist, both over time and across job-spells, i.e. even in the event of a job

separation. Job separations might be problematic for job-spell regressions if they occur because of the

adverse health effects we seek to identify. Getting at these persistent effects requires us to employ a


33
     Our results for the other hospitalization variables are similar to Figure 5.
                                                                                                           21
different methodology.

         In this sub-section, we examine the longer-term effects of sales changes by using the multi-period

difference-in-difference estimation of Jacobson et al. (1993), or JLS, where we construct the control

group using propensity score matching.34 We begin by defining the treatment and control groups, and

then describe the matching procedure.

         We focus on the health variables for the workers whose employers experienced the largest sales

increases, defined as the top decile of the distribution of year-to-year changes.35 We compare them to

the workers whose employers had sales changes falling in deciles 2 through 9 of the distribution.36

Following the job-displacement literature (e.g. Couch and Placzek 2010, Davis and von Wachter 2011),

we focus on medium-tenure workers (3+ years) with relatively large firms (50+ employees) that are 25-

54 years old (in the middle of the sample period, so that we can track them five years before and after a

demand shock).

         We control for the following pre-shock worker characteristics, to ensure that our control-group

and treatment-group workers are similar: age, gender, marriage, children, education and union

membership status. We also control for pre-shock firm sales, industry affiliation, and year. In addition,

for each sickness variable we study, we require that both treatment-group and control-group workers are

free of this condition for 5 consecutive years before the shock, thereby setting the pre-trend to 0.37

         We estimate the effects of large sales increases up to 5 years after the shock. Because we fix the




34
   As compared with recent studies that use the JLS-type identification strategy (e.g. Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury 2018,
Powell and Seabury 2018), we are unable to use workers within the same firm to construct the control group, because sales
increases affect all workers at a given firm. However, we are able to set the pre-trend to 0, by construction, because our
dependent variables are indicator variables for sickness.
35
   Note that the decile cutoff here is different from the previous sub-section, where the distribution is sales changes relative
to job-spell means. See Data Appendix 2 for the details.
36
   We leave out decile 1 because our results in the previous sub-section suggest that large decreases in firm sales may also
increase worker stress. We have experimented with including decile 1 in the control group, and obtained similar results.
37
   Because the mean sickness rates are low for our sample of working-age adults, this restriction does not cost us many
observations. Our matching procedure delivers similar means of the control variables for our treatment and control groups
(see Data Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                            22
compositions of both treatment and control groups, by construction, and our data allow us to track every

worker over time, our analyses in this sub-section include the workers who separate from their employers

after large sales increases. This enables us to examine longer run health effects free of selection.

       Figure 6a shows the results for narrow burnout over an 11 year window, where 0 is the year of

the large sales increases. By construction, there is no hospitalization related to work effort for five years

before the large sales increases. When the shock arrives, however, the mean rate of work-effort related

hospitalizations is significantly higher for the treatment group than for the control group. The magnitude

of this effect is comparable to the mean value of narrow burnout in Table 1. The point estimate remains

above zero for two years, but is not statistically significant in the five years after the shock.

       Figure 6b shows the results for hospitalizations due to liver diseases, an indicator for alcoholism,

and its pattern is similar to Figure 6a. We have examined the effects for the other hospitalization variables

as well, and found that they are similar to Figures 6a and 6b.

       Figures 7a and 7b show, respectively, the results for anti-depressants and heart-disease drugs, and

their patterns are different from Figures 6a and 6b. In Figure 7a, we see that the effects of large sales

increases on anti-depressants are somewhat persistent, being marginally significant 1 year post-shock

and significant 2 years post-shock. Figure 7b shows that the effects on heart-disease drugs are persistent,

and in fact continue growing in magnitude, being statistically significant for all the 5 post-shock years.

This persistence is plausible, because depression and heart diseases are chronic conditions from which

full recovery may be difficult.

       To summarize, we have used a different sample, a different specification, and a different

identification strategy, to study the effects of firm sales on worker stress. Despite these differences, our

results in this sub-section corroborate our previous results in section 4 and sub-section 5.1. We have also

enriched our previous results, by showing that large sales increases have significant effects on anti-

depressants and heart-disease drugs up to 2-5 years post-shock. These findings suggest that firm-level


                                                                                                          23
economic shocks may have long-term effects on individual workers’ health, and effects outside of job

spells as well.



6. Marginal Disutility and Utility Loss from Diseases: Theory

        In sections 4-5 we report a rich set of results showing that increases in firm sales make individual

workers less healthy. We now draw out the economic significance of these results, by quantifying the

average worker’s expected utility loss from increased stress, and then comparing this loss with the

average worker’s wage gains. An important step in our quantification is to calculate the marginal

disutility of diseases using readily available data. This is accomplished by deriving a formula for the

ratios of marginal disutility of pairs of diseases. Using an estimate of the marginal disutility of work

injury we can then find the level of marginal disutility of each disease. This reduced-form approach

allows us to remain agnostic about hard-to-measure structural parameters, such as the state dependence

of utility, and severity of diseases.

        We lay down the theoretical foundation for our approach in this section, and perform

quantification in the next section.



6.1 Framework: Expected Utility

        Consider an average worker employed in firm j. She may live in the healthy state, with income I

and utility u(.), or sick state g = 1…S, with utility vg(.) and income Ig, where Ig includes both monetary

income and disutility from sickness (we will spell out the expression for Ig in sub-section 6.3 below). We

note that Ig < I for all g and vg(x) ≤ u(x) for all income level x, given that utility is lower when sick. We

assume that both u(.) and vg(.) are continuous, increasing, twice differentiable, and weakly concave. We

make no assumptions about how the first-order derivatives, u'(.) and vg'(.), compare with each other, so

that our analyses do not depend on the nature of state dependence.


                                                                                                          24
         Let the probability of sick state g be pg > 0, and that of the healthy state 1 – Σgpg > 0. The average

worker’s expected utility is

          (1   g p g ) u ( I )   g p g v g ( I g )  u ( I )   g p g [ v g ( I g )  u ( I )] .               (4)

On the right-hand side of (4), the first term represents utility in a hypothetical disease-free world, and the

second-term represents utility loss of the real world relative to this benchmark.38 To express this utility

loss in monetary value, consider compensation M, invariant across state, that equates the expected utility

of (4) with the disease-free benchmark of u(I):

          u ( I )  u ( I  M )   g p g [ v g ( I g  M )  u ( I  M )] .                                        (5)

In equation (5), M is the compensating variation relative to the disease-free benchmark, and provides the

monetary value of the average worker’s disutility from the presence of the sick states. Although an

explicit, analytical expression for M is generally unavailable,39 equation (5) specifies M as an implicit

function of the other variables, including the sickness rates, pg. It follows, then, that the average worker’s

expected utility loss from higher sickness rates equals

          M       M p g
              g          ,                                                                                        (6)
                 p g 

where       represents shocks to TFP or demand facing the firm (proxied in our empirics using firm j’s

sales). Since we have estimated how sickness rates respond to sales, pg /  , in section 4, equation (6)

says that we can calculate the average worker’s expected utility loss, M /  , if we know the values

of the marginal disutility, M / pg .

         Equation (5) also implies that (Theory Appendix 3)




38
   The second-term is negative because vg(Ig) ≤ u(Ig) < u(I), and so vg(Ig) – u(I) < 0 for all g.
39
   When u(.) and vg(.) are all linear functions and u(.) = vg(.) for all g, (5) implies that M = Σgpg(I – Ig); i.e. disutility from the
sick states equals the expected value of income losses in these states.
                                                                                                                                   25
           M            u ( I  M )  vg ( I g  M )
                                                                   0.                                              (7)
           p g (1   l pl )u '( I  M )   l pl vl '( I l  M )


Equation (7) says that the marginal disutility, M / pg , is positive,40 and that its intuition is similar to

the value of a statistical life or injury, or VSLI; i.e. it shows the monetary compensation that the average

worker demands in exchange for heightened risk of disease g.

          One approach to calculate the marginal disutility is to identify the full set of structural parameters

and then plug them into equations (5) and (7). As we discussed in Introduction, the literature has not

reached a consensus about how to identify these parameters. To be agnostic about state dependence and

the values of the other structural parameters, we take a more reduced-form approach, which we outline

below.



6.2 Reduced-Form Approach: Utility Share Weights

          Our reduced-form approach starts with the utility share weight,

                    ln M /  ln pg
           g                             .                                                                         (8)
                     g
                         ln M /  ln pg

To see the intuition of the utility share weight, suppose βg is high. This means that the elasticity of

disutility with respect to disease g is high, relative to the other diseases; i.e. an increase in the sick rate

of g, pg, has a large effect on the average worker’s expected utility loss. In addition, we have βg > 0 (by

equation (7)) and Σgβg = 1 (by definition (8)).




                                                             M                 M
                                                              2                   2
40
     We also show that under some technical assumptions,              0 and                   0 (Theory Appendix 3). These results,
                                                           pg pl              ( pg )
                                                                                          2



together with equation (7), suggest that the relationship between M and pg is reminiscent of a cost function.
                                                                                                                                  26
         To think about how βg varies across disease types, we assume vg (.)  vl (.) , a common assumption

in the state-dependence literature.41 Equations (7) and (8) imply that

           g pg [u( I  M )  vg ( I g  M )]
                                               .                                                               (9)
          l   pl [u( I  M )  vl ( I l  M )]

To see the intuition of equation (9), consider diseases g and l. Suppose, first, that g happens with a higher

frequency (pg > pl). Equation (9) says that other things equal (i.e. Ig = Il), the average worker attaches a

larger utility share weight to g; i.e. βg > βl. Now suppose, instead, that g is more damaging to health; i.e.

Ig < Il. Equation (9) says that other things equal (pg = pl), the average worker again attaches a larger utility

share weight to g. In summary, equation (9) says that βg is high if disease g happens with a high frequency,

or if it is severe (i.e. low Ig).

         Suppose that we know the values of βg (we will explain how we do so in the next sub-section).

Then equations (9) and (7) imply that we can compute the marginal disutility using βg and the sickness

rates, pg:

          M / p g        g / pg
                                  for all g ≠ l                                                                (10)
          M / pl         l / pl

The intuition of equation (10) is as follows. From equation (9), we know that βg reflects both the

frequency and severity of g. From equation (7), we know that the marginal disutility, M / pg , captures

the severity of g, but not its frequency. This is why we normalize βg by pg on the right-hand side of (10).

Put another way, equation (10) says that relative to disease l, the marginal disutility of disease g is high

if g has a low frequency, pg, but a high utility share weight, βg. This is intuitive, because a low frequency




41
   One exception is Evans and Viscusi (1990), who allow v(.) to differ across two injury types but find results consistent with
u(.) = v1(.) = v2(.). Note that this assumption does not imply the same utility level for diseases g and l, since Ig and Il can be
different. In addition, it does not specify how vg(.) and vl(.) compare with u(.); i.e. we still accommodate positive, negative or
zero state dependence.
                                                                                                                              27
tends to reduce utility share weight, by (9). The fact that utility share weight is high despite low frequency

indicates high severity, or high marginal disutility.

         Equation (10) delivers the ratios of marginal disutility, but not the levels. We can follow the

literature to estimate the marginal disutility of work injury, which is VSI, for our sample. We then

combine VSI with the ratios of marginal disutility, delivered by (10), to obtain the levels of marginal

disutility. Intuitively, our approach extends VSI to any disease, and so the marginal-disutility values we

obtain may help measure the economic benefits of government policies and regulations that reduce the

risks of diseases, just like VSI.

         We can now calculate the average worker’s expected utility loss using (6), because we have

obtained the values of all the variables on the right-hand side of this equation.



6.3 Utility Share Weights: Expenditure Shares

         In the previous sub-section, we have outlined our reduced-form approach, and shown that a

critical component there is to obtain the values of the utility share weights, βg. We show, in this sub-

section, that expenditure shares provide a useful measure for βg.

         We start from equation (9), which says that βg depends on both the frequency and severity of g.

While frequency, pg, is readily observable, severity is hard to quantify. We therefore take a revealed-

preference approach; i.e. if individuals optimally choose treatment, then their choices reveal information

about severity. To be specific, we lay out a simple framework of optimal treatment choice, and derive

the relationship between treatment and severity. We then use this relationship to relate expenditure shares

to βg.

         Let sg denote the pain of disease g in monetary equivalent terms. If sick, the average worker

optimally chooses treatment, tg, which ranges in effectiveness from 0 to 100%. The private cost of




                                                                                                           28
treatment is c(tg).42 Assume that c(0) = 0, c'(.) > 0 and c''(.) > 0. The average worker’s problem,

conditional on being sick, is

          max t g { I g  I – s g 1 – t g  – c  t g }                                                 (11)

In equation (11), I – s g 1 – t g  is the average worker’s demand for treatment, and c(tg) is the supply

of treatment, as perceived by the worker.43 c(tg) captures both monetary costs (e.g. co-pay) and non-

monetary costs (e.g. disutility from treatment), and is affected by the state of medical technology and

institutional features of the healthcare system.44 The literature has considered two types of solutions for

(11): an interior solution, or partial recovery, with tg < 1, and a corner solution, or full recovery, with tg

= 1. We examine partial recovery first, and then full recovery.

        Under partial recovery, the optimization of (11) implies that vg'(.)[sg – c'(tg)] = 0, or that sg = c'(tg).

We differentiate sg = c'(tg) with respect to sg, and then apply the Envelope Theorem, to get

         t g           1            I
                                0 , g   (1  t g )  0 .                                              (12)
         s g       c ''( t g )      s g

To see the intuition of equation (12), suppose disease g is painful; i.e. sg is high. Then equation (12) says

that because g leads to a large utility loss if untreated, the marginal benefit of treatment is high, and so

treatment, tg, is also high. In addition, after treatment, severity remains high, because treatment is less

than 100% effective and also costly.45

        Equation (12) says that treatment depends on pain, sg, but not on frequency, pg. This is intuitive,

because people seek treatment after they get sick, not before (i.e. (11) and (12) are ex-post to, and



42
   We show, in Proposition 4 below, that our results hold for the more general specification of c(tg, sg).
43
   Equation (11) shows how the average worker allocates her resources for treatment, and we have implicitly assumed that
the amount of resources, I, is not affected by sickness. This is a common assumption in the literature (e.g. Hall and Jones
2007, Finkelstein et al. 2013).
44
   A literature studies whether physicians’ financial incentives may lead them to prescribe suboptimal treatments (e.g.
McGuire 2000), and most studies focus on the U.S. We assume, following this literature, that physicians have patients’ best
interests in mind, and abstract away from physicians’ financial incentives, given the differences in the healthcare system
between Denmark (and many other high-income countries) and the U.S. We discuss capacity constraints in note 48 below.
45
   Note that severity, Ig, is post treatment, but pain, sg, is pre-treatment.
                                                                                                                        29
conditional on, sickness). Equation (12) also shows that we can make inferences about severity, Ig, using

treatment, tg. Although tg itself is also hard to quantify, its total expenditure is not. Let C(tg) denote the

social monetary cost of treatment, with C(0) = 0 and C'(.) > 0. Then the total expenditure for tg

(normalized by population) is Eg = pgC(tg). C(.) differs from the private cost, c(.), because healthcare

expenses are typically paid for using public resources or through health insurance. Assume that

         C(tg) < C(tl) if and only if c(tg) < c(tl).                                                        (13)

Assumption (13) says that we need private and social costs to have the same rank order, but do not need

them to be identical; i.e. the average worker’s choice of treatment in equation (11) may not be socially

optimal. This means that our results accommodate moral hazard, a very important feature of the

healthcare system (e.g. Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000).46

         We can now relate the utility share weight, βg, to expenditure, Eg. Compare two diseases, g and

l, with the same frequency, pg = pl. Suppose g is more painful (sg > sl). Then by equation (12), treatment

for g is higher (tg > tl), and expenditure for g is also higher (Eg > El), by (13). In addition, by (12), post-

treatment net income is lower under g (Ig < Il), and so by (9), the utility share weight of g is higher (βg >

βl). Let μg = Eg/(∑gEg) denote the expenditure share of g. Clearly, μg > μl if and only if Eg > El. We then

have

Proposition 2 Under partial recovery and assumption (13), μg > μl if and only if βg > βl, for all diseases

l ≠ g with pg = pl.

         Proposition 2 says that expenditure shares, which are readily observable, vary across diseases in

the same direction as utility share weights, βg, and so they provide a useful measure for βg. One concern

is that Proposition 2 does not guarantee μg = βg. We are unable to derive stronger results under partial

recovery, because severity, Ig, varies across diseases. In this case, state dependence (i.e. how u(.)




46
  In the U.S., low-health-risk individuals may choose not to buy health insurance. Adverse selection is likely to be far less
important for Denmark, and many other high-income countries, where healthcare is universal.
                                                                                                                          30
compares with vg(.) and vl(.)) matters for the exact value of βg, by equation (9). In addition, social and

private costs also differ due to moral hazard.

       Although it is beyond the scope of our paper to provide solutions to these difficult problems, we

are able to show that (Theory Appendix 4)

Proposition 3 Under assumption (13), μg/μl = βg/βl for all diseases l ≠ g that feature either sg = sl or full

recovery.

Proposition 3 says that expenditure shares are the exact measure for utility share weights, up to a scalar,

for the diseases with similar pain or with full recovery. Intuitively, these conditions give us stronger

results than Proposition 2, because they imply that (post-treatment) severity, Ig, is the same across

diseases, so that βg is linear in frequency, by (9). In addition, frequency does not affect treatment, by

(12), and so expenditure, Eg = pgC(tg), is also linear in frequency.

       We now outline three extensions of Propositions 2-3. First, we relax the assumption that both

private- and social-cost functions depend only on treatment, and show that (Theory Appendix 5)

Proposition 4 Propositions 2 and 3 hold if c(tg, sg) and C(tg, sg) are increasing, convex, and have the

same rank order; i.e.

       C(tg, s) < C(tl, s)  c(tg, s) < c(tl, s), and C(t, sg) < C(t, sl)  c(t, sg) < c(t, sl).   (14)

Next, the logic of Propositions 2-4 is that patients with large pain, sg, demand high treatment, tg, which

is associated with high expenditure per patient, C(.). Whether the pain is caused by disease symptoms,

heightened mortality risk, or both, is not important. Formalizing this intuition, we show that (Theory

Appendix 6)

Proposition 5 Suppose sg captures the total effect of disease symptoms and mortality risk, and treatment

technology is more general than (11). Then Propositions 2-4 hold if the treatment technology has similar

properties to (11).




                                                                                                          31
        Finally, the state of medical technology may vary across diseases, so that the cost functions, c(tg,

sg) and C(tg, sg), may be decreasing with respect to pain, sg, and Propositions 2-5 do not apply. We show

that (Theory Appendix 7)

Proposition 6 μg > μl if and only if βg > βl, for all diseases l ≠ g with pg = pl, if c(tg, sg) and C(tg, sg) are

increasing and convex with respect to tg, and

        ∂c(.)/∂sg < 0, ∂C(.)/∂sg < 0, and both are large in magnitude                            (15)

To see the intuition of Proposition 6, consider bacterial infection. It’s painful if untreated (i.e. sg is high),

but antibiotics offers very effective treatment at low cost (i.e. Assumption (15) holds). As a result,

severity, which is after treatment, is low, and so is expenditure, implying that both the true and measured

marginal disutility are low.

        Following Propositions 2-6, we use expenditure shares to measure the utility share weights, βg.

This is intuitive, because expenditures reflect disease frequency and severity, two important factors that

also affect βg.



6.4 Discussion and Comparison with Literature

        In this sub-section, we discuss the qualifications and caveats of our approach in the context of the

literature. Cutler et al. (1997) and Murray and Acharya (1997) use survey data to measure quality of life,

or vg(Ig)/u(I). These surveys do not necessarily reflect individuals’ actual choices. It is also necessary to

take a stand on state dependence, in order to translate vg(Ig)/u(I) to our variables of interest, such as utility

share weights and marginal disutility (see equations (9) and (10)).

        In the framework of Hall and Jones (2007), there is no uncertainty about sickness, and healthcare

spending reduces mortality risk. As a result, the marginal utility of consumption matters for the optimal




                                                                                                              32
healthcare spending.47 In our framework, however, this variable does not affect treatment and

expenditure, because we assume, as in Ma and McGuire (1997), that the average worker takes the

sickness rates as given, and seeks treatment after sickness, not before. We make these assumptions

because our focus is the distinction among healthy and sick states.

         Medical technology also matters for healthcare spending (e.g. Newhouse 1992, Cutler 2005).

Proposition 6 shows that medical technology fits within our framework unless it has very different effects

on c(.) and C(.). Howard, Bach, Berndt, and Conti (2015) argue that anticancer drugs are expensive partly

because of their producers’ market power. To see how this affects our approach, suppose that the

treatment providers of disease g charge a higher price than those of disease l, and this leads to higher

expenditures on g than l. Our approach works in this case if g is more severe than l. 48

         In summary, many factors affect healthcare spending, and high expenditure may not always imply

large health benefits (e.g. Chandra and Skinner 2012).49 In general, it is challenging to quantify, for a

large number of diseases, the exact health benefits, including quality-of-life benefits. Propositions 2-6

clarify the conditions under which expenditure shares relative to frequency provide a useful

approximation for marginal disutility. On the plus side, our framework accommodates moral hazard, and

does not require the values of structural parameters (e.g. state dependence) as inputs. In addition, data on

disease frequencies and expenditures are easy to obtain. Finally, if we know, ex ante, that assumptions

(13)-(15) do not hold for certain diseases, we can drop them. Their exclusion does not affect the marginal-

disutility values of the remaining diseases, because these values are based on ratios of expenditure shares.



47
   The marginal utility of consumption may also matter for the design of optimal health insurance (e.g. Cutler and Zeckhauser
2000). In our framework, we abstract away from the differences in health insurance across consumers, because Denmark, like
many other high-income countries, has universal health care. We allow the private cost of treatment to differ from the social
cost, and do not take a stand on the efficiency of the Danish healthcare system.
48
   As another example, suppose that the provision of treatment is capacity constrained in Denmark. Intuitively, what matters
for our framework is how this constraint varies across diseases; i.e. whether assumptions (13) - (15) hold for the treatment, tg,
that the average worker chooses under capacity constraints.
49
   E.g. Cutler (2005) argues that “where we have spent a lot, we have received a lot in return”. Chandra and Skinner (2012)
note that the literature has reported both positive and negative correlations between healthcare spending and outcome for the
U.S., and provide evidence that expensive treatments with limited benefits are more widely used in the U.S. than in Europe.
                                                                                                                             33
       In the next section, we show that we obtain intuitive values of marginal disutility using our

framework.



7. Marginal Disutility and Utility Loss from Diseases: Quantification

       We now apply the framework developed in the previous section to calculate the marginal

disutility from diseases. We then use the marginal disutility to quantify the average worker’s utility loss

from the adverse health outcomes that are caused by rising firm sales.



7.1 Marginal Disutility

       We start with equation (10), where the disease frequency, pg, comes from the mean values that

we report in Table 1, and the utility share weight, βg, comes from the expenditure shares in Table 1. For

ease of reference, we gather these data in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5. We focus on the following sickness:

anti-depressants or psychiatrist visits (ADPV); hospitalization due to burnout, stress, or depression

(BSD); use of heart-disease drugs; hospitalization due to heart attacks or strokes; and alcoholism-related

hospitalizations. We also include work injury in the last row of Table 5, because we need its marginal

disutility, VSI, to compute the marginal disutility of the other diseases.

       Table 5 shows that the variation of sickness rates and expenditure shares across diseases is both

intuitive and consistent with our theory. For example, the stress and heart diseases that can be treated

with prescription drugs happen with high frequencies but have low expenditure shares, suggesting that

these conditions are not very severe. In comparison, the hospitalizations due to heart attacks and

alcoholism are severe. Consistent with this, they have high expenditure shares despite low frequencies.

       We now estimate the marginal disutility of work injury by following the VSLI literature.

Compatible with our framework, the VSLI approach is also agnostic about the state dependence of




                                                                                                        34
utility.50 This approach also produces standard errors of the VSI estimate, and we use them to construct

the 95% confidence interval of VSI. We report our VSI estimate, 1.56 million DKK, in column 3 of

Table 5. Our VSI estimate is larger than those obtained using U.S. data, because our data includes severe

injuries only (see Data Appendix 3 for the details).

        We then calculate the marginal disutility using equation (10), by combining our VSI estimate

with the data for sickness rates and expenditure shares. We report our results in column 3 of Table 5. To

see the intuition of our computation, consider the example of stroke hospitalization. As compared with

injury, its expenditure share is slightly lower (2.02% vs. 2.26%), but its frequency is much lower (1.6 per

thousand vs. 3.9 per thousand). As a result, equation (10) says that its marginal disutility is 2.23 times

that of injury, or DKK 3.47 million (= 1.56 x 2.23). Since our VSI estimate has its 95% confidence

interval, our marginal-disutility values have theirs, too, and we report them in Column 4 of Table 5.

        Table 5 shows that the values of marginal disutility and their rankings across diseases are both

intuitive. The two sickness conditions that can be treated by prescription drugs have low marginal

disutility, 31,370 DKK and 35,450 DKK. Stress that can be treated with prescription drugs has a much

lower marginal disutility (31,370 DKK) than stress that requires hospitalization (403,530 DKK). Both

BSD and strokes require hospitalization, but strokes are more severe than BSD, and so have a higher

marginal disutility (3.47 million DKK) than BSD (0.40 million DKK). The marginal disutility of strokes

hospitalization, in turn, is lower than that of mortality, which is $5-6.2 million (Viscusi and Aldy 2003),

or DKK 27.78-34.44 million.



7.2 Expected Utility Loss, and Compensating Differential




50
   The main idea of the VSI approach is that workers take injury risks into account when making occupational choices,
demanding high wages as compensation where occupational injury rates are high. This is premised on: (1) injury data is
readily available and widely publicized; and (2) injury risks are closely related to work hazards. These two conditions are
unlikely to hold, in general, for diseases, implying that the VSI approach may not be readily applicable to them.
                                                                                                                        35
         We now calculate the average worker’s expected utility loss using equation (6). We first translate

our elasticity estimates in Tables 3-4,  ln pg /  , into estimates for level changes, pg /  , by

multiplying the elasticity estimates by the sickness rates, pg. We report 100 times these estimates in

column 5 of Table 5. Plugging these estimates and the values of marginal disutility into (6), we obtain

that, in response to a 10% increase in firm sales, the average worker suffers an expected utility loss of

52.9 DKK.

         In order to clarify the economic significance of this utility loss, we compare it with the increases

in earnings from rising sales. In Data Appendix 3, we use our annual data to obtain an elasticity estimate

of 0.0085 for annual earnings.51 We thus obtain that, following a 10% increase in firm sales, earnings

increase by 313.1 DKK. As a result, the average worker’s expected utility loss amounts to 16.9% of her

earnings gain. This result suggests that a substantial fraction of the monetary gains from rising sales can

be attributed to compensating differential, for higher risks of sickness, in the spirit of Rosen (1986).

         Finally, we note that the expected utility losses are small relative to the values of marginal

disutility (columns 3 and 4 of Table 5), suggesting that the individuals who actually get sick suffer much

larger ex-post utility losses.52



8. Robustness Exercises and Heterogeneous Effects

         In this section, we first show that our main results, in Tables 3-4, hold for a number of robustness

exercises. We present these exercises in the same order in which we presented identification threats in

sub-section 3.3 above. We then explore how the effects of firm sales on worker stress and sickness vary

with gender and local-labor-market tightness. Table 6 reports the results for log hours, anti-depressants,



51
   Note that our elasticity estimates in Table 2 are based on monthly data. We also experimented with annual earnings (wage
income plus labor-market pension), and obtained similar results.
52
   We are unable to calculate the exact ex-post utility loss, because we have chosen not to take a stand on the values of the
structural parameters.
                                                                                                                         36
ADPV, and heart-disease drugs. Table 7 reports the results for our hospitalization variables. The results

for log hours are based on monthly data, where we control for firm-year and worker-year fixed effects.53

The other results are based on annual data.54

         First, we tackle reverse causality between worker health and sales by adding small firms and

dropping managers. In Panel 1 of Tables 6-7, we add the firms with employment between 10 and 50 into

our sample, which increases our sample size to roughly 3.8 million observations.55 The elasticity

estimate for hours are similar to Table 2, while the elasticity estimates for the stress-and-sickness

variables are slightly smaller than our main results, in Tables 3-4. These results suggest that, while

reverse causality might play some role for the smaller firms, their effects are likely to be limited. In

Panel 2 of Tables 6-7, we drop all the managers from our sample. We obtain very similar elasticity

estimates for the stress variables, as compared with Tables 3-4, and very similar elasticity estimates for

hours as well, as compared with Table 2. These findings suggest that our main results are not driven by

managers.

         In Panel 3 of Tables 6-7, we include additional controls for organizational change occurring

within the firm. We include the number of management layers by firm by year, constructed as in

Caliendo, Monte and Rossi-Hansberg (2015). We also include the numbers of imported and exported

products, and the numbers of import source countries and export destination countries. These five

variables proxy for the complexity of the firm as an organization, and we normalize them by firm sales,

and then include the logs of these ratios in our estimation. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 show that, as

the number of management layers increases relative to firm sales, workers have higher rates of effort-

related and work-related hospitalizations. This finding suggests that changes in organizational


53
   i.e. we use the same specification as column (4), panel 2, Table 2. The fixed effects here preclude us from performing some
of the robustness exercises below, where we bring in additional control variables that vary by firm by year.
54
    To save space, we only report sample size, and the coefficient estimates of firm sales and other explanatory variables of
interest. The results for the other control variables are available upon request.
55
    To get these smaller firms we also add the firms that are not engaged in international trade, and drop the log of offshoring
from the set of controls.
                                                                                                                            37
complexity tend to increase worker stress,56 consistent with Dahl (2011). We also see, from Panel 3 of

Tables 6-7, that the coefficient estimate of log firm sales remains positive and significant for most

measures of sickness and stress;57 i.e. changes in firm sales still have significant impacts on worker stress,

conditional on organizational changes.

        In Panel 4 of Tables 6-7, we address the potential endogeneity of firm sales to improvements in

technology that may also affect worker stress and health. We do this by constructing the following

Bartik-style/shift-share instrument for firm sales.58 Let Qkt denote the aggregate output of product k in

year t in Denmark, and sjk denote product k’s share in firm j’s output in the pre-sample year of 1994.

Then our instrument for j’s sales, Yjt, is I jt      s Q
                                                       k
                                                           jk   kt   . The intuition of our instrument is as follows. To


the extent that output demand, Qkt, fluctuates over time for exogenous reasons, firm j’s exposure to these

fluctuations depends on the pre-sample output shares, sjk. While some Danish firms may produce large

shares of the aggregate national output, Qkt, for some products, our identification requires that the shocks

are exogenous to individual workers, and predicted firm sales are likely to be less correlated with omitted

variables and more exogenous to individual workers than actual sales.

        Our shift-share variable is positive and significant in the first stage estimation, and its F-statistics

is 117.3 (see Data Appendix 4 for more details). We see, from Panel 4 of Tables 6-7, that we obtain

similar elasticity estimates here, using predicted sales, as compared with Tables 3-4, where we use actual

sales. These estimates are statistically significant in most cases, although they are less precise for some

of our hospitalization variables, which have low frequencies. The similarity between our estimates for




56
   The coefficient estimate of the number of layers relative to firm sales is insignificant for the other measures of worker
stress. The coefficient estimates of the other complexity variables are mostly insignificant, too.
57
    Note that the elasticity of stress with respect to firm sales depends on the coefficient estimates of log sales and the
complexity variables. We therefore choose not to normalize these estimates by the mean values of the dependent variables.
58
   This type of instrument is widely used in the literature (e.g. Blanchard and Katz 1992, Card 2009, Luttmer 2006, Hummels
et al. 2014, and Nakamura and Steinsson 2014).
                                                                                                                        38
actual and predicted sales59 is consistent with our discussions in sub-section 3.3 that omitted variables

likely have ambiguous effects on our results. It is also consistent with the common practice in the

literature to treat firm-level changes, such as employment, as exogenous to individual workers (e.g.

Sullivan and von-Wachter 2009).

         We now explore whether firm sales have different effects for men vs. women. We do so for two

reasons. One, men and women have different responses to stressful events (e.g. Altemus, Sarvaiya, and

Epperson 2014). Two, they also have different rates of stress; e.g. in our data, while 3.04% of men use

anti-depressants, 4.71% of women do (Data Appendix 4).

         In Panels 5 and 6 of Tables 6-7, we do our estimation separately for the sub-samples of men and

women. Our results show that the elasticity estimates for firm sales are significant for most stress-and-

sickness measures for both genders; i.e. increases in firm sales lead to adverse health outcomes for both

men and women. Firm sales are also significant for hours for both men and women. We also see that

men and women have different elasticity estimates, and this difference varies across measures of stress

and sickness. Men have stronger responses for effort- and work-related hospitalizations, while women

show stronger responses for anti-depressants, psychiatrist visits, heart-disease drugs, and hospitalizations

due to strokes and alcoholism. Men and women have similar responses for hospitalizations due to

burnout, stress or depression.

         Finally, we investigate whether the effects of firm sales vary with the tightness of the local labor

market. A high unemployment (UI) rate in the local labor market may weaken the workers’ bargaining

power and reduce their incentives for effort. It may also provide a large pool of potential workers, so that

the firms find it easy to increase employment when sales increases. Alternatively, the high UI rate may

decrease the workers’ outside option and induce them to provide more effort (e.g. Lazear, Shaw and



59
   Note that the high correlation between our instrument and firm sales does not mechanically imply similar results for OLS
and IV. E.g. Boustan, Fereira, Winkler and Zolt (2013)’s instrument has a first-stage F-stat of over 900, and their IV estimates
are substantially different from OLS.
                                                                                                                            39
Stanton 2016). As a result, how the effects of firm sales vary with labor-market tightness is ambiguous.

We calculate UI rate by commuting zone by year (see Data Appendix 4 for the details), augment our

regressions with the interaction between UI rate and log firm sales, and report our results in Panel 7 of

Tables 6-7. 60 The coefficient estimate of the UI rate interaction is sometimes negative and sometimes

positive, and it is positive and significant for anti-depressant or psychiatrist visits, and hospitalizations

due to burnout, stress, or depression. Meanwhile, the coefficient estimate for log sales remains positive

and significant.



9. Conclusion

        In this paper we use matched worker-firm data from Denmark to study how changes in firm sales,

which are exogenous to individual workers, affect workers’ stress and effort. Our rich data allow us to

directly measure individual workers’ effort and stress. When we base our identification on changes within

worker-firm matches, we find that as firm sales increases, workers work longer hours and suffer higher

risks of stress, such as anti-depressant uses, psychiatrist visits, hospitalization, and in particular,

hospitalizations that are specifically diagnosed as effort- and work-related. The effects of sales increases

on worker stress are robust to the use of multi-period difference-in-difference (e.g. Jacobson et al. 1993,

or JLS), and our JLS estimates also show that large sales increases have longer-term effects on anti-

depressants and heart-disease drugs. These results are novel to the literature, and provide tight

identification that work demand affects health through the effort-and-stress channel.

        We then develop a novel framework to compute the marginal disutility of diseases, and to

quantify the average worker’s ex-ante utility loss due to higher rates of stress. Although our approach

delivers approximate values of marginal disutility, it accommodates moral hazard, uses readily-available




60
  Note that the elasticity of stress with respect to firm sales depends on the UI rate, and so we have not normalized the
coefficient estimates by the mean values of the dependent variables.
                                                                                                                      40
data that reflects individuals’ actual choices, and does not require the values of structural parameters (e.g.

state dependence) as inputs. Our marginal-disutility values have sensible and intuitive variation across

diseases, and we find that the average worker’s utility loss accounts for a sizeable fraction of her earnings

gains from rising firm sales. Our framework provides a straightforward and intuitive extension of VSLI,

from mortality and work injury to morbidity.

         Finally, our results highlight the importance of workplace stress, which is emerging as an

important public-health concern in the U.S.61 For example, the U.S. CDC (Centers for Disease Control

and Prevention) lists work-related stress as the leading workplace health problem, ahead of physical

inactivity and obesity,62 and Goh, Pfeffer and Zenios (2015) argue that workplace stress contributes $190

billion, annually, to U.S. healthcare costs. Unfortunately, the public provision of mental-health care lags

far behind demand; e.g. in 44 U.S. states the biggest mental-health institution is a prison.63 Fortunately,

many employers are taking action. Large U.S. companies are offering training in cognitive behavioral

skills, scented relaxation rooms, smart phone apps for mental-health issues, “living walls” decorated with

plants, and outdoor cafes with wildflowers.64 Perhaps these endeavors reflect a growing private sector

recognition of the connection between work demand, work effort and employee stress identified in our

study.



References

Adda, Jérôme, and Yarine Fawaz. The health toll of import competition. mimeo, Bocconi University,
       2017.
Altemus, M., Sarvaiya, N., & Epperson, C. N. (2014). Sex differences in anxiety and depression clinical
       perspectives. Frontiers in neuroendocrinology, 35(3), 320-330.

61
   Our results are also reminiscent of Sigmund Freud. In his classic, “Civilization and Its Discontents”, he postulates that, as
the civil society grows in terms of technology and profits, its citizens become neurotic and discontent. The recent hit song,
Stressed Out, by the group Twenty One Pilots, echoes this theme.
62
   E.g. https://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/aag/pdf/2016/aag-workplace-health.pdf
63
   ‘Mental Health: Out of the Shadows”, Economist, April 25, 2015, 56-57.
64
   E.g. “To Cut Office Stress, Try Butterflies and Medication?”, by Sue Shellenbarger, The Wall Street Journal, October 9,
2012, and “Management: Tackling Mental Health, One Text at a Time …”, by Rachel Emma Silverman, the Wall Street
Journal, July 20, 2016.
                                                                                                                            41
Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew Shapiro and Christopher Tonetti, 2016. “Late-
        in-Life Risks and the Under-Insurance Puzzle”, NBER working paper 22726.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2015. “The Labor Market and the Marriage Market:
        How Adverse Employment Shocks Affect Marriage, Fertility, and Children’s Living
        Circumstances”. Working paper, MIT.
Baicker, K., Taubman, S. L., Allen, H. L., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J. H., Newhouse, J. P., ... & Finkelstein,
        A. N. (2013). The Oregon experiment—effects of Medicaid on clinical outcomes. New England
        Journal of Medicine, 368(18), 1713-1722.
Bauer, Daniel, Darius Lakdawalla, and Julian Reif. Mortality Risk, Insurance, and the Value of Life. No.
        w25055. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.
Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares, 2005. “The Quantity and Quality of Life
        and the Evolution of World Inequality”, American Economic Review March 2005, 95(1), pp.
        277-291.
Bernard, Andrew B., Emily J. Blanchard, Ilke Van Beveren and Hylke Vandenbussche "Carry-along
        trade." The Review of Economic Studies 86.2 (2019): 526-563.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. How much should we trust differences-in-
        differences estimates?. No. w8841. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2002.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2012. “Losing Heart? The Effect of Job
        Displacement on Health”. NBER working paper 18660.
Bosma, H., M. G. Marmot, H. Hemingway, A. C. Nicholson, E. Brunner, and S. A. Stansfeld, 1997,
        “Low Job Control and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease in Whitehall II (prospective cohort)
        Study”, British Medical Journal 314:558-565.
Browning, Martin and Eskil Heinesen, 2012, “Effect of job loss due to plant closure on mortality and
        hospitalization”, Journal of Health Economics 31: 599-616.
Browning, Martin, Anne Møller Danø, and Eskil Heinesen, “Job Displacement and Stress-Related Health
        Outcomes”, Health Economics 15 (2006), 1061-1075.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Ferdinando Monte, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. "The anatomy of French production
        hierarchies." Journal of Political Economy 123.4 (2015): 809-852.
Case, A and Deaton, A (2009): “Health and Wellbeing in Udaipur and South Africa”, Chapter 10 in
        Developments in the Economics of Aging. D. Wise (ed.) University of Chicago Press.
Chandra, A., & Skinner, J. (2012). Technology growth and expenditure growth in health care. Journal of
        Economic Literature, 50(3), 645-80.
Coile, Courtney C., Phillip B. Levine, and Robin McKnight, 2014, “Recessions, Older Workers, and
        Longevity: How Long Are Recessions Good for Your Health”, American Economic Journal:
        Economic Policy, 6(3), 92-119.
Colantone, Italo, Rosario Crinò, and Laura Ogliari. "The hidden cost of globalization: Import competition
        and mental distress." (2015).
Couch, Kenneth A., and Dana W. Placzek. "Earnings losses of displaced workers revisited." American
        Economic Review 100.1 (2010): 572-89.
Currie, Janet, and Brigitte Madrian. 1999. Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market. In Orley
        Ashenfelter and David Card edts., Handbook of Labor Economics, North-Holland.
Cutler, David M. Your money or your life: Strong medicine for America's health care system. Oxford
        University Press, 2005.
Cutler, D. M., Richardson, E., Keeler, T. E., & Staiger, D. (1997). Measuring the health of the US
        population. Brookings papers on economic activity. Microeconomics, 1997, 217-282.
Cutler, David M., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. "The anatomy of health insurance." Handbook of health
        economics 1 (2000): 563-643.
Davis, Steven J., and Till M. Von Wachter. Recessions and the cost of job loss. No. w17638. National
                                                                                                         42
        Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Dahl, Michael S. 2011, “Organizational Change and Employee Stress”, Management Science 57 (2), pp.
        240-256.
De Quidt, J., & Haushofer, J. (2016). Depression for economists (No. w22973). National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, Rodrigo R. Soares, and Gabriel Ulyssea. "Economic shocks and crime: Evidence
        from the brazilian trade liberalization." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10.4
        (2018): 158-95.
Edwards, Ryan D., 2008. “Health Risk and Portfolio Choice”, Journal of Business and Economic
        Statistics, 26(4), pp 472-485.
Egan, Mark L., Casey B. Mulligan, and Tomas J. Philipson. 2013 “Adjusting Measures of Economic
        Output For Health: Is the Business Cycle Countercyclical?”, NBER working paper 19058.
Eliason, Marcus, and Donald Storrie, 2007, “Does Job Loss Shorten Life?”, Journal of Human Resources
        44(2), 277-302.
Eliason, Marcus, and Donald Storrie, 2009, “Job Loss is Bad for Your Health – Swedish Evidence on
        Cause-Specific Hospitalization Following involuntary Job Loss”, Social Science and Medicine
        68, 1396-1406.
Evans, William N. and W. Kip Viscusi, “Estimation of State-Dependent Utility Functions Using Survey
        Data”, the Review of Economics and Statistics, 73(1), Feb. 1991, pp. 94-104.
Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo P. Luttmer and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, 2013, “What Good is Wealth Without
        Health? The Effect of Health on the Marginal Utility of Consumption”, Journal of European
        Economic Association 11(S1): 221-258.
Fransson, Eleonor I., et al. "Job strain and the risk of stroke: an individual-participant data meta-analysis."
        Stroke 46.2 (2015): 557-559.
Goh, Joel, Jeffrey Pfeffer, and Stefanos A. Zenios. "The relationship between workplace stressors and
        mortality and health costs in the United States." Management Science 62.2 (2015): 608-628.
Goldman-Mellor, S. J., Saxton, K. B., & Catalano, R. C. (2010). Economic contraction and mental health:
        a review of the evidence, 1990-2009. International Journal of Mental Health, 39(2), 6-31.
Hall, R. E., & Jones, C. I. (2007). The value of life and the rise in health spending. The Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 122(1), 39-72.
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding. 2010. “Inequality and Unemployment in a
        Global Economy”. Econometrica 78(4), 1239-1283.
Howard, D. H., Bach, P. B., Berndt, E. R., & Conti, R. M. (2015). Pricing in the market for anticancer
        drugs. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1), 139-62.
Hubert, H. B., M. Feinleib, P. M. McNamara, and W. P. Castelli, 1983, “Obesity as an Independent Risk
        Factor for Cardiovascular Disease: A 26-year Follow-up of Participants in the Framingham Heart
        Study”, Circulation 67: 968-977.
Hummels, D., R. Jørgensen, J. Munch, and C. Xiang, 2014. “The Wage Effects of Offshoring: Evidence
        from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data”, American Economic Review, 104 (6), 1597-1629.
Hummels, David, Jakob R. Munch, and Chong Xiang. "Offshoring and labor markets." Journal of
        Economic Literature 56.3 (2018): 981-1028.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. "Earnings losses of displaced workers."
        The American economic review (1993): 685-709.
Jones, Charles, 2016, “Life and Growth”, Journal of Political Economy 124(2), pp. 539-578.
Jones, Charles I. and Peter J. Klenow, “Beyond GDP? Welfare across Countries and Time”, American
        Economic Review 2016, 106(9), pp 2426-2457.
Kivimäki, M., & Kawachi, I. 2015. Work Stress as a Risk Factor for Cardiovascular Disease. Current
        cardiology reports, 17(9), 1-9.
                                                                                                            43
Kivimäki, Mika, et al. "Job strain as a risk factor for coronary heart disease: a collaborative meta-analysis
        of individual participant data." The Lancet 380.9852 (2012): 1491-1497.
Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas, and Stephen A. Woodbury. Sources of displaced workers’ long-term
        earnings losses. No. w24217. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.
Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher Stanton. "Making do with less: working harder
        during recessions." Journal of Labor Economics 34.S1 (2016): S333-S360.
Lillard, Lee A. and Yoram Weiss, 1997, “Uncertain Health and Survival: Effects on End-of-Life
        Consumption”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 15(2), pp. 254-268.
Lindo, Jason M. 2013, “Aggregation and the Estimated Effects of Local Economic Conditions on
        Health”, NBER working paper 19042.
Ludwig, J., Duncan, G. J., Gennetian, L. A., Katz, L. F., Kessler, R. C., Kling, J. R., & Sanbonmatsu, L.
        (2012). Neighborhood effects on the long-term well-being of low-income adults. Science,
        337(6101), 1505-1510.
Ma, Ching-To Albert and Thomas G. McGuire, “Optimal Health Insurance and Provider Payment”, the
        American Economic Review, 87(4), Sep. 1997, pp. 685-704.
Maccini, Sharon, and Dean Yang. "Under the weather: Health, schooling, and economic consequences
        of early-life rainfall." American Economic Review 99.3 (2009): 1006-26.
Manning, A., 2011, Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market, in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.,
        Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. 4B, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Marmot, M. G., Rose, G., Shipley, M., & Hamilton, P. J. (1978). Employment grade and coronary heart
        disease in British civil servants. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 32(4), 244-249.
Marmot, M. G, G. D. Smith, S. Stansfeld, C. Patel, F. North, J. Head, I. White, E. Brunner and A. Feeney,
        1991, “Health Inequalities Among British Civil Servants: the Whitehall II Study”, Lancet 337:
        1387-1393
McGuire, T. G. (2000). Physician agency. In Handbook of health economics (Vol. 1, pp. 461-536).
        Elsevier.
McManus, T. C. and G. Schaur, 2015, “The Effects of Import Competition on Worker Health”, Journal
        of International Economics, forthcoming.
Miller, D. L., Page, M. E., Stevens, A. H., & Filipski, M. (2009). Why are recessions good for your
        health?. American Economic Review, 99(2), 122-27.
Moran, J. R., & Simon, K. I. (2006). Income and the use of prescription drugs by the elderly: evidence
        from the Notch cohorts. Journal of Human Resources, 41(2), 411-432.
Murphy, K. M. and R. H. Topel. 2003, “The Economic Value of Medical Research,” in Kevin M. Murphy
        and Robert H. Topel, eds., Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Murray, Christopher J.L, and Arnab K. Acharya, 1997. “Understanding DALYs”, Journal of Health
        Economics 16, 703-730.
Newhouse, Joseph P. "Medical care costs: how much welfare loss?." Journal of Economic perspectives
        6.3 (1992): 3-21.
Olsen, LR, Munk-Jorgensen P, and Bech P, 2007. “The Prevalence of Depression in Denmark”, Ugeskr
        Laeger, April 2007, 169(16), 1425-1426.
O’Reilly, Dermot and Michael Rosato. 2013. “Worked to death? A census-based longitudinal study of
        the relationship between the number of hours spent working and mortality risk”, International
        Journal of Epidemiology 42(6), 1820-1830.
Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2016. ”Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from U.S.
        Counties”, Working paper, Yale University.
Powell, David, and Seth Seabury. "Medical Care Spending and Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from
        Workers' Compensation Reforms." American Economic Review 108.10 (2018): 2995-3027.
                                                                                                          44
Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences”, Chapter 12 in Handbook of Labor
       Economics, volumn 1, eds. by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, 641-692. Amsterdam:
       North-Holland.
Ruhm, Christopher, 2000. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?”. Quarterly Journal of Economics
       May 2000, 617-650.
Ruhm, Christopher J. "Good times make you sick." Journal of health economics 22.4 (2003): 637-658.
Ruhm, Christopher J. "Healthy living in hard times." Journal of health economics 24.2 (2005).
Smith, James, 1999. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: the Dual Relations between Health and
       Economic Status”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2), 145-166.
Schaller, Jessamyn, and Ann Huff Stevens. "Short-run effects of job loss on health conditions, health
       insurance, and health care utilization." Journal of health economics 43 (2015): 190-203.
Stevens, Ann Huff, Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page, and Mateusz Filipski. 2015 “The Best of Times,
       the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-Cyclical Mortality”, American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy 7, pp. 279-311.
Sullivan, Daniel and Till von Wachter. 2009. “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
       Administrative Data”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, , 1265-1306.
Torrance, George W. "Measurement of health state utilities for economic appraisal: a review." Journal
       of health economics 5.1 (1986): 1-30.
Tekin, Erdal, Chandler McClellan, and Karen J. Minyard. “Health and Health Behaviors During the
       Worst of Times: Evidence from the Great Recession”, NBER working paper 19234 July 2013.
Virtanen, Marianna, Katriina Heikkila, Markus Jokela, Jane E. Ferrie, G. David Batty, Jussi Vehtera,
       Mika Kivimaki, 2012 “Long working hours and coronary heart disease: a systematic review and
       meta-analysis”, American Journal of Epidemiology, 176 (7), 586-596.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Aldy, Joseph E., 2003, “The Value of A Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market
       Estimates Throughout the World”, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27, 5–76.
Viscusi, W. Kip and William N. Evans, “Utility Functions that Depend on Health Status: Estimates and
       Economic Implications”, the American Economic Review, 80(3), June 1990, pp 353-374.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. The
       MIT Press, Cambridge and London.




                                                                                                     45
                                Table 1 Summary Statistics

                                                                          Expenditure
                                         Obs. #       Mean    Std. Dev.     Share
Monthly Data
           log Hours (workers)          8834846     5.0352     0.3660        N.A.
         log Earnings (workers)         8834846     10.3295    0.4244        N.A.
        log Material Use (firms)        8829857     11.1757    1.8019        N.A.
Annual Data
    Firm Characteristics
             Log employment             3336244     6.4324     1.6615        N.A.
          Log capital labor ratio       3336244     19.7345    0.9550        N.A.
     Share of high-skilled workers      3336244     0.2111     0.1552        N.A.
              Log offshoring            3336244     17.3404    4.0138        N.A.
    Worker Characteristics
            Experience (years)          3336244     18.8202    9.8158        N.A.
     Union membership (dummy)           3336244      0.8591    0.3479        N.A.
            Married (dummy)             3336244      0.5774    0.4940        N.A.
    Stress (Dummies)
        Anti-Depressant (Drug)          3336244      0.0358    0.1857      0.3012%
      Anti-Dep./Psychiatrist Visit      3336244     0.0399     0.1958      0.4668%
        Narrow Burnout (Hosp.)          3336244     0.00005   0.00718      0.0005%
         Broad Burnout (Hosp.)          3336244     0.00006   0.00778      0.0006%
     Broad Burnout/Stress (Hosp.)       3336244     0.00020   0.01397      0.0111%
   Broad Burnout/Stress/Depression
                 (Hosp.)                3336244     0.00026   0.01623      0.0396%
          Heart Disease (Drug)          3336244      0.0245    0.1546      0.3237%
    Heart Attack or Stroke (Hosp.)      3336244      0.0016    0.0395      2.0200%
           Alcoholism (Hosp.)           3336244     0.0009    0.0301       0.4653%
                                       Table 2 Hours and Wages


                                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
          Hours: Full Sample
                   log(sales)             0.0408***     0.0243***     0.0132***    0.0226***
                                            [16.42]       [8.36]        [4.95]       [8.35]
                  log(materials)                                      0.0335***    0.0474***
                                                                        [6.51]       [7.67]
                    Obs. No.               8,834,846    8,640,464     8,635,513    8,828,145
                      R2                     0.0033       0.0207        0.0217       0.5468

          Hours: Dropping Imputed
          Hours
                   log(sales)             0.0260***     0.0156***     0.0089***    0.0139***
                                            [17.75]       [9.37]        [5.14]       [7.68]
                  log(materials)                                      0.0202***    0.0302***
                                                                        [7.92]       [9.43]
                    Obs. No.               8,503,975    8,321,194     8,316,412    8,497,033
                      R2                     0.0052       0.0295        0.0310       0.4144

          Earnings: Dropping Imputed
          Hours
                    log(sales)            0.0367***     0.0140***     0.0079**     0.0124***
                                            [11.23]       [4.52]        [2.28]       [3.52]
                  log(materials)                                      0.0186***    0.0165***
                                                                        [4.15]       [3.04]
                    Obs. No.               8,503,975    8,321,194     8,316,412    8,497,033
                      R2                     0.0055       0.0819        0.0826       0.7818

                worker-firm FE                Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
                    month FE                  No           Yes           Yes          Yes
               worker & firm char.            No           Yes           Yes          N.A.
                worker-year FE                No           No            No           Yes
                  firm-year FE                No           No            No           Yes


Notes: t-statistics in brackets, with clustering at firm-year-month level in all columns. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include year, industry and region fixed effects. The set of worker
characteristics includes union status, marital status and experience, and the set of firm characteristics
includes log offshoring, log employment, log capital/labor ratio, and the share of college-educated
workers in employment.
                            Table 3 Stress: Prescription Drugs and Doctoral Visits

                                           Anti-          (1) + Psychiatrist
                                         Depressants            Visits         Stroke Drugs
               VARIABLES                    (1)                  (2)                (3)

               log(sales)                 0.0237***          0.0247***          0.0360***
                                            [4.11]              [4.46]            [4.25]
               Exp. 5-20 years            0.0029***          0.0050***         -0.0126***
                                            [6.12]              [9.50]           [-44.04]
               Exp. 20+ years             0.0030***          0.0048***         -0.0208***
                                            [4.80]              [6.98]           [-43.55]
               Union                       0.0008*             0.0003           0.0031***
                                            [1.79]              [0.65]            [9.21]
               Married                      0.0003           0.0022***         -0.0055***
                                            [0.72]              [4.89]           [-21.39]
               log(employment)              0.0007             0.0006          -0.0016***
                                            [1.46]              [1.32]            [-4.10]
               log(K/L)                    -0.0000            -0.0001          -0.0005***
                                            [-0.21]            [-0.57]            [-2.72]
               Skilled-labor share        0.0064**           0.0059**          -0.0122***
                                            [2.27]              [1.96]            [-4.59]
               log(offshoring)              0.0000             0.0000            -0.0001
                                            [0.28]              [0.26]            [-1.09]

               Obs. No.                   3,432,554          3,432,554          3,432,554
               R2                           0.0062             0.0061             0.0139
               Job-Spell No.               723,664            723,664            723,664


Notes: t-statistics in brackets, with clustering at firm-year level in all columns. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. All specifications include job-spell fixed effects, plus industry, year and region fixed effects.
                                          Table 4 Effort-, Work- and Stress-Related Hospitalizations

                               Narrow Burnout      Broad Burnout       (2) + Stress    (3) + Depression       Strokes         Alcoholism
       VARIABLES                     (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)

       log(sales)                   0.446**            0.430**           0.292***           0.213**           0.0537**         0.122**
                                      [2.29]             [2.41]            [2.73]             [2.35]            [2.07]           [2.60]
       Exp. 5-20 years           -0.000045**          -0.00004*         -0.000020          0.000019        -0.000651***     -0.000728***
                                     [-1.98]            [-1.67]           [-0.43]             [0.35]           [-9.27]          [-6.70]
       Exp. 20+ years             -0.000035           -0.000030          0.000040          0.000103        -0.000767***     -0.000678***
                                     [-1.08]            [-0.88]            [0.64]             [1.41]           [-5.97]          [-5.19]
       Union                      -0.000003            0.000009          0.000072          0.000050          0.000189*        -0.000101
                                     [-0.13]             [0.31]            [1.58]             [1.00]            [1.76]          [-1.18]
       Married                   0.000066***        0.000079***       0.000224***        0.000268***       -0.000247***      -0.000148**
                                      [3.79]             [4.25]            [5.60]             [5.74]           [-2.91]          [-2.09]
       log(employment)            -0.000020           -0.000028         -0.000054         -0.000028          -0.000037         0.000095
                                     [-0.96]            [-1.26]           [-1.41]            [-0.63]           [-0.35]           [1.27]
       log(K/L)                   -0.000018          -0.000020*        -0.000031*         -0.000009          -0.000005        -0.000059
                                     [-1.64]            [-1.84]           [-1.79]            [-0.43]           [-0.09]          [-1.51]
       Skilled-labor share         0.000057           -0.000017         0.000164           0.000463          -0.000791         0.000362
                                      [0.46]            [-0.14]            [0.64]             [1.43]           [-1.16]           [0.79]
       log(offshoring)            0.000008*           0.000008*          0.000003          0.000009           0.000000        -0.000015
                                      [1.68]             [1.69]            [0.49]             [1.02]            [0.02]          [-0.88]

       Obs. No.                    3,432,554          3,432,554        3,432,554          3,432,554          3,432,554         3,432,554
       R2                            0.0000             0.0000           0.0001             0.0001             0.0003            0.0000
       Job-Spell No.                723,664            723,664          723,664            723,664            723,664           723,664

Notes: t-statistics in brackets, with clustering at firm-year level in all columns. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include job-
spell fixed effects, plus industry, year and region fixed effects.
                                                  Table 5 Marginal Disutility of Diseases

                                                                                                                  Change of
                                                                         Marginal Dis-       95% Confidence       Sick Rate
                                                        Utility Share       utility            Interval for 3     w.r.t. Sales
                                         Frequency        Weight          (DKK 000)             (DKK 000)            x 100
            Sickness                          1               2                3                     4                  5
            ADPV                           0.0399          0.47%            31.37              [2.70, 60.05]        0.0984
            BSD (Hospitalization)         0.00026         0.040%            403.53            [34.72, 772.35]       0.0056
            Stroke (hospitalization)       0.0016          2.02%           3466.65          [298.24, 6635.06]       0.0084
            Heart diseases (drugs)         0.0245          0.32%            35.45              [3.05, 67.84]        0.0883
            Alcoholism (Hosp.)             0.0009          0.47%           1374.75          [118.27, 2631.23]       0.0111
            Injury                         0.0039          2.26%           1556.84          [133.94, 2979.75]        N.A.

Notes: ADPV = anti-depressant or psychiatrist visits (column (2) of Table 3), BSD = burnout, stress, or depression (column (4) of Table 4).
The numbers in column 5 are our elasticity estimates in Tables 3-4 multiplied by sample means multiplied by 100.
                  Table 6 Additional Results: Hours, Prescription Drugs and Doctoral Visits

                                                           Anti-                 (2) + Psychiatrist           Stroke
                                              log(Hours) Depressants                   Visits                  Drug
                                                   (1)              (2)                   (3)                   (4)

        1. Add Small Firms (elasticity)
        log(sales)                    0.0145***                0.0222***              0.0231***            0.0308***
                                        [9.10]                   [3.91]                 [4.24]               [3.90]
        Obs. No.                      9,316,944                3,820,473              3,820,474            3,820,475

        2. Drop Managers (elasticity)
        log(sales)                    0.0148***                0.0256***              0.0270***            0.0379***
                                        [7.54]                   [4.09]                 [4.46]               [4.43]
        Obs. No.                      8,773,869                3,199,217              3,199,217            3,199,217

        3. Organizational Controls
        log(sales) x 100                         N.A.           0.294***              0.335***                0.117
                                                                   [3.11]               [3.32]                [1.50]
        log(# layers/sales) x 100                                -0.0161               0.0004                 0.107
                                                                  [-0.20]               [0.00]                [1.61]
        Obs. No.                                                3,316,650             3,316,650             3,316,650

        4. Predicted Firm Sales (elasticity)
        log(predicted sales)              N.A.                  0.0290**              0.0317***            0.0360***
                                                                  [2.44]                [2.82]               [2.60]
        Obs. No.                                                3,336,244             3,336,244            3,336,244

        5. Men Only (elasticity)
        log(sales)                            0.0158***         0.0151**              0.0191***            0.0322***
                                                [8.41]            [2.21]                [2.96]               [3.92]
        Obs. No.                              6,372,945         2,259,936             2,259,936            2,259,936

        6. Women Only (elasticity)
        log(sales)                            0.0085***        0.0344***              0.0293***            0.0755***
                                                [4.13]           [3.84]                 [3.49]               [5.13]
        Obs. No.                              2,943,999        1,076,119              1,076,119            1,076,119

        7. Local Labor Market Tightness
        log(sales) x 100               N.A.                    0.0073***              0.0084***            0.0098***
                                                                 [3.25]                 [3.46]               [4.66]
        log(sales) x UI_rate x 100                                0.240                0.313**               -0.214
                                                                 [1.61]                 [1.97]               [-1.55]
        Obs. No.                                               3,336,244              3,336,244            3,336,244
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Column (1) uses monthly data, includes job-spell, region,
month, worker-year and firm-year fixed effects, and clusters by firm-year-month. The other columns use annual data, include
job-spell, region, industry and year fixed effects, and cluster by firm-year. Panel 3 includes the logs of the numbers of imported
and exported products, and the numbers of import source countries and export destination countries.
                                 Table 7 Additional Results: Hospitalizations

                                Narrow        Broad                       (3) +
                                Burnout      Burnout     (2) + Stress   Depression      Strokes     Alcoholism
                                  (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)

1. Add Small Firms (elasticity)
log(sales)                       0.407**      0.397**     0.236**        0.171**        0.0461*       0.110**
                                  [2.41]       [2.50]      [2.40]         [2.04]         [1.76]        [2.56]
Obs. No.                        3,820,473    3,820,473   3,820,473      3,820,473      3,820,473     3,820,473
2. Drop Managers (elasticity)
log(sales)                      0.485***     0.479***    0.308***        0.220**       0.0601**      0.124***
                                  [2.59]       [2.68]      [3.02]         [2.47]         [2.30]        [2.69]
Obs. No.                        3,199,217    3,199,217   3,199,217      3,199,217      3,199,217     3,199,217
3. Organizational Controls
log(sales) x 100                0.0146***    0.0148***   0.0181**        0.0173*       0.0513**        -0.013
                                   [3.08]       [2.89]     [2.03]         [1.66]         [1.98]        [-0.66]
log(# layers/sales) x 100        0.0095**     0.0090**     0.0098         0.0063         0.0191       -0.0193
                                   [2.46]       [2.11]     [1.28]         [0.69]         [0.85]        [-1.16]
Obs. No.                        3,316,650    3,316,650   3,316,650      3,316,650      3,316,650     3,316,650
4. Predicted Firm Sales (elasticity)
log(predicted sales)               0.504*      0.512*     0.400**        0.334**         0.0505       0.167**
                                   [1.65]      [1.76]      [2.27]         [2.25]         [1.23]        [2.23]
Obs. No.                         3,336,244   3,336,244   3,336,244      3,336,244      3,336,244     3,336,244
5. Men Only (elasticity)
log(sales)                      0.704***     0.698***    0.308***        0.209**         0.036        0.0772*
                                  [3.24]       [3.27]      [2.59]         [2.23]         [1.42]        [1.75]
Obs. No.                        2,259,936    2,259,936   2,259,936      2,259,936      2,259,936     2,259,936
6. Women Only (elasticity)
log(sales)                        0.136        0.105      0.281**         0.224*        0.201**      0.357***
                                  [0.51]       [0.45]      [2.14]         [1.77]         [2.54]        [3.95]
Obs. No.                        1,076,119    1,076,119   1,076,119      1,076,119      1,076,119     1,076,119
7. Local Labor Market Tightness
log(sales) x 100              0.0024**       0.0028***   0.0047**        0.0040*        0.0088*      0.0107**
                                 [2.52]         [2.62]     [2.35]         [1.66]         [1.94]        [2.52]
log(sales) x UI_rate x 100     -0.0030        -0.0034     0.0206*       0.0337**        -0.0088       0.0089
                                [-0.54]        [-0.58]     [1.83]         [2.34]        [-0.20]        [0.31]
Obs. No.                      3,336,244      3,336,244   3,336,244      3,336,244      3,336,244     3,336,244

 Notes: t-statistics in brackets, with clustering at firm-year level in all columns. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
 p<0.1. All specifications include job-spell fixed effects, plus industry, year and region fixed effects. Panel
 3 includes the logs of the numbers of imported and exported products, and the numbers of import source
 countries and export destination countries.
Figure 1 Log Hours, by Decile of Sales Changes




 Figure 2 ADPV: by Deciles of Sales Changes
     Figure 3 Alcoholism: by Deciles of Sales Changes




Figure 4 Heart or Stroke Drugs: by Deciles of Sales Changes
           Figure 5 Broad Burnout: by Deciles of Sales Changes




       Figure 6a Effects of Large Sales Increases on Narrow Burnout

0.00025




0.00015




0.00005



           ‐5   ‐4    ‐3    ‐2    ‐1    0     1    2     3       4    5
‐0.00005




‐0.00015
           Figure 6b Effects of Large Sales Increases on Alcoholism

0.0008

0.0006

0.0004

0.0002

     0
             ‐5    ‐4   ‐3    ‐2    ‐1    0     1     2     3     4       5
‐0.0002

‐0.0004

‐0.0006

‐0.0008


         Figure 7a Effects of Large Sales Increases on Anti-Depressants

0.005

0.004

0.003

0.002

0.001

    0
            ‐5    ‐4    ‐3    ‐2    ‐1    0     1     2     3     4       5
‐0.001

‐0.002
     Figure 7b Effects of Large Sales Increases on Heart & Stroke Drugs

0.008

0.007

0.006

0.005

0.004

0.003

0.002

0.001

    0
         ‐5    ‐4    ‐3    ‐2    ‐1     0     1     2     3     4         5
‐0.001
                                          Data Appendix
1. More Details for Data Construction (Section 2)
1.1 Administrative Data on Health
        Prescription drugs data are drawn from the “Register of Medicinal Product Statistics”
maintained by Statens Serum Institut (SSI). These data include each individual’s drug
classification following the 4-digit Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) codes, copay (out-
of-pocket expenses by patients) and total prescription drug cost for the Danish government. For
all Danish full time workers aged 20-60 during 1995-2009, the median out-of-pocket expense for
prescription-drug copay is 404 DKK while the median labor income is 296,379 DKK (1 DKK is
about 0.18 USD in this time period).
        Data for contacts with the doctor are drawn from the “Doctoral Visits Register”. In this
register every visit to the doctor (including phone calls) is identified, and we observe each
individual’s visit dates (by week), type of doctors visited (e.g. general practitioner, psychiatrist),
and total cost of the visit for the Danish government. We disregard all dental visits in the data,
because dental care is not free.
        Finally, the data on hospitalization includes the diagnosis, by the International
Classification of diseases (ICD10), and the total cost of in-patient care for the Danish government.
        The ATC codes of our prescription-drug variables are as follows. Anti-depressants =
N06AA, AF, AG and AX. Drugs for heart diseases = B01 and C01. The ICD 10 codes for our
hospitalization variables are as follows. Narrow burnout = Z730, 731, 732, 733, Z563 and Z566.
Broad burnout = narrow burnout plus Z564, 565, 568 and 569. Heart attacks or strokes = I21, 61
and 63. Alcoholism = F100, 102, 104, 105, I85, K70, 860, T500 and 510.
1.2 Healthcare Expenses
        Table A1 reports the share of healthcare expenses in GDP for Denmark by year, for the
period 2010-2015. This share is stable over time. Total health care expenditure includes all private
expenditure related to doctors and medicinal products (drugs plus medical equipment, such as
hearing aid). It also includes all public expenditure, the category health in COFOG (Classification
of the Functions of Government) by Statistics Denmark, which includes doctors, medicinal
products, hospital service and R&D. Total health care expenditure excludes elderly care and
income transfers, such as cash benefits for sick leave.
        Table A2 breaks the healthcare expenses into the following categories for 2010. Hospital
services include regular hospitals, plus costs to birthing clinics and rehabilitation centers. Within
non-hospital services, medical products and equipment include all products used in the interest of
health not related to hospitals; e.g. prescription drugs, experimental medicine, prosthesis
equipment and glasses. Paramedic care includes all non-doctoral care that is not related to
hospitals. Other public health care is mainly administrative costs, R&D and preventive services
(such as vaccine).
        We obtain the Diagnosis-Related Group (DRG) expenses for our hospitalization variables
from the hospitalization registry. The DRG expenses have narrower coverage than the category of
hospital services in Table A2. As a result, we compute the shares of our hospitalization variables
within the total DRG expense, and assume that they are equal to the shares within the category of
hospital services. For example, since heart attacks and strokes have a share of 3.23% within the
total DRG expense, their total expense is 113.15 x 3.23% = 3.65 billion DKK.

2. Notes for Non-Linear Specifications (Section 5)
       Cut-off Points of the Decile Dummies: In section 5.1, we construct the decile dummies
for the distribution of the deviations of log firm sales relative to their job-spell means. For our
monthly data, the cut-off points are, respectively, -0.758, -0.285, -0.161, -0.080, -0.021, 0.035,
0.096, 0.175, 0.301 and 0.697. For our annual data, they are -0.788, -0.189, -0.083, -0.021, 0.028,
0.080, 0.148, 0.233, 0.363 and 0.784.
         Mass Layoff and Decreases in Firm Sales We denote the indicator variable for mass
layoffs by Fjt; i.e. Fjt = 1 if employment of firm j in year t is 30% or more lower than in year t – 1
(here we use the 30% cutoff following Sullivan and von-Wachter 2009). We then regress Fjt on
decreases in firm sales, controlling for firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. We report the
results in Table A3. In column (1), we use change in firm j’s log sales from year t – 2 to t – 1, and
obtain a negative and significant coefficient estimate. In column (2), we use the dummy variable
indicating whether year t – 1 is in the first decile of deviations from firm-level average sales, and
obtain a positive and significant coefficient estimate.
         Additional Details of PSM We now present additional details of the propensity-score
matching (PSM) procedure, using the antidepressant sample (the results for the other sickness
variables are similar). In section 5.2, we make use of the top and bottom deciles of the distribution
of year-to-year changes in log firm sales. The cutoff point is 0.47 for the top decile, and -0.23 for
the bottom decile.
         Table A4 shows the Probit model used to predict the propensity score values for each
individual. The model changes slightly across sickness outcomes analyzed because we require that
both treatment-group and control-group workers are free of this condition for five consecutive
years before the shock. After imposing the sample selection criteria explained in the text, we end
up with more than 38,000 workers in the treatment group (i.e. their firms have experienced an
increase in sales between year t-1 and t that belongs to the top decile in the distribution of sales
changes, and we can track them five years before and five years before the shock within the sample
window). The control group has more than 136,000 observations and consists of workers that did
not experience large sales decreases, i.e., decile 2 through 9 of the distribution.
         After having obtained the propensity score for each individual, we use simple nearest
neighbor matching without replacement to match one control observation to each treatment
observation. This reduces the differences in observed characteristics across the two groups
substantially, and we end up with mean differences between the two groups that are fairly small,
as shown in Table A5 (a mean difference of less than 10% is typically considered sufficient in the
PSM literature).


3. Data for Marginal Disutility and Ex-Ante Utility Loss (Section 7)
        Injury Data: In order to estimate VSI, we draw on the following data for severe work
injury in Denmark. When a worker is injured on the job, he/she may file a petition for
compensation with the National Board of Industrial Injuries (NBII). If the job injuries are severe
enough to cause permanent damages to the workers’ earning and working abilities, then the
workers are also eligible for a one-time, lump-sum monetary compensation. We observe all the
petitions filed during 1995-2009, and the final decision by NBII for each petition. To measure
injury we consider whether an individual receives positive monetary compensation from NBII.
The mean injury rate is 3.9 per thousand in our sample, lower than in the U.S. data, probably
because we only include severe injuries while the U.S. data includes all injuries. In addition, most
workers stay employed with the same firm after injury in our data.
        One potential concern with our injury dummy is that the standard used by NBII to award
compensation may endogenously respond to economic fluctuations (e.g. tougher standards during
recessions). This is not the case in our data. During 2007-2009, Denmark’s Great Depression, NBII
accepted around 51% of all petitions, while during the pre-recession years of 2004-2006, NBII
accepted about 48% of all petitions.
        Estimation of VSI: To carry out the estimation, we examine all full-time Danish workers
in the private sector aged 18-65 in 2006. We follow the literature (e.g. Viscusi and Aldy 2003) and
run a Mincer regression, augmented by the occupational injury rate. Our dependent variable is the
log of annual wage. Our controls include age, experience, experience square, tenure, dummies for
marriage, kids, white-collar occupations, vocational education, college education, and native-born
Danish. We cluster our standard errors by occupation.
        We report the results in Table A6. Our estimate for the log-wage-injury gradient is 5.24,
with the 95% confidence interval [0.45, 10.03]. This is consistent with the literature, given that our
sample mean is 0.0039 (e.g. Hersch 1998 obtains an estimate of 1.2~1.6 using U.S. data of all
injuries, where the sample mean is 0.03, and Martinello and Meng 1992 obtain 3.2~4.1 using
Canadian data of severe injuries, where the sample mean is 0.023). Because the average wage in
this sample is 297,164 DKK, our estimate for the marginal disutility of injury is DKK 1.56 million
(= 297,164 x 5.24), with the 95% confidence intervals of [0.134, 2.978] million DKK.
        Expenditure Share for Injury: In Denmark, injury-related expenses consist of medical
expenses, for treatment, and cash benefits, such as the monetary compensation we discussed earlier
in this section. For our quantification in section 7, we need medical expenses, not cash benefits.
However, we observe cash benefits through our NBII injury data, but do not observe medical
expenses. On the other hand, in the U.S., the medical expenses for work injury are typically fully
covered through insurance (e.g. Powell and Seabury 2018), like in Denmark. The categories of
injury-related expenses in the U.S. are also well studied, with medical expenses accounting for
roughly 50% of all expenses (medical expenses plus cash benefits) (e.g. Baldwin and McLaren
2016). Assuming that the Danish share of medical expenses is the same as in the U.S. data, we
obtain that, for 2010, total medical expenses for injury are equal to the total cash benefits of $4.1
billion DKK. The expenditure share for injury, therefore, is 2.26% (= 4.1/181.2).
        Elasticity of Earnings with respect to Sales: In order to provide a benchmark for
workers’ ex-ante utility losses, we regress the log of workers’ annual earnings on the log of firm
sales in Table A7. We use the same sample and the same set of controls as in Tables 3-4, and
obtain an elasticity estimate of 0.0085.

4. Notes for Robustness Exercises and Heterogeneous Effects (Section 8)
           First Stage Results We present our first-stage results in Table A8. Our instrument is
log( I jt )  log( s jk Qkt ) , where Qkt is the aggregate output of product k in year t in Denmark, and
                k
sjk is product k’s share in firm j’s output in the pre-sample year of 1994. We include the same set
of fixed effects and the same set of worker- and firm-characteristics as controls as in Tables 3-4,
and cluster our standard errors by firm by year. The coefficient estimate of our instrument is 0.726,
and the F-statistic for our instrument is 117.3.
         Additional Summary Statistics: Table A9 shows the mean values of our sickness
variables by gender. We use these mean values to calculate the elasticities in panels 5 and 6 of
Tables 6-7.
         Commuting Zones: Commuting zones are based on geographically connected
municipalities. 275 municipalities in Denmark are merged into 51 commuting zones such that the
internal migration rate is 50% higher than the external migration rate. The commuting zone
unemployment rate has substantial variation across workers and over time ranging from 1.4% to
16.8% with a mean of 5.3%.
                                                                  Theory Appendix
1. Proposition 1
        To ease exposition, we suppress the subscripts i, j, and t in this section. Firm j’s output is
AV, where A denotes j’s TFP, and V denotes j’s output net of TFP. Let K note j’s capital, M its
materials, and L labor employment. One individual worker’s effort is, again, e. The production
function relates Q to K, M, L, and e, and we assume that it is continuously differentiable and
concave (e.g. Cobb-Douglas, CES). We assume that an individual worker’ effort cost is E = ah(e),
where a > 0 is a parameter, and the function h(.) is continuously differentiable and convex. The
effort cost, E, represents the worker’s stress, or the adverse health effects induced by effort.
        Let ψY denote firm j’s revenue, where ψ represents both j’s output demand and TFP, and
Y is a monotonic function of V. The functional forms of ψ and Y depend on market structure. For
example, suppose that consumer preferences are CES with substitution elasticity σ > 1, and that
the market for j’s output is monopolistic competition. Then it is easy to show that firm j’s total
                             1   1      1
                   BA
revenue equals (         1
                                   ) V
                                         
                                                , where B is consumer expenditure and P the CES price index. In this
                     P
                      1      1                        1
                 BA
example, ψ = (       1 
                              )  and Y =          V    
                                                              .
                 P
         We assume that firm j takes the price of materials, pM, and rental rate of capital, r, as given.
Firm j and its employees engage in multi-lateral bargaining, where each worker receives the same
weight in the bargaining process (e.g. Stole and Zwiebel 1996, Helpman et al. 2010). At the
equilibrium of the bargaining game, firm j takes workers’ optimal effort choices as given, and
choose K, M and L to maximize its surplus. An individual worker, on the other hand, takes j’s
optimal choices of K, M and L and other workers’ optimal effort choices as given, and chooses e
to maximize her surplus.
         We now spell out the firm’s and workers’ objective functions. At the Nash equilibrium of
the bargaining game, firm j collects the fraction 1 – β of the total surplus, while each worker
collects the fraction β of total surplus per worker, where β is a constant. We assume that the
workers’ outside options are 0, and firm j’s outside option is the fraction 1 – θf of its total revenue,
ψY. The parameter θf is a constant, too. The total surplus of the bargaining game is then ψY – pMM
– rK – (1 – θf)ψY = θf ψY – pMM – rK.
         Firm j’s objective, then, is to choose L, M and K to maximize its surplus of (1 – β)[ θf ψY
– pMM – rK] + (1 – θf)ψY – b(L), where b(L) is search/hiring cost. For our derivations in this
section, we do not need to explicitly solve for the firms’ optimal choices, and so we postpone this
task to the next section.
         Meanwhile, an individual worker’s objective is to
                                      Y  rK  pM M
         max e {W  ah(e)}, W   f                       .                                      (A1)
                                              L
In this expression, W is the individual workers’ surplus. Let y = Y/L. Then the first-order condition
for (A1) is
                y
          f      ah '(e) .                                                                   (A2)
                e
Note that in our derivation, effort, e, does not affect the economic shock,  ; i.e. individual workers
take  as given. Equation (A2) determines the optimal effort level, e, and implies that
         e            f (y / e)
                                   .                                                     (A3)
                             2 y
              ah ''(e)   f  2
                               e
Because y / e > 0 (effort makes a positive contribution to output), h ''(e ) > 0 (effort cost is
                  2 y
convex), and           < 0 (diminishing returns with respect to effort level), equation (A3) says that
                  e2
 e
      > 0; i.e. as demand for firm j’s output increases for exogenous reasons, effort level increases.

                                                                                         E
        Because the effort cost function is increasing, we have, immediately, that            > 0; i.e.
                                                                                         
effort cost, which represents stress, also increases with output demand. We now apply the
                                                    W
Envelope Theorem to equation (A1), and obtain              f y > 0; i.e. workers’ income increases
                                                    
with output demand.

2. Derivation of Equation (1)
        We now make the transition from (A2) to estimation equations. We first make the
following specifications for E and y
         E  ah (e)  ae ,  1 .                                                          (A4)
              
         y  e F ( K , M , L), 0    1 .                                                  (A5)
Equation (A4) specifies a power function for effort cost, and η > 1 ensures that effort cost is
convex. Equation (A5) says that effort enters output in a multiplicative way, and 0    1 ensures
that output is increasing and concave in effort.
        To illustrate equation (A5), suppose the production function is Cobb-Douglas, with
V  K M  M ( DL) L ,  K   M   L  1 , where D   i ei is the aggregate of all the workers’
       K


efforts. In addition, suppose preferences are CES and the output market has monopolistic
                                   1
                                   
competition, so that Y = V , where σ > 1 is the substitution elasticity (see the previous section).
                          1
In this example,    L      .
                              
       Plugging (A4) and (A5) into equation (A2), we have the following expressions for effort
and effort cost
                                                                           
          
                   f                            f                  
        e                F ( K , M , L ) , E  a[         F ( K , M , L)] .                      (A6)
                    a                               a
       We now derive the expression for workers’ income, W. We start by solving for firm j’s
optimal choices
       max K , M , L {1 –    f  Y – pM M – rK   1 –  f  Y – b  L } .
The first order conditions for K and M are, respectively
                                       Y V                                       Y V
        [1 –    f  (1   f ) ]        r , [1 –    f   (1   f ) ]        pM .
                                       V K                                       V M
Let c0 = (1 – β) θf + (1 – θf), we can re-write these expressions as
           Y V              Y V
        c0      K  rK , c0         M  pM M .
           V K              V M
They imply that
           Y V      V
       c0    (   K       M )  rK  pM M .
           V K      M
                                                            f Y  rK  pM M
Plugging this expression into the expression W                                , we obtain
                                                                      L
                          Y V          V                           Y 1 V        V
        W         [ f Y  c0(     K        M )]   y [ f  c0         (    K     M )]
             L             V K          M                           V Y K       M
                                                                        ln Y  ln V  ln V
               =  y H ( , K , M , L), H ( , K , M , L)  [ f  c0       (             )] (A7)
                                                                        ln V  ln K  ln M
In equation (A7), the elasticities in the term H(.) depend on the parameters of firm j’s production
function and output demand. To illustrate these elasticities, consider, again, the following special
case. The production function is AV  AK  K M  M ( DL) L ,  K   M   L  1 , where D   i ei is
the aggregate of all the workers’ efforts. Preferences are CES and the output market has
                                                 1
monopolistic competition, so that Y = V  . It is easy to see that in this special case, H(.) =
       1
f c      ( K   M ) . In general, however, H(.) may depend on V, which, in turn, depends on  ,
        
K, L and M. Plugging equations (A5) and (A6) into (A7), we obtain
              f                   1
                                             

        W [      ] [  F ( K , M , L)]    
                                                H ( , K , M , L) .                                 (A8)
              a
       It is easy to see that we obtain equation (1) for e and E by taking the logs of both sides of
equation (A6), where the vector zjt represents ln F ( K jt , M jt , L jt ) . On the other hand, although
equation (A8) may not be log linear in output demand,  , it shows that income, W, depends on
 and the input uses, K, M, and L. This means that we can take a first-order Taylor approximation
with respect to the logs of  , K, M, and L. This gives us equation (1) for W.

3. Derivation of Equation (7), and the Second Order Derivatives of M
       Let pH = 1 – Σgpg > 0 denote the probability of the healthy state. Differentiate both sides of
equation (5)
        M                                                                            M
        pg
               p [u '( I  M )  v g '( I g  M )]  u( I  M )  v g ( I g  M ) 
               g g
                                                                                      pg
                                                                                          u '( I  M ) . (A9)

This implies
        M                u( I  M )  vg ( I g  M )                         u( I  M )  vg ( I g  M )
                                                                                                          ,
        pg u '( I  M )   l pl [vl '( I l  M )  u '( I  M )] pH u '( I  M )   l pl vl '( I l  M )
which is equation (7). ∂M/∂pg > 0 because vg(Ig+M) ≤ u(Ig+M) < u(I+M), and u'(.) > 0 and vg'(.) >
0 for all g.
                                                          2M                      2M
          We now show that if ∂M/∂pg is large,                       >  0 and             > 0. To economize on
                                                          ( pg )2                pg pl
notation, let u'(.) denote u'(I+M), and vg'(.) denote vg'(Ig+M), etc. We differentiate both sides of
equation (A9) with respect to pg, to obtain
         2M                                    M 2                                  M
                 2 g g
                      p [u '(.)  v g '(.)]  (     )  g pg [u ''(.)  vg ''(.)]  2     [u '(.)  vg '(.)]
         ( pg )                                pg                                   pg
             2M                         M 2
                      u '(.)  u ''(.)(     )
             ( pg ) 2
                                         pg
Re-arranging, we get
          2M                                       M 2                                    M
                 [ pH u '(.)   g pg vg '(.)]  (   ) [ pH u ''(.)   g pg vg ''(.)]  2     [u '(.)  vg '(.)] .
         ( pg ) 
                2
                                       pg                                pg          
                                      0                                             0                                   ??

In this expression, the sign of u'(.) – vg'(.) depends on the nature of state dependency and so is hard
to determine. However, since ∂M/∂pg is large, the first term on the right-hand side dominates,
                                                               2M
meaning that the right-hand side is negative. As a result,              > 0.
                                                               ( pg )2
         We then differentiate both sides of equation (A9) with respect to pl, to obtain

 2M                                        M M                                         M                       M
pg pl
             g
                  pg [u '(.)  vg '(.)] 
                                            pg pl
                                                         g
                                                              pg [u ''(.)  vg ''(.)] 
                                                                                          pg
                                                                                              [u '(.)  vl '(.)] 
                                                                                                                   pl
                                                                                                                       [u '(.)  vg '(.)]

     2M                     M M
           u '(.)  u ''(.)
    pg pl                  pg pl
Re-arranging, we get
          2 M
                [ pH u '(.)   g pg vg '(.)] 
         pg pl                 
                                      0
                                                                                                                 .
          M M                                     M                      M
                  [ pH u ''(.)   g pg vg ''(.)]     [u '(.)  vl '(.)]     [u '(.)  vg '(.)]
          pg pl                    pg       
                                                               ??
                                                                       pl             
                                      0                                                               ??

Again, the signs of u'(.) – vg'(.) and u'(.) – vl'(.) depend on the nature of state dependency, but the
first term on the right-hand side dominates since ∂M/∂pg is large. Thus the right-hand side is
                  2M
negative, and so           > 0.
                 pg pl

4. Proposition 3
        Suppose, first, that sg = sl but pg > pl for diseases g and l. Then equation (12) says that tg =
tl, and assumption (13) says that C(tg) = C(tl). Therefore, expenditures are proportional to
frequency (Eg/El = pg/pl). Equation (12) also says that net income, post treatment, is the same under
g and l (Ig = Il), and so by (9), utility share weights are also proportional to frequency (βg/βl = pg/pl
since vg(.) = vl(.)). As a result, Eg/El = βg/βl = μg/μl.
       Next, suppose we have full recovery instead of partial recovery. This means that treatment
is 100% effective; i.e. tg = tl = 1 for all diseases g and l. Clearly, Eg/El = βg/βl = μg/μl, as in the
previous case.

5. Proposition 4
         We start by noting that Ig = I – sg(1 – tg) – c(sg,tg), and Eg = pgC(sg,tg).
         First, suppose pg = pl but sg > sl. We show below that Eg > El and βg > βl if the cross-partial
of the private-cost function is lower than the 1, which equals the cross-partial of the benefit to
                                    2 c(.)
utility of treatment, sgtg; i.e.             1.
                                   t g sg
         Consider partial recovery first. Utility maximization implies that ∂Ig/∂tg = 0, or that sg =
∂c(.)/∂tg. This implies that
                              2 c(.)
                         1
                  t g       t g  s g
                                       0.                                                     (A10)
                  s g      2 c(.)
                            (tg )2
                                                         2 c(.)
The numerator is positive by the assumption that                  1 , and the denominator is positive by
                                                       t g sg
convexity of the function c(.). Meanwhile, using the envelope theorem on the expression Ig = I –
sg(1 – tg) – c(sg,tg), we get
                  I g                 c(.)
                        (1  t g )         0.                                                (A11)
                  sg                   sg
Equations (A10) and (A11) show that equation (12) still holds. We can then follow similar steps
as in the text, to show Proposition 2.
          Now consider full recovery. We immediately have tg = tl = 1, and so Ig = I– c(sg,1) < Il =
I – c(sl, 1). This means βg > βl. On the other hand, Eg = pgC(sg,1) > El = plC(sl,1) since sg > sl. Note
that we get weaker results than in Proposition 3, because now pain itself affects expenditure
directly.
          Finally, suppose pg > pl but sg = sl. Under partial recovery, tg = tl and Ig = Il by equations
(A10) and (A11). As a result, Eg/El = μg/μl= pg/pl = βg/βl. Under full recovery, again tg = tl = 1,
and Ig = Il since sg = sl. As a result, Eg/El = μg/μl = pg/pl = βg/βl. This completes the proof.

6. Proposition 5
       Suppose that sickness g is associated with the mortality risk of pgD, and pgD is
monotonically related to sg with pgD / sg > 0. We also assume that treatment may reduce
mortality risk; i.e. pgD / t g  0.
         Let vD denote the utility level under mortality, and vg1(.) denote the utility function in sick
state g, conditional on being alive. We normalize vD = 0, as in Murphy and Topel (2003) and Hall
and Jones (2007), and assume that the utility function vg1(.) has the same properties as the utility
function we use in the text, vg(.).
         Let Ig1 denote the severity of g caused by the symptoms of g. We assume, as in the text,
that Ig1 depends on the pain, sg, and treatment, tg, with I g1 / sg < 0. Then the expected utility in
sick state g is equal to (1 – pgD)vg1(Ig1) + pgDvD = (1 – pgD)vg1(Ig1).
         Given treatment, tg, this expected utility is a monotonic function of sg. To see this, suppose
sg increases. On the one hand, mortality risk, pgD, increases, and this tends to decrease expected
utility. On the other hand, severity also increases (i.e. Ig1 decreases), and this also tends to decrease
expected utility. In other words, this setting formalizes the intuition that sg captures the total effect
of disease symptoms and mortality risk.
         We now relate the expected utility to our framework in section 6, by noting that there exists
Ig such that
         vg(Ig) = (1 – pgD)vg1(Ig1).                                                              (A12)
Equation (A12) defines Ig as an implicit function of tg and sg. This implicit function is the
counterpart of equation (11), and gives us a chance to work with a more general functional form
than (11). Below, we list the properties of this function that are important for our results (these
properties all hold for equation (11), with cost c(sg,tg)). 1. Ig is continuous and differentiable with
respect to tg and sg. 2. If tg = tl = 1 and sg > sl, then Ig < Il. 3. The choice of tg to maximize Ig is a
well-defined problem. 4. For the optimal treatment tg, t g / sg > 0.
        First, suppose pg = pl but sg > sl. Under partial recovery, optimization sets I g / t g = 0.
Apply the Envelop Theorem to equation (A12), and we have
       I g '               p                       I
           vg (.)  vg1 (.) gD  (1  pgD )vg' 1 (.) g1 .                                       (A13)
       sg                   sg                     sg
Equation (A13) says that I g / sg < 0, because pgD / sg > 0 and I g1 / sg < 0. This result,
together with the property that t g / sg > 0, implies that equation (12) holds in this case. We can
follow the same steps as in the previous sub-section, to show that μg > μl.
        Under full recovery, we have tg = tl = 1, and so Ig < Il, because sg > sl. We can follow the
same steps as in the previous sub-section, to show that μg > μl.
        Finally, suppose pg > pl but sg = sl. We can follow the same steps as in the previous sub-
section, to show that Eg/El = μg/μl = pg/pl = βg/βl.

7. Proposition 6
        We assume that the treatment technology is (11) with private cost c(tg, sg). Because c(tg,
sg) and C(tg, sg) are increasing and convex with respect to tg, the average worker’s optimal choice
of treatment is a well-defined problem.
        Under partial recovery, the Envelope Theorem implies that
        I g                 c(.)
              (1  t g ) 
        sg                   sg
Under full recovery, we have
        I g      c(.)
             
        sg        sg
In both cases, ∂Ig/∂sg > 0 under Assumption (15) (i.e. ∂c(.)/∂sg < 0 and is large in magnitude).
        On the other hand, the expenditure on g is Eg = pgC(.), and so
        Eg       C (.) C (.) t g
               pg (                )
       sg         sg    t g sg
We have ∂Eg/∂sg < 0 under Assumption (15) (i.e. ∂C(.)/∂sg < 0 and is large in magnitude).
      Now consider the diseases l ≠ g with pg = pl and βg > βl. Equation (9) implies that Ig < Il.
We then have sg < sl, because ∂Ig/∂sg > 0. Thus Eg > El and μg > μl, because ∂Eg/∂sg < 0. This
completes the proof.


References:

Hersch, Joni, 1998. “Compensating Differentials for Gender-Specific Job Injury Risks”, American
       Economic Review June 1998, 88(3), pp. 598-607.
Martinello, F. and R. Meng, 1992. “Workplace Risks and the Value of Hazard Avoidance”,
       Canadian Journal of Economics, 25(2), 333-345.
McLaren, Christopher F., and Marjorie L. Baldwin. "Workers’ Compensation: Benefits, Coverage,
       and Costs,(2015 data)." National Academy of Social Insurance: Washington, DC (2016).
             Table A1 Total Danish health care expenditure as percentage of GDP

                    2010       2011     2012       2013     2014      2015
                   10.00%     9.91%    10.11%     9.94%    10.00%    9.97%

Notes: Our sources are Statistics Denmark, http://medstat.dk/, Forsikring & Pension, and
Arbejdsmarkedets erhvervssikring.




             Table A2 Danish Healthcare spending by category 2010 (billion DKK)

            Hospital Expenses                                                113.15
            Non-Hospital Expenses                                             56.37
                           Medical products and equipment                     24.81
                           Doctor Visits                                      23.48
                           Paramedic Care                                      8.10
            Other Expenses                                                    11.60
                           Other Public Health Care Expenses                   9.98
                           Expenses by None-Profit Institutions                1.62
            Grand Total                                                      181.15

Notes: Our sources are Statistics Denmark, http://medstat.dk/, Forsikring & Pension, and
Arbejdsmarkedets erhvervssikring.
            Table A3 Correlation between Mass Layoff and Decreases in Firm Sales

                 VARIABLES                           (1)             (2)

                 Large-Sales-Drop                                 0.163***
                                                                   [18.89]
                 Δlog(sales)                    -0.0971***
                                                  [-12.37]

                 Obs. No                          19,364           24,028
                 R2                               0.1023           0.0946


Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the
indicator variable for mass layoff. All specifications include firm fixed effects and year fixed
effects.

                           Table A4 Probit Model of Propensity Scores

                                                            Std.
                                              Coeff.        Err.  z-value
                      Age                     0.0148       0.0005   27.51
                      Female                 -0.0636       0.0083   -7.63
                      Children                0.0245       0.0061    4.03
                      Married                 0.0084       0.0086    0.98
                      Union status            0.0572       0.0129    4.44
                      High skilled           -0.0382       0.0107   -3.57
                      Log(Prodcom sales)     -0.1235       0.0026 -46.64

                      Industry dummies         Yes
                      Year dummies             Yes

                      Pseudo R squared         0.22
                      Observations           174,850
                      Treated                 38,123
                      Control                136,727

Notes: The data used are for the anti-depressant sample. The explanatory variables are (unless
otherwise indicated) from t-1, the year before the large increases in firm sales.
           Table A5 Mean Differences between Treatment & Control Groups in PSM

                                                Mean               Mean             %
       Variables:                              Treated            Controls         Bias
       Age                                     40.4590            39.6260          10.5
       Female                                  0.2969              0.3120          -3.2
       Children                                0.3620              0.3969          -5.2
       Married                                  0.5928             0.5839           1.8
       Union status                            0.9074              0.8843           7.6
       High skilled                             0.1463             0.1746          -7.5
       Log(Prodcom sales) in year t-1          12.3950            12.4320          -2.0


Notes: The standardized bias for a given variable is defined as the difference in means between
the treated group and the matched comparison group, scaled by the average variances. The
explanatory variables are (unless otherwise indicated) from t-2, two years before the sales shock
hits.
                                  Table A6 Estimation of VSI

                              Dep. Var. = log(annual wage)
                              Occp. Injury Rate        5.239**
                                                        (2.443)
                              female                  -0.209***
                                                       (0.0090)
                              kids                   -0.0341***
                                                       (0.0076)
                              married                0.0383***
                                                       (0.0031)
                              native                 -0.0907***
                                                       (0.0098)
                              vocational school      0.0923***
                                                        (0.011)
                              college                  0.233***
                                                        (0.013)
                              age                    -0.0056***
                                                       (0.0007)
                              experience              0.0569***
                                                       (0.0019)
                              experience2            -0.0011***
                                                      (3.98e-05)
                              tenure                 0.0047***
                                                       (0.0004)
                              Obs. No.                  890,650
                                2
                              R                          0.429

Notes: standard errors (clustered by occupation) in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                        Table A7 Elasticity of Annual Wages w.r.t. Sales


                                                            (1)
                                                        log(annual
                            VARIABLES                     wage)

                            log(sales)                  0.0085***
                                                           [6.36]
                            Exp. 5-20 years              0.174***
                                                          [81.27]
                            Exp. 20+ years               0.171***
                                                          [84.76]
                            Union                       0.0404***
                                                          [20.41]
                            Married                     0.0114***
                                                          [16.31]
                            log(employment)             0.0637***
                                                          [17.55]
                            log(K/L)                      -0.0011
                                                          [-1.19]
                            Skilled-labor share         0.139***
                                                           [9.99]
                            log(offshoring)               0.0005
                                                           [1.52]

                            Obs. No.                     3,467,642
                            R2                             0.0577
                            Job-Spell No.                 727,879

Notes: t-statistics in brackets, with clustering at firm-year level in all columns. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include job-spell fixed effects, plus industry, year and region
fixed effects.
                       Table A8 First Stage Estimation for Predicted Sales

                         VARIABLES                       log(sales)

                         log(instrument)                0.7261***
                                                           [10.83]
                         log(employment)                0.4340***
                                                           [12.25]
                         log(K/L)                         0.0267**
                                                             [2.37]
                         Skilled-labor share            -0.7684***
                                                            [-4.83]
                         log(offshoring)                 0.0287***
                                                             [4.23]
                         Exp. 5-20 years                   -0.0065
                                                            [-1.61]
                         Exp. 20+ years                  -0.0088**
                                                            [-2.05]
                         Union                              0.0022
                                                             [0.58]
                         Married                        -0.0056***
                                                            [-4.27]

                           Obs. No.                       3,468,419
                           R2                               0.4533
                           Job-Spell No.                   727,945
                           F-stat                           117.3
Notes: t-statistics in brackets, with clustering at firm-year level in all columns. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include job-spell fixed effects, plus industry, year and region
fixed effects.

                           Table A9 Mean Sickness Rates by Gender

                                                  Men                         Women
                                            Obs. #     Mean            Obs. #     Mean
         Anti-Depressant (Drug)            2259936    0.0304          1076119     0.0471
       Anti-Dep./Psychiatrist Visit        2259936    0.0329          1076119     0.0546
         Narrow Burnout (Hosp.)            2259936    0.00004         1076119    0.00007
         Broad Burnout (Hosp.)             2259936    0.00005         1076119    0.00009
      Broad Burnout/Stress (Hosp.)         2259936    0.00015         1076119    0.00030
     Broad Burnout/Stress/Depression
                 (Hosp.)                   2259936    0.00021         1076119      0.00038
          Heart Disease (Drug)             2259936     0.0289         1076119       0.0152
      Heart Attack or Stroke (Hosp.)       2259936     0.0020         1076119       0.0007
          Liver Disease (Hosp.)            2259936     0.0011         1076119      0.0005
