                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ESTIMATING CROSS-INDUSTRY CROSS-COUNTRY INTERACTION MODELS
              USING BENCHMARK INDUSTRY CHARACTERISTICS

                                       Antonio Ciccone
                                       Elias Papaioannou

                                      Working Paper 22368
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22368


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2016




We would like to thank Sebastian Hohmann for comments. Any errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Antonio Ciccone and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Cross-Industry Cross-Country Interaction Models Using Benchmark Industry Characteristics
Antonio Ciccone and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 22368
June 2016
JEL No. F10,G30,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

Empirical cross-industry cross-country models are applied widely in economics, for example to
investigate the determinants of economic growth or international trade. Estimation generally
relies on US proxies for unobservable technological industry characteristics, for example
industries' dependence on external finance or relationship-specific inputs. We examine the
properties of the estimator and find that estimates can be biased towards zero (attenuated) or
away from zero (amplified), depending on how technological similarity with the US covaries
with other country characteristics. We also develop an alternative estimator that yields a lower
bound on the true effect in cross-industry cross-country models of comparative advantage.


Antonio Ciccone
Mannheim University and UPF
antonio.ciccone@gmail.com

Elias Papaioannou
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Recent empirical work in macroeconomics and international trade has relied extensively on
cross-industry cross-country models that relate cross-country di¤erences in industry perfor-
mance – industry growth or industry exports for example – to an interaction between (i)
country characteristics like …nancial development, institutional quality, or human capital en-
dowments and (ii) industry characteristics like external-…nance dependence, the complexity
of production, or skill intensity. The approach has proven useful for examining a surpris-
ingly wide variety of interesting economic questions, brie‡y reviewed below. Two strands of
research stand out. First, following Rajan and Zingales (1998), cross-industry cross-country
models have been used to examine how economic growth and development is a¤ected by
…nancial development, property rights protection, contract enforcement, and human capital
endowments. Second, building on Romalis (2004) and subsequent theoretical contributions
in international trade, cross-industry cross-country models have served as the basis for em-
pirical studies of the e¤ect of factor endowments and institutions on comparative advantage
(for a review, see Nunn and Tre‡er, 2014). For example, Nunn (2007) uses the approach
to show that better contract enforcement is a source of comparative advantage in industries
that use relationship-speci…c inputs more intensively.
    Because there is little industry data for most countries, the cross-industry cross-country
literature generally treats the relevant technological industry characteristics –for example,
external-…nance dependence in Rajan and Zingales (1998) or relationship-speci…c input in-
tensity in Nunn (2007) – as unobservable and employs proxies from a benchmark country,
typically the United States (US). Another reason for using US industry data to obtain prox-
ies for the relevant industry characteristics is that technological industry characteristics must
be inferred from industry behavior, which is likely to yield more reliable results in countries
where markets are not too distorted. Our goal here is to understand the widely used cross-
industry cross-country estimator and formally analyze the implications of using data from a
benchmark country to proxy unobservable technological industry characteristics.
    Our starting point is an empirical framework that encompasses the cross-industry cross-
country models in the literature. A basic feature of the framework is that the technological
characteristics of industries may be more similar for some pairs of countries than others
(e.g., Bernard and Jones, 1996; Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 2001; Schott, 2004; Caselli, 2005).
We then show that the benchmarking estimator used in the cross-industry cross-country
literature is subject to a bias shaped by two countervailing forces. Unsurprisingly, proxying
the technological industry characteristics of countries using data from a benchmark country


                                               1
may result in a bias toward zero (an attenuation bias). The reasoning is similar to that of
the classical measurement error bias. But benchmarking may also result in a bias away from
zero, which we refer to as ampli…cation bias. The ampli…cation bias can be very strong if
technologically similar countries are similar in other dimensions.1
       A main area of application of cross-industry cross-country models is international trade,
where these models have been used to examine the e¤ect of factor endowments and institu-
tions on comparative advantage (e.g. Romalis, 2004; Levchenko, 2007; Nunn, 2007; Cuñat
and Melitz, 2012; Krishna and Levchenko, 2013; Manova, 2013). We show that in this
context there is a benchmarking estimator that is biased towards zero and therefore yields
a lower bound on the true e¤ect, as long as some countries di¤er in the direction of their
comparative advantage. We illustrate this estimator by applying it to Nunn’s (2007) study
of the e¤ect of contract enforcement on comparative advantage in industries that depend
more on relationship-speci…c intermediate inputs.
       The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Next we brie‡y review some of the applica-
tions of the cross-industry cross-country approach. Section 2 examines the estimator used in
the cross-industry cross-country literature. Section 3 develops the alternative estimator that
yields a lower bound on the true e¤ect in models of comparative advantage and illustrates
the estimator in the context of Nunn (2007). Section 4 concludes.

Some Applications of the Cross-Industry Cross-Country Approach The cross-
industry cross-country approach is widely used in economics and our brief review here is
only meant to illustrate the range of empirical applications. See Appendix Table 1 for a
summary of the variety of applications.
       Many applications of the cross-industry cross-country approach investigate the e¤ects
of …nancial markets on economic growth, …rm entry and exit, investment, and innovation
(e.g., Rajan and Zingales, 1998; Fisman and Love, 2003, 2007; Braun and Larrain, 2005;
Aghion, Fally, and Scarpetta, 2007; Beck, Demirgüc-Kunt, Laeven, and Levine, 2008; Brown,
Martinson, and Petersen, 2013; Hsu, Tian, and Xu, 2014; Calomiris, Larrain, Liberti, and
Sturgess, 2016).
       The cross-industry cross-country approach has been widely used to examine the determi-
nants of international trade and industrial specialization. Nunn (2007), Levchenko (2007),
and subsequent works show that institutionally advanced countries tend to specialize in sec-
   1
    It is tempting to think of the ampli…cation bias as a simple omitted variable bias, but there are di¤erences
that make this analogy less useful. For example, the two forces determining the bias of the benchmarking
estimator result in either ampli…cation or attenuation. In contrast, the simple omitted variable bias is either
upwards or downwards. Nevertheless, the bias of the benchmarking estimator can – just like the classical
measurement error bias –be understood as a nonstandard omitted variable bias.


                                                       2
tors that rely on di¤erentiated intermediate inputs (see also Ranjan and Lee, 2007; Ferguson
and Formai, 2013; Nunn and Tre‡er, 2014). Manova (2008, 2013) links …nancial devel-
opment to the patterns of international trade (see also Chan and Manova, 2015; Manova,
Wei, and Zhang, 2015). Building on Romalis (2004), Ciccone and Papaioannou (2009) show
that countries with an educated workforce tend to specialize in human capital intensive sec-
tors. The cross-industry cross-country approach has also been used to investigate the e¤ect
of product and labor market institutions on comparative advantage, productivity, entrepre-
neurship, and innovation (e.g., Ciccone and Papaioannou, 2007; Cingano, Leonardi, Messina,
and Pica, 2010; Cuñat and Melitz, 2012; Tang, 2012; Gri¢ th and Macartney, 2014). And
recent works have employed the cross-industry cross-country approach to study the e¤ects of
environmental protection laws and water supply on comparative advantage (Broner, Bustos,
and Carvalho, 2015; Debaere, 2015).
   Other applications of the cross-industry cross-country approach investigate a variety of
di¤erent economic issues. For example, the driving forces of outsourcing, foreign direct in-
vestment, and the fragmentation of production (e.g., Alfaro and Charlton, 2009; Carluccio
and Fally, 2012; Basco, 2013; Blyde and Danielken, 2015; Paunov, 2016). The cross-industry
cross-country approach has also been used to examine the economic consequences of cross-
country di¤erences in …rm size distributions, entry regulation, transaction costs, risk shar-
ing possibilities, skill dispersion, and foreign aid in‡ows (e.g. Pagano and Schivardi, 2003;
Klapper, Laeven, and Rajan, 2006; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Mitton, 2009; Rajan and Sub-
ramanian, 2010; Aizenman and Sushko, 2011; Bombardini, Gallipoli, and Pupato, 2012;
Michelacci and Schivardi, 2013; Larrain, 2014; Aghion, Howitt, and Prantl, 2014). Recent
applications use the cross-industry cross-country setup to assess the e¤ects of …nancial crises
on macroeconomic performance and international trade (e.g. Dell’Ariccia, Detragiache, and
Rajan, 2008; Iacovone and Zavacka, 2009; Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy, 2010; Claessens, Tong,
and Wei, 2012; Laeven and Valencia, 2013) and to examine the e¤ects of …scal and monetary
policy over the business cycle (e.g. Aghion, Farhi, and Kharroubi, 2013; Aghion, Hemous,
and Kharroubi, 2014).
   Variations of the cross-industry cross-country approach have been employed to exam-
ine the economic e¤ects of di¤erences in …nancial development, institutional quality and
trust across regions and over time (e.g. Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006; Bertrand, Schoar,
and Tesmar, 2007; Hsieh and Parker, 2007; Aghion, Askenazy, Berman, Cette, and Eymar,
2012; Fafchamps and Schündeln, 2013; Feenstra, Hong, Ma, and Spencer, 2013; Duygan-
Bump, Levkov, and Montoriol-Garriga, 2015; Jacobson and von Schedvin, 2015; Cingano
and Pinotti, 2016).


                                              3
2       The Benchmarking Bias
2.1      Empirical Framework
The basis of cross-industry cross-country models are theories linking outcomes for industries
in di¤erent countries to an interaction between country characteristics and technological
industry characteristics. For example, in Rajan and Zingales (1998), the outcome variable is
industry growth and the interaction is between country-level …nancial development and the
external-…nance dependence of industries. In Nunn (2007), the outcome variable is industry
exports and the interaction is between country-level contract enforcement and the intensity
with which industries use relationship-speci…c inputs. As the main theoretical prediction
concerns the e¤ect of the interaction between country and industry characteristics, cross-
industry cross-country models allow controlling for country and industry …xed e¤ects. An
empirical framework that encompasses the models used in the cross-industry cross-country
literature is

(1)                              yin =   n   +   i   + xn zin + vin

where yin is the outcome in industry i = 1; ::; I and country n = 1; ::; N ; xn the relevant
country characteristic; and zin the relevant industry characteristic. The        n   and   i   denote
country and industry …xed e¤ects and vin unobservable determinants of the outcome. The
parameter of interest is the coe¢ cient on the industry-country interaction, . We take vin
to be distributed independently of zin and xn to abstract from omitted variable and reverse
causation issues. We also assume that vin has a …nite variance and E(vin jn) = E(vin ji) = 0,
                              XN
and take xn to be given with       (xn x)2 > 0 where x is the average of xn .
                                   n=1
      Estimation of   in (1) would be straightforward if there were data on the technological
industry characteristics zin for a broad set of countries. But detailed industry data are
unavailable for most countries. Moreover, the cross-industry cross-country literature often
focuses on technological industry characteristics that are not directly observable and must
therefore be inferred from industry behavior. Such inference is likely to be more reliable in
countries where markets are not too distorted. In practice, zin is generally proxied using
industry data from a benchmark country, almost always the US.
      It is therefore important to understand whether       in (1) can be estimated using industry
characteristics from a benchmark country as a proxy for zin . For such a benchmarking
estimator to stand a chance, there must be some global element to an industry’s technological
characteristics. At the same time, it seems unreasonable to presume that industries use the
same technology in all countries, as the optimal technology choice depends on many factors


                                                     4
that vary across countries (e.g., Bernard and Jones, 1996; Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 2001;
Schott, 2004; Caselli, 2005). We therefore model the industry characteristics zin in (1) as
the sum of a global industry characteristic (zi ) and a country-speci…c industry characteristic
("in )

(2)                                               zin = zi + "in

where zi is i.i.d. with variance V ar(z ) and independent of other elements of the model.2
The country-speci…c industry characteristics "in allow us to capture that industry character-
istics may be more similar for some country-pairs than others in a simple way. We assume
E("in jn) = E("in ji) = 0; E("2in jn) =       2
                                                  ; E("in "jm jn; m) = 0 for all industries i 6= j; and the
following correlation of idiosyncratic industry characteristics for country pairs n 6= m

(3)                                    Corr("in "im jn; m) =        mn   .

Hence, the correlation of industry characteristics zin for country pairs n 6= m is
                                                                              2
                                                     V ar(z )
(4)                  Corr(zin ; zim jn; m) =                    2
                                                                    +                2 mn
                                                                                          :
                                                  V ar(z ) +            V ar(z ) +

Corr(zin ; zim jn; m) can be interpreted as an index of technological similarity and country
pairs with greater     mn   are therefore more similar technologically.

2.2      The Bias
As data on the technological industry characteristics zin are unavailable for a broad set of
countries, the cross-industry cross-country literature proceeds using a proxy from a bench-
mark country. We refer to this proxy as ziU S as the benchmark country is almost always the
US. Hence, the equation estimated in the cross-industry cross-country literature is

(5)                              yin = an + ai + bxn ziU S + residualin

where an and ai stand for country and industry …xed e¤ects. The main coe¢ cient of interest
in the literature is b and the method of estimation is least squares.3
      To understand the relationship between the least-squares estimator of b in (5) and                    in
(1), which is the parameter of interest, it is useful to rewrite the least-squares estimator in
   2
     While it is reasonable to think of industry characteristics as also re‡ecting a country-speci…c component,
we can omit such components in (2) without any loss of generality as they can be absorbed into the country
…xed e¤ects in (1).
   3
     Applications where the exogeneity of xn is an issue also use instrumental-variables estimation. Our
…ndings carry over to these instances. The easiest way to see this is to think of (5) as the reduced-form
equation.

                                                        5
terms of demeaned data (e.g., Baltagi, 2008)
                         X X
                     1 1
                     N I
                                    (ziU S z U S )(xn x) (yin                  yn       y i + y)
(6)             bb =       n      i
                                  X X
                              1 1
                              N I
                                            (ziU S z U S )2 (xn                x)2
                                               i      n
where y is the average of yin across industries and countries; y i the average of yin for industry
i; y n the average of yin for country n; z U S the average of ziU S ; and x the average of xn . The
probability limit of bb is4

(7)                                    bba = plim bb =          [1 + ] :
                                                    I!1
with
                                     X
                                             (xn    x) [Corr(zU S ; zn )xn ]
                                         n
(8)                              =                 X                                1
                                                      (xn x)2
                                                       n
where Corr(zU S ; zn )     Corr(ziU S ; zin jn):

2.2.1      The Case of Attenuation Bias

It follows from (7) that the benchmarking estimator bb used in cross-industry cross-country
empirics will be attenuated (biased towards zero) if and only if 0 < 1 +                               1; equivalently
using (8)
                                     X
                                             (xn    x) [Corr(zU S ; zn )xn ]
                                         n
(9)                           0<                   X                            1:
                                                      (xn x)2
                                                      n
For example, this will be the case if the index of technological similarity with the US is the
same for all countries and technological industry characteristics in the US therefore proxy
equally well for technological industry characteristics in all other countries, Corr(zU S ; zn ) =
  > 0. In this case, bba =      where plays the role of the reliability ratio in the classical
measurement error model (e.g. Wooldridge, 2002).
       A somewhat more general su¢ cient condition for bb to be biased towards zero is that the
index of technological similarity with the US, Corr(zU S ; zn ), is decreasing in the country
characteristic xn , but that Corr(zU S ; zn )xn is increasing in xn (if the latter condition is not
satis…ed, the benchmarking estimator may have the wrong sign).
   4
     Substituting (1) into (6) and taking the probability limit as I ! 1 of the numerator yields
            X                  X                                      X X
          1
plim      N        (xn x)xn I1     ("in "iU S )"iU S + plim      N
                                                                  1 1
                                                                    I           (ziU S z U S )2 (xn x)2 : Us-
I!1             n                i                      I!1             i     n
                               X                                                 X
                             1
ing (3) this simpli…es to   N        (xn x)xn ( U Sn 1) 2 + V ar(zU S ) N1             (xn x)2 : The proba-
                                  n
                                                                                  Xn
bility limit of the denominator when substituting (1) into (6) is V ar(zU S ) N1       (xn x)2 : Hence, the
                                      X                                               nX
                                    1
probability limit of (6) is +      N     (xn x)xn ( U Sn 1) 2 = V ar(zU S ) N1             (xn x)2     which
                                         n                                                         n
                                                                                                              2
de…ning Corr(zU S ; zn )   Corr(ziU S ; zin jn) and making use of (4) and V ar(zU S ) = V ar(z ) +                can be
written as in (7) and (8).

                                                           6
2.2.2      The Case of Ampli…cation Bias

But the benchmarking estimator bb can yield estimates of                                that are biased away from zero
(ampli…ed). From (7) and (8) it follows that this will be the case if and only if                                > 0 or
equivalently
                                  X
                                          (xn    x) [Corr(zU S ; zn )xn ]
                                      n
(10)                                            X                         > 1:
                                                   (xn x)2
                                                   n

The left-hand side of the inequality in (10) turns out to be the standard formula for the
least-squares slope of a regression of Corr(zU S ; zn )xn on xn . Hence, the condition for an
ampli…cation bias in (10) is equivalent to a least-squares slope greater unity when regressing
Corr(zU S ; zn )xn on xn . For this to be the case, the index of technological similarity of country
n with the US, Corr(zU S ; zn ), must be strictly increasing in the country characteristic xn
over some range.
      To develop some intuition for the ampli…cation bias, it is useful to rewrite the model in
(1) in terms of two equations

(11)                                   yin =       n    +       i   +   n zin   + vin

where

(12)                                                    n   = xn :

The country-speci…c slope parameters                n   capture cross-country di¤erences in how industry
outcomes covary with industry characteristics. For example, in Rajan and Zingales (1998)
these slope parameters would capture cross-country di¤erences in the covariation between
industry growth and the external-…nance dependence of industries. In Nunn (2007), the
slope parameters would capture cross-country di¤erences in the covariation between industry
exports and the relationship-speci…c input intensity of industries.
      Now imagine estimating the country-speci…c slopes                            n    in (11) with least squares using
US industry characteristics ziU S as a proxy of industry characteristics zin . The resulting
least-squares slopes bn re‡ect the covariation between industry outcomes in country n and
US industry characteristics ziU S . Substituting the least-squares slopes bn in (6) yields that
the benchmarking estimator can be expressed as the least-squares slope of a regression of
the country-speci…c slope estimates bn on the country characteristics xn
                                       X
                                            b (xn x)
(13)                              bb = Xn n           :5
                                            (xn x)  2
                                                            n
  5
      To see this, note that the least-squares estimates of the country-speci…c slopes expressed in terms of

                                                                7
Similarly, the probability limit of the benchmarking estimator bba can be written as the
least-squares slope when regressing ban on xn
                                         X
                                                        ban (xn        x)
(14)                                    bba = Xn
                                                            (xn    x)2
                                                        n

where

(15)                                   ban =     n Corr(zU S ; zn ):


Equation (14) shows that the bias of the benchmarking estimator will re‡ect how the bias
of the country-speci…c least-squares slopes covaries with the country characteristic xn . As
a result, the ampli…cation bias can arise even if all country-speci…c slope estimates are
attenuated because of classical measurement error, as long as the attenuation bias is weaker
for countries with greater xn .

A setting where countries fall into two groups The ampli…cation bias emerges most
clearly in a setting where countries except the US fall into two groups, A and B, and countries
in the same group are identical. In this two-group setting, (13) simpli…es to

(16)                                           bb = bA        bB
                                                                 :
                                                    xA        xB
That is, the benchmarking estimator is simply the slope of the line connecting the two points
(xA ; bA ) and (xB ; bB ). Making use of (15), the probability limit of (16) is
                         a
                  bba = bA     baB        Corr(zU S ; zA )xA                    Corr(zU S ; zB )xB
(17)                               =
                        xA     xB                         xA                    xB
where Corr(zU S ; zA )    Corr(ziU S ; zin jn) for all countries n in group A and Corr(zU S ; zB ) is
de…ned analogously. There is an ampli…cation bias if and only if the term in parenthesis is
greater than unity. The simplest way to see that the ampli…cation bias can be very large
is to consider the case where where (i) countries in group A have the same technological
characteristics as the US and US industry characteristics therefore proxy perfectly for indus-
try characteristics of these countries, Corr(zU S ; zA ) = 1, but (ii) countries in group B have
technological characteristics that di¤er from the US to the point where US industry charac-
teristics are uncorrelated with industry characteristics of these countries, Corr(zU S ; zB ) = 0.
In this case, (17) simpli…es to

                                        bba =                xA
(18)                                                                        :
                                                       xA         xB
                                               X                                         .X
                                                                                             2
demeaned data (e.g., Baltagi, 2008) are bn =          ziU S (yin       yn        y i + y)   ziU S.
                                                  i                                         i


                                                        8
Hence, there will be an ampli…cation bias if xA > xB > 0 and the bias will be very large if
the two groups of countries have very similar characteristics x. This is because in this case
there is a strong positive association between the country characteristic xn and technological
similarity with the US.
      Figure 1 illustrates the true model and the estimated model in the two-group setting
for     > 0. In …gure 1A, we graph the true country-speci…c slopes                  A   and   B   against xA
and xB . As      n   =    xn , the true parameter of interest             is simply the slope of the line
connecting the two points (xA ;     A)   and (xB ;    B ).    In …gure 1B, we also graph the probability
limits of the country-speci…c slope estimates      and baB against xA and xB . Equation (17)
                                                      baA
implies that the probability limit of the benchmarking estimator bba is simply the slope of
the line connecting the two points (xA ; ba ) and (xB ; ba ). The ampli…cation bias bba > > 0
                                              A                     B

follows because US industry characteristics are a perfect proxy for industry characteristics of
countries in group A, which implies baA =            A;   but do not proxy for industry characteristics
of countries in group B, which implies       baB   =0<         B:   More generally, the ampli…cation bias
of the benchmarking estimator arises when the attenuation bias of the country-speci…c slope
estimates (which re‡ects technological dissimilarity with the US) is su¢ ciently stronger for
countries that are less similar to the US in the country characteristic x.



                                    Figure 1A: True Model



                         LA



                                                          K

                         LB



                          0           xB                                xA




                                                      9
                                     Figure 1B: Amplification Bias



                åa
                L A = LA




                                                             K


                      LB
                                                       åa
                                                       K
                åa
                LB = 0
                           0                xB                                xA



      Notes: True country-speci…c slopes (bold circles) and estimated country-speci…c slopes (…lled circles) in the
      two-group model where the benchmarking estimator is biased away from zero (ampli…cation bias). There is
      ampli…cation bias although the country-speci…c slope estimates are weakly biased towards zero (attenuated).



3    Estimating Comparative Advantage Models with a
     Benchmarking Estimator
The (standard) benchmarking estimator of the empirical cross-industry cross-country lit-
erature has been used widely to investigate the determinants of comparative advantage in
international trade (e.g. Romalis, 2004; Levchenko, 2007; Nunn, 2007; Manova, 2008, 2013;
Cuñat and Melitz, 2012). In this context, there turns out to be a new benchmarking estima-
tor that yields a lower bound on the strength of comparative advantage under the assumption
that at least one pair of countries di¤ers in the direction of comparative advantage. We …rst
illustrate the argument in a model of comparative advantage where all countries except the
US fall into two groups and countries in the same group are identical. A special feature of this
setting is that the new benchmarking estimator turns out to be identical to the (standard)
benchmarking estimator used in the literature. Then we discuss the new benchmarking
estimator in a more general setting (where the new benchmarking estimator is no longer
identical to the benchmarking estimator used in the cross-industry cross-country literature).




                                                            10
3.1    Model and Assumptions
It is useful to rewrite (without loss of generality) the country characteristic xn in (11) and
(12) as xn = qn   q . This yields

(19)                                 yin =   n   +   i   +   n zin   + vin


(20)                                         n   = (qn       q ):

qn is the country characteristic that may determine a country’s comparative advantage and
q the value of qn where comparative advantage switches from high-z industries to low-z
industries as long as     6= 0. We can obtain a lower bound on the strength of comparative
advantage    under two assumptions. The …rst assumption, which is standard in the com-
parative advantage literature using the cross-industry cross-country approach, is that high-z
industries in the US also tend to be high-z industries elsewhere. The second assumption –
which will turn out to be testable –is that there is at least one country on either side of the
threshold q . Formally:

(A1) High-z industries in the US tend to be high-z industries elsewhere, Corr(zU S ; zn ) > 0.

(A2) There is at least one country on either side of the threshold q , that is (qn    q )(qm
q ) < 0 for at least one pair of countries n, m. Or equivalently, as long as     6= 0, at least
one country has a comparative advantage in high-z industries and at least one country has
a comparative advantage in low-z industries.

A setting where countries fall into two groups To illustrate why these two assump-
tions allow for a benchmarking estimator that yields a lower bound on the true strength of
comparative advantage, we return to the setting where countries except the US fall into two
groups and countries in the same group are identical. A special feature of this setting is that
the new benchmarking estimator turns out to be identical to the (standard) benchmarking
estimator used in the literature. We can therefore illustrate the argument using the standard
benchmarking estimator and postpone the introduction of the new benchmarking estimator.
   As shown above, in the setting where countries except the US fall into two groups and
countries in the same group are identical, the key formulas for the (standard) benchmarking
estimator bb used in the cross-industry cross-country literature simplify to (16) and (17).
Substituting xn = qn      q yields

(21)                                         bb = bA         bB
                                                  qA         qB

                                                     11
and
                  a
           bba = bA      baB         Corr(zU S ; zA )(qA        q )    Corr(zU S ; zB )(qB     q )
(22)                         =                                                                          :
                 qA      qB                                      qA    qB
The benchmarking estimator bb will be attenuated and therefore yield a lower bound on the
true e¤ect , if and only if the term in parenthesis on the right-hand side of (22) is strictly
greater than zero but smaller than unity. This is equivalent to6

                              [Corr(zU S ; zB ) + Corr(zU S ; zA )] (qA       q )(qB     q )
(23)                     < Corr(zU S ; zA )(qA       q )2 + Corr(zU S ; zB )(qB         q )2

and

                    [2     Corr(zU S ; zA )    Corr(zU S ; zB )](qA        q )(qB      q )
(24)                [1     Corr(zU S ; zB )] (qB     q )2 + [1        Corr(zU S ; zA )] (qA    q )2 .

Both conditions will be satis…ed if assumptions (A1) and (A2) hold. To see this, notice
that because countries in the same group are identical, assumption (A2) is equivalent to
(qA     q )(qB   q ) < 0: Combined with assumption (A1), this implies that the left-hand side
of (23) is strictly negative while the right-hand side is positive. Assumptions (A1) and (A2)
also imply that the left-hand side of (24) is negative while the right-hand side is positive.
Hence, assumptions (A1) and (A2) imply that the term in parenthesis on the right-hand-
side of (22) is strictly greater than zero but smaller than unity and that the benchmarking
estimator bb will be biased towards zero: When US industry characteristics are an imperfect
proxy for industry characteristics of countries in group A or group B; the inequality in (24)
will be strict and the benchmarking estimator bb will be strictly biased towards zero:
      Figure 2 illustrates the true model and the estimated model for                   > 0. In …gure 2A, we
graph the true country-speci…c slopes            A   and    B   against qA      q > 0 and qB            q < 0. As
 n   = (qn q ), the true parameter of interest              is simply the slope of the line connecting the
two points. In …gure 2B, we also graph the probability limits of the country-speci…c slope
estimates baA and baB against qA           q and qB         q . According to (22), the slope of the line
 connecting these two new points yields the probability limit of the benchmarking estimator
bba : As ba > 0 and ba < 0 are biased towards zero, it follows that the line connecting the
          A               B

country-speci…c slope estimates must be less steep than the line connecting the true country-
speci…c slopes. Hence, bba is biased towards zero (attenuated). For < 0 the argument is
analogous.
   6
     To derive the conditions in (23) and (24), it is convenient to write the term in parenthesis in (22) as
 1 2 . As long as qA 6= qB , the condition 0 < 1 = 2
  =                                                      1 is equivalent to 1 2 > 0, which is the condition
in (23), and ( 1 = 2 )(qA qB )2    (qA qB )2 , which making use of qA qB = (qA q ) (qB q ) is the
condition in (24).

                                                       12
                                      Figure 2A: True Model



                                               LA




                           qB ? qD
                                                      0                  qA ? qD
                                             K

                                                      LB




                                        Figure 2B: Estimated Model



                                                 LA
                                                 åa
                                                 LA
                                                                    åa
                                                                    K
                           qB ? qD
                                                      0                  qA ? qD
                                             K
                                                      åa
                                                      LB
                                                      LB




          Notes: True country-speci…c slopes (bold circles) and estimated country-speci…c slopes (…lled
          circles) in the two-group model of comparative advantage where the benchmarking estimator of
          the cross-industry cross-country approach is necessarily biased towards zero (attenuation bias).
                                                           .

    To better understand this result, it is useful to compare …gure 2B where the benchmarking
estimator bb is biased towards zero, with …gure 1B where bb is biased away from zero. In both
…gures, all country-speci…c slope estimates are biased towards zero. But in …gure 1B this

                                                           13
results in the benchmarking estimator bb being biased away from zero, while in …gure 2B bb
is biased towards zero. From the …gures it becomes clear that this is because in …gure 2B,
there are countries on both sides of q and these countries di¤er in the direction of their
comparative advantage. As a result, the line connecting the country-speci…c slope estimates
in …gure 2B is a clockwise rotation of the line connecting the true country-speci…c slopes.
Hence, bba is necessarily biased towards zero.

3.2       A New Benchmarking Estimator
There continues to be a benchmarking estimator yielding a lower bound on the true strength
of comparative advantage associated with country characteristic qn in (19) and (20) when
there are many di¤erent countries (but this estimator is no longer the benchmarking esti-
mator used in the cross-industry cross-country literature). To show this, we start with the
case where it is known which countries are on the same side of q . Or equivalently as long as
  6= 0, the case where it is known which countries have a comparative advantage going in the
same direction. Then we turn to the case where the grouping of countries by the direction
of their comparative advantage is unknown.

3.2.1      Known Country Grouping

If it were known which countries are on the same side of q , we could put countries on one
side of q into group A and countries on the other side of q into group B. Then we could
estimate the strength of comparative advantage associated with country characteristic qn
using the following new benchmarking estimator

(25)                                          bbG = bnA     bnB
                                                     qA     qB

where bA and bB denote the average country-speci…c slope estimate for countries in group
A and group B; q A and q B are the average country characteristic in groups A and B (it does
not matter which group countries with qn at the threshold q are assigned to; we denote
the new benchmarking estimator with a subscript G because the estimator can be seen as a
grouped-data estimator).7 It is immediate that the new benchmarking estimator in (25) is
identical to the standard benchmarking estimator in (21) when countries in the same group
are identical. Hence, the argument in section 3.1 that the standard benchmarking estimator
is biased towards zero under assumptions (A1) and (A2) when countries in the same group
are identical, implies that the new benchmarking estimator is also biased towards zero in this
  7
      See Angrist (1991) for an application and a brief historical review of grouped-data estimation.


                                                      14
special case. In the general case where the strength of comparative advantage di¤ers among
countries with the same direction of comparative advantage, (i) the new benchmarking
estimator and the standard benchmarking estimator are no longer identical, and (ii) the
standard benchmarking estimator may be biased upward or downward even if assumptions
(A1) and (A2) hold. However, assumptions (A1) and (A2) imply that the new benchmarking
estimator in (25) is biased towards zero this general case also, and the new benchmarking
estimator therefore continues to yield a lower bound on the strength of the true e¤ect. To
see this, we …rst obtain the probability limit of (25) using (15), which yields
                                                                                                          !
                  a
           bba = bnA        bamB          Corr(zU S ; znA )(qnA     q )   Corr(zU S ; zmB )(qmB     q )
(26)         G                   =
                  qA        qB                                       qA   qB

where Corr(zU S ; znA )(qnA          q ) is the average of Corr(zU S ; znA )(qnA       q ) across countries
n in group A and Corr(zU S ; zmB )(qmB                 q ) is de…ned analogously for countries m in group
B. (26) implies that the new benchmarking estimator will be attenuated and therefore yield
a lower bound on the true e¤ect, if and only if the term in parenthesis is strictly greater than
zero but smaller than unity. This turns out to be equivalent to8

                 Corr(zU S ; znA )(qnA      q ) (q B     q ) + Corr(zU S ; zmB )(qmB    q ) (q A    q )
(27)          < Corr(zU S ; znA )(qnA       q ) (q A     q ) + Corr(zU S ; zmB )(qmB    q ) (q B    q )

and

(28) [1         Corr(zU S ; znA )](qnA     q ) (q B     q ) + [1    Corr(zU S ; zmB )](qmB    q ) (q A     q )
         [1     Corr(zU S ; znA )] (qnA     q ) (q A     q ) + [1   Corr(zU S ; zmB )] (qmB   q ) (q B     q ).

Both conditions will be satis…ed if assumptions (A1) and (A2) hold. To see this, notice that
the left-hand side of (27) is strictly negative as Corr(zU S ; znA ) > 0, Corr(zU S ; zmB ) > 0;
and at least one pair of countries di¤ers in the direction of their comparative advantage,
(qnA      q )(qmB       q ) < 0; and the right-hand side of (27) is positive as countries in the
same group have the same direction of comparative advantage, (qnA                        q ) (q A    q )         0
and (qmB         q ) (q B    q )     0: A similar argument yields that the left-hand side of (28) is
negative while the right-hand side is positive. Hence, the term in parenthesis in (26) is strictly
greater than zero but smaller than unity and the grouping estimator bbG is biased towards
zero. When US industry characteristics are an imperfect proxy for industry characteristics
in at least one country where qn 6= q , the inequality in (28) will be strict and the new
benchmarking estimator bbG will be strictly biased towards zero.
  8
      The argument is analogous to that in footnote 6.

                                                          15
   Figure 3 illustrates the true model and the estimated model for                 > 0. In …gure 3A,
we graph the true country-speci…c slopes            n   against qn   q with each circle representing a
country. As   n   = (qn    q ), the true parameter of interest          is the slope of the line through
the circles. In …gure 3B, we also graph the probability limits of the country-speci…c slope
estimates ban against qn    q . All country-speci…c slope estimates are biased towards zero.
This means that we underestimate the country-speci…c slopes for countries with comparative
advantage in high-z industries and we overestimate the country-speci…c slopes for countries
 with comparative advantage in low-z industries. As a result, the new benchmarking estimator
bbG –which according to (26) is the slope of the line connecting the average country-speci…c
slope estimate for countries with comparative advantage in high-z industries with the average
country-speci…c slope estimate for countries with comparative advantage in low-z industries
–will necessarily be biased towards zero.



                                     Figure 3A: True Model


                                           Ln




                                                0                     qn ? qD
                                       K




                                                        16
                                             Figure 3B: Estimated Model



                                               å
                                       L n and L an


                                                                          åa
                                                                          K


                                                          0                            qn ? qD
                                                 K




         Notes: True country-speci…c slopes (bold circles) and estimated country-speci…c slopes (…lled circles)
         in a model of comparative advantage with many di¤erent countries (each circle represents a country).
         In this case the new benchmarking estimator is necessarily biased towards zero (attenuation bias).


   Summarizing, the new benchmarking estimator is downward biased in …gure 3 – and
hence a lower bound on the true e¤ect –because (A1) and (A2) combined with (25) imply
                                            #bias         "bias
                                            z}|{          z}|{                #bias
                                                                              z}|{
                                            bnA           bnB                  bbG :
(29)                                                                  )
                                              qA          qB
   For    < 0, the argument is analogous.

A 2SLS Interpretation The new benchmarking estimator in (25) turns out to have an
interpretation as a 2SLS estimator applied to the cross-industry cross-country model

(30)                               yin =     n   +    i   + bziU S qn + residualin :

To see this, de…ne an indicator function 1n that assigns a value of 1 to countries in group
A and a value of 0 to all other countries (or the other way round). Now we can estimate
(30) using 2SLS with the product of the indicator function and the US industry character-
istics ziU S 1n as an instrument for the interaction term ziU S qn . This 2SLS estimator can be
expressed in terms of demeaned data as
                                                           X
                                                                      bn 1n      1
(31)                                     bbG;2SLS = Xn
                                                                      qn 1n      1
                                                                  n


                                                              17
where the bn are the country-speci…c least-squares slopes estimated using US industry char-
                                                                                      X
acteristics as a proxy for industry characteristics in all other countries and 1 = N1   1n . It
                                                                                                n
is now straightforward to show that the right-hand side of (31) is the same as the right-hand
side of (25) and hence bbG;2SLS = bbG .

3.2.2   Estimated Country Grouping

The 2SLS estimator in (31) cannot be implemented directly because we generally do not
know whether countries have a comparative advantage in high-z or low-z industries. As a
result, we cannot generate the necessary indicator function 1n . But it turns out that we can
estimate 1n consistently under the (testable) assumption                6= 0. As shown in Wooldridge
(2002, Section 6.1.2), the 2SLS estimator using a consistently estimated instrument is not
only consistent but has the same asymptotic distribution as the 2SLS estimator using the
actual instrument under weak conditions. Hence, we can obtain an estimate with the same
asymptotic distribution as bbG;2SLS by estimating the cross-industry cross-country model in
                                                     1n where b
(30) with 2SLS and instrumenting ziU S qn with ziU S b        1n is a consistent estimator of
1n . We now discuss two approaches to obtain such a consistent estimator. A simple approach
that only relies on the sign of the country-speci…c slope estimates and a second, somewhat
more complex, approach that also considers the country characteristic shaping the direction
of comparative advantage.

Simple Approach The …rst estimator, which we refer to as b
                                                         11n ; is an indicator that takes
the value of 1 for countries n with bn           0 and the value of 0 for all other countries. Recall
that bn converges to   ban   =   n Corr(zU S ; zn )   = (qn    q )Corr(zU S ; zn ), where we made use of
(15) and (20). Hence, as long as    6= 0; assumption (A1) implies that ban has the same sign
for countries on the same side of q and b 11n is a consistent estimator of 1n : The hypothesis
  = 0 can be tested, as it implies that         n     = 0 for all countries n: We can therefore proceed
in three steps. First, estimate the least-squares slopes bn and test the hypothesis                 n   =0
for all n: Second, if this hypothesis can be rejected, obtain the estimate of the indicator
function for each country b11n . Third, estimate the model in (30) with 2SLS using ziU S b
                                                                                         11n as
an instrument for ziU S qn .

Alternative Approach There is a second, somewhat more complex, approach to obtain
a consistent estimator of the indicator function 1n . This approach di¤ers from the …rst
approach in that it also uses information on the characteristics qn that may be driving
countries’comparative advantage. To see the basic idea, suppose that                 > 0 and that (20)


                                                        18
holds. In this case, countries with qn       q have a comparative advantage in high-z industries
and countries with qn < q have a comparative advantage in low-z industries. The idea of
the approach is to estimate q and then group countries according to whether qn is above
or below q . Estimating q would be simple if we observed              n:   We could chose a value qb
that maximizes the share of countries with qn          qb and    n     0 plus the share of countries
with qn < qb and       n   < 0. This can be thought of estimating q so as to maximize the
share of countries whose direction of comparative advantage conforms to (20). Once we have
obtained the threshold qb we could generate the indicator function 1n by assigning a value
of 1 to countries n with qn         qb and a value of 0 to all other countries. This approach
would yield a unique indicator function, although the threshold qb would not be unique,
as the data for the country characteristic qn are discrete. If one wants to ensure a unique
threshold also, this can be easily done by choosing qb from the set of values taken by the
country characteristic qn . An analogous approach can be used to obtain qb when                 < 0. If
we observed    n,   we could chose a threshold qb from the set of values taken by the country
characteristic qn that maximizes the share of countries with qn              qb and      n   0 plus the
share of countries with qn < qb and      n   > 0. This can again be thought of as estimating q to
maximize the share of countries whose direction of comparative advantage conforms to (20).
   In practice, we generally neither observe the          n   nor do we know whether           > 0 or
  < 0. But instead of the       n   we can use the least-squares estimates bn , as their sign is a
consistent estimate of the direction of countries’comparative advantage under assumption
(A1). That we do not observe whether          > 0 or   < 0 can be taken care of by choosing either
the threshold estimated under the assumption           > 0 or the threshold estimated under the
assumption    < 0, depending on which yields a greater share of countries whose direction of
comparative advantage conforms to (20). Summarizing, the alternative approach generates a
consistent estimate of the indicator function 1n by splitting countries into two groups based
on an estimate of the threshold q . This estimate is obtained by maximizing the share of
countries whose estimated direction of comparative advantage conforms to (20).
   To explain the second approach more formally, we need to introduce a considerable
amount of notation. Let Q be the set that collects the values of qn for all countries n. De…ne
p( qj q 2 Q) as the share of countries with qn         q and a comparative advantage in high-z
industries plus the share of countries with qn < q and a strict comparative advantage in
low-z industries,

                                                               qn < q and     n   <0
(32)           p( qj q 2 Q) = share of countries with                                :
                                                               qn q and       n    0

Also de…ne m( qj q 2 Q) as the share of countries with qn            q and a comparative advantage

                                                  19
in low-z industries plus the share countries with qn < q and a strict comparative advantage
in high-z industries
                                                             qn < q and      n   >0
(33)            s(qj q 2 Q) = share of countries with                               :
                                                             qn q and        n    0
Let qQ be the value q 2 Q such that countries with qn          qQ have a comparative advantage
going in the same direction and countries with qn < qQ also have a comparative advantage
going in the same direction. If      > 0, qQ is straightforward to determine as it is the unique
value maximizing p( qj q 2 Q): Similarly, qQ is also straightforward to determined if           < 0,
as it is the unique value maximizing s( qj q 2 Q). Collecting the cases            > 0 and     < 0 it
follows that as long as 6= 0; we can determine qQ as
                  8
                  < argmax p(qj q 2 Q) if max p( qj q 2 Q) max s( qj q 2 Q)
(34)        qQ =                                                               :
                  : argmax s( qj q 2 Q) if max s( qj q 2 Q) > max p( qj q 2 Q)

To see this, notice that if    > 0, max p( qj q 2 Q) = 1 while max s( qj q 2 Q) = 0 except if
there are countries that happen to have a value of qn exactly equal to q ; in this case, max
s( qj q 2 Q) = M=N with N the number of countries and M the number of countries with
qn = q . On the other hand, if      < 0, max s( qj q 2 Q) = 1 while max p( qj q 2 Q) = 0 except
if there are countries that happen to have a value of qn exactly equal to q ; in this case, max
p( qj q 2 Q) = M=N .
   Using (34), we can obtain a consistent estimator of qQ once we have consistent estimators
of p(q) and s(q). Moreover, consistent estimators of p(q) and s(q) are straightforward to …nd
under assumption (A1). In this case, ban        0 if and only if   n      0, see (15). Hence, we can
obtain consistent estimators pb(q) and sb(q) of p(q) and s(q) by replacing          n   by bn in (32)
and (33): Then we can replace p(q) and s(q) by pb(q) and sb(q) in (34) to obtain a consistent
estimator qbQ of qQ . Finally, we can obtain our alternative consistent estimator of 1n as the
indicator function b12n that assigns a value of 1 to all countries n with qn qbQ and the value
of 0 to all other countries (or the other way around).

3.2.3   Applying the 2SLS Grouping Estimator

We now illustrate the alternative benchmarking estimator in the context of Nunn’s (2007)
empirical analysis of the e¤ect of contract enforcement on comparative advantage in in-
dustries that depend more on relationship-speci…c intermediate inputs (see also Levchenko,
2007, and Costinot, 2009, for related empirical and theoretical …ndings). Nunn’s analysis is
based on the cross-industry cross-country model

(35)                          ln ein = an + ai + bziU S qn + residualin

                                                 20
where ln ein is the log value of exports of country n in industry i; qn the quality of contract
enforcement in country n; and ziU S a measure of industry i’s dependence on relationship-
speci…c intermediate inputs obtained using US data. Nunn’s key …nding is that b is positive
and statistically signi…cant, indicating that countries with better contract enforcement export
relatively more in industries that depend more on relationship-speci…c intermediate inputs.
         To apply our 2SLS benchmarking estimator, we …rst need to estimate the country-speci…c
slopes       n   = bqn in

(36)                           ln ein =   n   +   i   +    n ziU S   + residualin :

The least-squares slope estimates bn tell us how much more country n exports in industries
that depend more on relationship-speci…c intermediate inputs. We plot these estimates
against the quality of contract enforcement qn in …gure 4. The second step is to use the
least-squares slope estimates bn to test the hypothesis that                          = 0 (by testing whether
 n  = 0 for all n). This hypothesis is rejected at any conventional con…dence level. The
                                                                                    11n and b
third step is to use the least-squares slope estimates to obtain the two indicators b       12n
that group countries by the direction of their comparative advantage.9 We can then obtain
an estimate of the e¤ect of better contract enforcement on exports in relationship-speci…c
input industries by applying 2SLS to (35) and instrumenting the interaction ziU S qn with
      11n , ziU S b
ziU S b           12n , or both. We proceed using both instruments simultaneously as this is the
most e¢ cient approach. Using Nunn’s baseline speci…cation (in his Table IV), this yields a
standardized beta coe¢ cient of 0:361 with a standard error of 0:015. Nunn’s estimate using
the standard cross-industry cross-country benchmarking estimator is 0:289 with a standard
error of 0:013. Hence, our new benchmarking estimator –which provides a lower bound on
the strength of the true e¤ect under assumptions (A1) and (A2) –yields that better contract
enforcement is even more important for exports in relationship-speci…c input industries than
the estimator of the cross-industry cross-country literature.
    The estimator b
     9
                   11n assigns countries with a positive least-squares slopes bn a value of 1 and all other
countries a 0. The estimator b12n assigns countries with a value for the quality of contract enforcement qn
above 0.588 a value of 1 and all other countries a 0 (that is qbQ is estimated to be 0.588).




                                                          21
                               Figure 4: Country-Specific Slopes, Nunn (2007)




             Notes: Country-speci…c least-squares slope estimates for the cross-industry cross-country
             model of Nunn (2007) plotted against the quality of contract enforcement.



4     Conclusion
Cross-industry cross-country models are used extensively in economics. The approach has
attractive features, like its focus on theoretical mechanisms and the possibility to control for
country-level determinants of economic activity. But there are also drawbacks. Implementa-
tion requires specifying technological industry characteristics that are generally unobservable
and must therefore be proxied with industry characteristics in a benchmark country. That
this can lead to an attenuation bias is unsurprising. What appears to not be understood is
that using data from a benchmark country to approximate industry characteristics elsewhere
can also lead to a (large) ampli…cation bias when technologically similar countries are similar
in other dimensions.
    A main area of application of cross-industry cross-country models is international trade,
where these models have been used to examine the e¤ects of factor endowments and insti-
tutions on comparative advantage. We show that in this context there is an estimator that
yields a lower bound on the true e¤ect, as long as some countries di¤er in the direction of
their comparative advantage.




                                                        22
   References
   Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2001). Productivity Di¤erences. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116 (2), pp. 563-606
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton (2009). Determinants of
Vertical Integration: Financial Development and Contracting Costs. Journal of Finance,
64 (3), pp. 1251-1290.
   Aghion, Philippe, Thibault Fally, and Stefano Scarpetta (2007). Credit Con-
straints as a Barrier to the Entry and Post-entry Growth of Firms. Economic Policy, 52 (6),
pp. 731-779.
   Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Askenazy, Nicolas Berman, Gilbert Cette, and
Laurent Eymard (2012). Credt Constraints and the Cyclicality of R&D Investment: Evi-
dence from France. Journal of the European Economic Association. 10 (5), pp. 1001-1024.
   Aghion, Philippe, Emmanuel Farhi, and Enisse Kharroubi (2013). Counter-
cyclical Monetary Policy, Liquidity Dependence, and Economic Growth. Mimeo, Harvard
University.
   Aghion, Philippe, David Hemous, and Enisse Kharroubi (2014). Cyclical Fiscal
Policy, Credit Constraints, and Industry Growth. Journal of Monetary Economics, 62 (1),
pp. 41-58.
   Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt, and Susanne Prantl (2014). Patent Rights,
Product Market Reforms, and Innovation. Harvard University, updated version of NBER
WP 18854.
   Aizenman, Joshua and Vladyslav Sushko (2011). Capital Flow Types, External
Financing Needs, and Industrial Growth: 99 countries, 1991-2007. NBER Working Paper
17228.
   Alfaro, Laura, and Andrew Charlton (2009). Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Invest-
ment. American Economic Review, 99 (5), pp. 2096-2119.
   Angrist, Joshua D. (1991). Grouped-Data Estimation and Testing in Simple Labor-
Supply Models. Journal of Econometrics, 47 (2-3), pp. 243-266.
   Basco, Sergi (2013). Financial Development and the Product Cycle. Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization, 94 (1), pp. 295-313.
   Baltagi, Badi (2008). Econometric Analysis of Panel Data. John Wiley and Sons,
USA.
   Beck, Thorsten (2003). Financial Dependence and International Trade. Review of
International Economics, 11 (1), pp. 296-316.


                                             23
   Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüc-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine (2008).
Finance, Firm Size, and Growth. Journal of Money, Banking, and Finance, 40 (8), pp.
1371-1405.
   Bernard, Andrew and Charles I. Jones (1996). Comparing Apples to Oranges,
pp. Productivity Convergence and Measurement Across Industries and Countries, American
Economic Review, 86 (6), pp. 1216-1238.
   Bertrand, Marianne, Antoinette Schoar, and David Tesmar (2007). Banking
Deregulation and Industry Structure, pp. Evidence from the 1985 French Banking Act.
Journal of Finance, 62 (2), pp. 597-628.
   Blyde, Jun, and Danielken Molina (2015). Logistic Infrastructure and the Interna-
tional Location of Fragmented Production. Journal of International Economics, 95 (2), pp.
319-332
   Bombardini, Matilde, Giovanni Gallipoli and German Pupato (2012). Skill
Dispersion and Trade Flows. American Economic Review, 102 (5), pp. 2327-2348.
   Braun, Matias, and Borja Larrain (2005). Finance and the Business Cycle: Inter-
national Inter-Industry Evidence. Journal of Finance, 60 (3), pp. 1097-1128.
   Broner, Fernando, Paula Bustos, and Vasco Carvalho (2015). Sources of Com-
parative Advantage in Polluting Industries. Working Paper, CREI.
   Brown, James R., Gustav Martisson, and Bruce C. Petersen (2013). Law, Stock
Markets, and Innovation. Journal of Finance, 68 (4), pp. 1517-1549.
   Calomiris, Charles, Mauricio Larrain, José Liberti, and Jason Sturgess (2016).
How Collateral Laws Shape Lending and Sectoral Activity. NBER Working Paper 21911.
   Carluccio, Juan and Thibault Fally (2012). Global Sourcing under Imperfect Capital
Market. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94 (3), pp. 764–788.
   Caselli, Francesco (2005). Development Accounting. In The Handbook of Economic
Growth edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. North Holland, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
   Cetorelli, Nicola, and Philip Strahan (2006). Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank
Competition and Industry Structure in Local US Markets. Journal of Finance, 61 (1), pp.
437-461.
   Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou (2007). Red Tape and Delayed Entry.
Journal of the European Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, 5 (2-3), pp. 444-458.
   Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou (2009). Human Capital, the Structure
of Production, and Growth. Review of Economics and Statistics, 91 (2), pp. 66-82.
   Cingano, Federico, Marco Leonardi, Julian Messina, and Giovanni Pica (2010).


                                            24
The E¤ect of Employment Protection Legislation and Financial Market Imperfections on
Investment: Evidence from a Firm-Level Panel of EU Countries. Economic Policy, 25 (1),
pp. 117-163.
   Cingano, Federico, and Paolo Pinotti (2016). Trust, Firm Organization, and the
Pattern of Comparative Advantage. Journal of International Economics, 100 (1), pp. 1-13.
   Chan, Jackie M.L. and Kalina Manova (2015). Financial Development and the
Choice of Trade Partners. Journal of Development Economics, 116 (1), pp. 122-145.
   Chor, David (2010). Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage, pp. A Quantitative
Approach. Journal of International Economics, 82 (2), pp. 152-167.
   Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven (2003). Financial Development, Property Rights,
and Growth. Journal of Finance, 58 (7), pp. 2401-2436.
   Claessens, Stijn, Hui Tong, and Shang-Jin Wei (2012). From the Financial Crisis
to the Real Economy: Using Firm-level Data to Identify Transmission Channels. Journal of
International Economics, 88 (2), pp. 375-387.
   Costinot, Arnaud (2009). On the Origins of Comparative Advantage. Journal of
International Economics, 77 (2), pp. 255-264.
   Cuñat, Alejandro, and Marc Melitz (2012). Volatility, Labor Market Flexibility,
and Comparative Advantage. Journal of the European Economics Association, 10 (2), pp.
225-254.
   Debaere, Peter (2014). The Global Economics of Water: Is Water a Source of Com-
parative Advantage? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6 (2), pp. 32-48.
   Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Enrica Detragiache, and Raghuram G. Rajan (2008).
The Real E¤ects of Banking Crises. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 17 (1), pp. 89-112.
   Duchin, Ran, Ogguzhan Ozbas, and Berk A. Sensoy (2010). Costly External
Finance, Corporate Investment, and the Subprime Mortgage Credit Crisis. Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics, 97 (3), pp. 418-435.
   Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Alexey Levkov and Judith Montoriol-Garriga (2015).
Financing Constraints and Unemployment, pp. Evidence from the Great Recession. Journal
of Monetary Economics. 75 (1), pp. 89-105.
   Fafchamps, Marcel and Matthias Schündeln (2013). Local Financial Development
and Firm Performance, pp. Evidence from Morocco. Journal of Development Economics,
103 (1), pp. 15-28.
   Feenstra, Robert (2004). Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence. Prince-
ton University Press, USA.
   Feenstra, Robert, Chang Hong, Hong Ma, and Barbara J. Spencer (2013).


                                             25
Contractual Versus Non-Contractual Trade: The Role of Institutions in China. Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 94 (1), pp. 281-294.
   Ferguson, Shon and Sara Formai (2013). Institution-Driven Comparative Advantage
and Organizational Choice. Journal of International Economics, 90 (1), pp. 193-200.
   Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love (2003). Trade Credit, Financial Intermediary
Development, and Industry Growth. Journal of Finance, 58 (1), pp. 353-374.
   Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love (2007). Financial Development and Growth
in the Short and Long Run. Journal of the European Economic Association, 5 (2-3), pp.
470-479.
   Gri¢ th, Rachel and Gareth Macartney (2014). Employment Protection Legisla-
tion, Multinational Firms, and Innovation. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96 (1), pp.
135-150.
   Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Jonathan Parker (2007). Taxes and Growth in a Financially
Underdeveloped Country. Evidence from Chile’s Investment Boom. Economia, 8 (1), pp.
41-53.
   Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Xuan Tian and Yan Xu (2014). Financial Development and Inno-
vation: Cross-Country Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 112 (1), pp. 116-135.
   Hummels, David and Peter Klenow (2005). The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s
Exports. American Economic Review, 95 (6), pp. 704-723.
   Iacovone, Leonardo and Veronica Zavacka (2009). Banking Crises and Exports:
Lessons from the Past. World Bank Research Working Paper 5016.
   Jacobson, Tor, and Erik von Schedvin (2015). Trade Credit and the Propagation
of Corporate Failure. An Empirical Analysis. Econometrica, 83 (4), pp. 1351-1371.
   Klapper, Laura, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram G. Rajan (2006). Entry Regulation
as a Barrier to Entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics, 82 (3), pp. 591-629.
   Klingebiel, Daniela, Randall S. Kroszner, and Luc Laeven (2007). Financial
Crises, Financial Dependence, and Industry Growth. Journal of Financial Economics, 84 (1),
pp. 187-228.
   Krishna, Pravin, and Andrei Levchenko (2013). Comparative Advantage, Complex-
ity, and Volatility. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 94 (2), pp. 314-329.
   Laeven, Luc and Fabian Valencia (2013). The Real E¤ects of Financial Sector
Interventions during Crises. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45 (1), pp. 147-177.
   Larrain, Mauricio (2014). Capital Account Opening and Wage Inequality. Review of
Financial Studies, 28 (6), pp. 1555-1587.
   Levchenko, Andrei (2007). Institutional Quality and International Trade. Review of


                                            26
Economic Studies, 74 (3), pp. 791-819.
   Manova, Kalina (2008). Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations and Inter-
national Trade. Journal of International Economics, 76 (1), pp. 33-47.
   Manova, Kalina (2013). Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International
Trade. Review of Economic Studies, 80 (2), pp. 711-744.
   Manova, Kalina, Shang-Jin Wei, and Zhiwei Zhang (2015). Firm Exports and
Multinational Activity under Credit Constraints. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97 (3),
pp. 574-588.
   Michelacci, Claudio, and Fabiano Schivardi (2013). Does Idiosyncratic Business
Risk Matter for Growth? Journal of the European Economic Association, 11 (2), pp. 343-368.
   Nunn, Nathan (2007). Relationship-Speci…city, Incomplete Contracts and the Pattern
of Trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2), pp. 569-600.
   Nunn, Nathan and David Tre‡er (2014). Domestic Institutions as a Source of
Comparative Advantage. In Handbook of International Economics edited by Gita Gopinath,
Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogo¤. North Holland, Netherlands.
   Pagano, Patrizio, and Fabiano Schivardi (2003). Firm Size Distribution and Growth,
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 105 (1), pp. 255-274.
   Paunov, Caroline (2016). Corruption’s Asymmetric Impacts on Firm Innovation.
Journal of Development Economics, 118 (1), pp. 216-231.
   Rajan, Raghuram G., and Arvind Subramanian (2011). Aid, Dutch Disease, and
Manufacturing Growth. Journal of Development Economics, 94 (1), pp. 106-118.
   Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales (1998). Financial Dependence and Growth.
American Economic Review, 88 (3), pp. 559-586.
   Ranjan, Priya and Jae Young Lee. (2007). Contract Enforcement and International
Trade. Economics and Politics, 19 (2): 191-218.
   Rauch, James E (1999). Networks versus Markets in International Trade. Journal of
International Economics, 48 (1), pp. 7-35.
   Romalis, John (2004). Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade.
American Economic Review, 94 (1), pp. 67-97.
   Schott, Peter (2004). Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in Inter-
national Trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2), pp. 647-678.
   Tang, Heiwai (2012). Labor Market Institutions, Firm-speci…c Skills, and Trade Pat-
terns. Journal of International Economics, 87 (2), pp. 337-351.
   Wooldridge, Je¤rey M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross-Section and Panel
Data. MIT Press, USA.


                                             27
                                           Appendix Table 1: Some applications of the cross-industry cross-country approach

    #   topic             paper               industry characteristic (z)        country characteristic (x)        main finding
                                              typically based on U.S. data

    effects of financial market development on economic growth, firm entry and   exit and innovation
    1     finance          Rajan and         industry dependence on exter-       country financial development     sectors that depend for inherent technological reasons more on
          and growth       Zingales (1998)   nal finance [ratio of capital ex-   [market capitalization, private   external sources of finance (debt and equity), as compared to
                                             penditures minus cash flow          credit, measure of accounting     internal sources (retained earnings), grow faster in financially
                                             over capital expenditures]          standards]                        developed countries
    2     finance and      Claessens and     industry intangible intensity       country-level property rights     sectors with an asset mix tilted towards intangibles grow faster
          growth           Laeven (2003)     [ratio of intangible assets to      protection [index of intellec-    in countries with better property rights
                                             net fixed assets]                   tual property rights, patent
                                                                                 rights, risk of expropriation]
    3   finance and       Fisman and          industry dependence on trade       country financial development     industries with higher reliance on trade credit grow faster in
        growth            Love (2003)         credit [accounts payable to        [market capitalization, private   countries with weaker financial institutions
                                              total assets]                      credit, measure of accounting
                                                                                 standards]
    4   finance and       Fisman and          industry growth opportunities      country financial development     industries with better growth opportunities grow faster in more
        growth            Love (2007)         [sales growth]                     [sum of domestic credit to pri-   financially developed countries
                                                                                 vate sector and market capita-
                                                                                 lization as a share of GDP]
1




    5   financial         Braun and           industry dependence on exter-      recession in country c at time    industries that are more dependent on external finance are hit
        dependence        Larrain (2005)      nal finance                        t                                 harder during recessions
        and business
        cycles
    6   credit con-       Aghion, Fally       industry dependence on exter-      country financial development     more small firms enter in more externally dependent sectors in
        straints, entry   and Scarpetta       nal finance                        [sum of private credit and        more financially developed countries
                          (2007)                                                 stock market capitalization as
                                                                                 a share of GDP, state owner-
                                                                                 ship of banks]
    7   finance           Beck, Demirguc-     industry share of small firms      country financial development     industries with a larger share of small firms grow faster in
        and growth        Kunt, Laeven,       [percentage of firms in each       [private credit to GDP]           more financially developed countries
                          and Levine          sector with less than 5, 10, 20,
                          (2008)              and 100 employees]
    8   finance and       Brown, Martin-      industry dependence on exter-      country financial development     firms in more externally financially dependent industries invest
        R&D invest-       sson and            nal finance                        [value of IPOs as a share of      more in R&D in more financially developed countries and in
        ment              Petersen (2013)                                        GDP, accounting standards,        countries with stronger shareholder protection
                                                                                 anti-self-dealing index of
                                                                                 shareholder protection]
    9   finance and       Hsu, Tian and       industry dependence on exter-      country financial development     high-tech sectors that depend more on external sources
        innovation        Xu (2014)           nal finance and industry high-     [stock market capitalization,     of finance innovate more in financially developed countries
                                              tech-intensity                     bank credit]
    #    topic            paper                industry characteristic (z)          country characteristic (x)       main finding
                                               typically based on U.S. data

    10   LTVs and col-    Calomiris,           firm pledging of movable [ma         country strength of collateral   in countries with weak collateral laws, LTVs are lower for
         lateral type     Larrain, Liberti     chinery, inventory and ac-           laws [sum of 7 binary coded      loans collateralized with movable assets
                          and Sturgess         counts receivable] as opposed        variables on scope (what can,
                          (2016)               to immovable [real estate]           be pledged), monitoring and
                                               collateral to secure a loan          enforcement from World Bank
                                                                                    “Doing Business”]

    international trade and industrial specialization
    11 factor pro-        Romalis (2004)        industry factor intensities in      country factor endowments        countries specialize in industries that intensively use factors
         portions and                           skilled labour, unskilled labour,   [human capital, physical capi-   that (a) they are already abundant in; (b) they are accumulating
         trade                                  and physical capital                tal, labour]                     rapidly
    12 human              Ciccone and           industry skill intensity [average   country initial human capital    countries with higher initial education levels grew faster in
         capital and      Papaioannou           years of employee schooling,        [averge years of schooling]      schooling-intensive industries
         growth           (2009)                share of high-school and col-
                                                lege graduates]
    13 institutions       Nunn (2007)           industry contract intensity         quality of contract enforce-     countries with good contract enforcement specialize in goods
         and trade                              [proportion of non-standar-         ment and the judiciary [per-     for which relationship-specific investments are most important
                                                dized inputs (without a             ception based rule of law
                                                refereence price) used in           index]
                                                production]
2




    14 institutions       Levchenko             industry dependence on differen-    country institutional quality    countries with better institutions have a greater share of US im-
         and trade        (2007)                tiated inputs [concentration        [rule of law]                    ports in sectors using more intermediate inputs
                                                Herfindahl index of intermediate
                                                input use]
    15 institutions,      Ferguson and          industry vertical integration-      country judicial quality         benefits of judicial quality [high quality contractual institutions]
         trade and or-    Formai (2013)         propensity and industry             [rule of law]                    for exports of contract-intensive goods are smaller in industries
         ganizational                           contract intensity                                                   where firms are more likely to be integrated with their input
         choice                                                                                                      suppliers
    16 institutions       Nunn and Trefler industry cost sensitivity to qua-        country quality of contracting   institutional sources of comparative advantage [as reflected by
         and compara-     (2014)                lity of contracting institutions    institutions                     the interaction of country-level rule of law with industry-level
         tive advantage                                                                                              contract intensity] are quantitatively as important as the impact
                                                                                                                     of human capital and physical capital
    17   financial li-    Manova (2008)        industry dependence on exter-        time-varying country equity-     liberalization increases exports disproportionately in sectors
         beralization                          nal finance and industry asset       market openess and liberaliza-   more dependent on outside finance or using fewer collateralized
         and trade                             tangibility [share of net proper-    tion                             assets
                                               ty, plant and equipment in total
                                               book-value assets]
    18   credit con-      Manova (2013)        industry dependence on exter-        country financial development    more financially developed countries export more in sectors
         straints and                          nal finance and industry asset       [private credit to GDP]          more dependent on outside finance or using fewer collateralized
         trade                                 tangibility                                                           assets
    19   credit con-      Manova, Wei          sector financial vulnerability       firm indicators for JV, MNC      foreign affiliates and JVs in China have better export perfor-
         straints and     and Zhang            [external financial dependence,      affiliates, firms with foreign   mance than private domestic firms in financially more vulne-
         trade            (2015)               asset tangilibity, inventory/sales   ownership                        rable sectors
                                               ratio, reliance on trade credit]
    #    topic             paper            industry characteristic (z)         country characteristic (x)          main finding
                                            typically based on U.S. data

    20   finance and       Chan and         industry dependence on exter        country financial development       more financially developed countries have more trading part-
         choice of ex-     Manova (2015)    nal finance and industry asset      [private credit to GDP]             ners and particularly so in financially dependent sectors
         port destina-                      and industry asset tangibility
         tions
    21   employment        Cingano, Leo-    sector worker reallocation          country employment protec-          EPL reduces investment in high reallocation- relative to low
         protection        nardi, Messina   intensity [average of norma-        tion legislation [OECD pro-         reallocation-sectors
         and invest-       and Pica         lized firm changes in employ-       duced weighted average of 18
         ment              (2010)           ment in a country-industry cell]    basic items]
    22   volatility,       Cunat and        volatility of firm output growth    country labour market flexibi-      exports of countries with more flexible labor markets are
         labour mar-       Melitz (2012)    [standard deviation of annual       lity [hiring-costs, firing costs,   biased towards high-volatility sectors
         ket flexibility                    growth rate of firm sales]          and restrictions on changing
         and specia-                                                            working hours as captured by
         lization                                                               World Bank index]
    23   labour mar-       Tang (2012)      industry firm-specific skill in-    country labour market protec-       countries with more protective labour laws export more in
         kets, educa-                       tensity [estimated from Mincer      tion                                firm-specific skill intensive sectors at both intensive and exten-
         tion and                           wage regression with inter-                                             sive margins
         trade                              action of worker job tenure
                                            with industry dummy]
    24   labour market     Griffith and     industry propensity to adjust to    country employment protec-          fewer radical innovations are done by high-layoff industries
3




         institutions      Macartney        external labour market [layoff      tion legislation [weighted sum      in countries with high EPL
         and inno-         (2014)           rate for 3-digit industry above     of sub-indicators for regular
         vation                             or below the median layoff          and temporary contracts and
                                            rate]                               collective dismissals]
    25   pollution and     Broner, Bustos   industry pollution intensity        country laxity of air pollution     countries with laxer environmental regulation have a
         comparative       and Carvalho     [EPA-computed total air pol-        regulation [proxied by out-         comparative advantage in polluting industries
         advantage         (2015)           lution per unit of output]          come measure: grams of lead
                                                                                content per liter of gasoline]
    26   natural re-       Debaere (2014)   sector water intensity [sector      country water resources [vol-       relatively water abundant countries export more water-
         sources and                        water withdrawals both direct       ume of renewable fresh water        intensive products
         comparative                        and indirect (inputs) from          per capita]
         advantage                          US Geological Survey]

    outsourcing, FDI, and the fragmentation of production
    27 vertical vs       Alfaro and        industry skill intensity [ratio of   country skill abundance [ave-       vertical FDI appears driven by comparative advantage at
         horizontal,     Charlton (2009) nonproduction to total workers]        rage years of schooling]            2-digit level but not at 4-digit level
         intra vs inter
         industry FDI
    28 sourcing of       Carluccio and     product complexity [measu-           country financial development       complex goods are more likely sourced from more
         goods of        Fally (2012)      red with different indicators        [private credit to GDP]             financially developed countries
         different                         of R& D expenditures]
         complexity
    #    topic            paper              industry characteristic (z)        country characteristic (x)      main finding
                                             typically based on U.S. data

    29   offshoring       Basco (2014)       industry R&D intensity [ave-       country financial development   more R&D intense industries use more intermediate inputs
                                             rage industry R&D expen-           [share of domestic credit to    (offshore more) in more financially developed countries
                                             diture]                            private sector over GDP]
    30   infrastructure   Blyde and          industry dependence logistic       country logistic infrastruc-    countries with better logistic infrastructure attract more
         and FDI          Molina (2015       services [firm-in-industry         ture [number of ports and       vertical FDI in more time-sensitive industries
                                             willingness to pay for air ship-   airports above a certain size
                                             ping to avoid an additional day    normalized by country po-
                                             of ocean transport]                pulation]
    31   corruption       Paunov (2016)      industry usage intensity of        country corruption [share of    firms in industries with greater reliance on quality certifi-
         and inno-                           quality certificates and patents   firms reporting gift required   cates own less such certificates in more corrupt countries
         vation                              [share of firms holding qua-       to obtain operating license]
                                             lity certificates; fractional
                                             patent count to value added]
    32   firm size and    Pagano and         sector R&D intensity [share        average firm size of firm in    sectors with larger average firm size grow faster; particul
         growth           Schivardi (2003)   of R&D personnel in total em       sector in country [measured     larly in R&D intense sectors
                                             ployment, ratio of R&D to          by employment]
                                             total investment and value
                                             added]
    33   regulation       Klapper, Laeven    industry natural propensity to     country entry regulation        costly regulations reduce firm creation, especially in indus-
4




         and entry        and Rajan          high entry [fraction of firms      [cost of business registra-     tries with naturally high entry
                          (2006)             in industry that is one or two     tion; in per capita GNP,
                                             years old]                         time, or procedures]
    34   regulation       Ciccone and        employment re-allocation [in-      country entry regulation        countries where it takes less time to register new businesses
         and entry        Papaioannou        dustry employment growth]          [time and procedures to         have seen more entry in industries that experienced
                          (2009)                                                register a new business]        expansionary global demand and technology shifts

    35   determinants     Acemoglu,          industry capital intensity as a    country-level contracting       firms in industries with higher capital-intensity are more
         of vertical      Johnson, and       proxy for vulnerability to         costs [procedural complex-      vertically integrated in countries with higher contracting
         integration      Mitton (2009)      holdup problems [fixed assets      ity, contract enforcement       costs
                                             to sales]                          procedures, legal formalism]
    36   aid and          Rajan and          industry sensitivity to ex-        country receipts of foreign     industries more sensitive to exchange rate appreciations
         manufac-         Subramanian        change rate appreciation           aid                             grew relatively more slowly in countries receiving larger
         turing growth    (2011)             [industry ratio of exports to                                      aid inflows
                                             value above or below the me-
                                             dian]
    37   international    Aizenman and       industry dependence on exter-      portfolio equity, debt, and     equity inflows have negative aggregate growth impact but
         financial        Sushko (2011)      nal finance                        FDI inflows in country c at     positive impact in more financially constrained industries;
         flows and                                                              time t                          FDI inflows have positive impact, both at the aggregate
         growth                                                                                                 level and more external finance dependent industries
    #    topic            paper              industry characteristic (z)       country characteristic (x)       main finding
                                             typically based on U.S. data

    38   human capital    Bombardini,        industry skill substitutability   country skill dispersion         countries with more dispersed skill distributions export
         and trade        Gallipoli and      [residual wage dispersion;        [within-country standard de-     more in sectors with high substitutability of workers’
                          Putato (2012)      rankings on teamwork, im-         viation of log scores on stan-   skills
                                             pact on co-woker output and       dardised tests]
                                             communication / contact]
    39   business risk    Michelacci and     sector idiosyncratic risk [sec-   country lack of diversifica-     OECD countries with low levels of risk diversification
         and growth       Schivardi (2013)   toral component of volatility     tion opportunities [impor-       opportunities perform relatively worse in sectors with
                                             of firm stock returns]            tance of family firms in the     high idiosyncratic risk
                                                                               economy; share of widely
                                                                               held firms in the economy]
    40   capital ac-      Larrain (2014)     industry dependence on exter-     timing of country capi-          capital account openness increases sectoral wage inequality,
         count openness                      nal finance and capital-skill     tal account opening              particularly in industries with both high external finance
         and inequality                      complementarity [external fi-                                      dependence and strong capital-skill complementarity
                                             nancial dependence as Rajan
                                             and Zingales (1998); capital
                                             intensity elasticity of skilled
                                             wage share]
    41   intellectual     Aghion, Howitt,    industry reliance on patents      EU wide product market re-       1992 EU product market reform led to more innovation
         property         and Prantl         [R&D expenditure to nomi-         form interacting with coun-      in countries with stronger patent protection and in par-
5




         rights and in-   (2014)             nal value added; patent count]    try-level strength of patent     ticular in industries relying more on patents
         novation                                                              rights [data on patent law
                                                                               reforms]
    42   real effects     Dell’Ariccia,      industry dependence on exter-     banking crisis in country c      sectors relatively more dependent on external finance
         of banking       Detragiache,       nal finance                       at time t                        perform worse during banking crises
         crises           and Rajan (2008)
    43   banking crises   Iacovone and       industry dependence on exter-     banking crisis in country c      during a crisis, exports of sectors more dependent on
         and exports      Zavacka (2009)     nal finance                       at time t                        external finance grow relatively less than those of other
                                                                                                                sectors
    44   investment       Duchin, Ozbas,     industry dependence on exter-     before/after sub-prime crisis    decline in corporate investment is sharpest in industries
         effect of the    and Sensoy         nal finance                                                        with high external financial dependence
         subprime         (2010)
         mortgage cri-
         sis
    45   transmission     Claessens,         industry dependence on exter-     country trade openness and       crisis hit firms more sensitive to trade and business cycles
         of financial     Tong, and Wei      nal finance and                   fiscal and monetary policy       hardest, especially in countries more open to trade
         crises           (2012)             trade sensitivity [global GDP
                                             elasticity of global exports at
                                             3-digit sector level]
    46   firm growth      Laeven and         industry dependence on exter-     country bank recapitalization    growth of finance dependent firms is disproportionately
         and bank         Valencia (2011)    nal finance                       policies [committed amounts      positively affected by bank recapitalization
         recapital-                                                            of public recapitalization
         ization                                                               funds]
    #    topic             paper                industry characteristic (z)            country characteristic (x)       main finding
                                                typically based on U.S. data

    47   monetary poli-    Aghion, Farhi,       industry credit or liquidity           degree of counter-cyclicality    credit or liquidity constrained industries grow more
         cy and growth     and Kharroubi        constraints [asset tangibility         of short-term interest rates     quickly in countries with more counter-cyclical short-term
                           (2015)               measured by value of net pro-          [coefficient on output gap in    interest rates
                                                perty, plant and equipment to          regression with ST-rates on
                                                total assets for credit con-           LHS]
                                                straints; labor-cost to sales
                                                for liquidity constraints]
    48   fiscal policy     Aghion,              industry dependence                    countercyclicality of            more externally dependent industries grow faster in
         and industry      Hemous, and          on external finance                    country fiscal policies [coef-   countries that implement more countercyclical fiscal
         growth            Kharroubi (2014)                                            ficient on output gap in re-     policies
                                                                                       gression with fiscal balance
                                                                                       to GDP on LHS]

    economic effects of differences in financial development, institutional quality   and trust across regions and time
    49 entry and ac-        Cetorelli and        industry external financial           degree of concentration in       sectors with greater external financial dependence have
         cess to fi-        Strahan (2006)       dependence                            local banking markets [two       larger and fewer firms in more concentrated local ban-
         nance                                                                         policy variables on within-      king markets
                                                                                       state branching and inter-
                                                                                       state-banking restrictions;
6




                                                                                       deposit Herfindahl concentra-
                                                                                       tion index]
    50   real effects      Bertrand, Schoar,    industry reliance on bank              before/after 1985                industries more reliant on bank financing before 1985
         of banking        and Thesmar          financing [all debt excluding          French bank reform               deconcentrated and experienced faster employment growth
         deregulation      (2007)               trade credit and bonds over                                             post bank-reform
                                                total outside financing (debt
                                                and book value of equity)]
    51   corporate tax     Hsieh and Parker     industry dependence                    before / after 1984 Chilean      post-reform investment boom occurred primarily in indus-
         reform and        (2007)               on external finance                    corporate tax reform             tries more dependent on external finance
         growth
    52   credit con-       Aghion, Aske-        industry dependence on exter-          business cycle in                for industries more reliant on external finance or with low
         straints and      nazy, Berman,        nal finance or asset tangility         France                           asset tangibility, R&D investment is countercyclical with-
         cylicality of     Cette and                                                                                    out credit constraitns, and becomes pro-cyclical with
         R&D invest-       Eymard (2012)                                                                                tighter credit constraints
         ment
    53   institutions      Feenstra, Hong,      industry reliance on contracts         cross-provincial variation in    firms in industries using more differentiated inputs export
         and trade in      Ma, and Spencer      [from Nunn (2007), differen-           institutional quality in China   firms, more if they are located in Chinese regions with
         China             (2013)               tiation of intermediate inputs]        [court efficiency as measu-      better courts
                                                                                       red by overall quality, delays
                                                                                       of verdicts and court costs]
    #    topic            paper               industry characteristic (z)     country characteristic (x)     main finding
                                              typically based on U.S. data

    54   firm growth      Fafchamps and       sectoral growth opportunities   local bank availability        firms in sectors with better growth opportunities grow
         and access to    Schündeln (2013)   [value added growth 1998-       [dummy = 1 if local com-       faster in localities with bank availability
         finance in                           2003]                           mune has a bank]
         Morocco
    55   unemploy-        Duygan-Bump,        industry dependence             US recessions 90-91,           workers in small firms are more likely to become unem-
         ment, reces-     Levkov, and         on external finance             2001, 2007-2009                ployed if they work for firms in industries with high depen-
         sions and fin-   Montoriol-Garriga                                                                  dence on external finance during recessions in which loan
         ancing con-      (2015)                                                                             supply contracts
         straints
    56   trade credit     Jacobson and        industry dependence on ex-      failure of trade credit deb-   propagation of corporate failure from trade-debtor to
         chains and       von Schedvin        ternal finance and liquidity    tors in Sweden                 creditor is particularly severe in finanically constrained
         corporate        (2015)              [latter measured by inventory                                  industries
         failure                              / sales ratio]
    57   trust and        Cingano and         industry delegation intensity   region / country trust         high-trust regions and countries specialize in delegation in-
         trade            Pinotti (2016)      [regression based measure:      [survey data]                  tensive industries
                                              part of variation of number
                                              of responsibility centres in
                                              a region-industry explained
                                              by industry fixed effects]
7
