NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR CLEAN AIR:
EVIDENCE FROM AIR PURIFIER MARKETS IN CHINA
Koichiro Ito
Shuang Zhang
Working Paper 22367
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22367

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

For helpful comments, we thank Douglas Almond, Marshall Burke, Steve Cicala, Thomas
Covert, Richard Freeman, Michael Greenstone, Rema Hanna, Kelsey Jack, Ryan Kellogg,
Michael Kremer, Shanjun Li, Mushfiq Mobarak, Matt Neidell, Paulina Oliva, Nick Ryan, Nick
Sanders, Joseph Shapiro, Christopher Timmins, Tom Wollmann, participants in the NBER
Environmental and Energy Economics Program Meeting, NBER/BREAD Development Meeting,
the NBER Chinese Economy Meeting and the SIEPR Conference, and seminar participants at
Harvard, MIT, Cornell, Colorado Boulder, IGC, University of Chicago, University of Illinois at
Urbana Champaign, University of Tokyo, University of Calgary, Georgetown, and the RIETI. We
thank Ken Norris, Jing Qian and Chenyu Qiu for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Koichiro Ito and Shuang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Willingness to Pay for Clean Air: Evidence from Air Purifier Markets in China
Koichiro Ito and Shuang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 22367
June 2016
JEL No. L0,Q0,Q5,Q51,Q52,Q53,Q56,Q58
ABSTRACT
We develop a framework to estimate willingness to pay (WTP) for clean air from defensive
investment. Applying this framework to product-by-store level scanner data on air purifier sales
in China, we provide among the first revealed preference estimates of WTP for clean air in
developing countries. A spatial discontinuity in air pollution created by the Huai River heating
policy enables us to analyze household responses to long-run exposure to pollution. Our model
allows heterogeneity in preference parameters to investigate potential heterogeneity in WTP
among households. We show that our estimates provide important policy implications for optimal
environmental regulation.

Koichiro Ito
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th St
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ito@uchicago.edu
Shuang Zhang
Department of Economics
University of Colorado Boulder
UCB 256
Boulder, CO 80302
shuang.zhang@colorado.edu

1

Introduction

Air quality is remarkably poor in developing countries, and severe air pollution is imposing a
substantial health and economic burden on billions of people. For example, the annual average
exposure to fine particulate matter in China was more than five times higher than that of the US
in 2013 (Brauer et al., 2016). Such high levels of air pollution cause large negative impacts on a
variety of economic outcomes, including infant mortality (Jayachandran, 2009; Arceo et al., 2012;
Greenstone and Hanna, 2014), life expectancy (Chen et al., 2013), and labor supply (Hanna and
Oliva, 2015). For this reason, policymakers and economists consider air pollution to be one of the
first-order obstacles to economic development.
However, a large economic burden of air pollution does not necessarily imply that existing
environmental regulations are not optimal. Optimal environmental regulation depends on the
extent to which individuals value air quality improvements—that is, their willingness to pay (WTP)
for clean air (Greenstone and Jack, 2013). If WTP for clean air is low, the current level of air
pollution can be optimal because social planners prioritize economic growth over environmental
regulation. On the other hand, if WTP is high, the current stringency of regulations can be far
from optimal. Therefore, WTP for clean air is a key parameter when considering the tradeo↵s
between economic growth and environmental regulation. Despite the importance of this question,
the economics literature provides limited empirical evidence. This is primarily because obtaining a
revealed preference estimate of WTP for clean air is particularly challenging in developing countries
because of limited availability of high quality data and a lack of readily available exogenous variation
in air quality that are necessary for empirical analysis.
In this paper, we provide among the first revealed preference estimates of WTP for clean air in
developing countries. Our approach is based on the idea that demand for home-use air purifiers,
a main defensive investment for reducing indoor air pollution, provides valuable information for
the estimation of WTP for air quality improvements. We begin by developing a random utility
model in which consumers purchase air purifiers to reduce indoor air pollution. A key advantage
of analyzing air purifier markets is that one of the product attributes—high-efficiency particulate
arrestance (HEPA)—informs both consumers and econometricians of the purifier’s e↵ectiveness to
reduce indoor particulate matter. The extent to which consumers value this attribute, along with

1

the price elasticity of demand, reveals their WTP for indoor air quality improvement.
We apply this framework to scanner data on market transactions in air purifier markets in
Chinese cities. At the retail store level, we observe product-level information on monthly sales,
monthly average price, and detailed product attributes. The product attributes include the information on each purifier’s e↵ectiveness to reduce indoor air pollution. Our data cover January 2006
through December 2012. The dataset provides comprehensive transaction records of 395 air purifier
products for some of the most polluted cities in the world. To our knowledge, this paper is the first
study to exploit these transaction data in the Chinese air purifier markets to examine consumers’
WTP for air quality. We also collect pollution data from air pollution monitors and micro data on
demographics from the Chinese census to compile a dataset that consists of air purifier sales and
prices, air pollution, and demographic characteristics.
The primary challenge for our empirical analysis is that two variables in the demand estimation—pollution and price—are likely to be endogenous. To address the endogeneity of air pollution,
we use a spatial regression discontinuity (RD) design, which exploits discontinuous valuation in air
pollution created by a policy-induced natural experiment at the Huai River boundary. The so-called
Huai River heating policy provided city-wide coal-based heating for cities north of the river, which
generated substantially higher pollution levels in the northern cities (Almond et al., 2009; Chen
et al., 2013). The advantage of this spatial RD approach is twofold. First, it allows us to exploit
plausibly exogenous policy-induced variation in air pollution. Second, the policy-induced variation
in air pollution has existed since the 1950s. This natural experiment provides long-run variation in
air pollution, which enables us to examine how households respond to long-lasting, not transitory,
variation in pollution.
To address the endogeneity of prices, we combine two approaches. First, we observe data from
many markets (cities) in China, and therefore we are able to include both product fixed e↵ects and
city fixed e↵ects. These fixed e↵ects absorb product-level unobserved demand factors and city-level
demand shocks. The remaining potential concern is product-city level unobserved factors that are
correlated with prices by product and city. We construct an instrumental variable, which measures
the distance from each product’s manufacturing plant (or its port if the product is imported) to
each market, with the aim of capturing variation in transportation cost, which is a supply-side cost
shifter.
2

We first present visual and statistical evidence that the level of air pollution (P M10 ) is discontinuously higher in cities north of the Huai River. A key prediction from our demand model
is that if households value clean air, the market share for HEPA purifiers—that is, purifiers that
can reduce indoor particular matter—should be higher in cities north of the river boundary. Our
second empirical analysis shows that there is indeed a discontinuous and substantial increase in the
market share of HEPA purifiers in the north. We estimate local linear regression for the RD design
and find that the WTP for removing the amount of P M10 generated by the Huai River policy for
five years is USD 190. Third, we estimate that the marginal WTP for removing 1 ug/m3 of P M10
for five years is USD 4.40. We show that our RD estimates are robust to using a range of di↵erent
bandwidths and local quadratic estimation. Fourth, to learn about the distribution of WTP, we
relax a few assumptions on standard logit demand estimation and estimate a random-coefficient
logit model. The random-coefficient logit model allows us to estimate potentially heterogeneous
preference parameters for pollution and price. We find substantial heterogeneity that can be explained by observed and unobserved factors. Our results indicate that the marginal WTP ranges
from USD 0 to over USD 15 among households in our sample and that higher-income households
have significantly higher marginal WTP for clean air compared to lower-income households.
This study provides three primary contributions to the literature and ongoing policy discussions.
First, we develop a framework to estimate WTP for clean air based on defensive investment on
market products. Earlier studies on avoidance behavior on pollution examine whether individuals
take avoidance behavior in response to pollution exposure.1 A key question in the recent literature is
whether researchers can obtain monetized WTP for environmental quality from observing defensive
behavior. Earlier theoretical work in environmental economics emphasizes that defensive investment
on market products can be useful to learn about the preferences for environmental quality (Braden
et al., 1991). However, few existing studies attempt to provide a framework to connect this economic
theory with market data for empirical analysis.2 Our paper compliments the literature by providing
1
Earlier studies on avoidance behavior against pollution find that people do engage in defensive investment against
pollution. For evidence in the US, see Neidell (2009); Zivin and Neidell (2009); Zivin et al. (2011). For evidence in
China, see Mu and Zhang (2014); Zheng et al. (2015). For evidence in other developing countries, see Madajewicz
et al. (2007); Jalan and Somanathan (2008). A key question in the recent literature is whether researchers can
estimate WTP for improvements in environmental quality from observing defensive investment in markets.
2
There are two recent papers that are most relevant to our study in the sense that our approach and the approaches
taken by the following papers are broadly categorized by the household production approach. Kremer et al. (2011)
uses a randomized control trial (RCT) in Kenya to estimate the WTP for water quality. Deschenes et al. (2012) use
medical expenditure data in the United Sates to learn about the cost of air pollution and the benefit of air quality

3

a framework that can be applicable to market-level sales and price data, which are available in
a variety of product markets in many countries through scanner data from manufacturers and
retailers.3
The second contribution is that our analysis provides empirical evidence of an important “missing piece” in the literature on air pollution in developing countries. Greenstone and Jack (2013)
suggest that few studies have attempted to develop revealed preference estimates of WTP for environmental quality in developing countries, despite the fact that recent pollution concentrations in
these countries are far above those ever recorded in the US. The extrapolation of WTP estimators
from studies in developed countries is unlikely to be valid because pollution and income levels are
substantially di↵erent among developed and developing countries. We fill this gap by providing revealed preference estimates of WTP for air quality in China. Our estimates are particularly useful
because the identification comes from long-run exposure to air pollution induced by the Huai River
policy. This is informative for WTP in the developing world where a large part of pollution is not
presented as “on-and-o↵ shocks”.
Finally, our findings provide important policy implications for ongoing discussions in energy
and environmental regulation in developing countries. Developing country governments recently
proposed and implemented interventions to combat air pollution problems. For example, Chinese
Premier Li Keqiang declared “War Against Pollution” to reduce emissions of P M10 and P M2.5
and has proposed various reforms in energy and environmental policies (Zhu, 2014). China has
also made a commitment to address global climate change, as featured by the New York Times
in April 2016 (Davenport, 2016). For example, policies include reforming the Huai River heating
policy and the launch of a national cap-and-trade program on carbon emissions in 2017. A key
question is whether implementing such policies enhances welfare. In the policy implication section
of this paper, we provide an evaluation of the recent reform of the Huai River heating policy as an
example to illustrate how estimates on the WTP for clean air can be used to examine the welfare
implications of energy and environmental policies.
regulation.
3
There are a few more related studies. Berry et al. (2012); Miller and Mobarak (2013) use randomized controlled
trials to estimate WTP for water filters and cook stoves per se instead of WTP for improvements in environmental
quality. Consumer behavior in housing markets is usually not considered to be “avoidance behavior”, but Chay and
Greenstone (2005) is related to our study in the sense that they provide a quasi-experimental approach to estimate
WTP for clean air.

4

2

Air pollution, Air Purifiers, and the Huai River Policy in China

In this section, we provide background information on air pollution in Chinese cities, air purifier
markets in China, and the Huai River policy, which are key to our empirical analysis.

2.1

The Main Pollutant in Chinese Cities

Among ambient pollution measures, fine particulate matter has most consistently shown an adverse
e↵ect on human health in recent medical research (Dockery et al. 1993, Pope et al. 2009 and
Correia et al. 2013). Additionally, particulate matter is mostly concentrated in developing countries.
According to a global map of satellite-derived P M2.5 (particulate matter with a diameter of 2.5
micrometers or less), Northern and Eastern China, and Northern India are the most polluted regions
in the world (Van Donkelaar et al., 2010).
Particular matter is the main air pollutant in Chinese cities. Since 2000, the Chinese Ministry
of Environmental Protection (MEP) has released a daily air pollution index (API) for 120 cities.
In each city, a number of monitors record hourly concentration measures of three air pollutants:
P M10 (particulate matter with a diameter of 10 micrometers or less), SO2 and N O2 . Daily API is
converted from the pollutant with the highest daily average value. The API value scales from 0 to
500: the higher the value, the greater the level of air pollution. For example, an API value of 0 to
50 represents excellent air while an API value over 300 represents heavily polluted air. When the
API is above 50, the MEP reports the specific type of pollutant from which the API was converted.
During 2006-2012, the main pollutant was PM10, followed by SO2 and NO2 with respective shares
of 91%, 8.9%, and 0.15% of the total days in our sample of cities The official API, based on ambient
P M10 for most days, is the only accessible pollution information for Chinese citizens during our
sample period.4 Both daily API level and the main pollutant type are reported to local residents
by city weather channels, radio and newspapers.

2.2

Air Purifiers

A key advantage of analyzing air purifier markets is that one of the product attributes—highefficiency particulate arrestance (HEPA)—informs both consumers and econometricians of the pu4
The Chinese government started to report P M2.5 in 2014. We focus on the period 2006 to 2012 because of the
availability and representativeness of our air purifier data for this period.

5

rifier’s e↵ectiveness to reduce indoor particulate matter. According to the US Department of
Energy, a HEPA air purifier removes at least 99.97% of particles of 0.3 micrometer or larger in diameter (DOE, 2005). It is even more e↵ective for larger particles such as P M2.5 and P M10 . Recent
clinical studies find that the use of HEPA purifiers in various settings provides improvements in
health, including reduced asthma symptoms and asthma-related health visits among children, lower
marker levels of inflammation and heart disease, and reduced incidences of invasive aspergillosis
among adults (Abdul Salam et al., 2010; Allen et al., 2011; Lanphear et al., 2011). In the Chinese
air purifier markets, consistent with the US Department of Energy standards, air purifier manufacturers and retail stores explicitly advertise that a HEPA purifier can remove more than 99% of
particle matter larger than 0.3 micrometers.
In Chinese cities, HEPA purifiers have approximately half of the market share, and non-HEPA
purifiers have another half of the market share. Non-HEPA purification technologies are designed to
remove other target pollutants, not particulate matter. Activated carbon absorbs volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), but it does not remove particles. A catalytic converter is e↵ective in removing
VOCs and formaldehyde. An air ionizer generates electrically charged air or gas ions, which attach
to airborne particles that are then attracted to a charged collector plate. However, there are no
specific standards for air ionizers, and they also produce ozone and other oxidants as by-products. A
study by Health Canada finds that a residential ionizer only removes 4% of indoor P M2.5 (Wallace,
2008).

2.3

The Huai River Policy and its Recent Reform

In 1958, the Chinese government decided to provide a centralized heating system. Because of
budget constraints, the government provided city-wide centralized heating to northern cities only
(Almond et al., 2009). Northern and southern China are divided by a line formed by the Huai River
and Qinling Mountains as shown in Figure 1. The government used this line because the average
January temperature is roughly 0° Celsius along the line, and the line is not a border for other
administrative purposes (Chen et al., 2013). Cities to the north of the river boundary have received
centralized heating in every winter. In contrast, cities in the south have not had a centralized
heating supply from the government.
The centralized heating supply in the north relies on coal-fired heating systems. Two-thirds
6

of heat is generated by heat-only hot water boilers for one or several buildings in an apartment
complex, and the remaining one-third is generated by combined heat and power generators for the
larger areas of each city. This system is inflexible and energy inefficient. Consumers have no means
to control their heat supply and, until recently, there has been no measurement of heat consumption
at the consumer level. The incomplete combustion of coal in the heat generation process leads to
the release of air pollutants, particularly particulate matter. Because most heat is generated by
boilers within an apartment complex, the pollution from coal-based heating remains largely local.
Almond et al. (2009) find that the Huai River policy led to higher total suspended particulate
(TSP) levels in the north. Chen et al. (2013) further find that the higher pollution levels created
by the policy led to a loss of 5.5 years of life expectancy in the north.
The heating supply in the north has been consistent since the 1950s while the payment system
under the policy underwent an important reform in 2003. Prior to 2003, free heating was provided
to residents in the north, and employers or local governments were responsible for the payment of
household heating bills (WorldBank, 2005). The payment system was designed under the centrally
planned economy under which the public sector employment dominated the labor market. However,
during China’s transition to a market economy, heating billing became a practical problem. The
size of the private sector has increased dramatically since the 1990s, and employers in the private
sector have not been required to pay heating bills. Additionally, many public sector employees have
moved out of public housing and have purchased homes in the private market, which complicated
the payment of heating bills by public sector employers.
In July 2003, the Chinese government issued a heating reform. The reform changed the payment
system from free provision to flat-rate billing (WorldBank, 2005). Individual households became
responsible for the payment of their own heating bills each season, which is a fixed charge per square
meter of floor area for the entire season ,regardless of actual heating usage. Whether a heating
subsidy is provided by employers varies by sector. In the public sector, former in-kind transfers
were changed to a transparent payment for heating added to the wage. In contrast, private sector
employers were not explicitly required to provide a heating subsidy to their employees. In the
2005 census, 21% of the labor force was in the urban public sector in the 81 cities in our sample,
suggesting that only a small percentage of employees receive a heating subsidy following the reform.
Our analysis focuses on to period from 2006 to 2012, after the 2003 reform on heating billing.
7

We summarize the comparison of winter heating between the north and the south. First, winter
heating is provided in the same way after the reform. The centralized city-wide heating supply
in the north remains the same, where households have little option other than the centralized
coal-based heating that generates higher pollution levels. In the south, households choose their
own methods of staying warm in winter, including using the heating function of air conditioners,
space heaters, heated blankets, etc. Second, heating costs in the north have changed since the 2003
reform. Northern households no longer enjoy free heating and instead have to pay a substantial
proportion of their heating bills from the centralized heating while households in the south continue
to pay for the heating methods of their choice. We collected heating costs in 20 cities within three
degrees of latitude relative to the Huai River boundary and find that household heating costs in
the north are comparable to, or could even be higher than, those in the south.5

3

Data and Descriptive Statistics

We compile a dataset from four data sources—air purifier market data, air pollution data, manufacturing/importing location data for each product, and demographic information from the 2005
Chinese census micro data. In this section, we describe each data source and provide descriptive
statistics.

3.1

Air Purifier Data

We use air purifier sales transaction data collected by a marketing firm in China from January 2006
through December 2012 for 81 cities. The company collected product-store-level scanner data on
monthly sales, monthly average price, and product attributes. The data cover a network of major
department stores and electrical appliance stores, which account for over 80% of all in-store sales.
During the period 2006 to 2012, in-store sales consisted of over 95% of overall purifier sales. The
5
For example, in Xi’an, a city within one degree of latitude north of the Huai River, the price of heating per
square meter per winter is USD 3.9. For an apartment of 100 square meters, the household pays USD 390. The
average subsidy in public sector is USD 177 per employee, and the number of public employees per household is 0.32
according to the 2005 population census. The average amount of subsidy per household is USD 57. Therefore, an
average household’s out-of-pocket payment is USD 333. In southern cities, space heaters and heated blankets are the
most common choices that could cost USD 150 to 200 including the purchasing of these devices and the electricity
bill in winter for a similar size home. If a household chooses a more expensive option, air conditioning, the electricity
bill for three months in winter could be approximately USD 240 to 280 and the entire cost depends on the price of
the air conditioners, which varies to a large extent.

8

marketing firm provided product-level data for in-store sales only. The share of online sales has
started to increase significantly since 2013. Therefore, our empirical analysis focuses on data for
2006 to 2012.
There are 395 products sold by 30 manufacturers in the dataset. The original sales and price data
are at the product-city-store-year-month level. In our empirical analysis, the exogenous variation
in pollution comes from cross-city variation. Therefore, we aggregate the transaction data to the
product-city level. That is, the unit of observation is a product in a city, and the main variables of
interest are the product’s total sales and average price at the city level during 2006-2012. A unique
feature of the dataset is that we observe detailed attributes for each product. The key attribute is
a High Efficiency Particulate Arrestance (HEPA) filter, which enables us to quantify the amount
of particulate matter that a product can remove.
Finally, to address the endogeneity of prices in our empirical analysis, we construct an instrumental variable, which measures the distance from each product’s manufacturing plant (or its port
if the product is imported) to each market. The distance measure captures the variation in the
transportation cost, which is a supply-side price shifter. For each product, we geo-coded the location of its manufacturing plant if it is domestically produced, or the location of the importing port
if it is imported. Around 16% of products are imported. We then calculate the distance (km) from
the city where the product is sold to its manufacturing plant for domestically produced products
and to the port for imported products.

3.2

Pollution Data

The official air pollution index (API) is the only accessible air pollution information for Chinese
citizens during the period of this study. We obtain daily API data for each city in our sample for
2006-2012 from the Chinese Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP). In addition to the API
level, the data source discloses the type of pollutant from which the API was taken from on days
when the air quality is not excellent (API is above 50). This information is also disclosed to the
public. During the sample period, the main pollutant was P M10 for 91% of the days.
The conversion from the concentration of each pollutant to API is based on a known nonlinear
function. For the days that P M10 is reported as the main pollutant, we use the official formula
from the Chinese MEP to convert daily API to daily P M10 . We then calculate the average daily
9

P M10 for the winter months (December to March) and non-winter months (April to November) at
the city level. We calculate P M10 for these two seasons separately because the centralized heating
in the north of the Huai River is turned on in late November and turned o↵ at the end of March.
We are cautious in using the API data because recent studies find evidence of underreporting
of API at the margin of 100 (Chen et al. 2012, Ghanem and Zhang 2014). The manipulation
is motivated by the blue sky award, which defines a day with an API below 100 as a blue sky
day and links the number of annual blue sky days to the annual performance evaluation of city
governments. For our analysis, we investigate the extent to which potential manipulation a↵ects
the average API level for cities for the period 2006 to 2012. In the online appendix, we perform
McCrary density tests (McCrary 2008) on daily API data to test potential manipulation and then
estimate the e↵ects of the manipulation on the average level of API at the city level. In Figure A.5
in the appendix, we find that potential manipulation changes the city-level average API for our
sample period by a negligible amount. This is because the manipulation occurs only at the margin
of 100 and therefore, it has a minimal e↵ect on the average API over a long trem.

3.3

Demographic Data

We compile demographic data from two sources. First, we obtain city-year measures on population
and GDP per capita from City Statistical Yearbooks in 2006-2012. Second, we obtain individuallevel micro data from the 2005 census. For each city, the dataset includes demographic variables
for a random sample of individuals. We use household-level income data to create the empirical
distribution of household annual income for each city, which we use in our empirical analysis.
We also aggregate the census data to calculate some additional city-level demographic variables
including average years of schooling and the percentage of individuals who have completed college.

3.4

Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics. In Panel A, we show the summary statistics of our air purifier
data at the product level. In our dataset, there are 395 products manufactured by 30 manufactures,
including domestic and foreign companies. Of the 395 products, 206 products, or 52% of all
products, have a HEPA filter. We report product-level summary statistics for all products in
column 1, HEPA purifiers in column 2, and non-HEPA purifiers in column 3. For each variable, we
10

also calculate the di↵erence in the means between HEPA purifiers and non-HEPA purifiers and the
standard errors for the di↵erences by clustering at the manufacturer level in column 4. Although
we observe substantial heterogeneity for each variable at the product level, the di↵erence in the
means between HEPA and non-HEPA purifiers is statistically insignificant for sales, market share,
other product attributes such as humidifying and room coverage, the distance to the factory or the
port, and the frequency of filter replacement. In contrast, the di↵erence is statistically significant
for the price of purifiers and the price of replacement filters. On average, HEPA purifiers are USD
112 more expensive than non-HEPA purifiers, and the di↵erence is statistically significant at the
10% level. HEPA replacement filters are also USD 20 more expensive than non-HEPA replacement
filters, and the di↵erence is statistically significant at the 10% level.
Panel B and C of Table 1 report summary statistics for our two datasets at the city level—
pollution data and demographic data. The average P M10 in winter months is 115 ug/m3 , while
it is 93 ug/m3 in non-winter months. Cities in our dataset have, on average, a population of 2.5
million. The average GDP per capita is USD 8,277. The average years of schooling is 8.36 years,
and the percentage of individuals who have completed college is, on average, 3.6%.
We also use two maps to show the spatial distributions of the cities and manufacturing plants/ports
in our dataset. Figure 1 shows the location of the 81 cities on the China map in our analysis. The
line of Huai River/Qinling Mountains divides China into North and South. Each dot represents
a city in our sample. All cities in our sample are located east of 100 degrees of longitude. The
river line east of 100 degrees of longitude ranges between 32.6 and 34.2 degrees of latitude. In our
spatial RD approach using the Huai River policy, we define a city’s relative latitude north of the
river line. Because the river line has several di↵erent curved segments, we divide the river line into
five segments. In each segment, we measure a city’s relative latitude to the middle point of the
river latitude range. For example, Beijing is located at 39.9 degrees of latitude and 116.3 degrees of
longitude, and the corresponding middle point of the river latitude range is 33.4 degrees. Beijing’s
relative latitude north of the river line is 6.5 (39.9 to 33.4) degrees. Cities in our sample are located
between -12.9 and 14.8 degrees north of the river line. In the appendix, we also show Figure A.1,
which includes the locations of manufacturing plants of domestically produced products and ports
of imported products on the map. Most manufacturing plants and ports are located on the east
coast.
11

4

Demand for Air Purifiers

Our goal is to obtain a revealed preference estimate of WTP for clean air by analyzing demand for
air purifiers. Because air purifiers are di↵erentiated products with multiple attributes, we start with
a random utility model for di↵erentiated products.6 When a consumer purchases an air purifier,
the consumer considers utility from the product attributes and disutility from the price. For our
objective, an advantage of analyzing air purifier markets is that one of the product characteristics—
high-efficiency particulate arrestance (HEPA)—informs consumers and researchers of the purifier’s
e↵ectiveness to reduce indoor particulate matter. The intuition behind our approach is that the
extent to which consumers value this characteristic, along with the price elasticity of demand,
provides useful information on their WTP for indoor air quality improvements.
Consider that consumer i in city c has ambient air pollution xc (particulate matter). The
consumer can purchase air purifier j at price pjc to reduce indoor air pollution by xjc = xc · ej .
We denote purifier j’s e↵ectiveness to reduce indoor particulate matters by ej 2 [0, 1]. We observe
markets for c = 1, ..., C cities with i = 1, ..., Ic consumers. The conditional indirect utility of
consumer i from purchasing air purifier j at city c is:

uijc =

i xjc

+ ↵i pjc + ⌘j +

c

+ ⇠jc + ✏ijc ,

(1)

where xjc is the improvement in indoor air quality conditional on the purchase of product j, pjc is the
price of product j in market c, ⌘j is product fixed e↵ects that capture utility gains from unobserved
and observed product characteristics,

c

is city fixed e↵ects, ⇠jc is a product-city specific demand

shock, and ✏ijc is a mean-zero stochastic term.

i

indicates the marginal utility for clean air, and

↵i indicates the marginal disutility of price. The functional form for the utility function assumes
that each variable, including the error term, enter the utility function linearly.
Air purifiers usually run for five years and require filter replacement several times within five
years. We assume that consumer i considers utility gains from purifier j for five years and pjc as
a total cost including the upfront and running cost.7 This approach abstracts from the interesting
6

For more detailed discussion on randomm utility models for di↵erentiated products and their estimation, see Berry
(1994); Berry et al. (1995); Goldberg (1995); Nevo (2001); Kremer et al. (2011); Knittel and Metaxoglou (2013).
7
This approach also implicitly assumes that consumers respond to the monetary value of an upfront cost and
running costs in the same way when they purchase air purifiers. For example, if consumers are myopic, they can
be more responsive to an upfront cost than running costs. While we cannot rule out this possibility, recent studies

12

possibility that consumers may consider the dynamics of product entries and make a dynamic
decision. Unfortunately, it is not possible to examine such a dynamic decision in the context
of our empirical setting. While we have monthly sales and price data, the exogenous variation in
pollution comes from purely cross-sectional variation as opposed to time-series variation. Therefore,
our empirical approach focuses on cross-sectional variation in pollution and purchasing behavior,
which has to abstract from potential dynamic discrete choices.
We assume that the error term ✏ijc is distributed as a Type I extreme-value function. We
then consider both a standard logit model and a random-coefficient logit model. A standard logit
model assumes that the preference parameters do not vary by i. The attractive feature of this
approach is that the random utility model in equation (1) leads to a linear equation. The linear
equation can be estimated by linear GMM estimation with instrumental variables for pollution
and price. A random-coefficient logit model allows the preference parameters to vary by household
i through observable and unobservable factors. This feature comes at a cost—random-coefficient
logit estimation involves nonlinear GMM estimation for a highly nonlinear objective function. In
this paper, we use both approaches to estimate WTP for clean air.

4.1

A Logit Model

We begin with a standard logit model. Suppose that

i

=

and ↵i = ↵ for all consumer i and that

the error term ✏ijc is distributed as a Type I extreme-value function. Consumer i purchases purifier
j if uijc > uikc for 8k 6= j. Then, the market share for product j in city c can be characterized by8
exp( xjc + ↵pjc + ⌘j + c + ⇠jc )
sjc = PJ
.
k=0 exp( xkc + ↵pkc + ⌘k + c + ⇠kc )

(2)

The outside option (j = 0) is not to buy an air purifier. We make a few assumptions to construct
the market share for the outside option (s0c ). We assume that the number of households in city c
are potential buyers, and that each household purchases one or zero air purifier during our sample
period. Then, s0c can be calculated by the di↵erence between the number of households in city c and
show empirically that consumers are not myopic concerning the running costs of durable goods (Busse et al., 2013).
When calculating the total cost of a purifier, we do not consider future discount rates in its running cost. However,
including discount rates changes the total cost only by a small amount and, therefore, we find that it does not have
a significant e↵ect on our empirical findings.
8
See Berry (1994) for the proof and more detailed discussions.

13

the total number of sales in city c. Our second assumption is that x0c = 0. That is, if consumers do
not buy an air purifier, they are exposed to indoor pollution that is equal to ambient air pollution.
Note that for the standard logit estimation, the assumptions on the outside option are not required
when we include city fixed e↵ects. City fixed e↵ects absorb observable and unobservable variation
at the city level. For completeness, we include the log of market share for the outside option (s0c )
in the equation below, but the term will be absorbed by city fixed e↵ects. The log market share for
⇣P
⌘
J
the outside options is ln s0c = ln
exp(
x
+
↵p
+
⌘
+
⇠
)
kc
kc
k
kc . The di↵erence between
k=0
the log market share for product j and the log market share for the outside options is,

lnsjc

where

lns0c = xjc + ↵pjc + ⌘j +

c

+ ⇠jc

(3)

is the marginal utility for clean air, and ↵ is the marginal disutility from price. The

marginal willingness to pay (MWTP) for one unit of indoor air pollution reduction can be obtained
by

/↵.
We interpret that our estimate of

/↵ provides a lower bound of MWTP for one unit of indoor

pollution reduction. First, our approach assumes that indoor air pollution levels in the absence of
air purifiers are equal to ambient pollution levels. Recent engineering studies show that, on average,
indoor pollution levels are lower than outdoor pollution levels in China.9 One approach we could
take is to rely on an engineering estimate of the indoor-outdoor air pollution ratio, which would
produce slightly larger estimates for MWTP. However, because we want to be as conservative as
possible, we assume that indoor air pollution levels are equal to outdoor pollution levels, which
is likely to underestimate the MWTP. Second, households may have limited information on the
negative health e↵ects of air pollution and, therefore, are likely to underestimate the health risk.
If this is the case, our MWTP estimate can be underestimated compared to the case in which
consumers are well-informed of the negative health e↵ects of air pollution. Third, if the running
costs of HEPA purifiers are higher because using HEPA filters costs more electricity, our MWTP
estimate without accounting for the di↵erence in the running costs could be underestimated.
An advantage of studying air purifier markets is that ej (purifier j’s e↵ectiveness to reduce
indoor particulate matters) is well-known for consumers. As we explained in Section 2.2, if a
9
A study from Tsinghua University finds that, in Beijing, on average, the indoor concentration of P M2.5 is 67%
of the outdoor concentration of P M2.5 . See The People’s Daily, April 23, 2015 (Zhang, 2015).

14

purifier has a HEPA filter, it can reduce 99% of indoor particular matter. On the other hand, if a
purifier does not have HEPA, it does not reduce indoor particular matter. In advertisements and
product descriptions of air purifier products in the Chinese market, consumers are well-informed of
the di↵erence between HEPA purifiers and non-HEPA purifiers. Therefore, we define the pollution
reduction by xjc = xc · HEP Aj , which equals xc if HEP Aj = 1 and equals zero if HEP Aj = 0.
That is, conditional on the purchase of a HEPA purifier, consumers can reduce indoor air pollution
by zc . Otherwise, the reduction in indoor air pollution is zero. Note that non-HEPA purifiers do
not provide reductions in particular matter but provide other utility gains, including reductions
in VOCs and odors. These utility gains are captured by the product fixed e↵ects ✓j . Using
xjc = xc · HEP Aj , our random utility model leads to an estimation equation:
lnsjc

lns0c = xc · HEP Aj + ↵pjc + ⌘j +

c

+ ⇠jc .

(4)

As we explained above, the log market share of the outside option (ln s0c ) will be absorbed by
city fixed e↵ects ( c ). From this equation, we can calculate a lower bound of MWTP by

/↵.

The empirical challenge is that pollution and price are likely to be endogenous even if we include
product fixed e↵ects and city fixed e↵ects. In our empirical strategy section, we explain how we
address these endogeneity problems by instrumental variables.

4.2

A Random-coefficient Logit Model

Our random-coefficient model relaxes some assumptions of the standard logit model. Since general
discussions on random-coefficient models are provided extensively in the literature (Berry et al.,
1995; Nevo, 2001; Knittel and Metaxoglou, 2013), we provide a brief description focusing on key
parts for our empirical analysis.
We begin with the same random utility model described in equation (1) but relax the assumptions on

i

and ↵i by allowing the two parameters to vary by consumer i through ob-

servable and unobservable factors. We model the two parameters by

i

=

0

+

1 yi

+ ui and

↵ = ↵0 + ↵1 yi + ei , where yi is the log of household income for household i from the census
micro data, ui ⇠ N (0,

) and ei ⇠ N (0,

↵ ).

Therefore, each of these two parameters depends

on the mean coefficient, log of household-level income, and a normally distributed random un-

15

observed heterogeneity. Denote the part of the utility function that does not depend on i (the
mean utility level) by
µjci = (

1 yi

=

jc

0 xjc

+ ↵0 pjc + ⌘j +

c

+ ⇠jc and the part that depends on i by

+ ui )xjc + (↵1 yi + ei )pjc . Then, the market share for product j in city c can be

evaluated using Monte Carlo integration assuming a number nc of individuals for city c by:10

sjc

nc
nc
exp( jc + µjci )
1 X
1 X
=
sjci =
.
PJ
nc
nc
k=0 exp( kc + µjki )
i=1

(5)

i=1

The important di↵erence between equations (2) and (5) is that equation (5) now includes elements
that vary by i. Therefore, the market share and
point iterations:

h+1
.c

=

h
.c

+ ln S.c

jc

has to be calculated numerically by the fixed

ln s.c for h = 0, ..., H in which s.c is the predicted market

share by equation (5) and S.c is the observed market share from the data. Once
can be written by ⇠jc =

jc

(

0 xjc

+ ↵0 pjc + ⌘j +

c)

is obtained, ⇠jc

⌘ !jc .

The idea behind the estimation is that if there is a set of instrumental variables that are
uncorrelated with !jc , we can estimate the parameters by nonlinear GMM using the moment
conditions of the instruments and !jc . Denote the vector of the parameters by ✓ and a set of
instruments by Zjc . Then, the GMM estimate is
✓ˆ = argmin !jc (✓)0 (Zjc )

in which

1

1

0
(Zjc
)!jc (✓),

(6)

is the optimal weight matrix for the GMM estimation. The GMM objective function

is nonlinear in parameters. Therefore, it has to be evaluated numerically by nonlinear search
algorithms. In the empirical strategy section below, we describe details about the estimation.

5

Empirical Analysis and Results

In this section, we provide empirical analysis based on the estimating equations derived in the
previous section. Our primary goal is to obtain consistent estimates of the preference parameters
for pollution ( ) and price (↵) to calculate WTP for clean air. We begin with standard logit
estimation in section 5.1 followed by random-coefficient logit estimation in section 5.2.
10

See Nevo (2001) for a more detailed explanation for how to derive this equation.

16

5.1

Logit Estimation

Our primary empirical challenge is that two variables in the demand estimation—pollution and
price—are likely to be endogenous. In an ideal controlled experiment, one would expose di↵erent
consumers to randomly assigned pollution levels and purifier prices to estimate the demand for
air purifiers in relation to variation in air pollution. In reality, these two variables are unlikely to
be randomly assigned. Air pollution is determined by both observable and unobservable factors.
Therefore, we cannot consider observed pollution levels across di↵erent cities exogenous variation
because of potentially omitted variables. Air purifier prices are also unlikely to be determined
exogenously because unobserved factors in demand are believed to be correlated with price. For
example, suppose that some demand factors are unobservable to econometricians but observable
to firms. If firms have the ability to set prices because of imperfect competition, we expect that
they set prices in response to the unobserved demand factors, which creates correlation between
the price and the error term in our demand estimation.
We address the endogeneity of air pollution by exploiting a regression discontinuity design at
the spatial border of the Huai River as described in section 2.3. This approach provides us a useful
research environment for two reasons. First, it allows us to exploit plausibly exogenous variation
in air pollution created by the natural experiment—the Huai river heating policy. If households
value air quality, our demand model in section 4 predicts that the market share for HEPA purifiers
is discontinuously higher in cities north of the Huai River. Second, the discontinuous di↵erence in
air pollution created by the Huai River policy has existed since the 1950s. Therefore, the natural
experiment provides long-run variation in air pollution, which enables us to examine how households
respond to variation in pollution that is long-lasting rather than transitory.
We address the endogeneity of prices by combining two approaches. First, we use data from
many markets (cities) in China, which allows us to include both product fixed e↵ects and city fixed
e↵ects. These fixed e↵ects absorb product-level and city-level unobserved demand factors. The
remaining potential concern is product-city level unobserved factors that might be correlated with
prices by product and city. To address this concern, we construct an instrumental variable that measures the distance from each product’s manufacturing plant (or its port if the product is imported)
to each market. This instrument provides variation at the city-product level because manufacturing

17

locations or importing ports are di↵erent between products, and it captures transportation cost of
the product, which is a supply-side cost shifter.
5.1.1

Empirical Strategy

First Stage on Air Pollution: We estimate the first stage on air pollution using a regression
discontinuity design created by the Huai river heating policy. We denote air pollution (P M10 )
for city c by xc , the latitude relative to the Huai River boundary by Lc , a dummy variable for
cities north of the Huai River by N orthc = 1 {Lc > 0}, and demographic control variables by Xc .
Recent studies suggest that a local linear regression or quadratic polynomials with observations
close to the cuto↵ provide more robust estimates for RD designs than those obtained by high
order global polynomial controls with observations far from the cuto↵ (Imbens and Lemieux, 2008;
Gelman and Imbens, 2014). We estimate a local linear regression and a local quadratic regression
for observations near the cuto↵ of N orthc = 1. Our local linear regression is,

xc = N orthc +

1 Lc

+

2 Lc

· N orthc +

3 Xc

+ ✏c .

(7)

The identification assumption is that the conditional expectation of the outcome variable (xc ) is
smooth at the cuto↵. One way to examine the validity of the RD design is to investigate observed
variables on either side of the Huai River. In the appendix, we show that there are no significant
discrete changes in population, GDP per capita, average years of schooling, and the percentage
of individuals who have completed college at the cuto↵ (Figure A.3). Nevertheless, we test the
robustness of our estimate by including these city demographics as covariates in Xc . Our coefficient
of interest, , measures the discontinuous increase in xc just north of the Huai River.
When estimating a regression discontinuity design, one needs to decide the bandwidth of the
sample that is included in a local linear regression. We apply the algorithm developed by Imbens
and Kalyanaraman (2012) to our data and find that the optimal bandwidth based on the algorithm
is five latitude degrees. The general consensus in the recent literature is that researchers should
report results with several sets of bandwidth choices to examine the robustness. Therefore, we
use five latitude degrees for our main result but also report results with four, six, seven, and eight
latitude degrees.

18

Finally, recent studies suggest that the local linear regressions should be run with kernel weights
that assign more weights on observations near the cuto↵ (Imbens and Kalyanaraman, 2012; Calonico
et al., 2014). For our main specification, we use a triangular kernel, which is most commonly used
in recent studies. We also estimate our regressions without weights. Because we limit our sample
to observation near the cuto↵, we find that including or excluding weights does not substantially
change the estimation results.

Reduced-form on Log Market Share: Suppose that our first stage on PM10 provides
evidence of a discontinuous increase in PM10 at the Huai river boundary. Then, our demand model
predicts that the market share for HEPA purifiers should be higher in cities north of the river if
households value clean air. Our reduced-form estimation examines whether there is a discontinuous
change in the market share for HEPA purifiers at the river boundary. We use our city-product level
data to estimate a reduced-form equation,

lnsjc = ⇢N orthc · HEP Aj + ↵pjc + (⇢1 Lc + ⇢2 Lc · N orthc ) · HEP Aj + ⌘j +
where ⌘j is product fixed e↵ects and

c

c

+ ✏jc ,

(8)

is city fixed e↵ects. Because we include city fixed e↵ects, the

log market share for outside options (ln s0c ) and a dummy variable for northern cities (N orthc ) are
absorbed by

c.

We allow the control function for the running variable (latitude) to di↵er between

HEPA purifiers and non-HEPA purifiers by including (⇢1 Lc + ⇢2 Lc · N orthc ) · HEP Aj .
As we described above, prices are likely to be endogenous in this equation. For instruments for
prices, we measure the distance from each product’s manufacturing plant (or its port if the product
is imported) to each market to capture the city-product level variation in transportation cost. Our
instruments are distance, distance2 , and distance3 , each of which is interacted with the dummy
variables for the product’s country of origin. In this way, we can allow flexible functional forms for
the relationship between prices and the distance to the markets.
The reduced-form estimation itself provides policy-relevant parameters. From the estimates of
⇢ and ↵, we can calculate the WTP for removing the amount of pollution generated by the Huai
River policy ( in equation (7)) by

⇢/↵.

19

Second Stage on Log Market Share: We estimate the marginal willingness to pay (MWTP)
for clean air by running the following second stage regression:

lnsjc = xc · HEP Aj + ↵pjc + (

1 Lc

+

2 Lc

· N orthc ) · HEP Aj + ⌘j +

c

+ ✏jc ,

(9)

by using N orthc · HEP Aj as the instrument for xc · HEP Aj and the same set of instruments used
in the reduced-form estimation as the instruments for pjc . The identification assumption is that
the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term given the control function and fixed e↵ects.
This estimation allows us to calculate the MWTP for removing one unit of PM10 by
5.1.2

/↵.

Graphical Analysis

Huai River policy generates a natural experiment in air pollution in the winter months because the
policy-induced pollution comes from centralized heating facilities operating in winter. In Figure 2a,
we show the average P M10 in the winter months (December to March) during 2006-2012 by the
running variable, which is the latitude of cities (Lt ). Because few cities are located in the farthest
north and the farthest south, the figure includes cities located within 10 degrees of latitude from the
Huai River boundary. Each plot in the figure shows the average P M10 by 1.5 degrees of latitude.
The vertical line at Lc = 0 indicates the location of the Huai River. Consistent with findings in
previous studies (Almond et al. (2009), Chen et al. (2013)), the figure suggests a discontinuous
increase in P M10 just north of the Huai River. This evidence suggests that the coal-based heating
policy generated higher pollution levels in cities north of the river boundary. We also investigate if a
similar discontinuity in air pollution can be found for non-winter months, when the heating facilities
do not operate. Figure A.2 in the appendix shows that there is no discontinuous change in P M10
levels at the boundary in non-winter months (April to November). This finding provides further
support that the discontinuous increase in pollution presented in Figure 2a is likely generated by
the Huai River policy.
In Figure 2b, we show an analogous RD figure for our outcome variable. That is, Figure
2b presents graphical analysis for the reduced-form regression. We calculate the market share of
HEPA purifiers by 1.5 degrees of latitude. In the south, the market share of HEPA purifiers is
below 60%. The figure indicates that there is a sharp increase in the market share of HEPA at the

20

river boundary, and that the share is over 70% in cities just north of the river. Additionally, the
figure shows no strong trend in the outcome variable by latitude. The relatively flat relationship
between the outcome variable and the running variable suggests that the choice of functional form
for the running variable is unlikely to have a substantial impact on the reduced-form estimation.
5.1.3

Estimation Results

Table 2 shows the results of the first stage estimation. We report the first stage estimation for
P M10 in Panel A. The first two columns show results without demographic controls, and the last
two columns show results with demographic controls. We report our estimates from local linear
regression and local quadratic regression. Without demographic controls, our estimates imply
that there is a discontinuous increase in P M10 of 37 to 39 units at the Huai River boundary.
The magnitude of these estimates is consistent with the visual evidence from Figure 2a. With
demographic controls, the magnitude becomes slightly larger, but the estimates with and without
demographic controls are statistically indi↵erent. Note that the mean P M10 for cities just south of
the Huai River is approximately 115 and jumps by approximately 30% just north of the river.
In Panel B of Table 2, we report the first stage estimation for prices. We include product fixed
e↵ects in all columns. The unit of the distance variable is in 1,000 kilometers (621 miles). The
coefficient estimates for all columns imply that distance and prices have a nonlinear relationship,
and it is monotonically increasing for the range of distance in the dataset. For example, the result
in columns 1 implies that a hundred kilometer increase (a 62.1 mile increase) in the distance to
the manufacturing plant or importing port is associated with an increase in price of approximately
USD 12 =136.14 · (0.1)

174.65 · (0.1)2 + 70.22 · (0.1)3 . Note that the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and

90th percentiles of the distance variable in our data are 230 km, 550 km, 1,000 km, 1,400 km, and
1,700 km, and that the average price of air purifiers is USD 400. Therefore, the first stage estimates
imply that a considerable amount of variation in prices can be explained by transportation costs
to markets. In columns 3 and 4, we include city fixed e↵ects to control for potentially confounding
factors at the city level. For example, firms possibly set higher prices for cities with higher average
income. The results in these columns imply that the relationship between distance and price is
robust to the inclusion of city fixed e↵ects.
Table 3 shows the reduced-form results in Panel A and the second-stage results in Panel B.
21

We include product fixed e↵ects and city fixed e↵ects. Because we have more instruments than
regressors (an over-identified case), the two-step GMM estimation with the optimal weight matrix
provides a more efficient estimator than the two-stage least squares (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005).
We use the orthogonality conditions of the instruments to implement the two-step linear GMM
estimation and cluster the standard errors at the city level. Consistent with Figure 2b, the reducedform results provide evidence that there is an economically and statistically significant discontinuous
increase in the market share of HEPA purifiers in cities north of the river from both specifications.
We calculate the WTP by

⇢/↵ and obtain its standard error by the delta method. Using local

linear regression, the estimates in column 1 imply that the WTP for reducing the amount of air
pollution generated by the Huai river policy for five years is USD 190 per household. With local
quadratic regression in column 2, the magnitudes of the estimates change slightly, but the estimates
from the two estimation methods are statistically indi↵erent.
Finally, we report the second-stage results in Panel B of Table 3. We use the delta method to
calculate the standard error for

/↵, which tells us the marginal WTP for reducing one unit of

P M10 for five years. The results for the local linear regression indicate that the MWTP is about
USD 4.4 per household.11
5.1.4

Robustness of the Estimates

We first test the robustness of our main results to bandwidth selection. For the second stage
estimation in Table 4, we use a range of bandwidths between four and eight latitude degrees. We
report the results using local linear regression in Panel A and local quadratic regression in Panel B.
We use triangular kernel for both functional forms. The results imply that our estimates are stable
to a choice of di↵erent bandwidths. We also report in Table A.2 and Table A.3 in the appendix that
estimates of the first stage and reduced form are also robust, consistent with the visual evidence in
Figures 2a and 2b.
A potential concern is that if high-income or better-educated households prefer HEPA purifiers
11

Figure A.2 in the online appendix shows that we do not find a discontinuous change in P M10 at the river boundary
for non-winter months (April to November). This is consistent with the fact that the centralized heating in the north is
provided in winter months only. Nevertheless, we consider the possibility that consumers could purchase air purifiers
during an entire year including non-winter months as a response to higher pollution levels in winter months because
air purifiers are durable goods. In the online appendix, we test this possibility in Table A.4. The point estimates
in the table suggest that demand for HEPA purifiers in all months has a moderate response to di↵erences in winter
P M10 , but the response is lower than in winter months.

22

over non-HEPA purifiers for reasons unrelated to air pollution, the interaction term of income and
HEPA, or that of education and HEPA, can be omitted variables. In Table A.1 in the online
appendix, we include the interaction of GDP per capita and HEPA and the interaction of average
schooling and HEPA. We find that the results are similar to our main estimates in Table 3.
5.1.5

Potential Confounding Factors to the Estimation

In this section, we consider potential confounders that could bias our results. First, the RD design
requires that the conditional expectation of potential outcomes are smooth in the running variable
across the river boundary. While potential outcomes are unobservable, we can examine whether
observable variables have discontinuities at the river boundary. In Figure A.3 in the online appendix,
we show that there are no discontinuous changes in demographic variables across the Huai River
boundary.
The second possible concern is sorting of households because of air pollution—households in
the north may migrate to the south to seek cleaner air. This sorting, if it exists, could bias our
estimates. In our case, however, sorting is unlikely to significantly a↵ect our estimates because
of strict migration policies enforced by the Chinese government. Internal migration in China is
strictly constrained by the Hukou system. The hukou, obtained at one’s city of birth, is crucial for
obtaining local social benefits and education opportunities, which makes migration a more costly
decision than migration in countries without restrictions on mobility. The government started to
relax the Hukou system by allowing a few types of migraiotn since the late 1990s, but the migration
rate is still low. We look into migration in the micro-data of the two population census after the
relaxation, the 2000 census and the 2005 census. Indeed, in the 2000 census micro-data, only 0.5
percent of the population in the city of origin within 1.5 latitude degrees north of the Huai river
had migrated to the south. In the 2005 census micro-data, 1 percent of the population in the city
of origin within 1.5 latitude degrees north of the Huai river had migrated to the south. Therefore,
in our case, migration is unlikely to have a significant impact on our estimation.
Third, if there are other policies that use the Huai River boundary, there can be di↵erential
impacts of such policies on households to the north and south of the river boundary. However, as
described in Chen et al. (2013), this line was used to divide the country for heating policy because
the average January temperature is roughly 0° Celsius along the line and has not been used for
23

administrative purposes.
Fourth, we are concerned that the Huai River policy may a↵ect purifier purchases for reasons
unrelated to air pollution. For example, if we consider the heating supply to the north a public
welfare entitlement with subsidized heating costs for northern households, northern households
might have a higher income because of the heating subsidy. We cannot fully rule out this possibility,
but our empirical strategy mitigates this concern for three reasons. First, our estimation includes
city fixed e↵ects. Therefore, if the subsidy for heating increases household wealth, which may
increase demand for purifiers overall (i.e., both HEPA and non-HEPA purifiers), it does not bias
our results. Second, in Table A.1, we find that including the interaction of GDP per capita and
HEPA does not change our main estimate. Third, as we discussed in Section 2.3, the heat reform
in 2003 changed the payment system from free provision to flat-rate billing. Of critical importance
is that northern households must pay a substantial proportion of the total heating bill since 2003.
Therefore, in our analysis during the period 2006 to 2012, the heating subsidy has a minimal e↵ect
on households, although we cannot fully exclude the possibility that the subsidy before 2003 may
have had long-run e↵ects on households during 2006–2012.
A final note is on the availability of HEPA purifier products between the north and south of the
river. If HEPA purifiers are more available in the north because appliance stores supply more of
them compared to non-HEPA purifiers, what we observe in Figure 2b might reflect the di↵erence in
supply. To directly test this concern, in Figure A.4, we plot the fraction of HEPA purifier products
(out of all available purifier products on the market) by 1.5 degrees of latitude relative to the Huai
River. We do not observe a discontinuous jump in the supply of HEPA purifiers just north of the
river boundary.

5.2

Random-coefficient Logit Estimation

The advantage of the standard logit estimation presented in the previous section is that it can be
estimated by a linear two-stage least squares or a linear GMM method, and therefore, it does not
involve nonlinear estimation. On the other hand, a key assumption in the standard logit model is
that the preference parameters are homogeneous across individuals. That is, we implicitly assume
that the preference for clean air ( ) and price (↵) are homogeneous and, hence, the MWTP for
clean air (

/↵) is homogeneous across i.
24

In this section, we relax this assumption and estimate heterogeneity in
parameters by

i

=

0

+

1 yi

and ↵. We model these

+ ui and ↵ = ↵0 + ↵1 yi + ei , where yi is the log of household-level

income from the census micro data, ui ⇠ N (0,

) and ei ⇠ N (0,

↵ ).

In this way, we model these

two preference parameters for consumer i depend on the mean coefficient, log of household-level
income, and a normally distributed random error.
5.2.1

Nonlinear optimization algorithms and starting values

Random-coefficient demand estimation requires nonlinear GMM estimation. The estimation has to
be based on a nonlinear search algorithm with a set of starting values and stopping rules for termination. Recent studies show caution regarding such numerical optimization and provide guidelines
in assessing robustness of estimation results. For example, Knittel and Metaxoglou (2013) suggest examining 1) conservative tolerance levels for nonlinear searches, 2) di↵erent sets of nonlinear
search algorithms, and 3) many starting values, to analyze whether the estimated local optimum is
indeed the global optimum of the GMM objective function.
We estimate our model with six nonlinear search algorithms (Conjugate gradient, SOLVOPT,
quasi-Newton 1, and quasi-Newton 2, Simplex and Generalized pattern search), a hundred sets of
starting values, and conservative tolerance levels for nonlinear searches. In total, we obtain 600
estimation results to test the robustness of our results. For starting values for nonlinear parameters,
we generate random draws from a standard normal distribution. We set the tolerance level for the
nested fixed-point iterations to 1E 14, and the tolerance level for changes in the parameter vector
and objective function to 1E 04.
5.2.2

Estimation results

Figure 3 shows the box plot of the nonlinear GMM estimation results for each of the six nonlinear
search algorithms with a hundred sets of starting values. The box plot shows the distribution of
the final objective function value for each set of estimation. We use a conventional style of box
plots—the thick vertical line indicates the median, the box shows the 25th and 75th percentiles,
and the dots present outside values. Five of the six search algorithms produce the same minimum
value of the objective function (48.723), which is the dashed vertical line in the figure. Only one
of the algorithms—the conjugate gradient algorithm—does not reach that minimum value. Among
25

the hundred set of starting values, 82% of them reach that minimum objective function value for
Generalized pattern search, 81% for Simplex, 97% for Quasi-Newton 1, 95% for Quasi-Newton 2,
and 92% for Solvopt. This result provides two key implications. First, it is important to test
multiple search algorithms and starting values to ensure that the local minimum in a particular
set of estimation is indeed the global minimum. This is consistent with the caution raised in
recent studies. Second, the fact that the five nonlinear search algorithms reach the same minimum
objective function value provides us strong evidence that the local minimum found at the function
value of 48.723 is likely to be the global minimum of the GMM objective function. Therefore,
we use the estimation result with this minimum objective function value to report the coefficient
estimates.
Table 5 shows the coefficient estimates of the random coefficient model described in equation
(6). As with our standard logit estimation, we use two sets of controls for latitude for our regression
discontinuity design. Column1 uses linear and linear interacted with the indicator variable for cities
in the north side of the Huai River, and column 2 uses quadratic controls for the latitude. The
results provide several key findings for heterogeneity in preference parameters. First, the MWTP for
the median and mean households are USD 5.13 and USD 5.46, which are slightly larger than but not
far from the MWTP estimate obtained by the standard logit model in the previous section. Second,
the positive and statistically significant coefficient

1

implies that there is a positive relationship

between the preference for clean air ( ) and household income (yi ). We do not find statistically
significant relationship between the sensitivity for price (↵) and household income. Third, the
coefficient estimate for

↵

indicates that there is statistically significant unobserved heterogeneity

among households for the sensitivity for price.
We use two figures to visually describe our estimation results. Figure 4 shows the distribution of
estimated MWTP based on the estimation results from column 1 of Table 5. Recall that from the
census data we have household-level income data for a random sample of households in each city.
We use each household’s log income y i , two random errors from two standard normal distributions:
ui ⇠ N (0, ˆ ) and ei ⇠ N (0, ˆ↵ ), and coefficient estimates to calculate the household-level MWTP,
mwtpi =

( ˆ0 + ˆ1 yi + ui )/(ˆ
↵0 + ↵
ˆ 1 yi + ei ). The distribution indicates that there is wide dispersion

of marginal willingness to pay and, in particular, the distribution has a long tail to the right. The
heterogeneity is mainly driven by the two coefficients—observed heterogeneity
26

1 yi

and unobserved

heterogeneity ei .
In Figure 5, we show the relationship between the MWTP and household-level income in USD.
The income distribution is based on household-level income data from the 2005 census. There is
a long right tail in the distribution with a very small fraction of households with an income over
USD 15,000. In the figure, we drop those with an income over USD 15,000 to better visualize the
majority of the distribution. We present the fitted line of the MWTP estimate over income levels.
It indicates that the MWTP is increasing in income, ranging from USD 0 to USD 9 for the range
of income between USD 0 to USD 15,000.
Overall, the results of the random-coefficient model provide several key implications, under
the assumptions required for the nonlinear GMM estimation. In our case, the results from the
standard logit estimation are not far from the results from the random-coefficient estimation if
our focus is to estimate the median or mean level of MWTP. However, the random-coefficient
estimation highlights substantial heterogeneity in MWTP. In particular, the results indicate that
higher-income and lower-income households have significantly di↵erent levels of MWTP for clean
air.

6

Policy Implications

Our findings provide important policy implications for ongoing discussion in energy and environmental regulation in developing countries. Developing country governments recently proposed and
implemented a variety of interventions to mitigate air pollution problems. For example, the Chinese Premier Li Keqiang declared “War Against Pollution” to reduce emission of P M10 and P M2.5
(Zhu, 2014) and proposed various reforms in energy and environmental policies. A key question is
whether implementing such policies enhance welfare.
For example, in 2005, the Chinese government and the World Bank initiated a pilot reform
to improve the Huai River policy in seven northern cities. The primary goal of the reform is to
save energy usage and reduce air pollution by introducing household metering and consumptionbased billing under which consumers pay for actual heating consumption and can control how much
heating they consume.12 Ten years after the start of the pilot reform, there is still ongoing debate
12

As we describe in Section 2.3, the 2003 reform in all northern cities replaced a free heating provision with flat-rate
billing. Households pay a fixed charge per square meter for heating for the entire winter, which does not depend on

27

about the reform—whether such a reform would improves welfare and whether similar reforms
should be implemented in other northern cities in China. The main challenge is that the costs of
installing individual meters and adopting consumption-based billing are high,13 while the benefits
of the reform have not yet been systematically examined.
In this section, we provide an evaluation of this reform as an example to illustrate how our
estimate on the WTP for clean air can be used to examine the welfare implications of an environmental policy. Our analysis is based on a back-of-the-envelope calculation with a set of assumptions.
This analysis can help shed light on the importance of WTP for clean air and policy discussion on
optimal environmental regulation.
Our empirical findings inform us of how much a household is willingness to pay for a reduction in
particulate matter that can be achieved by the reform. We use our random-coefficient logit estima⌘
N ⇣
1 P
ˆ
ˆ
tion results to calculate the mean of M W T Pi by N
( 0 + 1 · yi + ui )/(ˆ
↵0 + ↵
ˆ 1 · yi + e i ) ,
i=1

where the coefficient estimates come from column 1 of Table 5 and N is the number of households

in the census micro data. The mean MWTP based on this calculation is USD 5.46. Because
the amount of PM10 induced by the Huai river policy is 39, the estimate implies that a northern
household is willing to pay USD 213 (= 5.46 · 39) if the pollution generated by the Huai River
policy can be mitigated. We use this estimate to provide a cost-benefit analysis of the heat reform.
First, WorldBank (2014) estimates that the pilot heat reform in seven cities can generate a total
reduction in coal usage by 51 million tons over a 20-year period at the total abatement cost of USD
18 million. Thus, over 20 years, the reduction in coal usage per city is 0.36 million tons per year
at the abatement cost of USD 0.13 million per city per year. Second, the China Daily reports that
all northern cities use over 700 million tons of coal at their centralized heating facilities alone per
year (ChinaDaily, 2015), suggesting that an average northern city uses 5.3 million tons of coal for
their centralized heating per year. If we consider the percentage of coal reductions from the pilot
heat reform, it is 7% (= 0.36/5.3) per city. Third, our WTP estimate suggests that a northern
household is willing to pay USD 213 to clean the air from heating-induced pollution for a period
the actual amount of usage. The flat-rate billing provides no incentives for households to respond to market-based
energy costs.
13
According to the People’s Daily on October 23 2009 (People’sDaily, 2009), the Vice Minister of the Ministry
of Housing and Urban-Rural Development summarized three obstacles to the implementation of the heat reform:
1) many new construction projects refuse to install household meters because they are expensive, 2) it is costly
to remodel old buildings to accommodate the installation of household meters, and 3) it is costly to build a new
consumption-based billing system.

28

of five years. That is, the annualized WTP is USD 42.6 (= 213/5) per year.
We make a simplifying assumption on the relationship between reductions in coal usage and
reductions in P M10 . We assume that a certain percent reduction in coal usage for heating leads
to the same percent reduction in P M10 . This assumption can overestimate or underestimate the
reduction in P M10 , depending on the actual relationship between the two variables. With this
simple one-to-one assumption, we obtain that a household is willing to pay USD 2.98 (= 42.6 · 0.07)
per year for a 7% reduction in P M10 . Because the average number of households in a northern city
is 0.63 million, the total WTP is USD 1.88 (= 2.98 · 0.63) million per city per year. This estimate,
measuring the total benefits of the heat reform for households, is larger than the abatement cost,
which is USD 0.13 million per city per year. Note that this benefit estimate is a lower bound
estimate because our WTP estimate is a lower bound. Therefore, our analysis suggests that even if
we consider the lower bound estimate of the benefits, the heat reform is likely to be cost-e↵ective.
Our analysis suggests that the expansion of the heat reform to other northern cities could enhance
household welfare.14
More broadly, our WTP estimate is useful for evaluating a series of new energy policies and
environmental regulations that were recently implemented or announced to be introduced. For
example, as featured by the New York Times, USD 1.65 billion a year is o↵ered to reward cities
and regions that make “significant progress” in air pollution control (Wong, 2014a). Tougher fines
are enforced for polluters (Wong, 2014b). and coal-fired power plants will be upgraded to cut
pollution from power plants by 60% by 2020 (Wong, 2015). More prominently, as the world’s
largest greenhouse gas polluter, China recently made a commitment to address global climate
change by launching a national cap-and-trade program in 2017, when the government will set a cap
on total carbon emissions and firms can buy and sell emission permits (Davenport and Hirschfeld,
2015). For these policies, policymakers could compare the abatement costs to our WTP estimate
to assess the welfare implications of the policy.
14
This conclusion remains the same if we use the WTP estimate from the standard logit model. The standard logit
estimation results imply that a northern household is willing to pay USD 190 if the pollution generated by the Huai
River policy can be mitigated. If we use this number, the total WTP for the heating reform is USD 1.84 million per
city per year. This estimate is larger than the abatement cost, which is USD 0.13 million per city per year.

29

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we provide among the first revealed preference estimate of willingness to pay (WTP)
for clean air in developing countries. We examine the demand for home-use air purifiers, a main
defensive investment for reducing indoor air pollution, which provides valuable information for
estimating a lower bound of WTP for air quality improvement. Our empirical strategy leverages the
Huai River heating policy, which created discontinuous quasi-experimental and long-run variation
in air pollution between the north and south of the river. Using a spatial regression discontinuity
design, we estimate that the WTP for removing the amount of pollution generated by the Huai
River policy and the MWTP for removing 1 ug/m3 P M10 .
While we find a higher amount of WTP for environmental quality compared to previous studies
in developing countries (Kremer et al., 2011), our estimate is still lower than similar estimates in the
US (Chay and Greenstone, 2005; Deschenes et al., 2012). An important direction for future research
is to understand the reasons for this di↵erence. For example, if households are more informed about
the negative e↵ects of air pollution on health and labor supply, do they have a higher WTP for
clean air? Can policies be designed to provide information to the public on the pollution-health
relationship to a↵ect household responses to pollution? The answers to these questions are valuable
to improve policy design to address pollution problems in many countries.

30

References
Abdul Salam, Z.-H., R. B. Karlin, M. L. Ling, and K. S. Yang (2010). The impact of portable
high-efficiency particulate air filters on the incidence of invasive aspergillosis in a large acute
tertiary-care hospital. American Journal of Infection Control 38 (4), e1–e7.
Allen, R., C. Carlsten, B. Karlen, S. Leckie, S. van Eeden, S. Vedal, I. Wong, and M. Brauer (2011).
An air filter intervention study of endothelial function among healthy adults in a woodsmokeimpacted community. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 183, 1222–
1230.
Almond, D., Y. Chen, M. Greenstone, and H. Li (2009). Winter heating or clean air? unintended
impacts of china’s huai river policy. The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 99 (2), 184–190.
Arceo, E., R. Hanna, and P. Oliva (2012). Does the e↵ect of pollution on infant mortality di↵er
between developing and developed countries? evidence from mexico city. NBER Working Paper
No. 18349.
Berry, J., G. Fischer, and R. Guiteras (2012). Eliciting and utilizing willingness to pay: evidence
from field trials in northern ghana. Unpublished manuscript.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica 63 (4), 841–90.
Berry, S. T. (1994, July). Estimating discrete-choice models of product di↵erentiation. The RAND
Journal of Economics 25 (2), 242–262.
Braden, J. B., C. D. Kolstad, B. C. Field, and D. Azqueta Oyarzun (1991). Measuring the demand
for environmental quality. Number 333.7 M484. OEA, Washington, DC (EUA).
Brauer, M., G. Freedman, J. Frostad, A. van Donkelaar, R. V. Martin, F. Dentener, R. van Dingenen, K. Estep, H. Amini, J. S. Apte, K. Balakrishnan, L. Barregard, D. Broday, V. Feigin,
S. Ghosh, P. K. Hopke, L. D. Knibbs, Y. Kokubo, Y. Liu, S. Ma, L. Morawska, J. L. T. Sangrador,
G. Shaddick, H. R. Anderson, T. Vos, M. H. Forouzanfar, R. T. Burnett, and A. Cohen (2016).
Ambient air pollution exposure estimation for the global burden of disease 2013. Environmental
Science and Technology 50, 79–88.
Busse, M. R., C. R. Knittel, and F. Zettelmeyer (2013, February). Are consumers myopic? evidence
from new and used car purchases. American Economic Review 103 (1), 220–256.
Calonico, S., M. Cattaneo, and R. Titiunik (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence intervals for
regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica 82 (6), 2295–2326.
Cameron, A. C. and P. K. Trivedi (2005). Microeconometrics: methods and applications. Cambridge
university press.
Chay, K. Y. and M. Greenstone (2005, April). Does air quality matter? evidence from the housing
market. Journal of Political Economy 113 (2), 376–424.
Chen, Y., A. Ebenstein, M. Greenstone, and H. Li (2013). Evidence on the impact of sustained
exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from china’s huai river policy. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 110 (32), 12936–12941.
31

Chen, Y., G. Z. Jin, N. Kumar, and G. Shi (2012). Gaming in air pollution data? lessons from
china. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 13 (3).
ChinaDaily (2015, January). The annual debate on heating in china. The China Daily.
Correia, A., C. A. P. III, D. Dockery, Y. Wang, M. Ezzati, and F. Dominici (2013). The e↵ect of
air pollution control on life expectancy in the united states: An analysis of 545 us counties for
the period 2000 to 2007. Epidemiology 24 (1), 23–31.
Davenport, C. (2016, April). Obama and president xi of china vow to sign paris climate accord
promptly. The New York Times.
Davenport, C. and J. Hirschfeld (2015, September). China to announce cap-and-trade program to
limit emissions. The New York Times.
Deschenes, O., M. Greenstone, and J. S. Shapiro (2012, July). Defensive investments and the
demand for air quality: Evidence from the NOx budget program and ozone reductions. NBER
Working Paper (ID 2109861).
Dockery, D., A. P. third, X. Xu, J. Spengler, J. Ware, M. Fay, B. Ferris, and F. Speizer (1993).
An association between air pollution and mortality in six u.s. cities. New England Journal of
Medicine 329, 1753–1759.
DOE (2005). Specification for hepa filters used by doe contractors. DOE TECHNICAL STANDARD
DOE-STD-3020-2005, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, D.C.
Gelman, A. and G. Imbens (2014). Why High-order Polynomials Should not be Used in Regression
Discontinuity Designs. NBER Working Paper 20405, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Ghanem, D. and J. Zhang (2014). E↵ortless perfection: Do chinese cities manipulate air pollution
data? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 68, 203–225.
Goldberg, P. (1995). Product Di↵erentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets: The Case of
the U.S. Automobile Industry. Econometrica 63 (4), 891–951.
Greenstone, M. and R. Hanna (2014). Environmental regulations, air and water pollution, and
infant mortality in india. American Economic Review 104 (10), 3038–3072.
Greenstone, M. and B. K. Jack (2013, September). Envirodevonomics: A research agenda for a
young field. NBER Working Paper (19426).
Hanna, R. and P. Oliva (2015). The e↵ect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence from a natural
experiment in mexico city. Journal of Public Economics 122, 68–79.
Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity
estimator. Review of Economic Studies 79 (3), 933–959.
Imbens, G. W. and T. Lemieux (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice.
Journal of Econometrics 142 (2), 615–635.
Jalan, J. and E. Somanathan (2008). The importance of being informed: Experimental evidence
on demand for environmental quality. Journal of Development Economics 87, 14–28.
32

Jayachandran, S. (2009). Air quality and early-life mortality: Evidence from indonesia’s wildfires.
Journal of Human Resources 44 (4), 916–954.
Knittel, C. R. and K. Metaxoglou (2013, May). Estimation of Random-Coefficient Demand Models:
Two Empiricists’ Perspective. Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (1), 34–59.
Kremer, M., J. Leino, E. Miguel, and A. P. Zwane (2011). Spring cleaning: Rural water impacts,
valuation, and property rights institutions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 145–205.
Lanphear, B., R. Hornung, J. Khoury, K. Yolton, M. Lierl, , and A. Kalkbrenner (2011). E↵ects
of hepa air cleaners on unscheduled asthma visits and asthma symptoms for children exposed to
secondhand tobacco smoke. Pediatrics 127 (1), 93–101.
Madajewicz, M., A. Pfa↵, A. van Geen, J. Graziano, I. Hussein, H. Momotaj, R. Sylvi, and H. Ahsan
(2007). Can information alone change behavior? response to arsenic contamination of groundwater in bangladesh. Journal of Development Economics 84, 731–754.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A
density test. Journal of Econometrics 142 (2), 698–714.
Miller, G. and M. Mobarak (2013). Gender di↵erences in preferences, intra-household externalities,
and low demand for improved cookstoves. NBER Working Paper No.18964.
Mu, Q. and J. Zhang (2014). Air pollution and defensive expenditures: Evidence from particulatefiltering facemasks. E3 WP-078.
Neidell, M. (2009). Information, avoidance behavior, and health.
sources 44 (2), 450–478.

Journal of Human Re-

Nevo, A. (2001). Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econometrica 69 (2),
307–342.
People’sDaily (2009, October). The vice minister of of the ministry of housing and urban-rural
development suggests three obstacles of implementing the heat reform. The People’s Daily.
Pope, C. A. I., M. Ezzati, and D. Dockery (2009). Fine-particulate air pollution and life expectancy
in the united states. New England Journal of Medicine 360, 376–386.
Van Donkelaar, A., R. V. Martin, M. Brauer, R. Kahn, R. Levy, C. Verduzco, and P. J. Villeneuve
(2010). Global estimates of ambient fine particulate matter concentrations from satellite-based
aerosol optical depth: Development and application. Environmental Health Perspectives 118 (6),
847–855.
Wallace, L. (2008). E↵ectiveness of home air cleaners in reducing indoor levels of particles. Technical
report, Health Canada.
Wong, E. (2014a, February). China to reward cities and regions making progress on air pollution.
The New York Times.
Wong, E. (2014b, December). Fines total 26 million usd for polluters in china. The New York
Times.
Wong, E. (2015, December). China plans to upgrade coal plants. The New York Times.
33

WorldBank (2005). China - heat reform and building energy efficiency project. Technical report,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
WorldBank (2014). Implementation completion and results report on a global environment facility
grant in the amount of usd 18 million to the people’s republic of china for a heat reform and
building energy efficiency project. Technical Report ICR0003153, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Zhang, X. (2015, April). Indoor air pollution in beijing. The People’s Daily.
Zheng, S., C. Sun, and M. Kahn (2015). Self-protection investment exacerbates air pollution
exposure inequality in urban china. NBER Working Paper No.21301.
Zhu, N. (2014, March). Xinhua insight: China declares war against pollution. Xinhua News Agency.
Zivin, J. G. and M. Neidell (2009). Days of haze: Environmental information disclosure and
intertemporal avoidance behavior. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 58,
119–128.
Zivin, J. G., M. Neidell, and W. Schlenker (2011). Water quality violations and avoidance behavior: Evidence from bottled water consumption. American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings 101 (3), 448–453.

34

Figure 1: Huai River Boundary and City Locations

Notes: The line in the middle of the map is the Huai River-Qinling boundary. Each dot represents one city.
There are 81 cities in our sample.

35

Figure 2: Regression Discontinuity Design at the Huai River Boundary

80

100

PM10
120

140

160

(a) PM10 in Winter

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

5

6

7

8

9 10

6

7

8

9 10

.3

.4

Market share of HEPA purifiers
.5
.6
.7
.8

.9

(b) Market Share of HEPA Purifiers in Winter

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

5

Note: Figure 2a plots the average P M10 during winter (December to March) in 2006 to 2012 by 1.5 degrees
of latitude north of the Huai River boundary. The vertical line at 0 indicates the location of the Huai river.
Each dot represents cities at 1.5 degrees of latitude and corresponds to the middle point of the range on the
x-axis. For example, the dot at 0.75 on the x-axis represents cities between 0 and 1.5 degrees of latitude
north of the river line. The y-axis indicates the average P M10 level of cities within 1.5 degrees of latitude.
Figure 2b shows the market share of HEPA purifiers by 1.5 degrees of latitude north of the Huai River line.

36

Figure 3: Box Plots of the Objective Function Value in the Nonlinear GMM estimation

Conjugate gradient

GPS

Quasi-Newton 1

Quasi-Newton 2

Simplex

Solvopt
50

55

60
65
Objective Function Value

70

75

Note: For each of the six optimization algorithms listed in the vertical axis, we estimate the nonlinear GMM
in equation (6) with a hundred sets of di↵erent starting values for the nonlinear parameters. The box plot
shows the distribution of the final objective function value for each set of estimation. We use a conventional
style of box plots—the thick vertical line indicates the median, the box shows the 25th and 75th percentiles,
and the dots present outside values. We randomly draw starting values from a standard normal distribution.
Among the hundred set of starting values, 82% of them reach the minimum objective function value for
Generalized pattern search, 81% for Simplex, 97% for Quasi-Newton 1, 95% for Quasi-Newton 2, 92% for
Solvopt, and 0% for Contingent gradient.

37

Figure 4: The Distribution of Marginal Willingness to Pay for Clean Air
.05

Fraction

.04

.03

.02

.01

0
0

5
10
15
Estimated Marginal Willingness to Pay for Clean Air ($/PM10)

Note: This histogram is based on the estimates of the random coefficient logit model in column 1 in Table
5 and household-level income from the 2005 census micro data.

38

Estimated Marginal WTP for clean air ($/PM10)

10
9
Marginal WTP
8
7
6
5
4
3
Distribution of Household Income
2
1

0

0

.02
.04
.06
.08
Distribution of household income (fraction)

.1

Figure 5: Marginal Willingness to Pay for Clean Air and Household Income

0

5000
10000
Household income (USD/year)

15000

Note: This figures plots the estimated marginal willingness to pay over household income based on the
estimates of the random coefficient logit model in Table 5 and household-level income data from the 2005
census micro data.

39

Table 1: Summary Statistics
(1)
Whole sample

(2)
HEPA
purifiers

(3)
Non-HEPA
purifiers

(4)
Di↵erence
in means

570.18
(1525.62)
0.0029
(0.0078)
464.54
(358.89)
0.136
(0.344)
44.00
(24.12)
0.899
(0.321)
54.72
(59.78)
10.02
(6.71)

415.07
(956.14)
0.0021
(0.0049)
352.56
(331.90)
0.132
(0.340)
38.89
(20.50)
0.904
(0.395)
35.04
(26.43)
8.02
(5.08)

155.11
[259.27]
0.0008
[0.0013]
111.65*
[54.70]
0.004
[0.069]
5.11
[4.88]
-0.005
[0.069]
19.68*
[9.65]
2.01
[1.47]

Panel A: Air purifier data (product level)
Percentage of HEPA purifiers
Number of sales
Market share
Price of a purifier (USD)
Humidifing
Room coverage (square meter)
Distance to factory or port in 1000 km
Price of a replacement filter (USD)
Replacement frequency (in months)

0.52
(0.50)
495.96
(1285.791)
0.0025
(0.0066)
411.12
(350.28)
0.134
(0.341)
41.87
(22.77)
0.901
(0.358)
45.46
(48.08)
9.04
(6.05)

Panel B: Pollution data (city level)
PM10 in Winter (ug/m3)
PM10 in Non-winter (ug/m3)

114.85
(24.63)
92.97
(14.93)

Panel C: Demographics data (city level)
Population (1,000)
GDP per capita (USD)
Annual household income in 2005 (USD)
Years of schooling in 2005
Fraction completed college in 2005

2497.70
(2719.96)
8276.97
(3405.99)
2253.5
(1212.4)
8.36
(0.89)
0.036
(0.027)

Note: The product-level sample has 395 products of 30 brands. 206 products are HEPA purifiers and 189 are
non-HEPA purifiers. In column (1) to (3), standard deviations are reported in parentheses. In column (4),
standard errors clustered at the brand level are reported in brackets. * significant at 10% level; ** significant
at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.

40

Table 2: First Stage Estimation for PM10 and Prices
(a) First Stage Estimation for PM10

PM10
North
Observations
R2
Functional form
Demographic controls

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

38.50⇤⇤⇤
(9.87)
45
0.28
Linear*North

36.94⇤⇤⇤
(9.25)
45
0.28
Quadratic

39.49⇤⇤⇤
(9.35)
45
0.53
Linear*North
Y

39.84⇤⇤⇤
(9.61)
45
0.53
Quadratic
Y

(b) First Stage Estimation for Air Purifier Prices

Price
(1)
136.14⇤⇤⇤
(37.95)

(2)
136.24⇤⇤⇤
(37.91)

(3)
97.79⇤⇤
(43.72)

(4)
98.02⇤⇤
(43.74)

(Distance in 1000 km)2

-174.65⇤⇤⇤
(54.30)

-175.50⇤⇤⇤
(53.59)

-121.75⇤
(64.72)

-121.65⇤
(64.76)

(Distance in 1000 km)3

70.22⇤⇤⇤
(21.08)
3,046
0.97
Linear*North
Y

70.73⇤⇤⇤
(20.61)
3,046
0.97
Quadratic
Y

52.49⇤
(26.64)
3,046
0.97
Linear*North
Y
Y

52.38⇤
(26.66)
3,046
0.97
Quadratic
Y
Y

Distance in 1000 km

Observations
R2
Functional form
Product FE
City FE

Note: In Table 2a, each observation represents a city. In Table 2b, each observation presents a productcity. City-level demographic controls include population and GDP per capita from City Statistical Yearbook
(2006-2012), and average years of schooling and the percentage of population that have completed college
from the 2005 census microdata. In Table 2b, standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the city level.
The distance variable measures each product’s distance from a manufacturing factory/importing port to each
market. In addition to distance, distance2 , and distance3 , we also include these three variables interacted
with the dummy variables for the product’s country of origin to allow a flexible functional form for the
relationship between prices and distance. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant
at 1% level.

41

Table 3: Reduced Form and Second Stage Estimation Results
ln(market share)
(1)

(2)

0.886⇤⇤⇤
(0.099)

0.771⇤⇤⇤
(0.082)

-0.0047⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
190.385⇤⇤⇤
(23.918)

-0.0047⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
165.179⇤⇤⇤
(20.519)

3,046
71.16

3,046
64.44

0.019⇤⇤⇤
(0.002)

0.017⇤⇤⇤
(0.002)

-0.0044⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
4.409⇤⇤⇤
(0.736)

-0.0044⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
3.899⇤⇤⇤
(0.651)

3,046
64.41
Linear*North
Y
Y

3,046
59.93
Quadratic
Y
Y

Panel A: Reduced form
North*HEPA (⇢)
Price (↵)
WTP (-⇢/↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Panel B: Second-stage
PM10*HEPA ( )
Price (↵)
MWTP (- /↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Functional form
Product FE
City FE

Note: Each observation represents a product-city. Panel A presents reduced-form estimates, where price is
instrumented with the distance variables discussed in the text. Panel B presents the second stage results,
where PM10*HEPA is instrumented with North*HEPA and price is instrumented with the distance variables
discussed in the text. We estimate both of the reduced form and second stage regressions by the two-step
linear GMM estimation with the optimal weight matrix. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the
city level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. The Stock-Yogo
weak identification test critical value for one endogenous variable (10% maximal IV size) is 16.38, and for
two endogenous variables (10% maximal IV size) it is 7.03.

42

Table 4: Robustness Checks
ln(market share)
(1) 4-degree

(2) 5-degree

(3) 6-degree

(4) 7-degree

(5) 8-degree

0.017⇤⇤⇤
(0.002)

0.019⇤⇤⇤
(0.002)

0.020⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.025⇤⇤⇤
(0.005)

0.027⇤⇤⇤
(0.007)

-0.0042⇤⇤⇤
(0.0003)
3.963⇤⇤⇤
(0.622)

-0.0044⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
4.409⇤⇤⇤
(0.736)

-0.0055⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
3.640⇤⇤⇤
(0.919)

-0.0056⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
4.439⇤⇤⇤
(1.180)

-0.0058⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
4.594⇤⇤⇤
(1.537)

2,413
131.20

3,046
64.41

3,343
46.83

3,865
33.45

4,057
54.70

0.016⇤⇤⇤
(0.002)

0.017⇤⇤⇤
(0.002)

0.018⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.023⇤⇤⇤
(0.004)

0.025⇤⇤⇤
(0.006)

-0.0042⇤⇤⇤
(0.0003)
3.742⇤⇤⇤
(0.570)

-0.0044⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
3.899⇤⇤⇤
(0.651)

-0.0055⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
3.313⇤⇤⇤
(0.836)

-0.0056⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
4.125⇤⇤⇤
(1.102)

-0.0058⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
4.429⇤⇤⇤
(1.453)

2,413
118.07
Y
Y

3,046
59.93
Y
Y

3,343
47.52
Y
Y

3,865
35.28
Y
Y

4,057
55.82
Y
Y

Panel A: Linear*North
PM10*HEPA ( )
Price (↵)
MWTP (- /↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Panel B: Quadratic
PM10*HEPA ( )
Price (↵)
MWTP (- /↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Product FE
City FE

Note: Each observation represents a product-city. This table shows the second stage regression results with
di↵erent choices of bandwidth. See notes in Table 3. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the city
level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. The Stock-Yogo weak
identification test critical value for two endogenous variables (10% maximal IV size) is 7.03.

43

Table 5: Random-Coefficient Logit Estimation Results
(1)

(2)

Mean coefficient ( 0 )

0.0654
(0.0160)

0.0659
(0.0172)

Interaction with log household income ( 1 )

0.0221
(0.0079)

0.0208
(0.0075)

Standard deviation (

0.0002
(0.0098)

0.0001
(0.0095)

Mean coefficient (↵0 )

-0.0129
(0.0037)

-0.0128
(0.0037)

Interaction with log household income (↵1 )

0.0001
(0.0006)

0.0001
(0.0006)

Standard deviation (

0.0031
(0.0009)

0.0030
(0.0010)

3,046
Linear*North
Product FE, City FE
48.72
2.18
3.87
5.13
5.46
6.61
9.73

3,046
Quadratic
Product FE, City FE
49.64
2.37
3.98
5.19
5.51
6.64
9.68

PM10 · HEPA

)

Price

↵)

Observations
Control function for f(latitude)
Fixed e↵ects
GMM objective function value
MWTP 5th percentile
MWTP 25th percentile
MWTP 50th percentile
MWTP mean
MWTP 75th percentile
MWTP 95th percentile

Note: This table shows the results of the random-coefficient logit estimation in equation (6). Column
1 uses a linear control for the latitude interacted with the North dummy variable, and column 2 uses a
quadratic control for the latitude. Asymptotically robust standard errors are given in parentheses, which
are corrected for the error due to the simulation process by taking account that the simulation draws are
the same for all of the observations in a market. The household-level income data (in 2005 USD) come from
the 2005 Chinese census. The distribution of the marginal willingness to pay for clean air is obtained by
mwtpi = ( ˆ0 + ˆ1 yi + ui )/(↵
ˆ0 + ↵
ˆ 1 yi + ei ) using the estimated coefficients, household-level income, and
random draws from standard normal distributions.

44

Online Appendices Not For Publication
A

Additional Figures
Figure A.1: Huai River Boundary and City Locations

Note: The line in the middle of the map is the Huai River-Qinling boundary. Each dot represents one city.
Each triangle represents a factory location or a port location.

45

80

100

PM10
120

140

160

Figure A.2: Huai River: PM10 in non-winter months (April-November)

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

5

6

7

8

9 10

Note: This figure plots the average P M10 during non-winter months (April to November) in 2006-2012 by
1.5 degrees of latitude north of the Huai River boundary. The vertical line at 0 indicates the location of
the river. Each dot represents cities at 1.5 degrees of latitude and corresponds to the middle point of the
range on the x-axis. For example, the dot at 0.75 on the x-axis represents cities between 0 and 1.5 degrees
of latitude north of the river line. The y-axis indicates the average P M10 level of cities within 1.5 degrees of
latitude.

46

16000

Population

GDP per capita

0

0

1000

4000

Population(1000)
2000 3000 4000

GDP per capita
8000
12000

5000

6000

Figure A.3: Huai River and Demographics

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

5

6

7

8

9 10

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

6

7

8

9 10

5

6

7

8

9 10

College completion

0

4

6

Years of schooling
8
10
12

Fraction with college degree
.02
.04
.06

14

16

.08

Years of schooling

5

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

5

6

7

8

9 10

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

Note: These figures plot the mean of each demographic variable by 1.5 degrees of latitude north of the Huai
River boundary. The vertical line at 0 indicates the location of the river. Each dot represents cities at 1.5
degrees of latitude and corresponds to the middle point of the range on the x-axis. For example, the dot at
0.75 on the x-axis represents cities between 0 and 1.5 degrees of latitude north of the river line. The y-axis
indicates the mean level of each variable in cities within 1.5 degrees of latitude.

47

.5

Fraction of available HEPA purifier products
.55
.6
.65

.7

Figure A.4: Fraction of available HEPA purifier products

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Degree North to the Huai River

5

6

7

8

9 10

Note: This figure plots the fraction of available HEPA purifier products from all purifier products by 1.5
degrees of latitude north of the Huai River boundary. The vertical line at 0 indicates the location of the river.
Each dot represents cities at 1.5 degrees of latitude and corresponds to the middle point of the range on the
x-axis. For example, the dot at 0.75 on the x-axis represents cities between 0 and 1.5 degrees of latitude
north of the river line. The y-axis indicates the mean level of each variable in cities within 1.5 degrees of
latitude.

48

Figure A.5: API distribution
(b) McCrary density test (25% of sample)

0

0

.02

.05

.1

.04

.06

.15

(a) McCrary density test (75% of sample)

0

200

400

600

(c) Original distributions of the 25% sample

200

400

600

(d) Counterfactual distribution of the 25% sample
Counterfactual

number of days in 7 years
200
400
600
800
0

0

number of days in 7 years
200
400
600
800

1000

Original

1000

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

API

0

100

200

300

400

500

API

Note: To investigate potential manipulation of the API data in our sample, we perform McCrary density
tests (McCrary 2008) on daily API data for each city during 2006–2012. We report the results in the online
appendix. In 75% of city-year observations, we find no statistically significant bunching in the density of daily
API at 100 in Figure A.5a. There is statistically significant bunching at 100 in 25% of city-year observations
in Figure A.5b. To examine to what extent the bunching in the 25% of city-year observations changes the
average API, we use the distribution of API in the 75% non-manipulation city-year observations to estimate a
counterfactual distribution for the 25% manipulation subsample. Figure A.5c shows the original distribution
of API in the 25% subsample, where the mean of API is 147.90. Figure A.5d shows the counterfactual
distributions of API in the same 25% subsample, where the mean of API is 147.95. That is, the potential
manipulation changes the city-level average API for our sample period by a negligible amount. This is because
the manipulation occurs only at the margin of 100 and, therefore, it a↵ects the average API minimally over
the long term.

49

B

Additional Tables
Table A.1: Controlling for GDP*HEPA and Schooling*HEPA
ln(market share)
(1)

(2)

0.931⇤⇤⇤
(0.143)

0.759⇤⇤⇤
(0.106)

-0.0048⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
194.8561⇤⇤⇤
(33.0162)

-0.0048⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
158.0296⇤⇤⇤
(25.0110)

3,046
45.10

3,046
46.59

0.019⇤⇤⇤
(0.004)

0.016⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

-0.0047⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
4.0631⇤⇤⇤
(1.1245)

-0.0047⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
3.4114⇤⇤⇤
(0.7756)

3,046
38.24
Linear*North
Y
Y
Y

3,046
38.60
Quadratic
Y
Y
Y

Panel A: Reduced form
North*HEPA (⇢)
Price (↵)
WTP (-⇢/↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Panel B: Second-stage
PM10*HEPA ( )
Price (↵)
MWTP (- /↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Functional form
Product FE
City FE
GDP*HEPA and Schooling*HEPA

Note: Each observation represents a product-city. Panel A presents reduced-form estimates, where price is
instrumented with the distance variables discussed in the text. Panel B presents the second stage results,
where PM10*HEPA is instrumented with North*HEPA and price is instrumented with the distance variables
discussed in the text. We estimate both of the reduced form and second stage regressions by the two-step
GMM estimation with the optimal weight matrix. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the city
level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. The Stock-Yogo weak
identification test critical value for one endogenous variable (10% maximal IV size) is 16.38, and for two
endogenous variables (10% maximal IV size) it is 7.03.

50

Table A.2: Robustness Checks of First Stage
PM10
(1) 4-degree

(2) 5-degree

(3) 6-degree

(4) 7-degree

(5) 8-degree

41.22***
(10.50)
38
0.59

39.49***
(9.35)
45
0.53

36.75***
(9.18)
50
0.51

33.80***
(9.13)
54
0.49

30.24***
(8.69)
59
0.47

41.94***
(10.85)
38
0.59
Y

39.84***
(9.61)
45
0.53
Y

36.58***
(9.29)
50
0.51
Y

33.29***
(9.01)
54
0.49
Y

29.33***
(8.49)
59
0.47
Y

Panel A: Linear*North
North
Observations
R2
Panel B: Quadratic
North
Observations
R2
Demographic controls

Notes: Each observation represents a city. City-level demographic controls include population and GDP per
capita from City Statistical Yearbook (2006 to 2012), and average years of schooling and the percentage
of population that have completed college from the 2005 census microdata. * significant at 10% level; **
significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.

51

Table A.3: Robustness Checks of Reduced-form
ln(market share)
(1) 4-degree

(2) 5-degree

(3) 6-degree

(4) 7-degree

(5) 8-degree

0.871⇤⇤⇤
(0.108)

0.886⇤⇤⇤
(0.099)

0.709⇤⇤⇤
(0.093)

0.661⇤⇤⇤
(0.106)

0.605⇤⇤⇤
(0.101)

-0.0045⇤⇤⇤
(0.0003)
193.444⇤⇤⇤
(23.514)

-0.0047⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
190.385⇤⇤⇤
(23.918)

-0.0053⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
134.087⇤⇤⇤
(21.019)

-0.0053⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
123.744⇤⇤⇤
(25.610)

-0.0054⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
113.148⇤⇤⇤
(24.107)

2,413
133.98

3,046
71.16

3,343
59.20

3,865
35.14

4,057
58.66

0.759⇤⇤⇤
(0.086)

0.771⇤⇤⇤
(0.082)

0.633⇤⇤⇤
(0.085)

0.610⇤⇤⇤
(0.099)

0.572⇤⇤⇤
(0.099)

-0.0045⇤⇤⇤
(0.0003)
168.862⇤⇤⇤
(20.105)

-0.0047⇤⇤⇤
(0.0004)
165.179⇤⇤⇤
(20.519)

-0.0053⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
119.248⇤⇤⇤
(18.940)

-0.0054⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
113.870⇤⇤⇤
(23.942)

-0.0054⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
106.671⇤⇤⇤
(23.386)

2,413
140.49
Y
Y

3,046
64.44
Y
Y

3,343
58.94
Y
Y

3,865
35.12
Y
Y

4,057
58.16
Y
Y

Panel A: Linear*North
North*HEPA (⇢)
Price (↵)
WTP (-⇢/↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Panel B: Quadratic
North*HEPA (⇢)
Price (↵)
WTP (-⇢/↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Product FE
City FE

Notes: Each observation represents a product-city. This table presents reduced-form estimates where price is
instrumented with the distance variables discussed in the text. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered
at the city level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. The
Stock-Yogo weak identification test critical value for one endogenous variable (10% maximal IV size) is
16.38.

52

Table A.4: PM10 in winter months and Market share in all months
ln(market share)
(1) 4-degree

(2) 5-degree

(3) 6-degree

(4) 7-degree

(5) 8-degree

0.016⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.016⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.013⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.016⇤⇤⇤
(0.004)

0.018⇤⇤⇤
(0.005)

-0.0070⇤⇤⇤
(0.0005)
2.315⇤⇤⇤
(0.473)

-0.0076⇤⇤⇤
(0.0005)
2.066⇤⇤⇤
(0.407)

-0.0087⇤⇤⇤
(0.0005)
1.480⇤⇤⇤
(0.409)

-0.0088⇤⇤⇤
(0.0006)
1.785⇤⇤⇤
(0.536)

-0.0089⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
1.968⇤⇤⇤
(0.626)

3,118
82.58

3,889
73.98

4,289
13.57

4,892
7.43

5,152
6.93

0.016⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.014⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.011⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)

0.014⇤⇤⇤
(0.005)

0.016⇤⇤⇤
(0.005)

-0.0070⇤⇤⇤
(0.0005)
2.268⇤⇤⇤
(0.449)

-0.0077⇤⇤⇤
(0.0005)
1.883⇤⇤⇤
(0.395)

-0.0087⇤⇤⇤
(0.0005)
1.283⇤⇤⇤
(0.416)

-0.0088⇤⇤⇤
(0.0006)
1.577⇤⇤⇤
(0.564)

-0.0089⇤⇤⇤
(0.0008)
1.757⇤⇤⇤
(0.669)

3,118
87.32
Y
Y

3,889
86.15
Y
Y

4,289
13.73
Y
Y

4,892
7.48
Y
Y

5,152
6.97
Y
Y

Panel A: Linear*North
PM10*HEPA ( )
Price (↵)
MWTP (- /↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Panel B: Quadratic
PM10*HEPA ( )
Price (↵)
MWTP (- /↵)
Observations
First-Stage F-Stat
Product FE
City FE

Notes: Each observation represents a product-city. This table presents reduced-form estimates where
PM10*HEPA is instrumented with North*HEPA and price is instrumented with the distance variables discussed in the text. Note that we use PM10 in winter months as in all other tables, and we use market
share in all months which is di↵erent from other tables where market share is from winter months. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the city level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; ***
significant at 1% level. The Stock-Yogo weak identification test critical value for one endogenous variable
(10% maximal IV size) is 16.38.

53

