NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUNCHING AT THE KINK:
IMPLICATIONS FOR SPENDING RESPONSES TO HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRACTS
Liran Einav
Amy Finkelstein
Paul Schrimpf
Working Paper 22369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22369

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

Einav and Finkelstein gratefully acknowledge support from the NIA (R01 AG032449). We thank
John Friedman, Henrik Kleven, and Wojciech Kopczuk for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22369.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bunching at The Kink: Implications for Spending Responses to Health Insurance Contracts
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf
NBER Working Paper No. 22369
June 2016
JEL No. D12,G22
ABSTRACT
A large literature in empirical public finance relies on “bunching” to identify a behavioral
response to non-linear incentives and to translate this response into an economic object to be used
counterfactually. We conduct this type of analysis in the context of prescription drug insurance
for the elderly in Medicare Part D, where a kink in the individual’s budget set generates
substantial bunching in annual drug expenditure around the famous “donut hole.” We show that
different alternative economic models can match the basic bunching pattern, but have very
different quantitative implications for the counterfactual spending response to alternative
insurance contracts. These findings illustrate the importance of modeling choices in mapping a
compelling reduced form pattern into an economic object of interest.
Liran Einav
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

Paul Schrimpf
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
997 - 1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T1Z1
schrimpf@mail.ubc.ca

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, there has been an increased reliance in public economics on evidence that
is based on observed “bunching” around kink points in budget sets; Kleven (2016) provides an
overview of this growing literature. The key underlying idea is simple and tractable: if rational
individuals face a non-linear budget set with considerable kinks, they should bunch around the
kinks, and the extent of bunching should be informative about relevant elasticities (or lack thereof).
The existence of bunching or excess mass around kink points of a budget set can thus provide
compelling, visual evidence against the null hypothesis of no behavioral response of individual to
the incentives; likewise, the lack of such bunching suggests the opposite.
Many of the applications of this idea have been in the context of the behavioral response to
non-linear income tax schedules (Saez 2010; Chetty et al. 2011; Chetty, Friedman, and Saez 2013a;
Kleven and Waseem 2013; Bastani and Selin 2014; Kleven et al. 2014). But similar ideas have been
widely applied in other settings that generate non-linear budget sets, including pensions (Manoli
and Weber, forthcoming), electricity (Ito 2014), fuel economy policy (Sallee and Slemrod 2012),
mortgages (Best et al. 2015), cell phones (Grubb 2015; Grubb and Osborne 2015), broadband
(Nevo, Turner, and Williams 2016), taxes on home sales (Kopczuk and Monroe 2015; Best and
Kleven 2016), healthcare procurement (Bajari et al. 2013), and –the subject of this current paper
– health insurance contracts (Abaluck, Gruber, and Swanson 2015; Dalton, Gowrisankaran, and
Town 2015; Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015).
A likely key factor behind this recent popularity of bunching estimates is the seminal contribution of Saez (2010), which illustrates how one may convert an observed bunching pattern to an
economic object of interest: a “structural” behavioral elasticity parameter. Using data on individuals’annual earning, which bunch around concave kinks in the income tax schedule, Saez used a
stylized, static, frictionless model of labor supply to provide a simple, transparent, and easy-toimplement mapping from the observed bunching to an estimate of the elasticity of labor supply
(or earning) with respect to the marginal tax rate. This allows one to take the compelling visual
evidence of bunching and move beyond merely rejecting the null of non-behavioral response to estimating a quantitative economic object of interest that can be used to predict behavioral responses
to counterfactual scenarios. Not surprisingly, this compelling and tractable idea has been quite
in‡uential, and has been frequently used to translate various bunching estimates into “structural”
elasticities (Chetty et al. 2011; Kleven et al. 2011; Kleven and Waseem 2013; Bastani and Selin
2014).
The Saez (2010) approach is very appealing. It is transparent and easy to implement. Of course,
the simplicity comes at the cost of potentially abstracting from a host of real-world features that
may be important in a particular context. An alternative to this approach would be to develop a
more complete model of a given context, which includes dynamics, uncertainty, and other relevant
frictions. Manoli and Weber (forthcoming) provide such a model in the context of labor supply,
and our earlier work (Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015) provides another example in the
context of demand for prescription drugs. As the Saez approach is so much simpler and easier to

1

implement, it seems useful to ask how well of an approximation to the main object of interest, a
simpler, Saez-style approach can provide. Naturally, the reasonableness of the approximation will
depend on the speci…c context.
This is precisely the goal of the current paper, where we explore this question in the context of
demand for prescription drugs under Medicare Part D, the public prescription drug insurance program for elderly and disabled individuals in the United States. Our substantive question concerns
the spending (or “moral hazard”) e¤ects of alternative insurance contracts. This is a topic that has
attracted considerable attention both for health insurance contracts in general, and more recently
in our speci…c Part D context.
We begin in Section 2 by describing the setting and the data. An important feature of Medicare
Part D coverage is the donut hole in the basic bene…t design, which generates a large, discontinuous
increase in the marginal price. Consequently, individuals’annual drug expenditures bunch around
this kink, making it a natural context to explore the implication of di¤erent bunching estimates.
In Section 3 we present and estimate two di¤erent models of prescription drug purchasing
behavior. The …rst is our adaptation of the static, frictionless Saez (2010) model to the Medicare
Part D context; we refer to it hereafter as a Saez-style model and the resultant elasticities as
Saez-based elasticities. The second is the dynamic model we developed in our earlier work (Einav,
Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015); we refer to it hereafter as the dynamic model and the resultant
elasticities as the dynamics-based elasticities. Both models match the basic bunching pattern;
however, the implied elasticity from the dynamic model is an order of magnitude greater than the
Saez-based elasticity estimate. This is the key result of the paper.
There are multiple di¤erences between the two, non-nested settings. The Saez-style framework
assumes continuous spending decisions (i.e. no lumpiness in drug purchases), perfect foresight
of future health shocks (i.e. no uncertainty), and no discounting of the future. None of these
assumptions are made in the dynamic model. It is interesting to explore which features of the
model are most important for the di¤erences in implied elasticities, which is the focus of Section 4.
There we develop two modi…cations of the dynamic model, which bring it closer to the Saez-style
framework. We then re-estimate each of these versions of the model using the same data. Our main
…nding is that a static, perfect foresight version of the full dynamic model –which comes quite close
to the Saez-style model except that it allows for lumpiness in spending decisions –results in implied
elasticities that are about half way between the Saez-based estimates and the dynamics-based ones.
Interestingly, once we allow for lumpiness, allowing for uncertainty essentially allows us to recover
the magnitude of the elasticity implied by the full dynamic model; as it turns out, allowing for
discounting is not quantitatively important.
We emphasize that the results we present in this paper should be viewed as illustrative. They
are speci…c to our particular (Medicare Part D) context, as well as to the modeling choices we
have made. Nonetheless, they highlight what we believe to be an important and broader point:
in-sample bunching patterns may be rationalized by a host of modeling assumptions, and these
assumptions can, at least in some contexts, have very di¤erent quantitative implications for the
out-of-sample objects of interest. Kleven (2016) emphasizes a similar point in his review article;
2

in the labor supply context, he describes several empirical papers which show that, with potential
optimization frictions, a given excess mass in the earnings distribution can be rationalized with
virtually any underlying, “structural” labor supply elasticity.
More generally, our paper speaks to the growing interest in our profession in developing approaches to translate compelling, transparent, “reduced form” evidence of a behavioral response
into an economic object of interest. The bunching literature following Saez (2010) is one speci…c
application of the in‡uential “su¢ cient statistics”literature popularized by Chetty (2009) –which
attempts to use simple models to directly and transparently map reduced form parameters into
welfare analyses. But the phenomenon is more general. For example, randomized controlled trials
have the ability to deliver compelling “causal e¤ect” estimates, but translating the experimental
treatment e¤ects into economic objects that can be applied out-of-sample to make counterfactual
predictions or analyses often requires additional economic modeling assumptions (Aron-Dine, Einav,
and Finkelstein 2013). Our (modest) goal here is to illustrate in a particular context that these
modeling assumptions can be quite consequential. As we have demonstrated, two “reasonable”(in
our subjective view) alternative models can match the basic reduced form bunching facts, while
giving very di¤erent out-of-sample predictions. Su¢ cient statistics, in other words, are su¢ cient
conditional on the model (or a set of models). This is an obvious point, made clearly by Chetty
(2009), but it is sometimes forgotten in applications and interpretations.

2

Setting and data

A. Setting The setting for the exercise in this paper is Medicare Part D, the prescription drug
coverage component of Medicare that was added in 2006. As of November 2012, 32 million people
(about 60% of Medicare bene…ciaries) were enrolled in Part D, with expenditures projected to be
$60 billion in 2013, or about 11% of total Medicare spending (Kaiser Family Foundation 2012a,
2012b). Unlike Medicare Parts A and B for hospital and doctor coverage, which provide a uniform
public insurance package for all enrollees (except those who select into the managed care option,
Medicare Advantage), private insurance companies o¤er various Medicare Part D contracts, and
are reimbursed by Medicare as a function of their enrollees’risk scores.
While the exact features of the plans o¤ered vary, they are all based around a governmentde…ned standard bene…t design, shown in Figure 1. Our main focus is on the convex kink in the
budget set, arising from the discontinuous increase in the out-of-pocket price individuals face when
they cross into the “donut hole” (or “gap”; see Figure 1). Standard economic theory suggests
that, as long as preferences are convex and smoothly distributed in the population, we should
observe individuals bunching at this convex kink point of their budget set. Saez (2010) provides a
recent, formal discussion. To see the intuition, consider a counterfactual linear budget set, i.e. the
continuation of the co-insurance arm’s cost sharing into the gap. In this case, individual spending
would be distributed smoothly through the kink. For example, as illustrated in Figure 2, the solid
and dashed indi¤erence curves represent two individuals with di¤erent healthcare needs who would

3

have di¤erent total drug spending under this linear contract. With the introduction of the kink,
however, the spending of the sicker (dashed) individual will decrease and locate at the kink, as
would all individuals whose spending under the linear contract was in between the solid and dashed
individuals, thus generating “bunching.” In a frictionless world, these individuals would pile up
exactly at the kink. In practice, with real-world frictions such as the lumpiness of drug purchases
and some uncertainty about future health shocks, individuals are instead expected to cluster in a
narrow area around the kink.
B. Data We use data on a 20% random sample of all Medicare part D bene…ciaries over the years
2007-2009. The data include basic demographic information (such as age and gender), predicted risk
score, and detailed information on the cost-sharing characteristics of each bene…ciary’s prescription
drug plan. We also observe detailed, claim-level information on our bene…ciaries’Medicare part D
utilization during the same years.
We use a sub-sample of the data we used previously in Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015).
That data excluded various groups of bene…ciaries for whom the empirical strategy is not applicable
–such as individuals in Medicare Advantage and certain low income individuals for whom the basic
bene…t design we study does not apply –and individuals under age 65; see Einav, Finkelstein, and
Schrimpf (2015) for a complete discussion and details of the sample. In the current paper, given
the more conceptual emphasis and in order to reduce computational burden, we further restrict the
sample to a 10 percent random sample of enrollees in the …ve largest plan-years.
With these restrictions, our …nal analysis relies on a data set of 27,237 person-years (14,521
unique individuals), which are distributed fairly evenly across the …ve plans. One plan is in 2007,
two in 2008, and two in 2009. One plan is similar to the standard contract described earlier, with
approximately 20 percent cost sharing prior to the gap. The four other plans have no deductible, but
require enrollees to pay 35-40 percent (depending on the plan) prior to the gap. None of the plans
provides coverage in the gap, leading to a sharp kink as described earlier. The average age in our
sample is 76, and about two thirds of the individuals are females. Average annual, per-bene…ciary
drug spending is $1,853 dollars, out of which $834 are paid (on average) out of pocket. Spending is
very right skewed: 4.5% of bene…ciaries have no annual drug spending, median spending is about
$1,391, and the 90th percentile is about $3,689. The exact location of the kink, as a function of
total drug spending, also varies across observations in our sample depending on the year, but on
average it hits at roughly the 75th percentile of the drug spending distribution. On average, in our
sample, the out of pocket price increases from 0.35 to 0.99 at the kink.
C. Bunching Bunching at the kink is clearly evident in the raw data. Figure 3 provides the
motivation and starting point for the analysis in the rest of the paper. Because the kink location
has changed from year to year (from $2,400 in 2007, to $2,510 in 2008, and $2,700 in 2009), in
all our analysis we normalize annual spending by the kink location. We plot the distribution of
(normalized) annual spending (in $40 bins) for individuals whose spending is within $1,000 of the
kink (on either side). This constitutes 35% of our sample. The presence of signi…cant “excess mass,”
4

or “bunching” of annual spending levels around the convex kink in the budget set is apparent in
Figure 3: there is a noticeable spike in the distribution of annual spending around the kink. In
Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015) we presented this result in greater detail, showing how the
location of the spike moves as the kink location changes from year to year and analyzing the types
of drugs that individuals appear to stop purchasing when they slow down their drug utilization and
“bunch” at the kink.
The observed bunching pattern clearly demonstrates that individuals’ drug expenditure responds to the out-of-pocket price. In other words, this basic descriptive evidence provides a
compelling rejection of the null hypothesis that drug spending behavior does not respond to the
incentives created by the non-linear health insurance contract.
The remainder of the paper compares two di¤erent modeling approaches to translating the
bunching pattern in Figure 3 into an economic object of interest that could be used to construct
predictions of spending under counterfactual contracts. For concreteness, we examine the implications of the two di¤erent models for the estimate of an elasticity of spending with respect to a
uniform percentage change in the out-of-pocket price implied by the budget set illustrated in Figure
1.

3

Two economic models

We consider two di¤erent economic models for mapping the bunching estimate into an elasticity.
Both are fairly “o¤ the shelf.” One is an adaptation of Saez’s (2010) model to our context. The
other is the model we developed in our earlier work, which was used to analyze how drug spending
responds to non-linear health insurance contracts (Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015). In this
section, we brie‡y present each model, show that each matches the basic bunching pattern, and
present the (di¤erent) implications regarding the counterfactual spending response to a proportional
reduction in consumer cost sharing. In the next section we discuss –conceptually and empirically
–the reasons for the di¤erences.

3.1

A frictionless static model a-la Saez (2010)

Saez (2010) provides a static, frictionless model of labor supply, which can be used to convert
observed bunching of annual earnings around convex kinks in the income tax schedule to an estimate
of labor supply elasticities. We adapt it to our context, sticking as closely as possible to Saez’s
original model.
We assume that individual i obtains utility
ui (m; y) = gi (m) + y

(1)

from (total) drug spending m and residual income y, as in Einav et al. (2013). As in Einav et
al. (2013) and Saez (2010), we assume that utility is quasi-linear. We make further parametric

5

assumptions, so that
"

ui (m; y) = 2m
|

m

i

1+

1

{z
gi (m)

1+ 1

i

#

}

+ [Ii
|

C(m)] :
{z
} :

(2)

y

That is, residual income y is given by the individual’s income Ii minus his (annual) out-of-pocket
cost C(m), where C( ) de…nes the function that depends on the individual’s insurance coverage and
maps total spending m to the fraction of it that is paid out of pocket as illustrated, for example,
in Figure 1.
The choice of gi (m) in equation (2) is less standard, and is motivated by our attempt to obtain
a tractable, constant elasticity form of the spending function that would be similar to Saez (2010)
despite the di¤erent context. As will be clear soon, we specify gi (m) above so that one can think of
as a parameter,
i as representing an individual’s health needs, which vary across individuals, and
common across individuals, that a¤ects individuals’elasticity of drug spending with respect to the
out-of-pocket price.
To see the motivation for this particular parameterization, consider its implication in the context
of a linear coverage. Suppose coverage is linear and is given by C(m) = c m with c 2 [0; 1], so that
c = 0 represents full coverage and c = 1 represents no coverage. In such a case, an individual solves
#
"
1+ 1
m
i
(3)
+ Ii c m ;
max 2m
m
1+ 1
i
and the optimal choice of drug expenditure is given by
m=

i (2

c) :

(4)

That is, with no insurance (c = 1) the individual spends m = i , while with full insurance he
spends m = 2 i . Thus our speci…cation implies a constant elasticity of spending with respect
to (2 c).
This constant elasticity form of the spending function is now very similar to Saez’s choice of
labor supply function – although with the distinction that Saez’s speci…cation implies a constant
elasticity with respect to (1 t) ,where t is the marginal tax rate on income. For the rest of this
section we can therefore closely follow his strategy. Speci…cally, we assume that i is distributed
in the population with cdf F ( ) and pdf f ( ), analogously to individual’s ability (n) in Saez’s
framework. m is analogous to income (z), and (2 c) is analogous to (1 t)e in Saez’s work.
Applying these analogies, we can start with equation (2) in Saez (2010), which is identical (after
applying the analogies) to equation (4) above.
Estimation and implied elasticities Consider now H0 (m) to be the cdf of spending when
the marginal price (before the gap) is c0 . Denote by h0 (m) = H00 (m) the corresponding pdf.
Because m = i (2 c0 ) we have H0 (m) = Pr( i (2 c0 )
m) = F (m=(2 c0 ) ). So h0 (m) =
6

f (m=(2 c0 ) )=(2 c0 ) . Consider now the gap, where there is a kink and the marginal price
c1 >> c0 becomes much higher, so above the kink we have m = i (2 c1 ) . H is then the
distribution of spending under the kink scenario. If the kink is at m , then distribution of spending
up to m is given by H0 (m). That is, spending is such that
8
>
if i < m =(2 c0 )
< i (2 c0 )
m( i ) =
(5)
m
if i 2 [m =(2 c0 ) ; m =(2 c1 ) ] :
>
:
c1 )
if i > m =(2 c1 )
i (2
Thus, for spending above the kink (m > m ) we have H(m) = F (m=(2 c1 ) ).
The rest continues as in Saez, using the analogies described above. For example, Saez’s equation
(3) becomes:
m
= (2 c0 )
1
(6)
m
and his equation (5) becomes

B=m

2
2

c0
c1

h(m ) + h(m )+ =
1

2

2 c0
2 c1

:

(7)

Equation (7) can then be used to express as a function of estimable objects, allowing us to convert
our bunching estimate of B to an elasticity estimate .
Table 1 shows the results of implementing this approach. The bunching estimate B is calculated
as the number of people who are empirically around the kink (Nactual ) over and above the number of
people who we (counterfactually) estimate would be in this area if the kink did not exist (Ncounter );
in other words, B = Nactual Ncounter : The di¤erent rows of Table 1 report results under di¤erent
approaches to approximating that counterfactual distribution of spending that would exist in the
absence of the kink, and di¤erent de…nitions of what it means to be “around” the kink. The …rst
three columns describe the approach. The fourth column reports the excess mass, which is the ratio
of B to the (counterfactual) number of individuals that would be near the kink in the absence of a
kink; in other words, the excess mass is de…ned as (Nactual Ncounter ) =Ncounter .The …nal column
of Table 1 reports our elasticity estimate. We compute plan-speci…c ’s using equation 7, our
estimate of B for each plan, and plan-speci…c values for c0 and c1 . As noted, our speci…cation
implies a constant elasticity of spending with respect to (2 c). We therefore map our estimates
of to an individual-speci…c spending elasticity with respect to the (ex-post) individual-speci…c
end-of-year coinsurance rate c; this corresponds to the relevant price the individual responds to in
the Saez-style static model with perfect foresight. We report the average elasticity estimate across
the individuals in our sample.
The …rst row of Table 1 shows our baseline speci…cation. We approximate the counterfactual
distribution of spending that would exist near the kink if there was no kink by …tting a linear
approximation to the cdf, using only individuals in $40 spending bins whose spending is below the
kink (between $2,000 and $200 from the kink), and subject to an integration constraint, which
requires the overall number of individuals within $2,000 of the kink (in both directions) to remain
7

the same, as in the actual data. We then use a $200 window around the kink to produce our
bunching estimate B. The other rows of Table 1 show the sensitivity of our elasticity estimate to
…tting a cubic approximation (second row), changing the spending bin size (third row), or changing
the size of the exclusion window around the kink (bottom row). These exercises produce relatively
similar –and quite small –elasticity estimates, ranging from -0.034 to -0.049.

3.2

The dynamic model from Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015)

An alternative model that one could use to map the bunching pattern to an underlying elasticity
of spending with respect to the contract is the one we developed and used in our earlier work on
the topic, in Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015). We consider a risk-neutral, forward looking
individual who faces stochastic health shocks within the coverage period; at the beginning of the
coverage period (a year), an individual faces uncertainty regarding the distribution of health shocks
she will face, and makes prescription drug purchase decisions sequentially as information gradually
unfolds.1 These health shocks can be treated by …lling a prescription. The individual is covered
by a non-linear prescription drug insurance contract j over an annual coverage period of T = 52
weeks. A coverage contract is given by a function C( ; x), which speci…es the out-of-pocket amount
c the individual would be charged for a prescription drug that costs dollars, given total (insurer
plus out-of-pocket) spending of x dollars up until that point in the coverage period.
The individual’s utility is linear and additive in health and residual income. Health events are
given by a pair ( ; !), where > 0 denotes the dollar cost of the prescription and ! > 0 denotes the
(monetized) health consequences of not …lling the prescription. We assume that individuals make a
binary choice whether to …ll the prescription, and a prescription that is not …lled has a cumulative,
additively separable e¤ect on health. Thus, conditional on a health event ( ; !), the individual’s
‡ow utility is given by
(
C( ; x) if prescription …lled
u( ; !; x) =
:
(8)
!
if prescription not …lled
When health events arrive they are drawn independently from a distribution G( ; !). It is also
convenient to de…ne G( ; !)
G2 (!j )G1 ( ). Health events arrive with a weekly probability 0 ,
which is drawn from H( 0 j ) where is the weekly arrival probability from the previous week.
We allow for serial correlation in health by assuming that 0 follows a Markov process, and that
H( 0 j ) is (weakly) monotone in in a …rst order stochastic dominance sense.
1

The assumption of risk neutrality may seem odd in the context of insurance. Note however we are focused

not on insurance demand but on the demand for drugs conditional on the insurance contract. Conceptually, risk
neutrality may not be a bad approximation for week-to-week decision making, even when the utility function over
annual quantities (of income and/or health) is concave. Practically, we showed in Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf
(2015) that our quantitative results were robust to an alternative model which allowed for risk aversion, at the cost
of some expositional and estimation complexity.

8

The only choice individuals make is whether to …ll each prescription. Optimal behavior can
be characterized by a simple …nite horizon dynamic problem. The three state variables are the
number of weeks left until the end of the coverage period, which we denote by t, the total amount
spent so far, denoted by x, and the health state, summarized by , which denotes the event arrival
probability in the previous week.
The value function v(x; t; ) represents the present discounted value of expected utility along
the optimal path and is given by the solution to the following Bellman equation:
(
)
#
Z
Z "
C( ; x) + v(x + ; t 1; 0 );
0
0
0
(1
) v(x; t 1; ) +
max
dG( ; !) dH( 0 j ):
v(x; t; ) =
! + v(x; t 1; 0 )
(9)
with terminal conditions v(x; 0; ) = 0 for all x. Optimal behavior is straightforward to characterize:
if a prescription arrives, the individual …lls it if the value from doing so, C( ; x)+ v(x+ ; t 1; 0 ),
exceeds the value obtained from not …lling the prescription, ! + v(x; t 1; 0 ).
Estimation and implied elasticities To estimate the model, we parameterize the key objects.
We assume that G1 ( ) is lognormal. We assume that G2 (!j ) follows a mixture distribution with
! = with probability 1 p, and ! is drawn from a uniform distribution over [0; ] with probability
p. We allow heterogeneity across individuals assuming that they are drawn from …ve latent types,
and almost all parameters (with the main exception of ) are type-speci…c. We then estimate the
model using simulated moments, where the two key moments we use are the bunching pattern
presented in Figure 3 and the di¤erential pattern of monthly claim propensities for individuals
that are close and far from the kink. This is all, by design, identical to the model and estimation
carried in Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015), which provide much more details about the
parameterization and estimation. The results are also similar, but not exactly the same because of
the additional sample restrictions. Figure 4 shows the …t of the model to the bunching patterns;
by design, the …t is quite close. Appendix Table A1 present the parameter estimates.
Using the model and its estimates, we can now perform counterfactual exercises regarding
changes in the budget set. Given our focus on generating estimates that are comparable to the
Saez-based elasticity estimates obtained in the last section, our main exercise relies on applying a
uniform percentage price reduction to the budget sets (analogous to the one presented in Figure 1)
of the contracts that in our sample. We then simulate spending decisions for each individual under
his original coverage plan and under the modi…ed plans, and use these to compute elasticities.2
The results are summarized in Table 2. The implied elasticities range from -0.22 to -0.26. These
are about …ve times larger than the implied elasticities from the static model (see Table 1).
2

As emphasized by Aron-Dine, Einav, and Finkelstein (2013) and Aron-Dine et al. (2015), if individuals face

a non-linear budget set and take the dynamic incentives it creates into account, it is not advisable to characterize
the elasticity of spending with respect to “the price” without specifying the complete price change along the entire
non-linear budget set.

9

4

Understanding the models’di¤erent implications

The previous section established the central “result” of the paper: two di¤erent, natural (in our
view!) models of spending behavior that are empirically …tted to the bunching or excess mass
pattern in Figure 3 produce quantitatively very di¤erent implications for the underlying economic
object of interest one might want to use out of sample. The models are not similar, yet they use the
same key source of variation, so one might have expected them to produce elasticity estimates of
similar magnitudes. However, comparing the results in Table 1 and Table 2 suggest that the Saezbased elasticity estimates (Table 1) are about …ve times lower than the dynamics-based elasticity
estimates (Table 2). This raises a natural question: why?
In this section we brie‡y explore –conceptually and empirically –which economic and modeling
assumptions seem to be important in creating the di¤erent quantitative implications. A simple,
clear statement of what is driving the di¤erent results will not be easy; the models are not nested
versions of each other. Nor, it is worth emphasizing, do we consider them vertically rankable in
terms of their appeal. The static, frictionless model a-la Saez (2010) has the attraction of being a
simple and transparent mapping from a descriptive fact to an economic object of interest; relatedly,
it can be implemented easily and quickly. The dynamic model is more computationally challenging
and time consuming to implement and –not unrelatedly –a bit more of a “black box” in terms of
the relationship between the underlying data objects and the economic object of interest. As we
now discuss, these disamenities are introduced in order to account for three potentially important
economic forces in our context that our adaptation of Saez’s static, frictionless model abstracts
from: lumpiness in drug purchases, uncertainty, and discounting. We sometimes refer to the latter
two under the general rubric of “dynamics,” although they are conceptually somewhat distinct.

4.1

Conceptual di¤erences

A …rst distinction between the two approaches regards frictions. The adaptation to the Saez model
assumes away any frictions (including lumpiness). This is arguably a more important restriction in
the context for which it was originally developed – labor supply decisions. As has been discussed
extensively (Chetty 2012; Chetty et al. 2011, 2013a, 2013b; Bastani and Selin 2014), labor supply
decisions are likely restricted to certain discrete choices (e.g., full time or part time), which will
by necessity limit the amount of bunching at the kink that a given underlying behavioral response
can produce. Practical implementations of Saez (2010) allow for some frictions – by measuring
bunching in some bandwidth around the kink rather than simply a spike at the kink which is the
literal implication of the frictionless model – but will still miss any behavioral response to the
kink that does not result in an outcome within that bandwidth. Such lumpiness is arguably less
important in our setting, where a typical prescription drug costs $20 (for generic drugs) or $130
(for branded drugs), which is only a small fraction of total annual spending for those individuals
whose spending is around the kink. Yet, this is still potentially a force that would reduce the
implied behavioral elasticity estimated in the Saez-style approach, since any lumpiness will work

10

to push spending outside of the bandwidth used to measure excess mass. The dynamic model,
by contrast, accounts for lumpiness by modeling a discrete series of (weekly) health shocks and
purchase decisions, explicitly estimating the distribution of the cost of each drug ( ), whose right
tail is not trivial.
Second, the Saez model is a static model. This seems a reasonable approximation to many
annual labor supply decisions, which was the context for which it was developed.3 However, a
static model seems poorly suited to our context. Annual spending in our setting is the result of
individuals making many sequential prescription drug purchase decisions throughout the year as
health shocks arrive (and information is revealed), and the price of treating each shock changes as
individuals move along their non-linear budget set. This is in sharp contrast to the assumption of
the static framework in which all the uncertainty is realized prior to any spending decision.
Relatedly, if individuals respond to the dynamic incentives provided by the non-linear contract,
then not only does information arrive gradually, but also early purchase decisions re‡ect individuals’
expectations about future health shocks and their associated out-of-pocket price, adding yet another
important dynamic e¤ect. For example, the static analysis, by construction, limits the behavioral
response to the kink to those near the kink. Yet, the set of people “near” the kink –and therefore
“at risk” of bunching –may in fact be endogenously a¤ected by the presence of the kink; forwardlooking individuals, anticipating the increase in price if they experience a series of negative health
shocks, are likely to make purchase decisions that decrease their chance of ending up near the kink,
even if at that point they are far from reaching it.
This is not merely a theoretical point. In prior empirical work, we produced reduced form,
descriptive evidence that is consistent with such forward looking behavior; in particular, in both
prescription drug purchasing in Medicare Part D and in medical spending decisions in employersponsored health insurance we presented evidence that individuals’health care utilization decisions
respond to the future price of health care (Aron-Dine et al., 2015). Speci…cally, in both settings,
we found that individuals in the same health insurance contract who face the same spot price
of healthcare but a higher expected end-of-year price of care (because they joined the non-linear
contract at di¤erent points during the year) have lower initial healthcare spending. This evidence
of a response to the future price of care, among individuals who face the same spot, or initial price
of care, is consistent with individuals taking into account the entire non-linear budget set in making
current healthcare utilization choices.
Relatedly, our prior estimates of the dynamic model described in the previous section found a
non-trivial role for such “anticipatory”behavioral responses by people who expected to end up far
below the kink; for example, we estimated that about a quarter of the spending increase that we
project will occur from “…lling the donut hole” in Medicare Part D is associated with bene…ciaries
whose spending prior to the policy change would leave them short of reaching the donut hole
(Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015). Any such anticipatory response to the donut hole (or any
3

Although, as noted by Manoli and Weber (forthcoming), even in the labor supply context, retirement incentives

can create important dynamic considerations, which suggest a need to adapt the static bunching model.

11

non-linear feature of the health insurance contract), will be mechanically missed by a Saez-style
“bunching” estimator since, by de…nition, this behavioral response does not happen around the
kink.
Thus, qualitatively, both the assumption of a frictionless environment and the assumption
of a static environment seem likely to contribute to the lower Saez-based elasticity in Table 1
compared to the dynamics-based elasticity in Table 2. We now endeavor to explore the quantitative
importance of each factor by estimating various restricted versions of the “full” dynamic model
that shut down various features. Of course, these various modeling features are unlikely to have an
additively separable e¤ect on the estimates. so it will not be possible to do a strict accounting-style
decomposition of the contribution of frictions vs. static modeling to the di¤erences between the
two estimates.
Relatedly, an important point to keep in mind in any such exercise is that if we re-estimate the
“restricted”models, all of the parameter estimates will change in an attempt to have the restricted
models …t the various moments in the data (including the bunching at the kink) as well as possible.
In other words, this exercise is di¤erent from a theoretical comparative statics exercise. This is
because the data, and in particular the bunching pattern, is held …xed, and is being …tted by any
of the models we propose, so as we move from one speci…cation to another, the parameters are
re-estimated and change in response to modeling restrictions. As a result, a comparison of implied
elasticities from various alternative models – each separately estimated to …t the data – may not
lead to intuitive (or conceptually interesting) comparative statics.

4.2

Quantitative di¤erences

We consider two “restricted”versions of the “full”dynamic model presented earlier. These versions
are designed to shut down various features that are absent from the Saez-style model. In the …rst –
which we refer to as Restricted Model A (“no dynamics”) –we restrict the full model to shut down
dynamics. Speci…cally, we start with the full model and its parameterization, but then assume no
discounting or uncertainty as in Saez (2010). Yet, we continue to allow for frictions in the form
of lumpy spending. To do so, consider the dynamic model from the previous section, but assume
that individuals’discount factor is = 1 and that they do not face any uncertainty regarding the
future. That is, as of the …rst week of the year individuals have complete information about the
precise set of health events that they would experience throughout the year.
These assumptions make the individual drug expenditure decision a static problem. To see
=52
this, let H = f( t ; ! t )gTt=1
denote the set of health events realized during the coverage year, with
( t ; ! t ) = (0; 0) if there was no health event at week t, and it is easy to see that the individual
optimal decision is simply a linear programming problem of choosing the subset D
H of the
prescriptions that get …lled. The individual will choose D to solve the following problem:
h
i
X
X
max C
!
(10)
t
t ;
D H

t2D

t2D
=

which is conceptually very similar to the individual problem of maximizing equation (2) in the Saez12

style model in Section 3. A key di¤erence between our static version of the dynamic model and the
Saez-style model is that the former allows for the lumpiness of claims, relative to the frictionless
spending model of Saez (of course, there are also unavoidable functional form di¤erences between
the two). In particular, given 52 weeks in the year and an estimated average weekly arrival rate
of a health shock of approximately 0:4 (see the estimates of in Appendix Table A1), the typical
individuals faces about 20 shocks, so a relatively …nite set of choices of which to make claims (some
of which will have > ! and therefore are e¤ectively non-discretionary).
In the second restricted model –which we refer to as Restricted Model B (“no discounting”) –
we impose = 1 on the full model, rather than allowing to be a free estimable parameter. It thus
allows for lumpiness of spending, as in the …rst restricted model, but also allows for uncertainty in
the timing and nature of health shocks throughout the year. By imposing = 1, all the dynamic
behavior is due to uncertainty and incomplete information about the future, rather than due to
time preferences.
Both of these restricted models use a similar basic structure to that of the full model presented
in the previous section. We thus follow the same econometric and parametric assumptions regarding
functional form, distributions, and heterogeneity, and use the same method of simulated moments
and the same set of empirical moments for estimation. We should note, however, that the combination of lumpiness and complete information in Restricted Model A leads to a computational
problem: although conceptually trivial, solving the optimization problem in equation (10) is in fact
complicated as it leads to a large combinatorial choice. Therefore, to estimate Restricted Model A
we use approximation techniques, as detailed in the appendix.
In the appendix (Appendix Table A2 and Appendix Table A3), we report the underlying parameter estimates that are associated with each model. Loosely, the parameter estimates are reasonably
similar across models. This is not particularly surprising given how similar the models are, and
the fact that they try to …t the same descriptive (bunching) patterns in the data. Indeed, like the
full dynamic model and the Saez-style model, these two restricted models also …t the bunching
pattern well as we show in Figure 5 and Figure 6. Yet, it is interesting to discuss the parameter
that have changed as we move from the full dynamic model to restricted models A and B. Those
changing parameters are those that “compensate” for the changes in the modeling assumptions,
and may provide some intuition for why the elasticity estimates change. For example, comparing
the estimates for model A (Appendix Table A2) with the estimates of the full model (Appendix
Table A1) reveals that imposing certainty makes us estimate health shocks that are slightly more
persistent, and most importantly make us estimate lower moral hazard parameter p for the two
high-spending types, and this latter di¤erences is presumably what drives the lower price elasticity
implied by the certainty model.
The key focus is the implications of these di¤erent models –all of which are designed to …t the
bunching pattern –for the economic object of interest: the elasticity of annual spending with respect
to the out-of-pocket price. The main results are presented in Table 3 Panel A shows the results
for Restricted Model A (“no dynamics”) and panel B for Restricted Model B (“no discounting”).
Each table reports the implied elasticities in a parallel fashion to the way Table 2 was generated
13

for the “full” dynamic model of Section 3. Recall that the Saez-style model predicted Saez-based
elasticity estimates in the range of -0.04 to -0.05 (Table 1) while the “full”dynamic model produced
dynamics-based estimates of -0.22 to -0.26 (Table 2). For ease of discussion we focus on the midpoint
of this range, looking at a 15 percent reduction in price in Tables 2 and 3.
The “full”dynamic model generates an “elasticity”with respect to the 15 percent price reduction
of -0.25 (Table 2) while the “no dynamics” model in Panel A of Table 3 generates an elasticity of
-0.13. This “no dynamics” model represents our attempt to approximate –within our more richly
parametrized model –a static model a-la Saez. A key di¤erence between the “no dynamics”model
and the Saez-style model is that the latter, as discussed, is frictionless, whereas the “no dynamics”
model allows for lumpiness in drug purchases. Thus, one way to interpret these results is that
lumpiness in purchases may explain about half of the di¤erence in elasticity estimates between the
two models. Of course, there are functional form di¤erences between the “no dynamics”model and
the Saez-style model which may also impact the results.
As noted, the “no dynamics” model shuts down both discounting and uncertainty. Panel B of
Table 3 explores the importance of discounting by estimating a version of the full model that allows
for uncertainty but imposes no discounting ( = 1). As it turns out, the assumption regarding the
discount factor do not have a major e¤ect on the implied elasticity. The “no discounting” model
in Panel B of Table 3 yields an elasticity (for a 15 percent price reduction) of -0.22, which is quite
close to the “full model” estimate of -0.25 (relative to the “no dynamics” estimate of -0.13). In
other words, after lumpiness, allowing for dynamics in the form of uncertainty appears important
for the elasticity estimate, but discounting per se does not (although could be important for other
objects of interest).
We close by re-emphasizing our earlier caveat that comparisons across the “full”dynamic model
and the various restricted models are not “real” comparative statics. In each case, the model was
re-estimated and the parameters changed (see Appendix Tables A1 through A3) as the restricted
models also tried to match the (observed) bunching moments. As a result, it is hard to develop
economic intuition for “why” the restricted models deliver the results that they do relative to the
full model. In practice, in our setting we found that the “real” comparative statics generate much
smaller changes in elasticities than the re-estimated restricted models. For example, if we take
the parameter estimates from the full model (Table A1) but impose the restrictions of the “no
discounting” model (i.e. we impose = 1), we estimate that the elasticity declines from -0.25 to
-0.23, which is only two-thirds as much as the decline if we instead re-estimate the model after
imposing no discounting (in which case, we estimate an elasticity of -0.22). Similarly, if we take the
parameter estimates from the full model but impose the restrictions of the “no dynamics” model
(i.e. assume perfect foresight of the sequence of health events, and assume = 1), we estimate
that the elasticity declines from -0.25 to -0.20, which less than a half of the decline if we instead
re-estimate the model (in which case, we estimate an elasticity of -0.13).

14

5

Conclusions

This paper documents a case in which two di¤erent models both …t well in sample, but have di¤erent
implications out of sample. We illustrated this point in the speci…c context of translating bunching
estimates –which are being increasingly used in public economics –to behavioral elasticities, and
in the speci…c setting of studying the spending (or “moral hazard”) e¤ects of health insurance contracts. We showed that the translation of a descriptive bunching pattern to an elasticity estimate
using a Saez-style frictionless model could lead to …ve-fold lower counterfactual predictions relative
to those generated by a richer dynamic model. While this qualitative result – that two di¤erent
models lead to di¤erent results – by itself should be hardly surprising, we did not expect a-priori
such a large di¤erence in the magnitude of the prediction. We explored several “in-between”speci…cations to help assess which modelling assumptions may be most responsible for the di¤erences
in results.
Given these results, an obvious question is how to select among the many models that could
rationalize an observed pattern. There is of course no algorithmic answer to this question, and
model selection should likely depend on the context, the data at hand, and the key counterfactual
exercise for which it is used. Additional moments and external information could help with model
selection. Other aspects that could factor into such a decision are tradeo¤s between transparency,
simplicity, and speed of communication on the one hand, and richness of the model on the other
hand. When there is enough reason (or evidence) to believe that a richer model could lead to
substantially di¤erent results, it seems more important to move away from the simpler model.
However, we should note that even when simpler models are inferior in terms of a bottom-line
counterfactual, they may still prove quite useful in other respects. For example, going back to the
speci…c application of the current paper, even though the Saez-style model delivers elasticities that
are much lower, it may generate useful qualitative results regarding elasticity di¤erences across
groups. It can provide a relatively easy and quick way for general testing and assessment before
developing and estimating more complete models.

References
Abaluck, Jason, Jonathan Gruber, and Ashley Swanson (2015). “Prescription Drug Use under
Medicare Part D: A Linear Model of Nonlinear Budget Sets.” NBER Working Paper No. 20976.
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein (2013). “The RAND Health Insurance
Experiment, Three Decades Later ” Journal of Economics Perspectives, 27(1), 197-222.
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen (2015). “Moral hazard
in health insurance: Do dynamic incentives matter?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4),
725-741.
Bajari, Patrick, Han Hong, Minjung Park, and Robert Town (2013). “Estimating Price Sensitivity of Economic Agents Using Discontinuity in Nonlinear Contracts.” Mimeo, Stanford University.
https://economics.uchicago.edu/pdf/Hong_etal_2013_NonlinearContracts.pdf
15

Bastani, Spencer, and Hakan Selin (2014). “Bunching and Non-Bunching at Kink Points of the
Swedish Tax Schedule.” Journal of Public Economics 109, 36-49.
Best, Michael C., and Henrik Kleven (2016). “Housing Market Responses to Transaction
Taxes: Evidence from Notches and Stimulus in the UK.” Mimeo, London School of Economics
http://www.henrikkleven.com/uploads/3/7/3/1/37310663/best-kleven_landnotches_feb2016.pdf
Best, Michael C., James Cloyne, Ethan Iltzetzki, and Henrik Kleven (2015). “Interest Rates,
Debt and Intertemporal Allocation: Evidence from Notched Mortgage Contracts in the UK.”
Mimeo, London School of Economics. http://www.henrikkleven.com/uploads/3/7/3/1/37310663/bestcloyne-ilzetzki-kleven_aug2015.pdf
Chetty, Raj (2009). “Su¢ cient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural
and Reduced-Form Methods.” Annual Review of Economics, 1, 451-488.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri (2011). “Adjustment Costs,
Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax
Records.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 749-804.
Chetty, Raj (2012). “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 80(3), 969-1018.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez (2013a). “Using Di¤erences in Knowledge
Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” American Economic
Review, 103(7), 2683-2721.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber (2013b). “Does Indivisible Labor
Explain the Di¤erence between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin
Elasticities.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27, 1-56.
Dalton, Christina, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert Town (2015). “Myopia and Complex
Dynamic Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D.”Mimeo, http://users.wfu.edu/daltonc/docs/Research/Dalton
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark Cullen (2013) “Selection on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance.” American Economic Review, 103(1), 178-219.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf (2015). “The Response of Drug Expenditure
to Nonlinear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D.”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
130(2), 841-899.
Grubb, Michael (2015). “Consumer Inattention and Bill-Shock Regulation.” Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 219-257.
Grubb, Michael, and Matthew Osborne (2015). “Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs,
Learning, and Bill Shock.” American Economic Review, 105(1), 234-271.
Ito, Koichiro (2014). “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from
Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review, 104(2), 537-563.
Kleven, Henrik (2016). “Bunching.” Annual Review of Economics, 8, forthcoming.
Kleven, Henrik, Martin Knudsen, Claus Kreiner, Soren Pedersen, and Emmanuel Saez (2011).
“Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark.”Econometrica, 79(3), 651-692.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Esben Schultz (2014). “Migration and
16

Wage E¤ects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigners’ Tax Scheme in Denmark.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 333-338.
Kleven, Henrik, and Mazhar Waseem (2013). “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions
and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
128(2), 669-723.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, and David Munroe (2015). “Mansion Tax: The E¤ect of Transfer Taxes
on the Residential Real Estate Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2),
214–257.
Manoli, Dayanand S., and Andrea Weber (forthcoming). “Nonparametric Evidence on the
E¤ects of Financial Incentives on Retirement Decisions.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy.
Nevo, Aviv, John L. Turner, and Jonathan W. Williams (2016). “Usage-Based Pricing and
Demand for Residential Broadband.” Econometrica, 84(2), 411-443.
Saez, Emmanuel (2010). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?”American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2(3), 180-212.
Sallee, James M., and Joel Slemrod (2012). “Car Notches: Strategic Automaker Responses to
Fuel Economy Policy.”’Journal of Public Economics, 96(11), 981-999.

Appendix
In this appendix we describe the approximation we use to Restricted Model A in the paper. That is,
the version of the model that has no uncertainty (and therefore no dynamics). With full certainty,
a consumer faces a collection of potential prescriptions f t ; ! t gTt=1 and must choose which ones to
…ll. Denote dt = 1 if a prescription is …lled and dt = 0 if not. The consumer’s problem is
"
#
T
t 1
X
X
t
max
(1 dt )! t + dt C( t ;
ds s ) :
(11)
dt 2f0;1g

t=0

s=0

It is very di¢ cult to solve this discrete optimization problem. There are 252 possible sequences of dt ,
so a brute force solution is computationally intractable. The dynamic programming approach that
we used in the model with uncertainty is also not applicable here. With uncertainty, spending until
time t and the current ! t and t are the relevant state variables for a consumer. With certainty,
the consumer knows the entire sequence of t and ! t , so this entire sequence is relevant for the
consumer’s decision at time t.
To make computation tractable, we exploit the fact that the budget, C( ), is piecewise linear,
impose = 1, and settle for an approximate solution when the exact solution lies near the convex
kink. Given that the budget is piecewise linear, we can write it as
C(x) = yg + bg (x

kg ) for kg

x

kg+1

(12)

where kg are increasing with g. Once restricted to lie on a given segment of the budget set, the
17

consumer’s problem is an integer linear program,
max

dt 2f0;1g

s.t.kg

yg + bg kg +

T
X

[(1

dt )! t + bg dt t ]

(13)

t=1

T
X

dt

kg+1 :

t

t=1

Although there are algorithms to solve integer linear programs, integer linear programs are NP
hard, so the performance of these algorithms can be poor. Using them in our context was too time
consuming; we must solve the above problem thousands of times to estimate the model. Instead,
we compute an approximate solution as follows. Consider the relaxation of (13) to a linear program
by allowing dt to take any value in the interval [0; 1] (instead of either 0 or 1, as in the original
problem):
max

dt 2[0;1]

s.t.kg

yg + bg kg +

T
X

[(1

dt )! t + bg dt t ]

(14)

t=1

T
X

dt

t

kg+1 :

t=1

There are three possible solutions. Two corner solutions and an interior one,
dt = 1(! t > bg t ) and kg <

T
X

dt

t

< kg+1 :

(15)

t=0

Note that the interior solution has all dt 2 f0; 1g, so if the solution is interior, then the solution
is the same with or without the integer constraint. To describe the upper corner solution, sort
prescriptions such that
! t(0)
! t(1)
! t(T )
:
(16)
Let r = minfr :

Pr

i=0 t(i)

t(0)

t(1)

t(T )

> kg g. Then dt(r) = 1 for r < r , 0 for r > r and
Pr 1
kg
t(i)
i=0
dt(r ) =
:

(17)

t(r )

The solution is very intuitive and simple. We sort potential prescriptions by their relative cost of
not …lling, ! , and then …ll from most costly to least costly until we reach the corner. Unfortunately,
the corner solution violates the integer constraint. Simply rounding the solution to the not-integerconstrained linear program does not necessarily give the solution to the integer constrained linear
program. Nonetheless, we adapt the rounded solution as an approximate optimum.
After (approximately) solving the model along each segment, we take the segment solution that
gives the highest utility as the solution. Note that the only time an approximate corner solution will
be used is if the solution is at the single convex kink. Also, in these cases, the true and approximate
solutions both have the feature that either switching a single prescription from …lled to not …lled
(or vice versa) would move total spending from above to below the convex kink. The solution is
only approximate in that there may be a better set of prescriptions to …ll with this feature.
18

Figure 1: Medicare Part D standard bene…t design (in 2008)

The …gure shows the standard bene…t design in 2008. “Pre-Kink coverage” refers to coverage prior to the
Initial Coverage Limit (ICL) which is where there is a kink in the budget set and the gap, or donut hole,
begins. The level at which catastrophic coverage kicks in is de…ned in terms of out-of-pocket spending (of
$4,050), which we convert to the total expenditure amount provided in the …gure. Once catastrophic coverage
kicks in, the actual standard coverage speci…es a set of co-pays (dollar amounts) for particular types of drugs;
in the …gure we use show a 7% co-insurance rate, which is the empirical average of these co-pays in our data.

19

Figure 2: Rationale for bunching

The solid line illustrates the budget set of the same standard bene…t design as in Figure 1. The dashed line considers
an alternative budget set with a linear budget (above the deductible) at the co-insurance arm’s cost sharing rate. By
contrast, the standard budget set has a kink (price increase) at $2,510 in total spending. The individual denoted by
the solid indi¤erence curve is not a¤ected by the introduction of this kink; his indi¤erence curve remains tangent to
the lower part of the budget set. The individual with the dashed indi¤erence curves consumed above the kink under
the linear budget set; with the introduction of the kink her utility is lower, and her indi¤erence curve is now tangent
to the steeper part of the budget set at the kink. With the introduction of the kink, this latter individual would
therefore decrease total spending to the level of the kink location. By extension, any individual whose indi¤erence
curve was tangent to the linear budget set at a spending level between that of the two individuals shown would
likewise decrease total spending to the level of the kink location, thereby creating “bunching” at the kink.

20

Figure 3: Bunching of annual spending around the kink

Total annual prescription drug spending on the x-axis is reported relative to the (year-speci…c) location of
the kink, which is normalized to zero. Sample uses bene…ciary-years in our baseline sample whose annual
spending is within $1,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink location. The points in the …gure display the distribution
of annual spending; each point represents the set of people that spent up to $40 above the value that is on
the x-axis, so that the …rst point represents individuals who spent between -$1,000 and -$960 from the kink,
the second point represents individuals between -$960 and -$920, and so on. We normalize the frequencies
so that they add up to one for the range of annual spending shown. N = 8; 562.

21

Figure 4: Observed and …tted bunching using the dynamic model

Figure shows the distribution of observed and predicted total annual drug spending, zooming in on spending within
$1,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink (which is normalized to 0). It reports observed and predicted spending in $20 bins,
where each point represents individuals who spend within $20 above the value on the x-axis. Frequencies in the
bottom panel are normalized to sum to 1 across the displayed range.

22

Figure 5: Observed and …tted bunching using restricted model A (“no dynamics”)

Figure shows the distribution of observed and predicted total annual drug spending, zooming in on spending within
$1,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink (which is normalized to 0). It reports observed and predicted spending in $20 bins,
where each point represents individuals who spend within $20 above the value on the x-axis. Frequencies in the
bottom panel are normalized to sum to 1 across the displayed range.

23

Figure 6: Observed and …tted bunching using restricted model B (“no discounting”)

Figure shows the distribution of observed and predicted total annual drug spending, zooming in on spending within
$1,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink (which is normalized to 0). It reports observed and predicted spending in $20 bins,
where each point represents individuals who spend within $20 above the value on the x-axis. Frequencies in the
bottom panel are normalized to sum to 1 across the displayed range.

24

Table 1: Elasticity estimates from Saez-style static, frictionless model
Counterfacutal
distribution

Exclusion
windowa

Bin sizeb

Excess massc

Elasticityd

Linear
Cubic
Linear
Linear

200
200
200
100

40
40
60
40

0.401
0.314
0.418
0.586

-0.047
-0.037
-0.049
-0.034

Table reports estimates of the implied elasticities using our adaptation of the model from Saez (2010), under alternative
measurement assumptions. We limit the analysis to the approximately 80% of our baseline sample who end the year
within $2,000 of the kink. For each plan we use equation (7) plus the plan’s cost sharing rules to translate it into an
estimate of the (plan-speci…c) parameter

. We then map

to the individual-speci…c spending elasticity with respect

to the coinsurance rate c, evaluated at the individual-speci…c end-of-year coinsurance rate c. The right-most column
reports the average estimates across all individuals. The di¤erent rows report results from di¤erent approaches to
calculating the counterfactual distribution of spending that would exist in the absence of the kink. The …rst row
shows the baseline approach, in which the counterfactual distribution was calculated by …tting a linear curve to the
pdf, using only the points to the left of -$200 and using the “exclusion window” from of $200 around the kink to
estimate the response to the kink, and a spending bin size of $40. The other rows present similar results using
di¤erent parametric …t, exclusion window, and bin size, as described.
a Exclusion window refers to the distance from the kink location within which we calculate the response to the kink.

The counterfactual density is …t using points only to the left of the exclusion window.
b Bin size refers to the spending size of bins, which is used to …t the pre-kink spending distribution.
c Excess mass is computed as a ratio. The numerator is the di¤erence between the number of people whose spending

is within the exclusion window and our counterfactual estimate of the number of people who would have spent in
this window in the absence of the kink; the denominator is our counterfactual estimate of the number of people who
would have spent in this window in the absence of the kink.
d Elasticity of spending is calculated with respect to the end-of-year cost-sharing rate

plan-speci…c estimate of

c of each individual and her

. We then report the average estimated elasticity across individuals.

25

Table 2: Elasticity estimates from the dynamic model
(Uniform) Price Reductiona

Average Annual Spending

Implied "Elasticity"b

0% (Baseline)
1.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
25.0%

1,838
1,842
1,860
1,883
1,906
1,958

-0.22
-0.24
-0.24
-0.25
-0.26

Table reports estimates of the implied elasticities using the dynamic model of Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf.
(2015). The …rst row shows predicted average annual spending under the existing budget set in the …ve plans that
constitute the baseline sample. Other rows show predicted average annual spending (and the implied elasticities) of
various uniform price reductions to these budget sets.
a “Uniform price reduction” is achieved by reducing the price (i.e. consumer coinsurance) in every arm of each plan

by the percent shown in the table.
b The implied “elasticity” is calculated by computing the ratio of the percent change in spending (relative to the

baseline) to the percent change in price (relative to the baseline).

26

Table 3: Elasticity estimates from restricted versions of the dynamic model
(Uniform) Price Reductiona

Average Annual Spending

Implied "Elasticity"b

Restricted Model A ("No dynamics")
0% (Baseline)
1.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
25.0%

1,824
1,826
1,836
1,848
1,860
1,887

-0.11
-0.13
-0.13
-0.13
-0.14

1,825
1,828
1,844
1,863
1,884
1,930

-0.16
-0.21
-0.21
-0.22
-0.23

Restricted Model B ("No discounting")
0% (Baseline)
1.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
25.0%

Table reports estimates of the implied elasticities using the restricted versions of the dynamic model (models A and
B as described in the text). The structure of each panel parallels that of Table 2.
a “Uniform price reduction” is achieved by reducing the price (i.e. consumer coinsurance) in every arm of each plan

by the percent shown in the table.
b The implied “elasticity” is calculated by computing the ratio of the percent change in spending (relative to the

baseline) to the percent change in price (relative to the baseline).

27

Appendix Table A1: Parameter estimates from the dynamic model

Parameter estimates:
Beta_0
Beta_Risk
Beta_65
δ
μ
σ
p
λlow
λhigh
Pr(λt=λlow|λt+1=λlow)
Pr(λt=λhigh|λt+1=λhigh)
Implied shares:
Overall
For age=65
For age>65

j=1

j=2

j=3

j=4

j=5

0.00
0.00
0.00

3.60
-2.44
-0.13

4.02
-2.81
1.35

-4.37
4.09
0.93

-4.39
6.17
-1.59

0.013
2.35
0.86
0.013
0.011

------------------- 0.97 ------------------3.96
2.93
4.38
1.14
1.57
0.43
0.91
0.52
0.51
0.15
0.65
0.86
0.13
0.57
0.75
------------------- 0.557 ------------------------------------- 0.565 -------------------

4.35
1.42
0.44
0.47
0.41

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.27
0.13
0.27

0.34
0.87
0.32

0.03
0.00
0.03

0.31
0.00
0.33

Other implied quantities:
d(Share)/d(Risk)
0.00
E(θ)
16

-0.37
101

-0.52
65

0.06
87

0.83
211

Implied annual expected spending:
Full insurance
11
0.25 coins. Rate
8

811
627

2,198
1,914

3,891
3,398

5,110
4,542

Top panel reports parameter point estimates (standard errors are available from the authors upon request) from the
dynamic model of Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015). Bottom panels report implied quantities based on these
parameters.

28

Appendix Table A2: Parameter estimates from restricted model A (“no dynamics”)

Parameter estimates:
Beta_0
Beta_Risk
Beta_65
δ
μ
σ
p
λlow
λhigh
Pr(λt=λlow|λt+1=λlow)
Pr(λt=λhigh|λt+1=λhigh)
Implied shares:
Overall
For age=65
For age>65

j=1

j=2

j=3

j=4

j=5

0.00
0.00
0.00

3.56
-2.39
0.01

4.03
-2.63
1.34

-4.29
6.37
-1.61

-4.66
4.10
0.85

------------------- 1.00 (Imposed) ------------------0.043
3.98
2.95
4.34
4.52
2.29
1.08
1.64
1.42
0.51
0.82
0.84
0.47
0.10
0.41
0.010
0.14
0.60
0.35
0.99
0.008
0.10
0.46
0.27
0.77
------------------- 0.611 ------------------------------------- 0.540 ------------------0.04
0.00
0.05

0.24
0.14
0.25

0.36
0.85
0.33

0.34
0.00
0.35

0.02
0.00
0.02

Other implied quantities:
d(Share)/d(Risk)
0.00
E(θ)
14

-0.36
96

-0.55
73

0.88
210

0.03
104

Implied annual expected spending:
Full insurance
8
0.25 coins. Rate
6

674
532

2,257
1,994

3,850
3,755

5,377
4,821

Table reports estimation results from restricted model A (“no dynamics”), which is described in the main text. Table
structure parallels that of Appendix Table A1.

29

Appendix Table A3: Parameter estimates from restricted model B (“no discounting”)

Parameter estimates:
Beta_0
Beta_Risk
Beta_65
δ
μ
σ
p
λlow
λhigh
Pr(λt=λlow|λt+1=λlow)
Pr(λt=λhigh|λt+1=λhigh)
Implied shares:
Overall
For age=65
For age>65

j=1

j=2

j=3

j=4

j=5

0.00
0.00
0.00

3.63
-2.49
-0.07

4.01
-2.85
1.28

-4.28
4.07
0.97

-4.36
6.27
-1.65

------------------- 1.00 (Imposed) -------------------0.015
4.02
2.94
4.43
4.32
2.34
1.24
1.55
0.32
1.39
0.86
0.96
0.46
0.49
0.39
0.012
0.14
0.63
0.90
0.49
0.010
0.12
0.52
0.75
0.41
------------------- 0.570 ------------------------------------- 0.568 ------------------0.05
0.00
0.05

0.26
0.15
0.27

0.33
0.85
0.31

0.03
0.00
0.03

0.33
0.00
0.34

Other implied quantities:
d(Share)/d(Risk)
0.00
E(θ)
15

-0.39
120

-0.52
62

0.05
89

0.86
196

Implied annual expected spending:
Full insurance
9
0.25 coins. Rate
7

891
678

2,038
1,804

4,137
3,626

5,018
4,529

Table reports estimation results from restricted model B (“no discounting”), which is described in the main text.
Table structure parallels that of Appendix Table A1.

30

