NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO CREDIT CARD COMPANIES SCREEN FOR BEHAVIORAL BIASES?
Hong Ru
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper 22360
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22360

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We thank Marina Manova at ideas42 for outstanding research assistance and the Sloan
Foundation and ideas42 for financial support. We are grateful to Vikram Jambulapati and Jialan
Wang who provided us with the analysis of the Mintel data, including credit scores. We thank
Sumit Agarwal, Justine Hastings, Paul Heidhues, Ben Keys, David Laibson, and Tarun
Ramadorai for very thoughtful comments. We also thank seminar participants at the AFA 2016
Annual Meeting, Goethe University Frankfurt, Humboldt University, INSEE, University of
Zurich, NUS, and the MIT finance brownbag lunch for very helpful feedback. Of course, all
mistakes are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Hong Ru and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Credit Card Companies Screen for Behavioral Biases?
Hong Ru and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 22360
June 2016, Revised July 2016
JEL No. G02,G1,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
We look at the supply side of the credit card market to analyze the pricing and marketing
strategies of credit card offers. First, we show that card issuers target less-educated customers
with more steeply back-loaded fees (e.g., lower introductory APRs but higher late and over-limit
fees) compared offers made to educated customers. Second, issuers use rewards programs to
screen for unobservable borrower types. Conditional on the same borrower type, cards with
rewards, such as low introductory APR programs, also have more steeply backloaded fees. In
contrast, cards with mileage programs, which are offered mainly to the most-educated consumers,
rely much less on back-loaded fees. Finally, using shocks to the credit risk of customers via
increases in state-level unemployment insurance, we show that card issuers rely more heavily on
back-loaded and hidden fees when customers are less exposed to negative cash flow shocks.
These findings are in line with the recent behavioral contract theory literature.

Hong Ru
Nanyang Technological University
Block S3-B1A-07
50 Nanyang Avenue
Singapore 639798
ruhong@ntu.edu.sg
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

1.! Introduction

Over the last three decades, the US has experienced a rapid expansion of retail financial
products, especially among middle- and lower-income households. At the same time, the
heterogeneity and complexity of the products and the terms that are offered to consumers
increased dramatically; see, for example, Merton (1992), Miller (1993), or Tufano (2003).
Recent papers by Phillipon (2012) and Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013) suggest that
these emerging trends were accompanied by increased rents for intermediaries in the
financial industry. Many policy makers are concerned that these rents come at the expense
of consumers, particularly if less financially sophisticated consumers are targeted with
especially onerous or hidden fees. For a summary of the policy implications of consumers
that are not fully rational, see Thaler and Sunstein (2008) or Campbell et al (2011).
In this paper, we aim to establish whether and how financial institutions take the
sophistication of their customers into account by examining the US credit card industry.
We document three main findings: First, credit card terms that are offered to more
financially sophisticated consumers differ significantly from those offered to
unsophisticated customers, where sophistication is measured as educational attainment,
holding other observable household characteristics constant.

1

Less-sophisticated

households are much more likely to be offered back-loaded or hidden fee structures, such
as low introductory (or teaser) rates. However, after the introductory period, these cards
have higher rates, late fees and over-limit fees. In contrast, cards that are offered to

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1 !We

will discuss these findings in the context of behavioral contract theory models in which a lack of
financial literacy is often modeled as the inability to understand contract terms, e.g., Gabaix and Laibson
(2007), or to forecast one’s own demand for credit, e.g., Heidhues and Koszegi (2010) or Grubb (2010). !

sophisticated customers rely much less on back-loaded fees and instead have higher upfront
fees, such as annual fees. We also show that the worse the credit terms, the more likely
they are to appear either in small font or on the last pages of the offer letter. Similarly, offer
letters with back-loaded terms contain more photos and less text.
Second, we find that even when holding constant the observable characteristics of
customers, card issuers attempt to screen households based on unobservable characteristics
by offering a menu of cards with varying degrees of back-loaded fees and different rewards
programs. Cards with rewards programs that appeal to less-sophisticated consumers also
have more back-loaded terms. While cards with miles programs that appeal mainly to
sophisticated consumers have more front-loaded fees.
This explicit targeting of less-sophisticated households with more back-loaded or
shrouded credit terms is concerning because a number of prior studies on the demand side
of the credit card industry have shown that credit card users suffer when they choose these
contracts. For example, Agarwal et al (2008) and (2015) show that, on average, households
that choose cards with back-loaded terms are subject to higher fees and carry higher
balances. In light of this evidence, our results suggest that less-sophisticated consumers are
more likely to bear the costs of increased credit term complexity.
Third, we document an important trade-off between borrower sophistication and credit
risk that has not been previously explored in the literature. A lending strategy that selects
for less-sophisticated customers via back-loaded or shrouded attributes might increase
rents from these consumers over the short run, but it might also expose the lender to higher
credit risk over the long run if these customers do not understand the true cost of credit.
We find that banks proactively increase their reliance on back-loaded terms when the credit

risk of consumers decreases. Using a difference-in-difference estimator, we show that
when states increase unemployment insurance (UI), which protects and stabilizes
households’ cash flows on the downside, banks increase their use of back-loaded fees and
introductory APR (teaser) offers.
The credit card industry is an ideal environment in which to analyze how financial
institutions target more (or less) sophisticated consumer groups because the majority of
credit cards are sold via pre-approved credit card solicitations sent by mail.2 This means
that the same information that customers receive is observable to the researcher once we
obtain the card solicitations . 3 We use detailed information from Compremedia on the
almost one million individual credit card offers that were sent to a set of representative
households in the US between 1999 and 2011. 4 Compremedia selects the sample of
households to mirror the information credit card issuers observe when targeting customers.
These data allows us to observe the supply side of the credit card market, i.e., the types of
offers that customers receive. Using complete PDF versions of the actual offer letters, we
created algorithms to extract the card information and features of the offer. We classify the
“hard” information in the offers such as the APRs, fees, and reward programs. However,
we also observe what we call the “soft” features of the offers, for example, the use of

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
2

During our sample period, the majority of applications were solicited via mailers. Only in the last five years
have online applications become predominant. Therefore, we focus on the period before 2008. We repeated
the analyses using data up to Jan 2016, and the results are qualitatively unchanged.
3
For almost all other retail financial products, the customer’s choice is intermediated by sales agents or
advisors, for example, insurance brokers and financial advisors. This process makes it difficult to observe the
actual information consumers receive, as these agents might alter the information or even product features in
a way that is unobservable to the researcher.
4
Compremedia collects monthly information on all credit card mailers sent to a set of approximately 4000
representative households that work with Compremedia across the US. These households provide a
representative sample of US credit card owners. The goal of the data collection is to help card issuers monitor
each other’s offers and product innovations.

photos, color, font size, and whether information about an offer is provided at the beginning
or the end of the letter.5
A typical credit card in the US combines a broad set of complex features that constitute
a three-part tariff: a regular APR (annual percentage rate) is often combined with a low
introductory APR (that is, a lower rate for a limited time), very high late and over-limit
fees, and (low) annual fees. Approximately 50% of cards also include a rewards program,
such as cash back, points, or airline miles.
We first provide evidence that credit card issuers target unsophisticated customers with
more back-loaded or hidden card features than sophisticated ones, holding all other
observable characteristics constant. Our measure of sophistication is the educational
attainment of a household. The education levels are some high school, high school, some
college, college education, and more than college.6 We regress different card features on
dummies for educational attainment while controlling for income level, age, gender, and
marital status, as well as for the monthly fed funds rate and state-level fixed effects. Lower
educational attainment is correlated with higher late fees, higher over-limit fees and higher
default APRs, but these customers are more likely to receive low introductory APR offers
and no annual fees. The reverse is true for sophisticated consumers. We show that these
results hold even if we control for bank fixed effects in the regressions. This means that
these differences in targeting strategies are not a cross-bank phenomenon where different
banks target different customer groups, as the pattern holds even within a given bank.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
5

As financial institutions in the US have to follow TILA (Truth in Lending Act) rules, all the information
concerning the card must be included in the pre-approved mailer. In addition, the mandatory Schumer box
discloses most of the main card features included in the letter. However, issuers can choose how they display
the information that they highlight in the main text.!
6!For a subset of observations, we can also control for FICO scores.!

Since credit card terms are not offered to customers one by one but as a bundle, we
carefully explore the correlation structure of terms across cards. We find strong positive
correlations among all back-loaded card features (late fees, over-limit fees, default APRs
and low introductory APRs), and these features are negatively correlated with front-loaded
card features (annual fees and regular APR). A principal component analysis allows us to
sort cards into more forward- or back-loaded fee structures. We find that the first principal
component loads positively on all the back-loaded terms and negatively on front-loaded
ones, again suggesting that banks consistently sort cards into front- versus back-loaded
categories. We then regress the loading of each card on the first principal component on
our sophistication measure, controlling for personal characteristics. We find that consistent
with prior results, less-sophisticated households are more likely to receive card offers that
offer a bundle of back-loaded characteristics.
To explore the relationships between individual card features, we also regress frontloaded features, such as the regular APR or the annual fee, on the back-loaded fees, e.g.,
late fees, and an interaction between late fees and a dummy for the sophistication level of
the household. The results show that the trade-off between back- and front-loaded card
features is much steeper for less-sophisticated households. In other words, the less
sophisticated the household, the more back-loaded are the credit terms that are offered to
them. We repeat this analysis for the remaining back- and front-loaded card features.
To understand whether these different card features actually affect the pricing of the
cards, we follow the approach in Ausubel (1991) and use changes in the federal funds rate
as shocks to the banks’ cost of funding. This allows us to analyze which card features banks
use to pass these costs on to consumers. If issuers never expected to collect late fees or

over-limit fees from (unsophisticated) customers, we would not expect them to change
these card features. However, we see that when the FFR increases, credit cards that target
less-sophisticated consumers, respond strongly in their late fees and over-limit fees but not
in their upfront fees (regular APR and annual fees). In contrast, the regular APRs and
annual fees of cards offered to sophisticated consumers are more sensitive to a FFR
increase than are the back-loaded terms. This pattern supports our prior finding that the
pricing of the first set of cards is conducted via back-loaded fees, while cards offered to
sophisticated consumers are priced via the regular APR.
A second important dimension of the credit card market is that even conditional on
borrowers’ observable characteristics, they might differ in their sophistication along ex
ante unobservable dimensions. Our data allows us to observe the menu of card offers that
issuers send to the same household in order to screen for unobservable borrower types.
This means we can compare the pricing of different cards while holding constant the
borrower fixed effect. It appears that issuers use rewards programs to screen for
unobservable differences between borrowers. We show that cards that have rewards
programs, such as low introductory APRs, cash back or points, rely more on back-loaded
pricing terms such as lower regular APR and higher late and over limit fees. In contrast,
cards with airline miles programs, which are mainly offered to the most educated groups
in the population (less than 9% of cards offer airline miles), have significantly higher
regular APRs and often carry an annual fee, but they have low late fees and over-limit fees.
The results of these screening regressions hold even if we control for bank fixed effects,
which means that two credit cards offered by the same issuer show these differences in
pricing strategy. These findings suggest that card issuers try to use different rewards

programs to separate more-sophisticated from less-sophisticated borrowers. As moresophisticated borrowers might be able to avoid back-loaded fees, it is not in the interest of
the card issuers to offer them features such as low introductory teaser rates.
Finally, we show that banks seem to understand that reliance on back-loaded or
shrouded features can affect the credit risk of their borrower pool because it changes which
customers take up these credit cards. If borrowers do not understand all the credit terms or
mistakenly believe that they will never incur the back-loaded fees, these pricing strategies
could attract customers who cannot afford the credit cards that are offered and who then
default when the fees come due. This risk creates an endogenous limit to how heavily
lenders can rely on these strategies.
To test whether banks proactively take this effect into account, we look at exogenous
shocks to customer creditworthiness, in particular, changes in state-level unemployment
insurance (UI) in the US over the last decade.7 UI has increased in a staggered fashion
across several US states over the last decade. These changes provide higher levels of
unemployment insurance and longer UI benefits periods. By reducing the impact on
consumer cash flows in the event of negative shocks, increases in UI also reduce a lender’s
exposure to one of the largest negative economic shocks that customers can experience.
This policy change allows us to use a standard difference-in-difference estimator to regress
changes in card features on UI changes across states. Our results show that these shocks to
borrowers indeed affect the willingness of card issuers to rely on back-loaded and shrouded
features. We find that increases in UI levels lead to an increase in the fraction of offers
with low intro APRs and other reward programs. However, we also see a significant
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
7

We follow Agrawal and Matsa (2013) in using changes in the state-level unemployment insurance limits
as a source of variation in employee risk exposure.

increase in late fees and default APRs. Interestingly, we also find that when the UI level
increases, offer letters use more colors and move back-loaded features to the back of the
letter. Taken together, these results suggest that credit card companies realize that there is
an inherent trade-off in the use of back-loaded features in credit card offers: They might
induce customers to take on more (expensive) credit, but at the same time, they expose the
lender to greater risk, if those consumers do not anticipate the true cost of credit.
Our results are in line with the predictions of several recent behavioral models of the
credit card market.8 These models suggest that the three-part tariff we see in the credit card
market might be optimal if customers do not understand their actual cost of credit. These
consumers will demand credit as if they were facing the low APRs but not the back-loaded
fees. A rational consumer who understands the full cost of credit would instead reduce
borrowing to avoid late fees, but this practice is not optimal for card issuers because it
reduces the infra-marginal rents they can extract. 9 The mistakes consumers make in
estimating their costs of credit can be due to misunderstandings about either the contract
(myopia) or their own demand (self-control). A prominent example of the former is the
model by Gabaix and Laibson (2006) on shrouded attributes. It suggests that companies
can attract myopic consumers by offering low base prices or other enticing features but
break even by charging high prices for hidden, add-on features.10 Heidhues and Koszegi
(2010, 2015) provide a micro foundation for these contracts if borrowers have self-control
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
8

For a detailed overview of the theoretical models, see for example, DellaVigna (2009), Koszegi (2013) or
Heidhues and Koszegi (2015).
9
Standard adverse selection models with nonlinear pricing a la Mussa and Rosen (1978) or Maskin and Riley
(1984) predict that the last unit of consumption should be priced at marginal cost so that the highest demand
consumer will pay the lowest marginal price. For a discussion of these points, see Grubb (2015).
10
Carlin (2013) suggests a related model where heightened product complexity increases the market power
of financial institutions because it prevents some consumers from becoming knowledgeable about prices.
Here, complexity works as a negative externality on all customers rather than being targeted at particular
subsets of the population.

issues but naively underestimate the likelihood of being tempted in the future.11 Grubb
(2010) derives very similar results for consumers with overoptimistic evaluations of how
well they can forecast the variance of their future demand.
Our results are also consistent with recent papers on salience, see for example Bordalo
et al (2013, 2016), which suggest that consumers overweigh the most salient features of a
product and try to maximize the quality-price ratio of the goods they purchase. This can
lead to “quality salient equilibria” where firms compete by differentiating themselves along
a quality dimension rather than price. In our context of the credit card market, this could
be interpreted as customers viewing reward programs as the perceived quality dimension
of a credit card choice.
Independent of the specific form of mistake, these models provide a number of
common predictions that are confirmed by our findings. First, when consumers are naïve,
the prices of front-loaded or salient card features are driven down, while the prices of
features that consumers do not focus on are very high (e.g., late fees and over-limit fees).
This leads to participation distortion because consumers take on more credit than they
rationally should. Conversely, in markets with predominantly sophisticated consumers, we
do not expect to find pricing below marginal cost because these consumers can see through
add-on pricing and can avoid costly back-loaded features. Second, in a competitive market
with both naïve and sophisticated agents where firms cannot ex ante separate consumers,
there is cross-subsidy from naïve to more-sophisticated agents. Ideally, firms would find it
optimal to reduce this subsidy to capture these rents themselves.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
11

We do not aim to differentiate myopia from present bias, as the two traits can be intimately linked for the
purpose of credit card issuers. Borrowers who have present bias might be happy to not be confronted with
late fees, even if they are not naïve about the contract features. Alternatively, hiding certain features of the
card might aggravate a consumer’s time inconsistency.

We do not want to rule out that it might not be possible to write dynamic adverse
selection models with rational agents that can explain our set of results. However, there are
a number of findings that seem challenging to explain in a purely rational framework. First,
one could imagine consumers who value a back-loaded fee structure if they are very credit
constrained today but expect to be much less constrained in the future. As a result, these
borrowers would be willing to trade a very low interest today for a high interest in the
future.12 However, several findings in our data do not support this interpretation: On the
one hand, the steep non-linearity of late fees seems to run counter to the idea that the late
fees are an interest rate because they do not take into account the actual balance that the
borrower carries. On the other hand, in a world where rational consumers are looking for
cards that allow them to shift their interest payments to the future, late fees and back-loaded
fees should be very prominent in contracts because they represent a service that consumers
are selecting.13 This is not what we find: fees are always in printed in small fonts on the
last page of the offer letter.
Second, an alternative rational model could be one where very price-sensitive and lowrisk borrowers signal their (high) type to the bank by selecting contracts with low APRs
but very high back-loaded penalty rates. The expectation on both sides would be that the
borrower will never incur any late fees and always pay on time, on the equilibrium path.
However, this interpretation is also difficult to reconcile with our findings. First, as before,
we would expect penalty rates in such a situation to be prominently displayed in the

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12

One caveat for such a model would be that banks have to get their timing just right, as highly credit
constrained borrowers typically have high default propensities such that the back-loaded fees coincide with
the borrower’s ability to pay.
13
One could argue that even a rational agent would not look at the future fees because they intend to default
if fees are too high. This is not an equilibrium because banks would not be able to break even.

contract because they would be desirable features of the card. Second, we show that credit
cards with rewards that have particularly steep back-loaded fees react very strongly in the
size of the late fees (but not the regular APRs) when there is a shock to the bank's cost of
capital. If banks were never expecting to be paid via late fees, funding shocks should not
affect them. Finally, we draw on several papers that have looked at the usage behavior of
credit cards; see, for example, Agrawal et al (2008), which finds that borrowers who take
up credit cards with high late fees indeed often pay them.14 Thus, this rational signaling
model is difficult to reconcile with our difference-in-difference results using UI changes.
If consumers use high late fees to signal their price sensitivity and ability to manage credit,
this should not change when their credit risk is reduced.15
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a detailed literature
review. In section 3, we present the data used in the study, the variables we constructed for
the paper and the design of the sample. Section 4 summarizes the results for how credit
card companies target consumers, while section 5 focuses on credit card screening. In
section 6, we describe our difference-in-difference analysis using unemployment insurance
shocks to borrower credit risk. Section 7 concludes.

2. Literature Review
By focusing on the supply side of credit, our paper complements a growing
literature in household finance on the demand side of the credit card market and credit card
usage. Agarwal et al (2008) analyze more than 4 million credit card transactions to show
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14

A related behavioral version of this argument suggests that borrowers demand high late fees to prevent
themselves from over-spending or falling behind on card payments; see, for example, DelaVigna and
Malmendier (2004). In this case, we would also expect late fees to be prominently featured in the offer letter.
15
We thank Michael Grubb for alerting us to this argument.

that customers, on average, pay significant fees (late payment fees and penalties) of
approximately $14 per month, which does not include interest payments. These results
confirm that fees indeed have a significant bite and that customers are not able to optimally
avoid all the negative features of their cards. That paper also shows that customers seem to
learn to reduce fees over time. However, this learning is relatively slow, as payments fall
by approximately 75 percent after four years. Using a similar data set, Gross and Souleles
(2000) show that consumers respond strongly to increases in their credit limits, especially
to interest rate changes such as low introductory teaser rates. The long-run debt to interest
rate elasticity is approximately -1.3, where more than one-half reflects net increases in total
borrowing (rather than balance transfers). In related work, Agarwal et al (2010) document
that consumers who respond to inferior lender offers have poorer credit characteristics ex
ante and default more often ex post. Similarly, Agarwal et al (2009) show that over the
lifecycle, middle-aged households obtain the best credit terms, while older customers select
worse credit terms. The authors conjecture that deterioration in cognitive ability could
explain why older people choose worse terms. 16 These papers provide important
confirmation that credit cards with disadvantageous features are being taken up and have a
significant impact on the borrower’s cost of capital. Similarly, in the context of health club
memberships, DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004) provide convincing evidence that
consumers systematically choose contracts that lead them to overpay per gym visit because
they are overconfident about their actual health club attendance.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16

Hastings and Mitchell (2011) use a large-scale, nationally representative field survey from Chile to directly
relate impatience and financial literacy to poor financial decisions in a savings context. The results show that
impatience is a strong predictor of wealth. Financial literacy is also correlated with wealth, although it appears
to be a weaker predictor of sensitivity to framing in investment decisions. Agarwal et al (2016) show similar
demand responses to credit card contracts.

Our study is related to a number of papers documenting considerable heterogeneity
in the pricing of retail financial products, even in the face of increasing competition. For
example, the seminal paper by Ausubel (1991) documents that credit card companies have
very low pass-through rates for changes in their cost of capital. Hortacu and Syverson
(2004) and Bergstresser et al (2009) show that wide dispersion in fees in the mutual fund
industry is related to changes in the heterogeneity of the customer base. More recently, Sun
(2014) and Celerier and Vallee (2014) show that even with the introduction of increased
competition, price dispersion does not decrease and product complexity might increase.
Similarly, Hastings, Hortacsu and Syverson (2012) look at the introduction of individual
savings accounts in Mexico and show that firms that invested more heavily in advertising
had both high prices and larger market shares because customers seem to be insufficiently
price sensitive. Similarly, Gurun, Matvos and Seru (2016) show that areas with large house
price increases and expanding mortgage origination saw increases in marketing expenses
and marketing solicitations. Similarly, a recent paper by Agarwal et al (2016) follows our
methodology and analyzes the back-ward loading of mortgage contracts in areas with
increased banking competition. These results suggest that firms compete on nonfinancial
dimensions, such as advertising, to substitute for price competition.
Finally, a large literature in economics and marketing has looked at how individuals
respond to how product features are displayed when choosing complex contracts, such as
retail financial products, medical insurance contracts or even cell phone plans. For
example, Lohse (1997) demonstrates in an eye-tracking study that color Yellow Pages ads
are viewed longer and more often than black-and-white ads. Similarly, Lohse and Rosen
(2001) suggest that the use of colors, photos or graphics increases the perceived quality of

the products being advertised and enhances the credibility of the claims made about the
products compared with non-color advertisements. Heitman et al (2014) document that
how prices and add-on features are displayed significantly affects how well people choose
among products. Besheres, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2010) show that even when
subjects are presented with information about mutual funds that is very transparent and
easy to digest, they select dominated savings vehicles. Bertrand et al (2010) show that the
advertising content can indeed have a significant impact on product take-up and even
willingness to pay. They set up a field experiment as part of a consumer lender’s direct
mailing campaign in South Africa and found that advertising content that appeals to
emotions (such as a woman’s face versus a man’s) or more simply displayed choices leads
people to accept much more expensive credit products. We build on this earlier literature
by analyzing whether firms deliberately incorporate these behavioral biases when
designing credit card offers.
Han, Keys and Li (2013) use a very similar data set but focus on a complementary
topic. The authors use Compremedia data between 2007 and 2011 to document the large
expansion in the supply of credit card debt in the period leading up to the financial crisis
and after the crisis. The results show that the expansion prior to crisis was particularly large
for consumers with medium credit scores rather than sub-prime customers. In addition,
they show that even customers who have previously declared bankruptcy have a high
likelihood of receiving offers, but these offers are more restrictive.

3. Data and Summary Statistics
3.1. Data Description

We use a comprehensive dataset from Mintel (also known as Compremedia) that
contains information on the types of credit card offers that customer with different
characteristics receive in the US. These data are based on a monthly consumer panel of
more than 4000 households, which are paid to collect all direct credit card mailers and send
the originals to Mintel. For this data collection effort, Mintel selects households based on
their demographic and economic characteristics in order to create a representative sample
of the population of US credit card holders. For each household, Mintel collects detailed
demographic information, including the age and education of the head of the household,
household income, household composition, family status, and zip code. Each month,
Mintel collects all credit solicitation mailers received by the household, such as credit
cards, home equity loans and mortgage offers. We only observe offers to the entire
household, usually to the head of the household.
After gathering the physical credit card offers from the households, Mintel
manually scans the mailers to produce PDF versions and electronically enters some key
information, which is usually contained in the Schumer box: regular purchase APRs,
balance transfer APRs, cash advance APRs, default APRs, credit limits, annual fees, late
fees (penalties), over-limit fees, etc. We manually check the quality of the dataset and find
that all the variables are adequately collected, except default APRs, which have many
missing values.
Our data covers the period from March 1999 to February 2011. However, we also
repeated our analysis excluding the post-2007 data to abstract from the impact of the
financial crisis and the CARD Act. The results are unchanged. For each month, there are
approximately 4,000 households and 7,000 credit card mail campaigns, on average. In total,

there are 1,014,768 mail campaigns, which consist of 168,312 different credit card offers.
Credit card companies usually issue the same offer to many households at the same time.
We use OCR (optical character recognition) software and our own extraction algorithms
to confirm the quality of the Mintel data. We find that most variables are coded accurately.
One exception is the default APR, which seems to have many missing entries.
We also create a second data set based on the Mintel information by using all the
scanned pages of the credit card offers. These allow us to analyze the actual structure and
design of the offer, e.g., where information about the card is located on the mailers.
However, Mintel only keeps scanned images of approximately 80% of the credit card offers
(approximately 803,285 out of the 1,014,768 scanned credit card offers are complete).
Mailers are more likely to be missing in the first two years of the sample, and there are also
later offers with randomly missing images. However, we verify that, with the exception of
the time trend, the missing observations do not seem to have any observables biases.
We extract information on reward programs and soft information on the design of
the mailer itself from these scanned images. First, we use OCR (Optical character
recognition) software to transfer all the images into Word documents. The OCR software
we use is OmniPage Professional version 18.0, a leading document imaging software that
is accurate and fast. The OCR software separates the characters and graphics/background
patterns from the original documents (i.e., the scanned credit card offers), recombines them
based on original digital documents’ design and turns them into editable Word documents.
Then, we use a keyword searching algorithm to search for the reward programs in each
offer. We are able to identify 8 commonly used reward programs: cash back, points, airline

mileage, car rental insurance, purchase protection, warranty protection, travel insurance,
and zero introductory APRs.
Moreover, because we keep the formatting information for each character in the
offer, we can also record the format design of these reward programs. Using Word in VBA,
we are able to identify the fonts. We collect the size and color of each reward program
when they were mentioned in the offer letter, as well as whether they were highlighted with
bold or italic text. Additionally, we count the number and size of the pictures on each page.
To check the quality of the OCR and keyword searching algorithm, we randomly select
some offers and manually check the accuracy, which is over 90%. As we previously
mentioned, there are some values for default APRs missing from Mintel’s hand-collected
database. To address this missing data, we use the keyword searching algorithm to search
for the default APRs stated in the offers. Usually, the Schumer box contains the default
APRs, which is sometimes called the penalty APR. We extract default APRs from the
scanned images of all credit card offers using our algorithm and compare them to the rates
collected by Mintel. The accuracy of our algorithm is approximately 98%. In this way, we
are nearly able to complete the default APRs data. Because only 80% of the sample
includes the scanned offers, our variables for reward programs and format are limited to
this 80% sample.

3.2. Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 describes the summary statistics of the main variables used in the paper. In
Table 1, the first twelve variables are based on our full sample of 1,014,768 mail offers
from Mintel. APR is the regular purchase APR listed in the credit card offer. If the regular

APR is a range, we pick the midpoint as the APR. The mean APR of the 982,767 total
mailings received by consumers is 12.65%. The APRs for balance transfer has a mean of
11.33% and standard deviation of 3.34%. The cash advance APR has a mean of 19.89%
and the standard deviation is 4.28%. For the default APR, the mean is much higher at
26.51%, which is higher than all other APRs. The high default APRs is not surprising
because it is conditional on the borrower being more than 60 days late. The default APR
may be applied to all outstanding balances of a credit card if a consumer pays the monthly
bill late. All these APRs are compounded monthly.

Intro_APR_regular, Intro_APR_balance and Intro_APR_cash are dummies indicating
whether the offer has 0% introductory APR (or very low introductory APR) for regular
purchases, balance transfers and cash advances, respectively. Max Card limit is the natural
log of the maximum credit card limit stated in the offers. We only have 526,949
observations for Max Card limit because many credit card offers do not specify a limit,
especially after 2008.
Credit cards also have a number of different fee types; the dimensions that we
observe in the data are the annual, late, and over-limit fees. Annual fees on average are
$12.29 with a standard deviation of 31.99. The distribution of annual fees in our sample is
quite skewed: 81.5% of the mailed offers have no annual fee, and the maximum annual fee
is $500. Typically, cards that have annual fees offer mileage programs and other expensive
value-added services. A late fee is the onetime charge incurred when the consumer does
not pay at least the minimum monthly payment by the due date. This is a dollar value rather
than a rate. In our sample, late fee has a mean of $33.83, a standard deviation of 6.17, and

a max of $85. Its distribution is much less skewed than that of the annual fee.
Approximately 90% of credit card offers have late fees ranging from $29 to $39. This fixed
monthly fee comes due if the minimum payment has not been made, independent of the
size of the balance. Thus, this fee can be especially high for small balances.
Finally, an over-limit fee is charged when the consumers’ credit card balance goes
over the card limit. The mean of over-limit fee is $29.74 with a standard deviation of
$10.16. The distribution of the over-limit fee is also concentrated: approximately 87% of
the cards have over-limit fees ranging from $29 to $39. Although credit card companies
usually charge no annual fee, they charge much more for late payments and over
borrowing.
The remaining variables in Table 1 are based on the 80% sample of mail campaigns
for which we have scanned images of the credit card offers. “Size” is the maximum size of
the reward programs minus the average size of all characters on every page of each credit
card offer. For example, if “cash back” appears in the offer 3 times, we pick the largest
one. “Size” equals this largest number minus the average size of all characters on the same
page. The size is drawn directly from Word document. The variable “Size” has a mean of
4.71 mean and a standard deviation of 5.49. The maximum value of Size is 143.63 because
some offers use very large characters to highlight reward programs. The 90th percentile of
variable Size is 10.99.

We use this relative size measurement because credit card

companies tend to use larger characters to emphasize the paragraphs that describe the
reward programs compared to the nearby paragraphs. The size differences between them
should be the measure highlighted. Moreover, “Color” is a dummy indicating whether the
reward programs in the offer highlighted in color rather than in black and white. We focus

on the characters describing the reward programs rather than on the entire offer because
most credit card offers use some color, especially later in the study period.17 “Bold” is a
dummy indicating whether the offer used bold to highlight its reward programs.
“Picture” is the file size of each page of the offer, which measures how many or
how “fancy” the pictures in the offer are. We do not use an actual count of the pictures or
the size of the pictures because our algorithm considers the background of the page as a
big picture (usually it is just a large, plain color picture). Using the storage size of each
Word document, we can approximate the complexity of the page design. Other features,
such as characters, also increase file size. However, pictures in Word documents usually
take most of the file storage. Thus, we think that file size is a good measure of pictures in
the credit card offers. The variable “Picture” is the file size, and the unit is megabytes
(MB). The mean of “Picture” is 0.23 MB with a 0.26 MB standard deviation.
Finally, we are able to code the reward programs based on the PDF images. We
define “Reward” as the number of reward programs, CASH, POINT and Car rental
insurance, included in each offer. We choose these three reward programs because they are
similar and most commonly used. CASH, POINT, MILE, Carrental, Purchaseprct are
dummies indicating whether the offer includes these reward programs. Finally, FFR is the
monthly average federal fund rate from January 1999 to December 2011. We merge FFR
into our credit card dataset for each month.

3.3 Credit Card Design

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17

To construct formatting variables, such as Size, Color, and Bold, we focus on the reward programs fonts,
which include cash back, points, mileage, car rental insurance, purchase protection, and low intro APR
programs.

Table 2 summarizes the physical design of the credit card offers to document how
and where certain features of the card are displayed in the letter. All credit card offers state
late fees, default APRs, over-limit fees, and annual fees because their disclosure in the
Schumer box is mandated. However, only 5.8% of the credit card offers mention late fees
on the first page; 4.97% mention default APRs on the first page, and 6.96% mention overlimit fees on the first page. Not surprisingly, credit card offers usually do not mention fees,
especially those that typically are back-loaded on the first page. On the other hand, 79.28%
of the credit card offers include annual fee information on the first page. However, as we
will document below, annual fees are usually associated with cards that are offered to moreeducated, higher-income customers. Similarly, reward programs are usually mentioned in
the first page of the offers; 100% of cash back and mileage programs are mentioned in the
first page. For point reward, car rental insurance, and zero introductory APRs, the
likelihood of appearing on the first page is 93.51%, 80.48%, and 91.04%, respectively.
Panel B of Table 2 compares the font size of the credit card terms conditional on
whether they are mentioned on the first page. Late, over-limit, and annual fees are lower if
they are mentioned on the first page of the offer than if they are mentioned on the back of
the offer. Again, it is not surprising that issuers would highlight the features they perceive
as very competitive.
Table 3 provides a correlation matrix for the different reward programs, as indicated
along the vertical and horizontal axes. The numbers are the percentage of credit card offers
with both reward programs. For example, 6.30% of the credit card offers have both cash
back and point reward programs. We see that there is little overlap among reward
programs. Mileage programs, for instance, are not usually offered with cash back or points

programs. Only 1.15% of cards have for example both mileage and cash back programs.
Similarly, mileage programs are rarely offered with other reward programs or zero APRs.
However, more than 50% of cards with airline miles carry an annual fee. In contrast, cards
with cash back, points or zero APRs are almost never combined with annual fees.

4. Customer Characteristics and Credit Card Features
We start by analyzing how the offer features vary with the observable
characteristics of the customers. In other words, how do credit card companies target their
offers to customer types. The characteristics we observe in Mintel for people receiving
these offers parallels the information that banks obtain by buying mailing lists from
gatekeepers or other firms that sell consumer data. Each observation in our data set is an
offer sent to a specific consumer, where consumers stand for a bundle of characteristics.
Because clients stay in the data set for only a limited time (they usually do not work for
Mintel over many years) we follow not individuals but “cells” that can be thought of as
bundles of characteristics. For example, we can observe the types of offers that a typical
household in a middle-income group or a certain educational level receives over time or
from different issuers. For each cell, we have several people with the same characteristics
in the sample who provide their information, and we are thus able to estimate their typical
offer structure.
In Table 4, we run a simple hedonic regression model of card features, such as
APRs, late fee, or reward program, on customer characteristics. The characteristics of
interest to us are the education levels of customers, which are measured as six distinct
educational achievement dummies ranging from some high school to completed graduate

school. We also consider nine income groups (annual household income) ranging from less
than $15,000 to over $200,000. In these regressions, we also control for age group fixed
effects of the customer, state fixed effect, dummies for household composition and credit
card company fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the demographic cell, which is
constructed by state, age, income, education and household composition.
In Column (1) of Table 4, we start with the regular purchase APR as the dependent
variable and report the coefficients on the education and income bins. The results show
that the regular APR decreases significantly for higher-income groups, and the results are
relatively monotonically increasing with income. The magnitude of the effect is quite large.
Between the lowest and the fourth-highest income groups, the difference in mean APR is
almost 0.607 percentage points, which is a significant difference. The relationship between
APR and income drop off a little for the three highest income groups, but we show that
these groups also have different product features. In contrast, there is no significant
relationship between the regular APR and education. The estimated coefficients are all
close to zero and insignificant. We re-estimate the regression for the APRs on balance
transfers and cash withdrawals and obtain very similar results; these regressions are not
reported but can be obtained from the authors. These results intuitively suggest that higherincome customers have lower credit risk and thus enjoy lower costs of capital.
Interestingly, this is not true for more-educated customers, suggesting that people of similar
educational achievement might vary considerably in their income and, thus, in their credit
worthiness.
Interestingly, we find that late fees and default APRs increase significantly with
customer income but drop with higher educational attainment. For example, the difference

in the default APRs of the lowest and highest income groups is approximately 0.543
percentage points. Thus, customers with higher incomes actually face higher default
interest rates than those with lower incomes. The same pattern holds for late fees. In
contrast, customers with more education receive card offers that have smaller late fees,
lower default APRs, and lower over-limit fees. On the other hand, in Column (5), frontloaded annual fees are significantly higher for households with more education. These
results are a first indication that interest rates and fees are set not just with an eye toward
credit risk but also toward the sophistication of the customer.
In a next step, we look at how reward programs are offered to customers. In Column
(6), the dependent variable is a dummy that equals one if the credit card offer contains a
cash back program. We see that there is a strong positive correlation with income; between
the highest and lowest income groups, there is a 4 percent difference in the presence of a
cash back program. This difference is economically substantive because only 21 percent
of card offers contain a cash back program. In contrast, we do not see any relationship
between education and the likelihood of receiving a credit card offer with a cash back
program. In Column (7), we see a very similar result for points programs. Again, there is a
statistically and economically significant increase in the likelihood of receiving an offer
with a points program for households at higher income levels. However, there is weak
relationship with education.
We observe a very different relationship when looking at miles programs. In
Column (8), we show that the likelihood of receiving a card offer with a miles program
increases significantly with the education level of the household. Households in the second
to last highest income group are more than six percent more likely to receive an offer with

a miles program compared to a household in a the lowest educational bin. Because only
eight percent of credit card offers include a miles program, education seems to be a very
important dimension in receiving miles programs. We also see that miles programs increase
with the income level of the customer. Finally, we look at low introductory APR offers.
These usually expire after a few months (customarily after 6 to 12 months), and a higher
interest rate then applies. In Column (9), we see that introductory APR programs are
predominantly offered to less-educated or lower-income customers. A similar relationship
holds for introductory APR rates on balance transfers.
In Table 4, Column (10), Format is the first principal component of reward
programs' font size, colors used, bold text and picture size in the credit card offers. We
show that more-educated households or high-income households can obtain more
elaborately designed credit card offers, which usually use larger fonts, more colors, more
bold text, and more pictures to emphasize the reward programs.
Finally, we create a combined measure of how back-loaded a card is overall by
calculating the first principal component of the card terms, including regular APR, overlimit fees, late fees, zero introductory APR dummy, and annual fee. The results are
presented in Appendix Table A2. The first principal component loads very positively on
front-loaded features, such as annual fees and APR, and negatively on back-loaded fees,
such as late fees and over-limit fees. When we estimate a hedonic regression on this
combined measure that we called Backward. In column (11), we see the same very
significant pattern: back-loadedness decreases significantly with the education level.
Interestingly, the same is not true for income. In fact, richer people tend to receive more
back-loaded card terms (controlling for education).

Taken together, these results suggest that different reward programs are used to
target different customers groups. Introductory APR offers are primarily offered to lesseducated and poor clients. In contrast, points and cash back programs are offered to richer
customers independent of their educational level. Finally, miles is the only reward program
that is predominately targeted to richer and, importantly, more-educated customers. We
plot the coefficients from Table 4 in Figures 1 and 2 to clarify the patterns. Figure 1 plots
the estimated coefficients of education on credit card terms and reward programs. Figure
2 plots the estimated coefficients of income on credit card terms and reward programs.
Robustness Check: One dimension that we do not have in our data is the FICO score
for individual borrower, since Mintel is not allowed to provide credit card information to
individuals. To analyze the role of FICO scores for out analysis, we obtained Mintel data
via the CFPB. 18. While the data set available at the CFPB covers a shorter time period than
ours (starting in 2007), they have the advantage of including FICO scores. The idea it to
see whether the pricing relationships documented in our paper differ significantly when
including FICO score. For this purpose, we repeat our waterfall regressions of card features
on customer characteristics, adding FICO scores as an additional explanatory variable.
Adding the FICO scores does not add additional explanatory power to the regression. The
adjusted R-squared of the regressions are unchanged, and none of the coefficients on other
RHS variables change when including the FICO scores. Overall, it appears that the
dimensions spanned by the FICO scores are orthogonal to the other observable
characteristics used in the paper. These results alleviate concerns that we are missing an
important, and un-spanned dimension of customer characteristics.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

18!We!thank!Jialan!Wang!at!the!CFPB!for!making!this!data!available!to!us,!and!VIkram!Jialabuti!for!

running!the!analysis!for!us.!

5. Screening with Different Credit Card Offers
5.1. Trade-offs between card features
We now explore the menu of credit card contracts that a consumer with a given set
of characteristics is offered. In particular, we want to understand how issuers trade-off
front-loaded terms, such as regular APR and annual fees, with back-loaded terms, such as
late fees. In Table 5, we regress regular APRs on late fees; we also control for the fed fund
rate (FFR) in the month the offer was made. One should understand this estimated
coefficient purely as the correlation between late fees and regular APR rather than as a
causal estimate in any sense. However, we prefer this specification because it allows us to
easily control for household demographic cell fixed effects and bank fixed effects. In
Column (1), we first report the cross-sectional correlation between late fees and APRs.
Therefore, we only control for state and year fixed effects. We find that a $1 increase in
the late fee is associated with a 0.6 percentage point decrease in the regular APR. We then
add controls for bank fixed effects in Column (2). The specification holds the borrower
type and bank constant. This variation exists in the data because banks experiment with
sending credit card holders different contracts to screen for their types. This means we can
identify the menu of contract structures that a given bank sends the same customer. We
find that the negative correlation between regular APRs and late fees also holds at the
individual level. Customers have to trade-off between lower upfront fees and high late fees,
or vice versa.
In the next two columns, (3) and (4), we analyze whether this trade-off is steeper
for less-educated consumers, as suggested in the hedonic regressions in Table 4. Therefore,
we interact late fees with a dummy indicating whether a customer is in the top half of the

education distribution (some college and above) or in the bottom half of the education
distribution. We see that the trade-off between late fees and APR indeed becomes more
negative, i.e., steeper, for less-educated borrowers.
In the next step, we analyze whether this trade-off changes with other card features,
specifically the reward programs. If reward programs that are aimed at less-sophisticated
consumers screen for more myopic or present-biased consumers, we would expect the
terms of the credit card to become more back-loaded. However, rewards that are sent
predominantly to sophisticated consumers should not show the same structure. As
suggested in Gabaix and Laibson (2006), these consumers can see through and avoid addon pricing. To test these ideas, in Columns (5) and (6), we add the number of reward
programs, cash back, point, and car rental insurance (which we saw are targeted at all
income and education levels) in each offer and interact it with late fees. Again, in Column
(5), we control for cell fixed effects, and in (6), for both cell and bank fixed effects. We
find a significant, negative coefficient on this interaction term, which means that the tradeoff between upfront fees (APR) and late fees becomes steeper for cards with these rewards.
In unreported regressions, we reestimate the regressions using an indicator variable for
whether the card has a low introductory APR program. The results are qualitatively similar
but larger in magnitude.
Then, in Columns (7) and (8) of Table 5, we look at the use of mileage programs
and find a distinct pattern. Interestingly, we see that the interaction term between mileage
programs and late fees is strongly positive and significant, which suggests that these cards
have a much flatter trade-offs between late fees and regular APRs. In other words, these
cards have a much less back-loaded fee structure, which is in line with the idea that cards

that are offered to more-sophisticated people cannot be back-loaded because they can
overcome back-loaded features. In Table 5B, we reestimate the regressions in Table 5 using
annual fees as our dependent variable. We confirm that the results are parallel to the
findings for regular APRs.
Finally, in the last two columns of Table 5, we explore the role of the marketing
material itself. The algorithm we use to process the offer letters allows us to rank offer
letter by how much they rely on pictures rather than text. This variable, Picture, indicates
the size of the file and of the images in each credit card offer. To test whether offer letters
that have more pictures and flashier advertising material also rely more on back-loaded fee
structures, we reestimate our trade-off regressions but interact late fees with the Picture
variable. The results in Columns (9) and (10) show a very significant and negative
coefficient on the interaction term. This suggests that offer letters that employ flashier
communications also have more back-loaded fees.
In sum, these results are consistent with a model in which credit card companies
offer a menu of contracts to potential customers (conditional on their observable
characteristics) to screen between naïve and sophisticated customers along unobservable
dimensions. To separate myopic or present-biased consumers from more-sophisticated
ones, issuers seem to offer terms such as low APRs and annual rates but very high late fees.
These cards are usually combined with rewards programs, such as low introductory APRs,
cash back and points. Interestingly, we see that credit cards with rewards programs that
are only offered to more-sophisticated borrowers (i.e., miles) do not have the same backloaded fee structure because these customers would be able to overcome add-on pricing.

5.2. Pricing of credit cards
In a next step, we want to understand how the pricing of credit card offers changes
when the cost of capital for the issuers changes. Specifically, we analyze which terms of
the card are more sensitive to the issuer’s cost of capital. We draw on the idea pioneered
in Ausubel (1991), assuming that APRs should be very sensitive to the Federal Fund Rate
(FFR) because this is the rate at which the banks can raise capital. This approach will allow
us to understand which parts of the credit card contract are important for the issuer to
receive rents from the borrower and to break even on the loan pool in expectation. If cards
that are offered to less-educated consumers are more reliant on back-loaded features, we
should see that for these cards, back-loaded terms respond more strongly to shocks in the
FFR than front-loaded features. The opposite should hold for cards offered to moresophisticated consumers.
Similarly, we should find that if cards with rewards programs, such as points, cash
back or low introductory APRs, are indeed used to screen for naïve consumers who pay
via late fees, then we should see late fees respond particularly strongly when the FFR
changes. The reverse should be true for miles cards, which we have shown are mainly
offered to sophisticated consumers.
To test this relationship, in Table 6, our regression specification is:
!",$,% = '( ×**+, + '. ×/01234",$,% + *2",$,% + 5",$,%

Yi , j ,t indexes the dependent variables we are interested in, such as regular purchase APRs,
default APRs, late fees and over-limit fees. For example, APRi , j ,t is the regular purchase
APR offered by company i to consumer j at time t. FFRM indexes the federal fund rate at
month M. /01234",$,% indexes the dummies indicating whether the education level of the

household head is below college. We also control for fixed effects such state fixed effects,
bank fixed effects, and household demographic cell fixed effects, 19 and t is at a daily
frequency.
Additionally, we explore the sensitivity of APRs to the FFR by adding interaction
terms between FFR and a dummy for less-educated borrowers:

!",$,% = '( ×**+, + '. ×/01234",$,% + '6 ×/01234",$,% ×**+, + *2",$,% + 5",$,%
We cluster the standard errors at the cell level. In Table 7, we then re-estimate the
regression and interact FFR with dummies for different reward programs, such as miles
and zero introductory APR programs. We also report the cash back and points reward
program results in Appendix Table A3.
Education levels: In Table 6, we differentiate between cards that are issued to lessand more-educated borrowers. Again, the low education dummy is equal to one for
customers who have no college education. In Column (1), we regress the regular APR on
the FFR and an indicator for low education. In this first column, we control for cell fixed
effects but not bank fixed effects. We see that the coefficient on FFR is positive (0.813).
While the coefficient is highly significant, it indicates that there is less than perfect passthrough of the cost of capital to customers. We also see that cards that are offered to lesseducated people have higher regular APRs, which confirms our findings in Table 4. In
Column (2), we add bank fixed effects to the regression. This allows us to control for the
differences in pricing strategies between banks. We see that with bank fixed effects, the
coefficient on Low education drops significantly. This result suggests that banks differ
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19!We

state. !

construct the household demographic cells by age, education, income, household composition, and

significantly in their targeting of less-educated consumers, and issuers that target lesseducated consumers extensively also charge lower APRs. In Column (3), we add the
interaction term between FFR and the Low Education dummy. As discussed above, this
approach follows Ausubel (1991) to test how different contract terms change with the FFR.
We find a negative and significant coefficient on the interaction term, which means that
the APRs offered to less-educated people are less sensitive to the FFR than those offered
to more-educated consumers.
In Columns (4) and (5), we repeat the analysis using the annual fee of the card as
our dependent variable. We find, as expected from our prior results, that annual fees are
significantly lower for cards offered to less-educated people. This relationship holds when
holding constant person and bank fixed effects. Parallel to the results in Column (3) for the
APR, we find that the interaction term between the Fed fund rate and the Low education
dummy is negative.
In contrast, when looking at late fees and over-limit fees in columns (7) and (9),
respectively, we see that the interaction term is positive. This means that credit cards
offered to less-educated people are more sensitive in the late fees and over-limit fees to
changes in the Fed fund rate.
These results support our hypothesis that back-loaded fees, such as late fees and
over-limit fees, are the important pricing dimensions of cards offered to less-educated
people. Therefore, these back-loaded terms react to a change in the bank’s cost of capital.
In contrast, the regular purchase APRs and annual fees of cards offered to more educated
people are much more sensitive to changes in the FFR. If more-educated people do not fall

prey to back-loaded terms, a change in the cost of capital affects the regular purchase APR
and annual fee.
Mileage Programs and Introductory APRs: In Table 7, Panels A and B, we focus
on the pricing of cards with different rewards programs. The idea is to test whether cards
with rewards program that are primarily offered to educated people, such as miles
programs, show greater reliance on front-loaded terms, such as APRs and annual fees,
while rewards programs offered mainly to less-educated people, such as low introductory
APRs, rely on back-loaded pricing. These regressions parallel those in Table 6. We follow
the same set of specifications as in Table 6 but interact FFR with the reward programs. In
Table 7, Panel A, we find that cards that have miles programs have significantly higher
regular APRs, much higher annual fees and much lower late fees or over-limit fees than
cards without these programs. Again, it is important to note that these results hold even
when we control for cell and bank fixed effects. Thus, we are identifying the variation in
two different card offers sent to the same borrower type. Consistent with the results in
Table 6, when we add an the FFR*MILES interaction term, we find that APR and annual
fees are very sensitive to changes in FFR if the card has a mileage program, but late fees
and over-limit fees are less sensitive. When we repeat these specifications in Panel B for
cards with low introductory APR programs, we obtain the opposite results. For these cards,
back-loaded terms (late fees and over-limit fees) are more sensitive to the FFR.20 This
confirms that mileage programs are not priced via back-loaded features but via regular
APRs and annual fees because sophisticated consumers see through add-on pricing.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
20!In the appendix, we show that credit cards with cash back or points programs have pricing structures
similar to those with introductory APR programs.
!

6. Shocks to borrower credit risk: Unemployment insurance
Finally, we analyze the effect of an exogenous shock to the credit worthiness of
customers, in particular, their risk of default, on credit card terms and reward programs.
We suggest that there is a countervailing force to how much card issues can rely on naivetébased price discrimination. If back-loaded or shrouded card features attract not only
myopic or present-biased but also lower credit quality customers, these can have an adverse
effect on the card issuers. For example, if customers who are drawn in by zero APR
introductory programs truly do not expect that they ever have to pay interest on the credit,
they might have to default once the introductory period expires. However, this
endogenously limits the extent to which banks should rely on this strategy.
To test whether banks take this dynamic into account, we use changes in the (state)
unemployment insurance (UI) programs as exogenous shocks to the credit risk of
customers. UI has increased in a staggered fashion across several US states over the last
two decades. These changes provided higher levels of unemployment insurance and longer
benefits periods. By providing households with a cash flow stream in cases of negative
shocks, UI also reduces a lender’s exposure to one of the largest negative economic
outcomes that customers might suffer. We obtain data on the level of unemployment
insurance (UI) from the US Department of Labor for each state. Based on this information,
we calculate annual changes in UI at the beginning of each year from 1999 to 2012 and
match them to our credit card dataset. Following Hsu, Matsa and Melzer (2012), we use
maximum UI benefits as the measure of unemployment protection. We define maximum
UI benefits as the product of the maximum weekly benefit amount (WBA) and the

maximum number of weeks allowed. For example, in January 2000, Alabama allowed a
maximum of 26 weeks of unemployment insurance over a 52-week period, and the
maximum weekly benefit amount (WBA) was $190. We use $4,940 (26 weeks times $190
WBA) as the level of UI. For each state, we then calculate the annual percentage increase
of UI. We use 10% annual growth as the cut-off and define a UI “jump” as an increase
equal to or greater than 10% within a year.
This allows us to use a standard difference-in-difference estimator to regress
changes in card features on UI changes across states and over time. We use a window of
one year before and after the UI increase to estimate the effect. The reason to use this short
cut-off is that some states have a large increase in UI in one year and small changes in a
following year; we did not want to confound the impact of the UI change with small
subsequent changes. In addition, we see in the data that credit card companies, on average,
react very quickly to changes in the market. For example, if one issuer introduces a new
product feature in the market, other firms adopt this change within a few months. We also
include dummies to control for a possible pre-trend three or six months before the UI
change. All regressions control for time fixed effects, cell fixed effects, and bank fixed
effects. We reestimated these regressions using other time windows, e.g., two-year
windows, around the change, and the results are qualitatively and quantitatively very
similar.
Table 8, Panel A presents the one-year difference-in-difference regression results
between 1999 and 2007. We drop the years following the financial crisis of 2008. Because
economic conditions worsened significantly in the years following the crisis, changes in
UI after 2008 are likely to be endogenous to the economic distress of a state, and there may

be concerns that other hidden variables drive our results. Overall, we find that card issuers
rely more heavily on back-loaded and shrouded terms when UI is increased and thus the
riskiness of the borrowers is reduced. In Column (1), the dependent variable is the regular
APR. The coefficient on the UI dummy is negative but not significant. However, in Column
(2), we see that an increase in UI leads to a large and significant increase in late fees. In
contrast, Column (3) shows that annual fees do not change significantly around UI changes,
while in Column (4), look at whether credit card issuers use more intro APR programs
when UI increases. For that purpose, we build a dummy variable, Intro_APR_All, to
indicate whether the credit card offer has zero intro APRs for regular purchases, balance
transfers, or cash advances. We find that card issuers indeed use more intro APR programs
after UI increases have been implemented. In Column (5), we again use the first principal
component as a summary of all the front- and back-loaded features as the dependent
variable. Overall, these results strongly support the idea that with the increase in UI issuers
use a greater reliance on back-loaded payment features. Finally, in the last four columns of
Table 7, Panel A, we look at the “softer” dimensions of the credit card offer. We see that
after a UI increase, issuers are more likely to use colorful mailers. At the same time, the
offers are more likely to move information about late fees and default APRs from the front
of the offer letter to the end. In addition, when we repeat all the regressions without the
bank fixed effects, the results are quite similar to those in Table 7, and the estimated
coefficients barely change. This means that the results are not driven by banks differentially
selecting to offer credit cards in states with UI changes. Our results are driven by within
bank variation in decisions to change pricing policies based on UI changes. We then repeat

the analysis in Table 8, Panel B across our entire sample period (1999 to 2011). The
regression results in Panel B are very similar to Panel A.
Taken together, these results suggest that credit card companies realize that there is
an inherent trade-off in the use of back-loaded or shrouded features of credit card offers:
They might induce customers to take on more (expensive) credit, but at the same time, they
expose the lender to people who pose greater risk. Therefore, we observe greater reliance
on these features when the customer pool experiences an (exogenous) improvement in
credit quality.

7. Conclusions
The results in this paper suggest that credit card companies target and screen
sophisticated and naïve creditors differently by offering these groups different reward
programs and pricing structures. In line with the behavioral contract theory literature, the
results suggest that cards offered to less-sophisticated customers rely more on back-loaded
and shrouded terms. In contrast, more-sophisticated customers who would be able to avoid
back-loaded terms while benefitting from lower introductory fees are offered more frontloaded terms in order for the lender to break even. These results support the insights of
behavioral contract theory models, in particular, Gabaix and Laibson (2006), Heidhues and
Kozsegi (2010) and Grubb (2010), which suggest that card issuers will not offer shrouded
terms on products that are demanded mainly by sophisticated consumers because they can
undo these terms and thus reduce the rents that accrue to the firm. We find that issuers use
reward programs to effectively segregate these groups. Cards with miles programs, which
appeal to educated consumers, are predominantly offered to sophisticated consumers and

have front-loaded pricing. In contrast, cards with introductory APR programs are mainly
issued to less-sophisticated consumers and carry more back-loaded pricing.
Finally, our analysis highlights an important dimension of the use of naiveté-based
discrimination that has not been previously explored in the literature. The interaction
between behavioral screening and classic adverse selection is more complex than noted in
the prior theoretical literature. There appears to be a built-in trade-off between the
immediate benefits of using naiveté-based price discrimination and the impact on the credit
risk of the customer pool. By attracting customers who do not understand the credit terms
that they are offered, the issuer might ultimately end up with a borrower pool that has a
higher chance of not being able to afford the credit and thus of defaulting. Using changes
in state-level unemployment insurance, which reduces the credit risk of borrowers, we
show that card issuers rely more heavily on back-loaded terms when borrowers’ credit risk
is reduced. These findings suggest that card issuers are aware of the above trade-off.

Authors:
Hong Ru
Nanyang Technological University
Block S3-B1A-07
50 Nanyang Avenue
Singapore 639798
ruhong@ntu.edu.sg

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

APPENDIX

Table A1
Demographic Distribution
Panel A: Income
Frequency

Percentage

Cum. Percentage

Less than $15,000

61,091

6.04

6.04

$15,000 - $24,999

78,154

7.72

13.76

$25,000 - $34,999

100,433

9.92

23.68

$35,000 - $49,999

150,700

14.89

38.57

$50,000 - $74,999

218,744

21.61

60.18

$75,000 - $99,999

197,131

19.48

79.65

$100,000 - $149,999

150,831

14.9

94.56

$150,000 - $199,999

34,653

3.42

97.98

Over $200,000

20,461

2.02

100

1,012,198

100

Frequency

Percentage

Cum. Percentage

74,167

7.63

7.63

Graduated High School

307,469

31.62

39.25

Some College

210,821

21.68

60.94

Graduated College

239,315

24.61

85.55

Post College Graduate

140,488

14.45

100

Total

972,260

100

Total

Panel B: Education

Below High School

Note: Variables are based on Mintel's credit card's direct mail campaigns
from March 1999 to February 2011. Mintel collects the income and
education information from the households which receive the credit card
offers. Income is the household annual income. Education is the household
head education level.

Table A2
Principal Component Analysis on Credit Card Pricing
Panel A
Comp1

Comp2

Comp3

Comp4

Comp5

APR_res

-0.331

0.514

0.635

-0.468

-0.065

Annual Fee_res

-0.442

0.480

-0.106

0.642

0.389

Late Fee_res

0.405

0.607

-0.222

0.167

-0.625

Over-limit Fee_res

0.551

0.350

-0.160

-0.314

0.670

Intro_APR_res

0.477

-0.119

0.715

0.492

0.071

Eigenvalue

1.566

1.182

0.855

0.771

0.626

Variance Proportion

0.313

0.237

0.171

0.154

0.125

Cumulative Variance

0.313

0.550

0.721

0.875

1.000

Comp1

Comp2

Comp3

Comp4

Comp5

APR

-0.425

0.481

0.122

0.737

-0.174

Annual Fee

-0.439

0.499

0.283

-0.517

0.460

Late Fee

0.437

0.572

0.142

-0.290

-0.615

Over-limit Fee

0.451

0.437

-0.558

0.187

0.510

Intro_APR

0.482

-0.050

0.757

0.266

0.347

Eigenvalue

1.839

1.093

0.785

0.712

0.571

Variance Proportion

0.368

0.219

0.157

0.142

0.114

Cumulative Variance

0.368

0.587

0.743

0.886

1.000

Observations

895,633

Panel B

Observations

895,633

Note: Panel A shows the principal component analysis on credit card regular APR, annual fee,
late fee, over-limit fee, and intro APR dummy after taking out the bank fixed effects and monthly
fixed effects. Column 1 to 5 are the eigenvectors of component 1 to 5 respectively. Panel B shows
the principal component analysis on credit card regular APR, annual fee, late fee, over-limit fee,
and intro APR dummy. Column 1 to 5 are the eigenvectors of component 1 to 5 respectively.

Table A3
Cashback nd Points Reward Programs
Panel A
FFR
CASH

1
APR
0.301***
(0.005)
-0.453***
(0.013)

2
APR
0.255***
(0.005)
-0.165***
(0.012)

Yes
No
753,690
0.019

Yes
Yes
753,690
0.214

APR
0.315***
(0.005)
-0.673***
(0.013)

APR
0.258***
(0.005)
-0.062***
(0.012)

Yes
No
753,690
0.022

Yes
Yes
753,690
0.214

CASH*FFR
Cell Fixed Effects
Bank Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

3
APR
0.347***
(0.005)
0.718***
(0.019)
-0.352***
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
753,690
0.219

4
Annual Fee
-0.908***
(0.032)
-11.943***
(0.086)

APR
0.298***
(0.005)
0.393***
(0.021)
-0.165***
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
753,690
0.215

Annual Fee
-0.783***
(0.032)
1.240***
(0.120)

Yes
Yes
771,535
0.228

5
Annual Fee
-1.162***
(0.041)
-14.450***
(0.155)
1.003***
(0.044)
Yes
Yes
771,535
0.228

6
Late Fee
-0.108***
(0.007)
0.849***
(0.022)

Annual Fee
-0.298***
(0.028)
6.109***
(0.268)
-1.783***
(0.076)
Yes
Yes
771,535
0.213

Late Fee
-0.132***
(0.007)
1.511***
(0.015)

Yes
Yes
769,923
0.221

7
Late Fee
-0.140***
(0.007)
0.536***
(0.026)
0.125***
(0.010)
Yes
Yes
769,923
0.221

8
Over-Limit Fee
0.338***
(0.013)
-2.514***
(0.053)

Late Fee
-0.246***
(0.008)
0.362***
(0.023)
0.421***
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
769,923
0.230

Over-Limit Fee
0.379***
(0.013)
-2.315***
(0.050)

Yes
Yes
693,714
0.194

9
Over-Limit Fee
0.008
(0.014)
-5.969***
(0.094)
1.295***
(0.027)
Yes
Yes
693,714
0.202

Panel B
FFR
POINT
POINT*FFR
Cell Fixed Effects
Bank Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
771,535
0.212

Yes
Yes
769,923
0.227

Yes
Yes
693,714
0.193

Over-Limit Fee
0.428***
(0.014)
-1.692***
(0.087)
-0.218***
(0.028)
Yes
Yes
693,714
0.194

Note: Panel A shows OLS regressions to estimate relationship between Cashback reward programs and credit card APRs and fees. Panel B shows OLS regressions to
estimate relationship between Points reward programs reward programs and credit card APRs and fees. Data period is from 1999 to 2011. Data is restricted to offers we
have scanned pictures in Panel A. Panel B includes the entire credit card offer sample with and without scanned pictures. Regressions in column 1 to 9 are controlled by
household demographic cell fixed effects based on states, age, income, education, and household composition. Regressions in column 2 to 9 are controlled by bank fixed
effects. MILE is the dummy of whether the credit card offer has mileage reward program or not. Intro_APR is the dummy of whether the credit card offer has 0 intro APR
for regular purchase or not. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells.

#

42#

REFERENCES
Agarwal, Sumit, Itzhak Ben_David and Vincent Yao, “Systematic Mistakes in the
Mortgage Market and Lack of Financial Sophistication,” Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming, 2016.
Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson, “Learning in the
credit card market,” NBER Working Paper No. 13822, 2008.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Chunlin Liu, "The Importance of Adverse
Selection in the Credit Card Market: Evidence from Randomized Trials of Credit Card
Solicitations," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 42 (2010), 743-754.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles, "Do
Consumers Choose the Right Credit Contracts?," Review of Corporate Finance Studies,
2015.
Agarwal, Sumit, Xavier Gabaix, John C. Driscoll, and David Laibson, "The Age of Reason:
Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, (2009), 51-117.
Agarwal, Sumit, Changcheng Song and Vincent W. Yao, “Banking Competition and
Shrouded Attributes: Evidence from the US Mortgage Market”, Working Paper, (2016).
Agrawal, Ashwini K., and David A. Matsa, "Labor unemployment risk and corporate
financing decisions," Journal of Financial Economics, 108 (2013), 449-470.
Ausubel, Lawrence M., "The failure of competition in the credit card market," American
Economic Review, 81 (1991), 50.
Bergstresser, Daniel, John M. R. Chalmers, and Peter Tufano, "Assessing the Costs and
Benefits of Brokers in the Mutual Fund Industry," Review of Financial Studies, 22 (2009),
4129-4156.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan
Zinman, "What's Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit
Marketing Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (2010), 263-306.

#

43#

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, "Simplification
and saving," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 95 (2013), 130-145.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Salience and Consumer Choice”
Journal of Political Economy (2013) 121 (5): 803-843.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Competition for Attention”
Review of Economic Studies (2016) 83 (2): 481-513.
Campbell, John Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Peter Tufano, "Consumer
Financial Protection," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (2011), 91-114.
Carlin, Bruce I., "Strategic price complexity in retail financial markets," Journal of
Financial Economics, 91 (2009), 278-287.
Cochrane, John H., "Finance: Function Matters, Not Size," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 27 (2013), 29-50.
DellaVigna, Stefano, "Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field," Journal of
Economic Literature, 47 (2009), 315-372.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier, "Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory
and Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 353-402.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
Information Suppression in Competitive Markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121
(2006), 505-540.
Greenwood, Robin, and David Scharfstein, "The Growth of Finance," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 27 (2013), 3-28.
Gross, David and Nicholas Souleles, "Consumer Response to Changes in Credit Supply:
Evidence from Credit Card Data," Center for Financial Institutions Working Papers 00-04,
Wharton School Center for Financial Institutions, University of Pennsylvania, 2000.
Grubb, Michael D., "Selling to Overconfident Consumers," American Economic Review,
#

44#

99 (2009), 1770-1807.
Gurun, Umit G., Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, "Advertising Expensive Mortgages,"
Journal of Finance, 2016.
Han, Song, Benjamin J. Keys and Geng Li, "Unsecured Credit Supply over the Credit
Cycle: Evidence from Credit Card Mailings", Working Paper, 2013.
Han, Song, Benjamin Keys, and Geng Li, “Information, Contract Design, and Unsecured
Credit Supply: Evidence from Credit Card Mailings,” Finance and Economics Discussion
Series, 2015-103. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Hastings, Justine and Olivia S. Mitchell, “How Financial Literacy and Impatience Shape
Retirement Wealth and Investment Behaviors.” NBER Working Paper No. 16740, 2011.
Hastings, Justine, Ali Hortaçsu and Chad Syverson, “Sales Force and Competition in
Financial Product Markets: The Case of Mexico’s Social Security Privatization,” Working
Paper, 2015.
Heidhues, Paul, and Botond Koszegi, "Exploiting Naivete about Self-Control in the Credit
Market," American Economic Review, 100 (2010), 2279-2303.
Heidhues, Paul, and Botond Kőszegi, "Naïveté based discrimination,” Working Paper,
2015.
Heitmann, M., Johnson, Eric Johnson and Andreas Herrmann, “Pricing Add-Ons as
Totals: How Changing Price Display Can Influence Consumer Choice,” Working Paper,
2014.
Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, "Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and
Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 403-456.
Hsu, Joanne, David A. Matsa, and Brian T. Melzer, “Positive Externalities of Social
Insurance: Unemployment Insurance and Consumer Credit”, Working Paper, 2014.

#

45#

Koszegi, Botond, "Behavioral Contract Theory," Journal of Economic Literature, 52
(2014), 1075-1118.
Lohse, Gerald L., "Consumer Eye Movement Patterns on Yellow Pages Advertising,"
Journal of Advertising, 26 (1997), 62-73.
Lohse, Gerald L., and Dennis L. Rosen, "Signaling Quality and Credibility in Yellow Pages
Advertising: The Influence of Color and Graphics on Choice," Journal of Advertising, 30
(2001), 73-85.
Maskin, Eric, and John Riley, "Monopoly with incomplete information," RAND Journal of
Economics (RAND Journal of Economics), 15 (1984), 171-196.
Merton, Robert C, "Financial innovation and economic performance," Journal of applied
corporate finance, 4 (1992), 12-22.
Miller, Merton H., "Financial Innovation: The Last Twenty Years and the Next," Journal
of Financial & Quantitative Analysis, 21 (1986), 459-471.
Mussa, Michael, and Sherwin Rosen, "Monopoly and Product Quality," Journal of
Economic Theory, 18 (1978), 301-317.
Shui, Hanyan and Lawrence M. Ausubel, “Time Inconsistency in the Credit Card Market,”
Working Paper, 2005.
Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein., Nudge: Improving decisions about health,
wealth, and happiness. (Yale University Press, 2008).
Tufano, Peter, "Securities innovations: a historical and functional perspective," Journal of
applied corporate finance, 7 (1995), 90-104.
---, "Financial Innovation," in Handbook of the economics of finance. Volume 1A.
Corporate finance, George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, eds.
(Handbooks in Economics, vol. 21. Amsterdam; London and New York: Elsevier, North
Holland, 2003).

#

46#

#

47#

Table 1
Summary Statistics
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Obs

FFR

2.68

2.14

0.07

6.54

156

APR

12.65

4.18

0.00

79.90

982,767

Max Card limit

10.05

1.37

6.21

15.42

526,949

APR_Balance

11.33

3.34

0.00

29.90

749,264

APR_CASH

19.89

4.28

0.00

79.90

942,430

ARP_Default

26.51

3.97

0.00

41.00

721,393

Annual_fee

12.29

31.99

0.00

500.00

1,003,977

Late_fee

33.83

6.17

0.00

85.00

1,001,221

over_limit_fee

29.74

10.16

0.00

79.00

898,636

Intro_APR_regular

0.47

0.50

0.00

1.00

1,014,768

Intro_APR_balance

0.47

0.50

0.00

1.00

1,014,768

Intro_APR_cash

0.06

0.23

0.00

1.00

1,014,768

Size

4.71

5.49

0.00

143.63

644,865

Color

0.32

0.47

0.00

1.00

644,865

Bold

0.36

0.48

0.00

1.00

644,865

Picture

0.23

0.26

0.00

4.10

803,285

Reward

0.68

0.77

0.00

3.00

803,285

CASH

0.21

0.41

0.00

1.00

803,285

POINT

0.24

0.43

0.00

1.00

803,285

MILE

0.09

0.28

0.00

1.00

803,285

Carrental

0.23

0.42

0.00

1.00

803,285

Purchaseprct

0.23

0.42

0.00

1.00

803,285

Note: FFR is the federal fund rate at monthly frequency. Other variables are based on Mintel's credit card's
direct mail campaigns from March 1999 to February 2011. Variables from "Size" to "Purchaseprct" are from
80% of 1,014,768 total mail campaigns which have scanned images of credit card offers. Size is the maximum
size of the reward programs minus the average size of the whole page in credit card offer. Color is the dummy
of whether reward programs in the offer use color other than black/white in the offer. Bold is the dummy of
whether the offer use bold to highlight reward programs. If there is no reward program in the offer, we put
missing value to Size, Color, and Bold. Picture is the file storage size of the credit card offer images. The
unit is megabyte (MB). We drop the year before 2003 due to a lot of missing scanned images of credit card
offers. Reward is the number of reward programs of CASH POINT and Car rental insurance in each offer.
CASH, POINT, MILE, Carrental, Purchaseprct are dummies of whether the offer has these reward programs
respectively. Intro_APR_regular, Intro_APR_balance and Intro_APR_cash are the dummies of whether the
offer has 0% introductory APR for regular purchase, balance transfer and cash advance respectively. APR is
the regular purchase APR of the credit card offer which is the middle point if APR is a range in the offer.
Card Limit is the log of maximum credit card limit stated in the offer. Annual fee, late fee and over limit fee
are fees charged by credit card company which usually are in shumerbox.

#

48#

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics for Format Design of Credit Card Offers
Panel A
Percentage of cards that have this term
Term mentioned on 1st page
Font size of term if mentioned on 1st page
Font size of CC term if NOT mentioned on
first page
Font color of CC term if mentioned on first
page
Font color of CC term if NOT mentioned on
first page
Font bold of CC term if mentioned on first
page
Font bold of CC term if NOT mentioned on
first page
# Obs
Panel B
If term is on first page
If term is in the back (schumer box)

Over
limit fee
100.00%
6.96%
9.80

Annual
fee
100.00%
79.28%
13.24

CASH

POINT

MILE

Carrental

100.00%
5.80%
9.49

Default
APR
100.00%
4.97%
9.28

21.05%
100%
11.16

23.83%
93.51%
11.47

8.79%
100%
14.12

22.74%
80.48%
10.27

Intro
APR
51.64%
91.04%
11.27

9.57

9.63

9.50

13.76

10.62

10.80

9.91

10.04

10.62

33.98%

37.88%

27.73%

66.86%

40.13%

42.84%

47.12%

24.34%

32.28%

24.67%

26.19%

27.73%

44.35%

37.24%

38.45%

29.47%

23.31%

32.29%

38.59%

27.77%

35.07%

79.01%

47.24%

43.90%

56.34%

10.56%

53.15%

49.00%

19.59%

34.53%

53.20%

36.58%

29.97%

18.08%

13.08%

39.99%

776,624

776,624

776,624

776,624

803,285

803,285

803,285

803,285

776,624

29.38
35.10

28%
27%

27.59
30.11

7.69
33.22

Late fee

Note: The dataset is based on Mintel's credit card's direct mail campaigns from March 1999 to February 2011. Descriptive statistics are based on 80% of 1,014,768
total mail campaigns which have scanned images of credit card offers. Penal A is the descriptive statistics of format information of credit card terms and reward
programs. In Penal A, late fee, default APR, over-limit fee, and annual fee appears in 776,624 offers since we have missing pages of Schumer box where these
terms usually appear. Intro_APRs contains all introductory APR programs: regular intro APR, balance transfer Intro APR and cash advance Intro APR. Size is the
maximum size of the reward programs in credit card offer. Color is the dummy of whether reward programs in the offer use color other than black/white in the
offer. Bold is the dummy of whether the offer use bold to highlight reward programs. Picture is the file size of each page of the offer which is the measurement of
how many or how large are pictures in the offer. Penal B is the descriptive statistics of credit card terms when they mentioned on the first page or not. "First page"
includes the envelope and the first page letter of credit card offers.

#

49#

Table 3
Correlation Among Credit Card Features
CASH

POINT

MILE

PurchasePrct

Intro_APR

Zero Annual fee

CASH

0.21

0.06

0.01

0.03

0.12

0.21

POINT

0.06

0.24

0.00

0.07

0.09

0.20

MILE

0.01

0.00

0.09

0.01

0.02

0.04

CAR

0.05

0.08

0.02

0.11

0.11

0.16

PurchasePrct

0.03

0.07

0.01

0.23

0.15

0.17

Intro_APR

0.12

0.09

0.02

0.15

0.49

0.43

Zero Annual fee

0.21

0.20

0.04

0.17

0.43

0.81

Note: The dataset is based on Mintel's credit card's direct mail campaigns from March 1999 to February
2011. Statistics are based on 80% of 1,014,768 total mail campaigns which have scanned images of credit
card offers. The numbers on diagonal are the percentage of credit card offers with the reward program. For
example, 21.10% of the credit card offers have cash back program. The numbers in other cells are percentage
of the credit card offers with both programs accordingly. For example, 6.3% of the credit card offers have
both cash back and point reward programs.

#

50#

Table 4
Credit Card Features And Demographics

FFR
Education_2
Education_3
Education_4
Education_5
Income_2
Income_3
Income_4
Income_5
Income_6
Income_7
Income_8
Income_9
Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

1
APR
0.352***
(0.004)
-0.046
(0.030)
0.026
(0.032)
-0.073**
(0.033)
-0.004
(0.035)
-0.227***
(0.040)
-0.349***
(0.038)
-0.452***
(0.037)
-0.531***
(0.037)
-0.607***
(0.039)
-0.562***
(0.041)
-0.420***
(0.055)
-0.391***
(0.063)
Y
942,397
0.253

2
Late Fee
-0.242***
(0.006)
-0.118***
(0.045)
-0.323***
(0.045)
-0.277***
(0.047)
-0.541***
(0.052)
0.133**
(0.067)
0.134**
(0.052)
0.321***
(0.052)
0.430***
(0.052)
0.460***
(0.056)
0.580***
(0.060)
0.611***
(0.081)
0.555***
(0.093)
Y
961,247
0.157

3
Default APR
0.882***
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.031)
-0.029
(0.032)
-0.025
(0.034)
-0.110***
(0.038)
0.092**
(0.039)
0.149***
(0.040)
0.132***
(0.038)
0.225***
(0.038)
0.263***
(0.041)
0.356***
(0.043)
0.432***
(0.061)
0.543***
(0.073)
Y
713,882
0.310

4
Over-limit Fee
0.173***
(0.010)
-0.472***
(0.051)
-0.592***
(0.056)
-1.118***
(0.059)
-1.561***
(0.068)
-0.264***
(0.065)
-0.386***
(0.064)
-0.406***
(0.063)
-0.696***
(0.064)
-0.973***
(0.070)
-1.286***
(0.076)
-1.722***
(0.112)
-2.218***
(0.147)
Y
872,831
0.177

5
Annual Fee
-0.565***
(0.024)
-0.551***
(0.162)
-0.068
(0.169)
0.352**
(0.176)
1.326***
(0.201)
-1.199***
(0.222)
-1.620***
(0.213)
-1.908***
(0.207)
-1.982***
(0.209)
-1.423***
(0.220)
-0.262
(0.236)
1.924***
(0.333)
3.200***
(0.422)
Y
963,283
0.233

6
CASH
-0.012***
(0.000)
0.014***
(0.002)
0.009***
(0.002)
0.017***
(0.002)
0.010***
(0.003)
0.020***
(0.003)
0.026***
(0.003)
0.030***
(0.002)
0.044***
(0.002)
0.048***
(0.003)
0.048***
(0.003)
0.047***
(0.004)
0.040***
(0.004)
Y
777,192
0.248

7
POINT
0.010***
(0.000)
0.007***
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
0.009***
(0.002)
0.004
(0.002)
0.013***
(0.002)
0.022***
(0.002)
0.025***
(0.002)
0.035***
(0.002)
0.042***
(0.002)
0.047***
(0.003)
0.049***
(0.004)
0.051***
(0.004)
Y
777,192
0.262

8
MILE
0.008***
(0.002)
0.013***
(0.002)
0.019***
(0.001)
0.046***
(0.003)
0.064***
(0.004)
0.015***
(0.002)
0.022***
(0.002)
0.028***
(0.002)
0.045***
(0.003)
0.059***
(0.003)
0.076***
(0.004)
0.100***
(0.006)
0.117***
(0.006)
Y
777,192
0.075

9
Intro_APR
-0.026***
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.015***
(0.003)
-0.026***
(0.003)
-0.049***
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.006*
(0.003)
-0.014***
(0.003)
-0.021***
(0.003)
-0.035***
(0.004)
-0.051***
(0.005)
-0.066***
(0.005)
Y
972,260
0.159

10
Format
-0.014***
(0.001)
0.070***
(0.007)
0.075***
(0.008)
0.160***
(0.008)
0.190***
(0.009)
0.079***
(0.010)
0.111***
(0.009)
0.137***
(0.009)
0.200***
(0.009)
0.247***
(0.010)
0.291***
(0.010)
0.336***
(0.014)
0.380***
(0.018)
Y
629,637
0.080

11
Backward
-0.057***
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.007)
-0.035***
(0.008)
-0.067***
(0.008)
-0.124***
(0.009)
0.033***
(0.010)
0.051***
(0.010)
0.063***
(0.009)
0.067***
(0.009)
0.054***
(0.010)
0.018*
(0.010)
-0.040***
(0.015)
-0.089***
(0.018)
Y
870,029
0.307

Note: OLS regressions to estimate relationship between credit card features and consumer's demographics. Data is restricted to offers we have scanned pictures from column 6, 7, 8, and 10. Format is
the first principal component of reward programs' size, color, bold and the picture sizes on the credit card offers. Backward is the first principal component of regular APR, annual fee, late fee, over
limite fee, and intro_APR after taking out the bank and monthly fixed effects. Income_2 is the dummy for households whose annual income is from 15k to 25K. Income_3 is for 25k to 35k.
Income.Income_4 is for 35k to 50k. Income_5 is for 50k to 75k. Income_6 is for 75k to 100k. Income_7 is for 100k to 150k. Inocme_8 is for 150k to 200k. Income_9 is for over 200k. The missing
category is the income less than 15k. Education_2 is dummy for household head whose highest education is high school. Education_3 is for some college. Education_4 is for graduated college.
Education_5 is for post college graduate. The missing category is education below high school. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by demographic cells, which are based on states, age,
income, education and household composition. Regressions are controlled by age fixed effects, household composition fixed effects, state fixed effects and bank fixed effects.

#

51#

Table 5
Regular APR vs. Late Fees
1
APR
FFR

3
APR

4
APR

5
APR

6
APR

7
APR

8
APR

(0.011)

(0.001)

(0.014)

(0.001)

(0.012)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.009)

LateFee*LowEdu

(0.002)

(0.010)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.079)

-0.043*** -0.039***
(0.002)

(0.002)

Reward

1.945*** 2.069***
(0.056) (0.056)
-0.065*** -0.057***
(0.002) (0.002)

LateFee*Reward
MILE

-2.193*** -0.906***
(0.092) (0.086)
0.115*** 0.080***
(0.003) (0.002)

LateFee*MILE
Picture
LateFee*Picture

R-squared

(0.011)

1.678*** 1.384***
(0.089)

Observations

10
APR

-0.057*** -0.016*** -0.045*** -0.002 -0.024*** 0.023*** -0.077*** -0.017*** -0.043*** 0.008***

LowEdu

Year FEs
Cell FEs
Bank FEs

9
APR

0.568*** 0.459*** 0.553*** 0.444*** 0.809*** 0.671*** 0.761*** 0.666*** 0.768*** 0.670***
(0.013)

LateFee

2
APR

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

936,641 936,641 936,641
0.150

0.332

0.164

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

936,641 773,694
0.348

0.172

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

749,983 749,983
0.329

0.168

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.828*** 1.045***
(0.157) (0.141)
-0.022*** -0.024***
(0.004) (0.004)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

749,983 749,983
0.347

0.146

749,983
0.327

Note: OLS regressions to estimate relationship between regular APR and late fees in credit card offers. Data is restricted to
offers we have scanned pictures in column 5 to 10. Regression in column 1, 2, and 5 to 10 are controlled by demographic cell
fixed effects based on states, age, income, education and household composition. Regression in column 3 and 4 are controlled
by demographic cell fixed effects based on states, age, income, and household composition. Regressions in column 2, 4, 6, 8
and 10 are controlled by bank fixed effects. Reward is the number of reward programs of CASH POINT and Car rental
insurance in each offer. MILE is the dummy of whether the credit card offer has mileage reward program or not. Picture is the
file storage size of the credit card offer images. The unit is megabyte (MB). LowEdu is a dummy for household head's education
level below college (highest degree is high school). All regressions are controlled by year fixed effects. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by cells.

#

52#

Table 5B
Annual Fees vs. Late Fees
1
Annual Fee

2
Annual Fee

3
Annual Fee

4
Annual Fee

5
Annual Fee

6
Annual Fee

7
Annual Fee

8
Annual Fee

9
Annual Fee

10
Annual Fee

FFR

-0.824***

-0.609***

-0.748***

-0.571***

-1.076***

-1.116***

-1.261***

-1.283***

-1.148***

-1.148***

(0.063)

(0.057)

(0.061)

(0.055)

(0.085)

(0.077)

(0.082)

(0.074)

(0.086)

(0.077)

LateFee

-0.625***

-0.061***

-0.520***

0.034***

-0.092***

0.279***

-1.235***

-0.573***

-0.515***

-0.100***

(0.011)

(0.007)

(0.013)

(0.008)

(0.010)

(0.007)

(0.016)

(0.011)

(0.012)

(0.008)

LowEdu

12.399***

8.051***

(0.632)

(0.413)

LateFee*LowEdu

-0.364***

-0.256***

(0.018)

(0.012)
44.955***
(0.699)
-1.242***
(0.018)

32.936***
(0.512)
-0.921***
(0.014)
-56.262***
(0.642)
2.362***
(0.018)

-31.103***
(0.484)
1.669***
(0.014)
1.927***
(0.246)
-0.059***
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
Yes
767,502

Reward
LateFee*Reward
MILE
LateFee*MILE
Picture

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

5.744***
(1.181)
-0.162***
(0.033)
Yes
Yes
No

957,656

957,656

957,656

957,656

767,502

767,502

767,502

767,502

767,502

LateFee*Picture
Year FEs
Cell FEs
Bank FEs
Observations

R-squared
0.032
0.226
0.036
0.234
0.049
0.232
0.109
0.285
0.031
0.223
Note: OLS regressions to estimate relationship between annual fees and late fees in credit card offers. Data is restricted to offers we have scanned pictures in
column 5 to 10. Regression in column 1, 2, and 5 to 10 are controlled by demographic cell fixed effects based on states, age, income, education and household
composition. Regression in column 3 and 4 are controlled by demographic cell fixed effects based on states, age, income, and household composition.
Regressions in column 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 are controlled by bank fixed effects. Reward is the number of reward programs of CASH POINT and Car rental
insurance in each offer. MILE is the dummy of whether the credit card offer has mileage reward program or not. Picture is the file storage size of the credit card
offer images. The unit is megabyte (MB). LowEdu is a dummy for household head's education level below college (highest degree is high school). All
regressions are controlled by year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells.

#

53#

Table 6
Relationships between APRs/Fees and Education

FFR

LowEdu

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

APR

APR

APR

Annual Fee

Annual Fee

Late Fee

Late Fee

Over-Limit

Over-Limit

Fee

Fee

0.813***

0.736***

0.755***

0.498***

0.671***

0.047***

0.007

-0.356***

-0.424***

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.025)

(0.033)

(0.008)

(0.011)

(0.008)

(0.011)

0.133***

0.009

0.163***

-0.213**

1.148***

0.320***

0.007

0.490***

-0.042

(0.021)

(0.017)

(0.032)

(0.089)

(0.158)

(0.027)

(0.043)

(0.029)

(0.047)

LowEdu*FFR

-0.050***

-0.440***

0.101***

0.173***

(0.008)

(0.048)

(0.014)

(0.016)

Cell Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Bank Fixed Effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

785,950

785,950

785,950

800,546

800,546

798,936

798,936

749,306

749,306

0.103

0.318

0.318

0.251

0.252

0.208

0.208

0.198

0.199

Observations
R-squared

Note: OLS regressions to estimate relationship between education and credit card APRs and fees. Data period is from 1999 to 2007. Regressions in column 1 to 9
are controlled by household demographic cell fixed effects based on states, age, income, and household composition. Regressions in column 2 to 9 are controlled
by bank fixed effects. LowEdu is a dummy for household head's education level below college (highest degree is high school). Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by cells.

#

54#

Table 7
Mileage Program vs. Zero Introductory APR Program
Panel A

FFR
MILE

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

APR

APR

APR

Annual Fee

Annual Fee

Late Fee

Late Fee

0.796***
(0.005)
2.009***
(0.022)

0.741***
(0.005)
2.096***
(0.023)

0.364***
(0.030)
22.429***
(0.231)

Yes
Yes
597,489
0.321

Yes
Yes
609,055
0.281

0.213***
(0.029)
15.681***
(0.453)
1.918***
(0.127)
Yes
Yes
609,055
0.281

0.264***
(0.008)
-1.654***
(0.057)

Yes
No
597,489
0.114

0.728***
(0.005)
1.526***
(0.042)
0.163***
(0.013)
Yes
Yes
597,489
0.321

Yes
Yes
607,868
0.240

0.385***
(0.007)
3.755***
(0.092)
-1.539***
(0.037)
Yes
Yes
607,868
0.251

APR

APR

APR

Annual Fee

Annual Fee

Late Fee

Late Fee

0.797***
(0.005)
-1.199***
(0.013)

0.725***
(0.004)
-0.925***
(0.014)

0.401***
(0.026)
-9.088***
(0.096)

Yes
Yes
785,950
0.317

1.101***
(0.035)
-4.047***
(0.153)
-1.640***
(0.045)
Yes
Yes
800,546
0.267

0.050***
(0.008)
1.133***
(0.020)

Yes
No
785,950
0.116

0.897***
(0.005)
0.285***
(0.023)
-0.394***
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
785,950
0.324

-0.245***
(0.009)
-0.988***
(0.028)
0.690***
(0.010)
Yes
Yes
798,936
0.223

MILE*FFR
Cell FE
Bank FE
Observations
R-squared

8
Over-Limit
Fee
-0.226***
(0.011)
-10.266***
(0.089)

Yes
Yes
570,300
0.297

9
Over-Limit
Fee
-0.096***
(0.010)
-4.126***
(0.186)
-1.756***
(0.053)
Yes
Yes
570,300
0.303

Panel B

FFR
Intro_APR
Intro_APR*FFR
Cell FE
Bank FE
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
800,546
0.265

Yes
Yes
798,936
0.214

Over-Limit
Fee
-0.344***
(0.009)
1.969***
(0.032)

Yes
Yes
749,306
0.207

Over-Limit
Fee
-0.455***
(0.012)
1.223***
(0.045)
0.244***
(0.015)
Yes
Yes
749,306
0.208

Note: Panel A shows OLS regressions to estimate relationship between mileage reward programs and credit card APRs and fees. Panel B shows OLS regressions to estimate
relationship between zero intro APR reward programs reward programs and credit card APRs and fees. Data period is from 1999 to 2007. Data is restricted to offers we
have scanned pictures in Panel A. Panel B includes the entire credit card offer sample with and without scanned pictures. Regressions in column 1 to 9 are controlled by
household demographic cell fixed effects based on states, age, income, education, and household composition. Regressions in column 2 to 9 are controlled by bank fixed
effects. MILE is the dummy of whether the credit card offer has mileage reward program or not. Intro_APR is the dummy of whether the credit card offer has 0 intro APR
for regular purchase or not. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells.

#

55#

Table 8
Unemployment Insurance and Credit Card Feature
Panel A

FFR
UI
UI_Pre_3M
UI_Pre_6M
UI_Small
Time FE
Cell FE
Bank FE
Observations
R-squared

1

2

3

4

5

6

APR

Late Fee

Annual
Fee

IntroAPR
_All

Backward

Color

-0.146***
(0.007)
0.052*
(0.031)
0.075***
(0.022)
0.009
(0.024)
0.010
(0.031)
Yes
Yes
Yes
97,449
0.311

0.011***
(0.004)
0.008
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
Yes
91,783
0.0413

-0.011***
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
Yes
48,592
0.0514

-0.009*
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.010)
0.000
(0.011)
0.014
(0.009)
Yes
Yes
Yes
48,592
0.0301

0.256**
(0.115)
0.010
(0.133)
0.358***
(0.103)
0.320***
(0.100)
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,895
0.324

Backward

Color

Default
APR
MainPage

LateFee
MainPage

Default
APR
Back

-0.145***
(0.007)
0.065**
(0.029)
0.078***
(0.021)
0.010
(0.022)
-0.000
(0.028)
Yes
Yes
Yes
103,427
0.305

0.001
(0.009)
0.003
(0.006)
0.003
(0.006)
0.002
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
Yes
98,126
0.0589

-0.008
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.009*
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
Yes
55,778
0.0852

-0.006
(0.007)
-0.010
(0.011)
-0.006
(0.012)
0.003
(0.009)
Yes
Yes
Yes
55,778
0.0336

0.231***
(0.089)
0.038
(0.136)
0.320***
(0.080)
0.386***
(0.089)
Yes
Yes
Yes
17,408
0.389

0.111***
(0.040)
-0.064
(0.114)
-0.182
(0.118)
-0.015
(0.114)
-0.028
(0.092)
Yes
Yes
Yes
102,735
0.315

0.122**
-0.053
0.17
-0.12
-0.215
-0.14
0.077
-0.086
Yes
Yes
Yes
103,342
0.255

0.163
(0.667)
-1.294***
(0.466)
0.379
(0.682)
-0.625
(0.460)
Yes
Yes
Yes
103,820
0.257

0.053***
-0.015
0.070*
(0.037)
0.004
(0.034)
-0.003
(0.011)
Yes
Yes
Yes
105,380
0.154

APR

Late Fee

Annual
Fee

IntroAPR
_All

7
Default
APR
MainPage

8
LateFee
MainPage

9
Default
APR
Back

Panel B

FFR
UI
UI_Pre_3M
UI_Pre_6M
UI_Small
Time FE
Cell FE
Bank FE
Observations
R-squared

0.121***
(0.035)
-0.019
(0.111)
-0.121
(0.123)
0.027
(0.121)
-0.007
(0.081)
Yes
Yes
Yes
109,692
0.307

0.118**
(0.060)
0.168
(0.113)
-0.230*
(0.138)
0.090
(0.081)
Yes
Yes
Yes
110,475
0.275

-0.190
(0.700)
-1.194**
(0.494)
0.192
(0.742)
-0.910
(0.817)
Yes
Yes
Yes
110,984
0.237

0.044***
(0.015)
0.062*
(0.037)
-0.003
(0.030)
-0.010
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
Yes
112,575
0.153

Note: OLS regressions to estimate unemployment insurance effects on credit card features at 6-month frequency. Panel A includes the
credit card offers from 1999 to 2007. Panel B is from 1999 to 2011. All columns are controlled by 6 month fixed effects, bank fixed
effects, and cell fixed effects based on states, age, income, education and household composition. UI is the dummy which equals 1 if
unemployment insurances increase by more than 10% in this year and equals 0 in the year before the increase. UI_Pre_3M is the dummy
for 3 month pre-trend of the UI jumps. UI_Pre_6M is the dummy for 6 month pre-trend of the UI jumps. UI_Small is the dummy of the
UI increases below 10% which are mainly due to inflation adjustments. Column 7 and 6 are OLS regression on whether default APR/late
fees are mentioned on the main page of the credit card offers. Column 9 is for the default APR level when it's on the main pages.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level.

#

56#

FIGURE 1

APRS%AND%FEES%BY%EDUCATION
1.5
1
0.5
0

HIGH#SCHOOL

SOME#COLLEGE

COLLEGE

POST#COLLEGE#
GRADUATE

%0.5
%1
%1.5
%2
APR

ARP_Default

Late#Fee

Annual#Fee

Over%Limit#Fee

REWARD%PROGRAMS%BY%EDUCATION
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

HIGH#SCHOOL

SOME#COLLEGE

COLLEGE

%0.02

POST#COLLEGE#
GRADUATE

%0.04
%0.06
CASH

POINT

MILE

Intro_APR

Figure 1 plots the estimated coefficients on education when we regress individual card features on dummies
for different education levels (as provided by Mintel). The regression results are reported in Table 4.

#

57#

FIGURE 2

REWARD%PROGRAMS%BY%INCOME
0.15

0.1

0.05

0

15K%25K 25K%35K 35K%50K 50K%75K

75K%
100K

100K%
150K

150K%
200K

>200K

%0.05

%0.1
CASH

POINT

MILE

Intro_APR

APRS%AND%FEES%BY%INCOME
4
3
2
1
0

15K%25K 25K%35K 35K%50K 50K%75K

%1

75K%
100K

100K%
150K

150K%
200K

>200K

%2
%3
APR

ARP_Default

Late#Fee

Annual#Fee

Over%Limit#Fee

Figure 2 plots the estimated coefficients on the education when we regress individual card features on
dummies for different household income levels (as provided by Mintel). The regression results are reported
in Table 4.

#

58#

