                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     BOND FINANCE, BANK CREDIT, AND AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS IN AN
                           OPEN ECONOMY

                                        Roberto Chang
                                       Andrés Fernández
                                         Adam Gulan

                                      Working Paper 22377
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22377


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2016




Prepared for the Spring 2016 Carnegie Rochester NYU Conference on Public Policy. We thank
Mark Aguiar, Andrea Ferrero, Leonor Modesto, Maria Pía Olivero and Damiano Sandri for
useful discussions. We have also benefited from conversations with Julian Caballero, Luis Catão,
Fiorella De Fiore, Pablo D'Erasmo, Markus Haavio, Bengt Holmström, Esa Jokivuolle, Joachim
Jungherr, Enrique Mendoza, Guillermo Ordoñez, Vincenzo Quadrini, Antti Ripatti, Ctirad Slavík,
Christian Upper, Jaume Ventura, Mirko Wiederholt, and participants of several seminars and
conferences. The opinions in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the opinion of the Inter-American Development Bank or its board of directors, nor the
countries that they represent, nor of the Bank of Finland, nor of the European System of Central
Banks. Chang acknowledges the hospitality of CREI. Santiago Téllez provided excellent research
assistance. Further comments will be most appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Roberto Chang, Andrés Fernández, and Adam Gulan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bond Finance, Bank Credit, and Aggregate Fluctuations in an Open Economy
Roberto Chang, Andrés Fernández, and Adam Gulan
NBER Working Paper No. 22377
June 2016
JEL No. F3,F4

                                         ABSTRACT

Corporate sectors in emerging markets have noticeably increased their reliance on foreign
financing, presumably reflecting low global interest rates. The evidence also shows a rebalancing
from bank loans towards bonds. To study these developments, we develop a dynamic open
economy model where these modes of finance are determined endogenously. The model
replicates the stylized facts following a drop in world interest rates; in particular, rebalancing
towards bonds occurs because bank credit becomes relatively more expensive, reflecting the
scarcity of bank equity. More generally, the model is suitable for studying interactions between
modes of finance and the macroeconomy.

Roberto Chang                                   Adam Gulan
Rutgers University                              Monetary Policy and Research Department
Department of Economics                         Bank of Finland
75 Hamilton Street                              Snellmaninaukio
New Brunswick, NJ 08901                         Helsinki, FI00101
and NBER                                        Finland
chang@econ.rutgers.edu                          adam.gulan@bof.fi

Andrés Fernández
Research Department
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue NW
Washington DC 20577
andresf@iadb.org
1      Introduction


In recent years, the corporate sector in emerging market economies has increased its reliance

on foreign nancing considerably. This trend became more marked during the period of

low global interest rates following the global nancial crisis, and has generated a lively

debate regarding its interpretation and policy implications. An optimistic view is that the

increase in corporate liabilities is a natural response to favorable interest rates and relatively

favorable investment prospects in emerging countries. A less sanguine view is that larger

foreign liabilities are dangerous and place emerging economies in a precarious position.

    Understanding this phenomenon has been complicated by the observation that it has

largely reected increased bond issuance by emerging economies' rms, in contrast to the

bank loans which dominated capital ows in the past.1 To illustrate, Figure 12 reproduces a

chart from Powell (2014), describing the evolution of foreign corporate liabilities in Brazil,

Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, as well as an average (LAC-5). The gure shows a clear

acceleration in the amount of both bonds and loans owed by Latin American rms. It also

shows that the relative importance of bonds has increased since the start of the century

and, more emphatically, since the global crisis. For an average country in the gure, the

share of bonds in the stock of international corporate debt increased from 22% in 2000 to

43% in 2013. This process has taken place while, simultaneously, debt-to-output ratios have

increased in emerging economies. In 2005 debt-to-quarterly GDP for LAC-5 was about 30%,

while by the end of 2013 it had almost doubled, just below 60%.3

    Figure 2 shows that the surge of external borrowing has been accompanied by a drop in

the interest rates faced by emerging economies. This drop was partly related to the low global
    1 Notealso that these developments have been dominated by corporate debt rather than sovereign debt,
which was prevalent in earlier periods. As shown in Caballero, Fernández and Park (2016), corporate
bond issuance has also increased domestically, but not as much as the one issued in international markets.
Sovereigns, on the other hand, have displayed a tendency of substituting international bond issuance with
domestic bond issuance.
   2 Figures and tables are gathered at the end of the paper.
   3 We measure debt on a residence basis. Stylized facts hold as well when debt is measured on a nationality
basis. The Online Appendix reproduces Figure 1 by scaling the amount of debt by GDP.



                                                     2
interest rates since the onset of the crisis, here measured by real U.S. bond rates. However,

since the early 2000s it was also accompanied by the low spreads that these countries are

charged on top of the riskless rate.4 Low spreads continued despite the short-lasting jump

following the panic of 2008.

    This paper sheds light on the interpretation and implications of these events by developing

a stochastic dynamic equilibrium model of an open economy in which the quantities of

direct versus intermediated nance are determined endogenously. Our calibrated model

embeds the static, partial equilibrium model of Holmström and Tirole (1997, henceforth

HT) into an otherwise standard dynamic setting. As in HT, the production of capital goods

requires nance from outside investors. As we are interested in foreign borrowing by the

emerging economies, we assume in the model that this outside lending comes from abroad.

Due to moral hazard problems, only a fraction of this production can be nanced directly

from the outsiders, while another portion can be nanced only with the participation of

monitors or "banks".5 In each period, therefore, the amounts of bank loans and direct

nance are endogenous and depend on variables such as the price of capital goods and the

equity of capital producing rms and banks. The latter are determined in a dynamic general

equilibrium, in contrast to HT. Hence our model allows for a study of the interaction between

modes of nance and the macroeconomy, and is of independent interest.

    As a main nding, the model yields an intuitive economic explanation of the joint dynam-

ics of bonds, bank loans, and interest rates summarized by Figures 1 and 2. In the model, an

exogenous drop in world interest rates leads to an increase in the demand for capital goods

and a corresponding increase in their relative price. The latter raises the protability of

capital goods production; given existing corporate equity, this raises pledgeable income and
   4 These  favorable borrowing conditions have been enjoyed not only by sovereign borrowers, as depicted
by the EMBIG spread in Figure 2 but also by non-nancial corporations, as measured by the CEMBI which
has also followed the dynamics of EMBIG.
    5 We abstract from equity issuance as a source of funding. In practice this is not far from reality, par-
ticularly for emerging market economies. Gozzi, Levine and Schmukler (2010) examine rm-level patterns
in international nancing decisions over the period 1991-2005 nding that debt issues in public markets are
much more important as a source of nance for rms than equity issues, with debt accounting for 80% of
the total funds raised through public markets.

                                                     3
allows for increases in both corporate bonds and bank loans. At the same time, however,

the return to the equity of the banking sector goes up, reecting that such equity is scarce

and slow to adjust. Hence bank nance becomes relatively more costly than direct nance

and, accordingly, the ratio of corporate bonds to bank loans goes up. These implications are

all in line with the empirical observations mentioned above, and reect the crucial roles of

corporate equity and bank equity in the adjustment process.

    The model is suitable to tackle several related questions. In particular, it has been con-

jectured that the observed increase in direct nance relative to indirect nance in emerging

countries may reect changes in the underlying technology of nance (e.g. costs of moni-

toring or degree of moral hazard) which, at the same time, may have made those countries

more vulnerable to external shocks. Our model provides a less pessimistic perspective: as we

show, permanent changes in moral hazard parameters or monitoring costs can indeed result

in an increase in the ratio of commercial bonds to loans, but also imply smoother responses

to interest rate shocks. This is intuitive, reecting that the mode of nance provides an
                                                                                      6
additional margin of adjustment in an environment of low interest rates.

    Finally, we extend the model to allow for an exports commodity sector, and analyze

the impact of shocks to world commodity prices. This is of interest because many emerg-

ing economies, including the ones featured in Figures 1 and 2, rely heavily on commodity

exports whose prices have experienced large uctuations since the millennium and consid-

erable increases during the period of low global interest rates. In the extended model, a

favorable shock to the prices of export commodities causes an increase in the demand for

capital goods, raising their price. This, in turn, leads to increased production of capital

goods, larger quantities of both direct and indirect nance, and an increase in the bonds to

loans ratio, just as in the baseline model and because of the same reasons. The extended

model thus conrms the insights of the baseline model as to the mechanism by which ex-
   6 Incontrast, Shin (2013) and others have argued that larger foreign liabilities are dangerous and place
emerging economies in a precarious position. Shin (2013) has emphasized that the increase in commercial
debt can be problematic because of the possibility of exacerbating currency mismatch problems, which we
do not address in this paper.

                                                    4
ternal shocks may explain the dynamics of bonds and loans. It also rationalizes the idea

that favorable commodity prices may have acted in conjunction with lower interest rates in

generating such dynamics.

    Our work is related to several strands of literature. One is a set of empirical studies that

have documented recent international trends in corporate debt issuance and analyzed the de-

terminants of corporate debt choice. Shin (2013) and Turner (2014) report the considerable

increase in foreign currency borrowing in international bond markets by emerging market

corporations.7 Powell (2014) and Bastos, Kamil and Sutton (2015) carefully document this

phenomenon for Latin American economies while Caballero, Fernández and Park (2016) pro-

vide similar evidence for Asia and Eastern Europe.8 Our model can be seen as a theoretical

explanation of the above empirical evidence. In particular, it is consistent with the ndings

of Caballero, Fernández and Park (2016), that aggregate investment has responded to low
                                                                                                         9
credit spreads during the period of corporate debt expansion in emerging economies.

    In developing our model, we build upon HT and other basic contributions that have

provided microfoundations for the choice between bank and market nance under moral

hazard.10 Our work extends this line of research by endogenizing the choice between bank
    7 Bruno and Shin (2015) document the distribution of corporate bond issuance in emerging economies
across sectors. The oil and gas sector accounts for over 23% of total issuance, while the telecoms and utilities
sectors also represent a large portion of the issuance activity (24%). They argue that, to the extent that
the cash ows of the latter sectors are mainly in domestic currency, the issuance of US dollar bonds entails
some currency exposure for the issuing rms. Also, part of the borrowing has been done by rms' oshore
aliates and therefore does not show up in residence-based statistics.
    8 In terms of the maturity of the corporate bonds in emerging economies, Caballero, Fernández and Park
(2016) document a median maturity at issuance of about 7 years between 2000 and 2014. Bruno and Shin
(2015), in turn, report an increase in the maturity for the bond issuance since 2001.
    9 On the other hand, using rm-level data, Bruno and Shin (2015) nd that emerging market corporates
tend to borrow more in US dollars when they already hold large cash balances. This indicates that cash needs
for investment may not be the only motivation for bond issuance; instead, Bruno and Shin suggest, rms
have been engaging in carry trades. The question of whether corporates borrow for investment purposes or
carry trades remains open. Using rm level data, Alfaro et al. (2016) nd that the evidence is mixed: they
document an increase in tangible xed asset investment among rms in emerging markets that exceeds the
average for the full emerging market sample in the pre-Asian crisis period; but they also uncover some cases
of weaker liquidity, solvency, and corporate distress indications compared to the pre-Asian crisis average.
See also Caballero, Panizza and Powell (2016) nd that non-nancial rms in emerging economies are more
likely to act like nancial intermediaries in countries with tighter capital controls.
   10 Repullo and Suarez (2000) also endogenize the choice between bank nance and market nance within
an environment where rms are heterogeneous in the amount of available net worth. See also Diamond
(1991), Rajan (1992), Besanko and Kanatas (1993) and Bolton and Scharfstein (1996).

                                                       5
nance and market nance embedding HT's dual moral hazard problem within a dynamic,

general equilibrium context of a small open economy.

    Our approach emphasizes the role of corporate equity and bank equity as determinants

of the demand for credit, like HT. We go beyond HT, however, in exploring dynamics as

well as macroeconomic implications. Chen (2001), Aikman and Paustian (2006), and Meh

and Moran (2010) have also embedded HT into dynamic equilibrium settings. A crucial

dierence with our paper, however, is that none of these forerunners modeled the endogenous

determination of direct nance versus intermediated nance, which is the central concern of

our paper.

    Perhaps the closest antecedent of our study is the recent paper by De Fiore and Uhlig

(2015)11 . They develop a model in which rms choose to nance productive projects either

directly or with the help of nancial intermediaries; the latter can draw a signal about

the probability of project success, which helps avoiding bankruptcy. De Fiore and Uhlig

(2015) then argue that their model can account for a simultaneous fall in bank loans and an

increase in bond issuance by US rms during the Great Recession; this is the case if rm-

level uncertainty and intermediation costs of banks happen to increase at the same time.

Our paper coincides with De Fiore and Uhlig's in modeling the endogenous determination of

direct nance versus bank nance in dynamic macro models, but it is very dierent otherwise.

We start from dierent facts: in emerging economies, the amounts of bonds and bank loans

have moved in the same direction; in contrast, De Fiore and Uhlig's objective was to explain

the observed fall in loans and increase in bonds in the US. More notably, our theoretical

framework is quite dierent from theirs: ours emphasizes the key role of corporate and bank

equity, which allows us to provide an economic explanation of the links between observable

changes in world interest rates and commodity prices and the dynamic behavior of bonds

and loans. Finally, De Fiore and Uhlig's model is a closed economy one, while we model an
  11 De Fiore and Uhlig (2011) rst develops the model in De Fiore and Uhlig (2015), providing steady state
analysis and focusing on long run dierences between the US and the Euro area.




                                                    6
open economy in order to understand the international phenomena described above.12

      The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the basic model, outlines its

solution, and discusses its theoretical implications. Section 3 describes a baseline calibration.

Section 4 examines dynamic implications of the calibrated model. Section 5 extends the

model to allow for a commodity exports sector and discusses the implications. Final remarks

are given in Section 6.



2       The Model


Our focus is on a small open economy. Time is discrete and indexed by t = 0, 1, .... The

economy is inhabited by households, nal goods producers and holding companies which

produce new capital goods. The rest of the world acts as a supplier for credit, both for the

holding companies as well as for the households.


2.1 Households and Final Goods Production
Our specication of the household sector and of the production of nal goods is standard, so

it will be brief. This is because, for our purposes, the main aspect of this part of the model

is to generate a dynamic demand for capital goods. Accordingly, we assume that producing

nal goods requires capital, which is owned by domestic households, and that the relative

price of capital is time varying.

      There is a freely traded nal good that will serve as numeraire. Competitive domestic

rms produce nal goods with capital and labor via a Cobb-Douglas function:


                                             Yt = At Ktα Ht1−α                                            (1)


with Yt denoting output of nal goods, Kt capital input, Ht labor input, At total factor
    12 See
         also Crouzet (2015), which develops a dynamic model where banks oer more exibility than market
lenders if a rm is in nancial distress; banks lending is more restrictive than market lending otherwise. The
role of bank equity, which is critical in our framework, is also absent in Crouzet's setup.

                                                      7
productivity (assumed to be exogenous) and 0 < α < 1.

   Competitive factor markets yield the usual marginal conditions


                                              αYt = rtK Kt                              (2)

                                     (1 − α)Yt = wt Ht                                  (3)


where rtK and wt denote the rental rate of capital and the wage rate, respectively.

   Households are the owners of productive factors, including capital. They can also borrow

or lend in world markets at a gross interest rate Ψt+1 Rt+1
                                                        ∗
                                                            , where Rt+1
                                                                     ∗
                                                                         is the safe world

interest rate between periods and Ψt+1 is a country specic spread.

   The household's budget constraint in period t is, then,


                 Ct + Qt Xt + Ψt Rt∗ Dt = wt Ht + rtK Kt + Dt+1 + 1 − φf Πt             (4)
                                                                        



where Ct denotes consumption of the nal good, Xt purchases of new capital, Qt the price of

new capital, and Dt+1 the amount borrowed abroad. Finally, 1 − φf Πt denotes dividends
                                                                   

from capital producing rms, which are transferred to the household, as described below.

   The spread Ψt is exogenous to the household but, as discussed by Schmitt-Grohé and

Uribe (2003), it depends on D̄t , the aggregate value of Dt :



                                   Ψt = Ψ̄ + Ψ̃(eD̄t −D̄ − 1)                           (5)

   The representative household maximizes the expected present discounted utility of con-

sumption and labor eort. We assume GHH preferences following Greenwood, Hercowitz

and Human (1988) for which the marginal utility of consumption is

                                                              −σ
                                                         Hτ
                                              
                                    λct   =       Ct − κ                                (6)
                                                         τ




                                                    8
where κ, τ, and σ are parameters. Optimal labor supply is then given by:


                                             wt = κHtτ −1                                      (7)



       The optimal foreign borrowing-lending policy is given by


                                                    λct+1
                                       1 = β h Et               ∗
                                                          Ψt+1 Rt+1                            (8)
                                                     λct

where β h ∈ (0, 1) is the household's discount factor and Et (.) is the conditional expectation

operator.

       Finally, capital accumulation is subject to adjustment costs:

                                                                           2
                                                     ϕ               Kt+1
                            Kt+1   = (1 − δ)Kt + Xt − Kt                  −1                   (9)
                                                     2                Kt

where 0 < δ < 1 is the depreciation rate and ϕ > 0 is a parameter giving the degree of

adjustment costs. Then optimal investment is given by the dynamic equation:



                                     
                                Kt+1
                 Qt 1 + ϕ            −1                                                       (10)
                                 Kt
                                                                                      2
                   λc
                                                                            
                                                             Kt+2     Kt+2 ϕ Kt+2
             = β Et t+1
                  h
                        [rK + Qt+1 (1 − δ) + ϕ                    −1       −        −1 ]
                    λct t+1                                  Kt+1     Kt+1   2 Kt+1

This equation, as well as the previous ones, have standard interpretations.

       For a given process for the price of capital Qt , and given a process for Πt , the preceding

two equations determine the demand for investment. It is often assumed that domestic

output can be split between consumption goods and new capital goods at no cost, so that

Qt = 1 always, and that capital production yields no prots so that Πt = 0. In that case,
(1)-(10) is a system of ten equations that suces to determine the rest of the variables so

far.


                                                     9
2.2 Finance and Production of New Capital Goods
To depart from the usual approach, we assume that new capital goods Xt are produced via

a process subject to nancial frictions. In equilibrium Qt will be variable and investment

will reect the dynamic supply of investment as well as demand. More importantly, those

dynamic forces will interact with the behavior of alternative modes of corporate nance.

   New capital goods are produced by "holdings", each of which manages a continuum of

productive units ("branches" for short) indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. The representative holding

arrives at period t with some amount of equity Ktf , inherited from the previous period. At

the beginning of the period, each branch i is charged with nancing and executing a project

of the same size, which takes It units of the nal good as input, and returns a random

amount of new capital goods at the end of the period, as we will describe below. The size

of the investment project, It , is chosen by the manager of the holding to maximize end of

period prots. At the end of the period, successful branches return all their prots back to

the holding manager. Also, as holdings are ultimately owned by households, a fraction of

these prots are paid out every period as dividends.

   Also at the beginning of the period, the holding's equity is split evenly between its

branches, so that each of them receives Ktf (due to their unit mass). Every branch i then faces

an idiosyncratic shock Zti to its equity, which is a random variable with mean one, distributed

i.i.d. across periods and time. This setting can be thought of as a situation in which there

are nationwide corporations (holdings) that own units (branches) in dierent locations. The

holding chooses a project design that has to be implemented by all branches. Each branch

is given the same initial amount of equity money, but idiosyncratic, location-specic startup

cost shocks imply that branches eectively start projects with equity Ait = Zti Ktf , distributed

with the cumulative distribution function Gt ( . ). Simple algebra shows that Gt (A) can be

re-expressed as Gt (A) = Φ(log at ), where at is the level A normalized by the holding equity

Ktf (i.e. "per-unit of holding equity" level of A) and Φ( . ) is a time-independent cdf of




                                               10
log Zti .13 This normalization will prove useful in the following discussion.14


2.2.1 Individual Projects

Consider the problem of a branch which starts period t with equity Ait . As mentioned, the

branch manager takes the project size It as given. For most rms in the distribution (except

for a small fraction very far in the right tail of the distribution, discussed below) it will be

the case that It > Ait . These rms will seek external nancing in order to implement the

investment project. As we are interested in foreign borrowing by emerging markets' rms,

we assume that external nancing in the model comes from abroad. As in HT, we allow for

both direct and intermediated nancing. Directly nanced projects are not monitored and

therefore can be associated with borrowing via bonds. Intermediated borrowing is subject

to monitoring and can be associated with bank lending.

    Specically, investment projects are subject to moral hazard. If the branch manager

has secured at least an amount It of funds at the beginning of the period, she can invest

them into a "good" project that yields RIt units of new capital with probability pH and

zero with probability 1 − pH . The manager can, alternatively, invest It in a "bad" project,

which reduces the probability of the successful outcome to pL < pH but gives the manager a

private benet of size BIt . Here R, B, pH and pL are some given parameters.

    Branches can seek funds from foreign outside investors. Because, for tractability, con-

tracts are settled within a period, and the rest of the world is included in the set of outside

investors, it is appropriate to assume that outside investors are risk neutral and have a zero

opportunity cost for funds. However, assuming that the good project has positive expected

value but the bad project does not, outside investors will agree to lend only under a contract
  13 G        = Pr Ait ≤ A = Pr log Ait ≤ log A = Pr{log Zti ≤ log A − log Ktf } = Pr{log Zti ≤ log at } =
                              
      t (A)
Φ(log at ).
  14 The reason why the distribution of equity is not history-dependent is entirely for tractability. Otherwise
one would have to keep track of the entire distribution of equity in the economy. This modeling choice,
however, can be justied since the probability of success in a given period is exogenous and given by pH ,
and all ICCs hold. Since every branch "behaves", every branch's ex post return is purely random and
history-independent as well, therefore there is no reason to reward one branch more than another.


                                                      11
that provides enough incentives to the branch manager not to undertake the bad project.

Denoting by Rtf,i the payo to the branch manager in case of project success, the necessary

incentive compatibility constraint can be written as


                                        pH Rtf,i ≥ pL Rtf,i + BIt


or
                                                         BIt
                                               Rtf,i ≥
                                                         ∆

with ∆ = pH − pL .15

     Also, for the branch to be able to nance the project by borrowing from the outside

lenders, the amount borrowed must be It − Ait . Then, the expected payo to the lenders

must be at least as large, that is,


                                     pH (Qt RIt − Rtf,i ) ≥ It − Ait


     Combining the last two inequalities, it follows that the branch manager will be able to

nance its project directly from outside lenders (i.e. via bonds sold abroad) only if it has

enough equity: Ait ≥ Āt , where

                                                            
                                                           B
                                     Āt = It 1 − pH (RQt − )
                                                           ∆

It will be useful for the discussion that follows to normalize this cuto by Ktf , the aggregate

level of holding equity:
                                                            
                                                           B
                                     āt = it 1 − pH (RQt − )                                         (11)
                                                           ∆
  15 Sincethe branch is not the ultimate owner of the equity it operates and has to return the net revenue
back to the holding at the end of the period, it may be asked why would then the incentive constraint apply
to the branch. We assume here that the remuneration of the branch is performance based and proportional
to the expected branch revenue by factor x. The incentive constraint of a branch can then be written
as xpH Rf > xpL Rf + BI , which makes the constraint equivalent to the one in the main text and x not
separately identiable from B .


                                                    12
where it =   It
             Ktf
                 .   Given it , āt depends naturally on parameters such as R, as in HT. In our

setting, āt also depends on the price of capital: it falls if Qt increases. This will imply that

more rms will be able to participate in bond nancing, thus, in principle, increasing the

supply of capital as Q increases.

   Consider now a branch j for which Ajt < Āt ? As in HT, we assume the existence of

nancial intermediaries or "banks". Banks start each period with some equity of their

own that can be used for funding projects. More importantly, they also own a monitoring

technology that allows them to reduce the branch manager's private benet of the bad project

from B to b < B. However, using the monitoring technology entails a private cost cIt to a

bank.

   This implies that, for a branch j to secure external funding with the participation of a

bank, the bank's payo if the project is successful, denoted by Rtm,j , has to provide enough

incentives for the bank to monitor:


                                      pH Rtm,j − cIt ≥ pL Rtm,j


   or
                                                   cIt
                                         Rtm,j ≥       ≡ Rtm
                                                   ∆

   Also, for a branch j to convince a bank to participate in the project, it must oer the

bank a return on its funds at least as large as what the banker would obtain elsewhere.

Denoting the latter by βt and the bank's contribution to the project by Itm,j , the condition

is that pH Rtm,j ≥ βt Itm,j . Although the contract is within a period, βt is greater than the

market return (of one) to compensate the bank for the cost of monitoring but also, as we will

see, because bank equity is scarce. This means that holding branches will never borrow more

from bank's own equity than strictly necessary, so the condition must hold with equality,




                                                   13
which combined with the previous relation gives


                                                     pH Rtm
                                           Itm,j =          ≡ Itm
                                                       βt

      In this case, the participation of outside investors implies the incentive compatibility

constraint pH Rtf,j ≥ pL Rtf,j + bIt , that is,


                                                           bIt
                                                Rtf,j ≥
                                                           ∆

where Rtf,j denotes the payo to the branch manager in case of project success.

      Finally, for outside investors to recover the opportunity cost of their funds, their expected

payo must be at least as large as the amount they lend to the project. This can be written

as:



                               pH (Qt RIt − Rtf,j − Rtm ) ≥ It − Itm − Ajt

      In equilibrium, this inequality will be binding.16 As in the case of direct nance, one can

show, by combining the previous three equations, that a branch j will be able to nance its

project via monitored nance if it has enough equity: Ajt ≥ At , where

                                                            
                                          cpH             b+c
                              At = It 1 −      − pH RQt −
                                          βt ∆             ∆

Again, normalizing this equation by Ktf yields in turn

                                                            
                                          cpH             b+c
                              at = it 1 −      − pH RQt −                                               (12)
                                          βt ∆             ∆

The normalized version of the cuto is handy, because Φ (log at ) denotes the fraction of rms

with no access to external nance in period t and shows that this fraction is solely a function
  16 Notethat, even in equilibrium, Rtf,j will not be constant across branches (i.e. we keep the j subscript)
because branches have dierent levels of equity Ajt .

                                                      14
of the normalized cuto. We refer to this fraction of rms as "Category 1" rms. By analogy,

the fraction of rms which borrow via banks ("Category 2") is given by Φ (log āt )−Φ (log at ).

Finally, the fraction of rms nancing themselves through corporate bonds ("Category 3")

is 1 − Φ (log āt ).

    For the purpose of later analysis let us make an additional comment on the determination

of the rate of return to bank equity βt . In this setting, as in HT, the return to a banker for

participating in a project must be large enough to induce monitoring. This requires that the

payo to the banker, Rtm = cIt /∆, exceed the opportunity cost of monitoring, which is just cIt

(since ∆ < 1 and the alternative rate of return is the intraperiod return of zero). Therefore,

bankers earn an excess return for participating in investment projects. The assumption in

HT, which we adopt here, is that bankers compete for such excess returns by providing

equity Itm to the projects. The rate of return βt then adjusts so as to equate the aggregate

amount of bank equity thus oered to the available stock of bank equity at the beginning of

the period, which will be denoted by Ktm . In our formulation, Ktm is predetermined, so the

rate of return on equity βt adjusts to reect the scarcity of bank equity.

    It may also be worth noting that the endogeneity of the return to bank equity βt implies

that the responses of Āt and At to exogenous shocks are qualitatively dierent. From (11)

it is apparent that shocks aect Āt only through their impact on the price of new capital Qt

and project size It . In contrast, (12) tells that At responds to shocks not only through Qt

and It , but also through βt . Thus the nature of nancing has important consequences for

how the economy responds to external shocks such as to world interest rates.17
  17 Toelaborate, suppose that βt were (counterfactually) some exogenous parameter β̄. Then (11) and (12)
imply that At would be the same as Āt , but with the term b + c(1 − 1/β̄) in the former replacing the private
benet B in the latter. Then indeed the responses of Āt and At to a shock in Rt∗ would be qualitatively the
same. But this is not the case in our model, since βt is an endogenous variable rather than an exogenous
parameter and therefore it uctuates over the business cycle.




                                                     15
2.2.2 The Choice of Project Size

The prots of a typical holding in period t can then be written as:

                                                         AtZ
                 Πft                                        Ait dGt Ait
                                                                        
                        = pH Qt RIt (1 − Gt (At )) +
                                                       0
                            Z ∞
                                                                cIt
                                  It − Ait dGt Ait − pH                                             (13)
                                                                                      
                          −                                         Gt (Āt ) − Gt (At ) (βt − 1)
                             At                               βt ∆

    The rst line expresses the holding's end of period revenue, the sum of expected payo

from investment projects plus the (zero) return from funds from branches that will not be

able to nance their projects. The rst term in the second line summarizes the market cost

of external nance paid to outside investors. Noting that (pH cIt )/(βt ∆) = Itm , the last term

captures the excess return to bank equity.

    The holding chooses investment project size It to maximize prots subject to (11) and

(12), taking Qt and βt as given. After some manipulation, the rst order optimality condi-

tion18 can be written as:

                                                                          
                                                            cpH                                 
                         (pH RQt − 1)(1 − Gt (At )) −             (βt − 1) Gt (Āt ) − Gt (At )
                                                            βt ∆
                                                                                 pH c
                                                                                                    (14)
                                                   
                       = At gt (At ) [pH RQt − 1] + Āt gt (Āt ) − At gt (At )        (βt − 1)
                                                                                  βt ∆

where gt (A) is the density function associated with Gt (.).19

    The preceding equation together with (11) and (12) now determine It , At , and Āt . The

interpretation of this condition is illuminating. The LHS can be seen as the expected increase

in the surplus to the holding from a marginal increase in project size It . Each additional unit

of initial investment has expected return pH RQt −1, and is undertaken by 1−Gt (At ) branches.

Part of that gain, however, is appropriated by the banks because the return on bank equity

exceeds the market return (that is, if βt > 1). This is the second term in the LHS. The RHS
  18 For our discussion, we assume here that the rst order condition identies a maximum. Later, in the
calibrated version of our model, we checked that the second order conditions for maximization do hold at
the nonstochastic steady state.
  19 g            ∂              1
                                             − log Ktf )
     t (A)   =   ∂A Gt (A)   =   A φ(log A


                                                               16
collects terms associated with the impact of an increase in It on the distribution of branches.

A larger It implies an increase in At and, hence, a reduction of approximately At gt (At )

producing units, implying a corresponding reduction in the holding's revenue of pH RQt − 1

per lost unit. Finally, Āt also increases, which means that approximately Āt gt (Āt ) branches

move from direct nance to bank nance. Since At gt (At ) drop out from production, the

number of branches resorting to bank nance increases by Āt gt (Āt ) − At gt (At ) , with each
                                                                                   

of them shifting prot towards banks by (pH c)/(βt ∆)(βt − 1). In other words, the fact that

the LHS equals the RHS in (11) means that the optimal decision of the holding equalizes

the net marginal revenue of undertaking one more unit of investment with its marginal cost.


2.3 Market Clearing and Dynamic Equilibrium
As discussed before, the return on the bankers' equity βt adjusts so that the bankers' par-

ticipation in investment projects Itm Gt (Āt ) − Gt (At ) adds up to available bank equity,
                                                         

denoted by Ktm . This requires:


                                                  pH cIt 
                   Ktm = Itm Gt (Āt ) − Gt (At ) =                                         (15)
                                                                              
                                                           Gt (Āt ) − Gt (At )
                                                    βt ∆

   In turn, the equilibrium price of new capital goods, Qt , must adjust to equate the demand

for new capital goods to their supply:


                                    Xt = pH RIt [1 − Gt (At )]                              (16)


   To nish specifying dynamics, we need to describe the laws of motion of the equity

variables Ktm and Ktf . As a rst approximation, we simply assume here that banks and

holding companies have xed dividend rates 1 − θm and 1 − θf respectively.

   Hence the law of motion of Ktm is


                                          m
                                         Kt+1 = θm βt Ktm                                   (17)


                                                17
and the law of motion of Ktf can be expressed as:


                                           f
                                          Kt+1 = θf Πft                                      (18)


   Now the eight equations (11)-(18) give It , At , Āt , βt , Qt , µt and the motions of Ktm and

Ktf . Together with (1)-(10) and an assumption about the process for exogenous shocks, they
complete the specication of the model.


2.4 The Choice Between Direct versus Indirect Finance
In spite of the complexity of the model, one can extract useful insight about the choice of

direct versus indirect nance by studying the equilibrium conditions. Specically, consider

an unexpected increase of investment demand, which may be due to a favorable shock,

specied in more detail later. Intuitively, in equilibrium, both the price and the quantity

of investment must increase. Since the production of new capital goods requires external

nance, and the equity of both holdings and banks is slow to adjust, the total amount of

credit raised by the outside investors must increase, at least in the short run.

   But we can say more than that. Increasing the production of new capital goods in this

model requires a combination of a larger investment project size It and of adjustments in the

numbers of branches resorting to either direct or indirect nance. The latter is determined

by the thresholds Āt and At , given by (11) and (12).

   In this situation, for the model to generate an increase in direct nance relative to indirect

nance, as in the data, it must be the case that the threshold Āt fall relative to At . This

is, however, conditional on the shape of the assumed distribution of equity G ( . ). We verify

that this is indeed the case for the specic type of distribution that we use (see details below).

But such a fall must reect that bank nance has become relatively more expensive, as given

by an increase in the return to bank equity βt . More precisely, note that (11) and (12) imply




                                               18
that
                                                             B
                                     Āt       1 − pH (RQt − ∆ )
                                         =     cpH
                                           1 − βt ∆ − pH RQt − b+c
                                                                   
                                     At                          ∆

    An increase in the demand for new capital goods raises the price of new capital Qt which,

by itself, would raise the ratio.20 Increased demand also raises the return on bank equity βt

and this must be the dominant force if the ratio is to fall.

    The intuition is simple and illustrates the crucial roles of corporate equity and bank

equity. As emphasized by HT, a branch will undertake a project of size It if and only if

it has enough equity to cover the shortfall between the unit cost of investment project,

which is one, and the pledgeable income from the project, which is pH (RQt −               B
                                                                                           ∆
                                                                                             )   per unit of

investment. The cuto Āt is the value of equity which is just enough to cover that dierence:

that is what (11) says. Branches with equity less than Āt resort to their next best option,

which is monitored nance. This reduces those branches' moral hazard problem (reected

in the fall in the parameter from B to b) but entails two additional costs: monitoring costs

reduce pledgeable income directly, as given by the term c/∆, but also banks appropriate

part of the surplus since βt > 1, that is, since the rate of return on bank equity exceeds

the (within period) market return (of one). Hence, when the price of capital increases, the

fact that bank equity is scarce means that βt must increase in equilibrium. This reduces

pledgeable income for bank-monitored projects (but not for projects with access to direct

nance).

    In this way, our model provides an economic explanation of the observed increase of

bond issuance relative to bank loans in emerging markets. Falling world interest rates led

to increased demand for new capital, raising the protability of investment projects. In

response, producers of new capital goods increased project size (It in our model) and adjusted

the number of active branches and borrowing (Āt and At ). Total credit then increased,

predominantly through direct nance, since bank nance became more expensive (higher

βt ).
  20 To   see this, take logs and note that ∂ log Āt /At /∂Qt = pH R(1/At − 1/Āt ) > 0
                                                       



                                                       19
    The above argument is somewhat loose in that it refers to the thresholds Āt and At

only. Under our assumptions, however, the measure of branches resorting to either direct or

indirect nance depends also on the shape of the distribution Gt (A). Also, as we have seen,

the thresholds depend on project size It . Therefore it will be useful to dene measures of the

total amounts borrowed via bonds or bank loans. For corporate bonds CB t , a reasonable

measure is
                                                  Z   It
                                         CB t =            (It − Ait ) dGt (Ait )
                                                   At

    CB t is appropriate under the assumption that branches with access to direct nance put
all their equity into their projects, and that branches with excess equity (those with Ait > It )

do not issue bonds.21 The corresponding measure for bank loans BLt is22

                            Z   At
                                     (It − Itm − Ait ) dGt (Ait ) + Itm Gt (Āt ) − Gt (At )
                                                                                           
                    BLt =
                             At



where the right-hand side indicates that bank loans are nanced from a sum of deposits (rst

term) and banks' own equity (second term). The expressions for CB t and BLt emphasize

that the shape of Gt impacts both measures and their ratio. If Gt were a Uniform cdf,

of course, it would follow directly from the reasoning given above that an increase in the

demand for new capital would raise the bond measure relative to the loans measure. As

argued below, it is more realistic to assume that Gt is not Uniform, however, and we will

need to resort to numerical methods to examine the ratio. But the intuition given above

remains valid.
  21 These rms pursue the investment project and allocate excess equity on the market at the riskless intra-
temporal interest rate (one). Notice that this allows the model to encompass the case of rms in emerging
markets identied in some empirical studies that engage in carry trade activities (see Introduction).
  22 Here we are assuming that banks act as nancial intermediaries. But, as HT note, an alternative
interpretation might be that monitors provide certication services, which then allow branches in the indirect
nance range to raise additional funds from outside investors. This would introduce some ambiguity in
measuring bank loans. For concreteness, we stick to the nancial intermediaries interpretation of the model.




                                                             20
3       Steady State and Calibration


We calibrate the model at quarterly frequency. As we noted, our specication of house-

holds and production of nal goods is fairly standard. Consequently, values for associated

parameters are readily taken from the literature on small open economy models.

      Our choices for H , σ , τ and α,   C
                                         Y
                                           ,   R∗ , Ψ̃, and ϕ are taken from Fernández and Gulan
(2015). We normalize the price of capital goods Q and the total factor productivity parameter

A to 1. We then choose β h and δ to match the empirical ratios          X
                                                                        Y
                                                                            = 0.2 and   K
                                                                                        Y
                                                                                            = 8. The last
value translates into capital stock being worth two years of output and is consistent with

the data for Mexico collected by Kehoe and Meza (2012). The volatility and persistence

parameters of the exogenous shocks to productivity are set to standard values as well. We

calibrate the R∗ process to t the data on ten year US bonds' interest rates deated by

the University of Michigan's survey-based ination expectations. All calibrated parameters,

normalizations and matched ratios are summarized in Table 1.

      The second step of the calibration is more novel and involved. It concerns the parameters

of the capital goods supply side, that is, of the holding companies. Recall that Φ(z) denotes

the cdf of zti = log Zti . We assume that is Normal with standard deviation σG and mean
  2
−σG /2 (which is necessary to ensure that the expectation of Zti is one). This implies that the
distribution of equity within the holding, Gt (.) is log-normal, with mean Ktf . Log-normality

is often assumed in macroeconomics (e.g. Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist 1999) and in line

with the literature on the size of rms (e.g. , Axell 2001, Quandt 1966).

      We set the quarterly rate of return to bank equity β = 1.0364, based on the World

Bank's Global Financial Development Database (GFDD) for the United States (see ihák

et al., 2013).23 This automatically gives the value of banks' dividend parameter φm = β1 . We

calibrate pH = 0.99 following Meh and Moran (2010), which reects a quarterly bankruptcy
                                                                                              pH 24
rate of 1%. We then manually set pL = 0.96, the minimum value satisfying β >                  pL
                                                                                                 .
    23 Recall
            that banks are foreign-based in the model because we attempt to explain the empirical dynamics
of foreign bank loans.
  24 Keeping p low relative to p allows to widen the admissible parameter ranges for c, b, B and R in the
               L                  H



                                                   21
    At this stage one is left with equation (14), describing the rst-order condition of the

holding. Normalizing all terms by K f and simplifying, the equation reduces to an expression

in only 6 unknowns: c, b, B , σG , i = I/K f and R. To pin down their values, we use ve

more independent restrictions.

    The rst target is the ratio of quarterly bank operating costs-to-bank assets, which we

set to 0.78 percent guided by recent observations for the U.S. in the World Bank's GFDD.

Because empirically monitoring costs constitute only a part of all banks' operating costs,

this number constitutes in fact an upper bound for monitoring costs that one would like to

target in the model.

    Secondly, we try to match two leverage ratios. The rst one is that of bank assets to bank

equity (i.e. bank leverage) where we target the value 10.64, in line with the evidence reported

in the World Bank's GFDD for U.S. commercial banks. The other is the representative

holding's leverage: Fernández and Gulan (2015) report an average value of 1.71 for publicly-

traded rms in EME-13.

    Finally, we attempt to match two debt-related ratios akin to those presented in Figure

1. One is the median ratio of gross foreign bank loans stock to quarterly GDP, reported in

the BIS for 5 selected Latin American countries (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru),

approximately equal to 19.3 percent. The other, based on the same source of data, is the

gross foreign corporate bond stock to quarterly GDP of 6.3 percent.

    In addition to the six equations just listed, the unknowns c, b, B , σG , i = I/K f and R

must satisfy several inequalities25 . Hence we choose values for those unknowns to minimize a

weighted average of the dierences between the model-generated and empirical ratios subject

to the required inequalities. Details are given in the Appendix.

    Table 2 presents the empirical targets of the ratios alongside those in the calibrated model
calibration process and also implies a meaningful dierence between the two probabilities.
  25 Specically, it follows from HT that, for the model to be well behaved, the parameters c, b, B and R
must satisfy: 0 < A < Ā < I − I m < I , b + c > B > b. Also, the Lagrange multipliers associated with (11)
and (12) must be positive. Finally, there are natural restrictions; for example, monitoring costs cannot be
negative and the rate of return R should be greater than 1. Finally, for the case of log-normal distribution,
the second-order condition of the holding that delivers a prot maximum is 21 − log
                                                                                  σ2
                                                                                     a
                                                                                       > 0.
                                                                                   G




                                                     22
whereas Table 3 summarizes the nancial parameters' values that deliver these targets. The

overall match is satisfactory. We get very close to the chosen targets for bank leverage and

corporate bonds-to-GDP ratio. We underestimate somewhat the volume of bank loans, but

importantly, they are still over twice as large in the model than bonds, as it is the case in

the data. While we underestimate the bank operating costs, as discussed previously, the

empirical target should be only interpreted as an upper bound for bank monitoring costs

because it reects all banks' operating costs. The one dimension in which the match is not

as close is the leverage of the holding: the target is 1.71 whereas the best we can generate

with the model parameters is 4.76.



4     Dynamic Implications


In this section we present the performance of the model over time. To explain the main

mechanisms at work in the model, we start with the impulse responses. We then perform

a simulation in which we feed into the model a series of interest rate shocks recovered from

the data. This exercise shows that the model is qualitatively able to replicate the empirical

facts presented in the introduction. Finally, we study how a change in structural nancial

parameters of the model aect the economy and its dynamics.


4.1 Implications of Lower Interest Rates
Figure 3 describes impulse responses to a one percentage point drop in the quarterly (non-

annualized) world interest rate Rt∗ . This exercise is intended to explore the response of the

model to the fall in real interest rates observed since the start of the millennium.

    As usual, lower world interest rates raise both the household's stochastic discount factor

and the marginal utility of consumption. As a consequence, consumption, output, and hours

increase for several periods (about 20 quarters in our calibration), reecting the persistence




                                              23
of the Rt∗ shock.26 Also as a consequence, households increase their demand for capital goods

Xt . This is met, in equilibrium, with both an increase in the production of new capital goods
and the price of capital Qt .

   The dynamic responses of investment projects and the mix of direct and indirect nance

accord with the intuition presented earlier. Since the price of new capital increases, holding

companies have an incentive to increase production. To do this, the size of the typical

project relative to the holding's equity, it = It /Ktf , increases for several quarters. Since Ktf

is predetermined, the project size It itself increases on impact and afterwards it is hump

shaped.

   To understand the responses of the quantities of bonds and loans the gure reports the
                                      At
responses of āt =   Āt
                     Ktf
                           and at =   Ktf
                                          ,   i.e. thresholds normalized by Ktf , denoted as "abar" and

"aubar" in the gure, respectively. From (11) we know that the response of āt is ambiguous,

since the increase in it raises it but the increase of Qt lowers it. The latter dominates in

our calibration: on impact, āt falls implying that the number of branches resorting to direct

nance increases (these are labeled "Category 3" branches). In contrast, at increases. As

discussed before, this reects not only the impact of higher it and Qt , but also an increase

in the relative cost of bank nance reected in the rising return to bank equity βt . The latter

occurs, as discussed, because bank equity is predetermined.

   The gure shows that both bonds and loans increase on impact, although bonds increase

by more, so that the CB t /BLt ratio goes up. The ratio increases relative to its steady state

level for about a year and a half, and then undershoots. The evolution of this ratio reects

the dynamics imparted by the accumulation of prots, which leads to increases in both the

holding's equity Ktf and bank equity Ktm . Both increase for about two years, which in turn

supports more capital production and, therefore, bond nancing and loan nancing. Part of

this increase can be attributed to the fact that the number of rms with access to external

nance, i.e the extensive margin, increases. As a consequence, Qt drops relatively quickly.
  26 Output does not react on impact which reects the key property of GHH preferences, namely the lack
of income eect on the supply of labor.

                                                       24
βt also falls sharply, reecting both the fall in Qt as well as the accumulation of bank equity.
The fall in βt means that bank nance becomes more attractive; this is reected in the fact

that BLt has a hump shaped response, while CB t is monotonic. This also explains why the

CB t /BLt ratio appears to be less persistent than investment projects.
   Over time, the impact of the shock wanes, and all variables return to their steady state

values. Overall, this experiment indicates that our model can replicate the recent observed

increases in both direct and indirect nance, as the economy reacts to a fall in the world

interest rate. In this sense, the model rationalizes the evidence presented in the introduction.


4.2 A Simulation
As a complement to the impulse response analysis of the previous subsection, we examine

the predictions of the model when hit by a sequence of shocks to real interest rates akin to

those observed in the data. For that purpose, we obtain the tted residuals from an AR(1)

process that we estimate on the real ex ante 10 year US bond rate. Then we feed these

residuals as Rt∗ shocks into the model. The simulation period goes from 3Q 2004 until 4Q

2015. Figures 4 and 5 plot the results of this experiment.

   The left panel of Figure 4 plots the total amount of corporate external debt implied by

the model, i.e. the sum of stocks of corporate bonds CB t and bank loans BLt , normalized

to 100 for the rst period of the simulation. The right panel plots the simulated paths of

CB t and BLt separately. Qualitatively, the process of total debt tracks well the one observed
in Figure 4. First, the simulation captures a rise of debt in the pre-Lehman period, then a

reversal during the crisis in 2008-2009, followed by a vigorous recovery in the years 2010-

2013. The simulation also mimics a stronger recovery of bond issuance in the post crisis,

relatively to that of loans, which is a distinctive feature in the data presented in Figure 4.

Quantitatively, from trough in 2009 to peak in 2013, the simulation captures half of the

increase in corporate debt observed in the data. However, it counterfactually predicts a

considerable fall of debt in the last two years of the period considered, 2014-2015, whereas


                                              25
the data displays only a stagnation.

   Finally, Figure 5 shows that the surge in debt issuance has been, according to the model,

channeled to the real economy, mainly to productive investment, but also to consumption.

This is qualitatively consistent with the empirically observed growth in capital accumulation

reported in Caballero, Fernández and Park (2016) and Alfaro et al. (2016), as discussed in

the Introduction.

   This experiment exemplies the model's view of how low interest rates may help explain-

ing the outburst of corporate external debt in emerging markets. Evidently however, factors

other than low interest rates may have also contributed to the considerable growth in debt

in these economies, and indeed one of them, commodity prices, will be the subject of a later

section. But before we turn to that, we explore the role and impact of some of the deep

parameters of the model.


4.3 The Impact of Financial Frictions
The values of the parameters of the model, especially those related to nancial frictions

can be thought of as proxies for a country's level of nancial development. We focus on

monitoring costs and the private benet from moral hazard.


4.3.1 Monitoring Costs

Suppose that monitoring costs c are one third higher than in the benchmark calibration, while

all other parameters of the model are kept at their benchmark values. The corresponding

steady state is reported in the third column of Table 4.

   Intuitively, a larger c, by making monitoring more costly, reduces the size of investment

projects, so that aggregate investment in physical capital X should go down and the price of

capital Q should go up. In turn, the steady state levels of capital, output, and consumption

all should go down. The table shows that all of these implications are borne out, although

the magnitudes are small.


                                             26
   More noticeably, bank loans BL fall in the steady state. This is not surprising, since a

larger monitoring cost not only induces less total borrowing, but also a switch away from

bank nance. To put it in terms of our previous discussion, a larger c is associated with a

lower project size i and a higher price of capital Q. Looking at (11) and (12), both i and Q

have the same eect on ā and a, given that they aect pledgeable income in the same way.

However, the higher value of c has an additional, direct eect on a, reecting that larger

monitoring costs reduce pledgeable income of monitored projects. So it must be the case

that, for given i, the ratio Ā/A must fall.

   The switch away from bank nance explains why corporate bonds, CB , increase in the

steady state. This reects the fact that the eect of more branches moving into Category

3 (direct nance) dominates the fact that each branch borrows less. (since project size I

falls). In contrast, the fall in BL is explained by the fall in project size, since the measure of

branches moving to Category 2 (bank nance) actually increases.

   To see how the model's dynamics change when c is higher, Figure 6 plots impulse re-

sponses to a one percentage drop in the world interest rate Rt∗ in the benchmark case

(solid/black) and the counterfactual case of higher c (dashed/red). In the counterfactual

case, the response of the real variables is dampened relative to the benchmark. In other

words, increasing the cost of monitoring puts sand in the wheels of the mechanism by which

foreign interest rate shocks translate into movements in economic activity. This can be

clearly seen in the responses of aggregate investment in physical capital Xt , which increases

in the counterfactual by much less relative to the benchmark, thus making the price of new

capital goods Qt go upwards by more.

   The explanation for the dampening can be traced back to the responses of the holding's

debt, particularly that channeled trough banks. Indeed, total loans not only decrease in the

steady state (as argued before), but their response to a drop in interest rates is less vigorous

when c increases than in the benchmark. This comes intuitively from the fact that bank

credit is more costly. Note also that the response of bond nance is stronger relative to the


                                               27
benchmark, increasing the bond to loan ratio.

   Another direct consequence of higher monitoring costs and the associated reduction of

the demand for bank loans is the reduction of banks' revenue. Consequently, bank equity

accumulation is relatively more sluggish than in the benchmark, which inhibits banks lending

later on. This has also negative implications for equity buildup of the holding companies

which, likewise, experience a relatively slower pace of equity accumulation. Lastly, household

income is aected by this slower equity buildup of the holding insofar as the dividends as

smaller than in the benchmark, reducing the extent to which consumption rises following

the shock.


4.3.2 Private benets

Suppose now that the private benet B associated with moral hazard is ten percent smaller

relative to the benchmark. This may capture an increase in transparency in the private

sector, less corruption, or a stronger rule of law.

   The impact on the steady state is given in the last column of Table 4. Intuitively, one

should expect a lower B to lead to more investment, capital, output, and consumption, as

well as a lower price of new capital goods. Again, these predictions are conrmed by the

table, although the magnitudes are small.

   Lower private benets also favor direct nance over bank nance. The table shows that,

accordingly, the measure of branches obtaining direct nance (Category 3) increases, and so

does the amount of bonds CB . In contrast, the measure of branches with bank loans falls;

this reects both the increase in project size I as well as the fall in the price of new capital

goods Q. As a consequence, bank loans BL fall in the steady state.

   Figure 7 describes the impulse responses to a one percentage drop in the world interest

rate Rt∗ in the benchmark (solid/black) and the counterfactual case (dashed/red) of lower

B . Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the counterfactual dynamics is reected in the
evolution of the holding's debt. The quantity of bonds increases by more relative to the


                                               28
benchmark while the opposite occurs with bank loans. Consequently, the bond-to-loan ratio

increases more on impact, (in addition to the previously discussed increase in the steady

state).

      However, this change in the composition of debt does not translate into a stronger in-

crease in the reaction of the real variables (e.g., output, aggregate investment, consumption)

following an interest rate shock. If anything, the opposite occurs, i.e. the reactions of real

variables are now dampened relative to the benchmark case when B was higher. The key to

understand this is that, even with a lower B , the reaction of holdings to an increase in the

price of capital is restricted by their equity, and also by equity of banks (which determines

the cost of bank nance). The accumulation of both types of equity is slower than in the

benchmark, which dampens the impulse responses.

      The observations in this subsection and the previous one raise the interesting possibility

that the observed increase in bond nancing relative to bank nancing may reect changes

in the nancial technology, as given by an increase in c or a fall in B. Such changes, in

turn, would not increase the economy's sensitivity to external shocks: here the responses of

investment and aggregate demand to interest rate shocks are, if anything, smoother when c

is higher or B lower. This should not be too surprising in the context of our model, because

holdings do take advantage of an additional margin of adjustment when facing shocks. On

the other hand, this perspective provides an interpretation of the data reviewed in the

introduction that is more optimistic than that of Shin (2013) and others.27



5       Bonds, Loans, and Commodity Prices


While world interest rates appear to be the obvious suspects in accounting for the observed

dynamics of bonds and loans, emerging economies have been hit by other external shocks.

Most noticeably, drastic uctuations in commodity prices have been at center stage, as
    27 As
        mentioned in a previous footnote, Shin's (2013) perspective is largely grounded on the possibility
of currency mismatches. Our model does not feature mismatches, so it is not suitable to evaluate such
perspective.

                                                   29
illustrated by Figure 8. The left panel of the gure plots the evolution of the price index

for the three broadest categories of commodity goods, raw agricultural products, metals and

fuels, since the 1990s. It shows a remarkable increase in the volatility of the prices of all

three categories since the mid 2000s.28

    The right panel of Figure 8 uses country-specic commodity price indices computed for

Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru, all net commodity exporters, and compares the indices

with the Latin American EMBI spread. The plot shows that the four price indices were

strongly correlated with each other, and also endured a marked increase in their volatility

since the mid 2000s. At that time foreign nancing is these countries also began increasing;

this was expressed by a remarkable negative comovement between commodity prices and

country spreads, which is shown in the gure. That periods of booming commodity prices

have coincided with low interest rate spreads on country debt has been observed not only

for the four countries here but for commodity-exporting emerging economies in general.29

    These drastic uctuations in the prices of commodities exported by emerging economies

has motivated a recent literature on their business cycle implications as well as the appro-

priate monetary and scal policy responses.30 The literature, however, has largely ignored

the related issue of how commodity prices and nancial ows may be related. Specically,

can favorable shocks to commodity prices explain the stylized patterns of bond and bank

nancing in emerging economies? In this section we outline an extension of our basic model

that provides a positive answer. More generally, the model suggests interesting links between

commodity prices and the type of capital ows to emerging economies.31
  28 The   three price indices are computed by the IMF and are publicly available on the web. The gure
presents a smoothed transformation of the original series using a centered rolling moving average of 6 months.
   29 Country-specic commodity prices come from Fernández et al. (2015), who calculated them combining
the spot prices of 44 distinct commodity goods sold in international markets with country-specic shares of
each of these commodities in total commodity exports. This work computes country-specic price indices for
a large pool of emerging economies and quanties the (strong) degree of comovement between them. It also
provides more systematic evidence between country-specic commodity prices and measures of sovereign and
corporate spreads of international debt issued by emerging economies.
   30 See e.g. Fernández et al. (2015) and the studies in Caputo and Chang (2015).
   31 Recent works have studied the amplication mechanism of spreads that react to changes in commodity
prices within a quantiative general equilibrium (see Fernández et al., 2015 and Shousha, 2016). Others have
tried to provide microfoundations for movements in spreads following changes in commodity prices within a

                                                     30
   Doing full justice to this issue would require a separate paper, in our view; our treatment

here is intended only to illustrate the main connections, as well as to reinforce the intuition

of our model of alternative modes of nance. So, following Catao and Chang (2013), among

others, we add a simple commodity export sector ("mining") of competitive "mines" to

the benchmark model analyzed before. The representative mine produces and exports a

commodity ("copper") whose world price (relative to traded nal goods) is exogenous and

denoted by PtC . It is assumed that PtC follows an AR(1) process:


                                 PtC = (1 − ρC ) P̄ C + ρC Pt−1
                                                             C
                                                                + εC
                                                                   t




                                                         t are normally distributed iid shocks
where P̄ C is the real steady state price of copper and εC

with mean 0 and variance σC2 .

   Production takes only capital, and the production of the typical mine is:

                                                                 αC
                                              YtC = AC KtC


where YtC denotes copper output and KtC the copper mine's capital. In addition, αC and

AC are constants.
   The mine's only cost is accumulation of new capital XtC , which governs the evolution of

mining capital. For simplicity, we assume that the adjustment costs are similar to those of

households, although with possibly dierent coecients:

                                                                              C
                                                                                    2
                                                                 ϕC C
                                                                         
                         C                C                                  Kt+1
                        Kt+1   = (1 − δ       )KtC   +   XtC   −   K              −1
                                                                  2 t        KtC

   The prots of a typical mine are then given by

                                                               αC
                                   ΠC     C C
                                    t = Pt A  KtC                    − Qt XtC
nancial accelerator framework (Beltran, 2015; González et al., 2015). None of these works, however, have
studied the type of capital inows into emerging economies and commodity prices.


                                                          31
   In the preceding expression we have assumed that the mining sector uses the same capital

goods as the non-mining sector, and buys them at the same price Qt . Prots increase with

the commodity price, and fall with the price of new capital Qt .

   Finally, we assume that mines are wholly owned by the representative household. As

a consequence, the mine's problem is to choose a dynamic investment plan that maximizes

the present value of its prots, with the discount factor given by the household's marginal

utility of income. This results in an adjustment equation of mining capital which is similar

to the one for non-mining capital:

                      C
                          
                  C Kt+1
      Qt 1 + ϕ           −1
                    KtC
                 (           "                                            2 #)
              c
                                            C       C        C
                                                                  C
            λ                               K        K       ϕ    K
    = β h Et t+1   C
                       + Qt+1 1 − δ C + ϕC    t+2      t+2          t+2
                                     
                  rt+1                            −1       −            −1
             λct                              C
                                            Kt+1       C
                                                     Kt+1     2 Kt+1C



where
                                                        αC −1
                                  rtC = αC PtC AC KtC

is the return on mining capital. Note that it increases with the commodity price.

   The addition of the commodity sector requires two further amendments to the baseline

model. First, the household's budget constraint 4 must include prots from this sector,

 t . And second, since total new capital is now Xt + Xt , the market clearing condition for
ΠC                                                    C


aggregate investment (16) becomes


                               Xt + XtC = pH RIt [1 − Gt (At )]


   Calibrating the extended model involves choosing the parameters of the mining produc-

tion function, αC and AC , a depreciation rate for mining capital δ C , the capital adjustment

parameter ϕC , and the parameters in the process for the world price of commodities, P C .

In a similar specication to ours, Fornero et al. (2014) calibrate the capital share parameter

in the production function of the commodity sector to 0.31, using available data of physical


                                             32
capital from Codelco, the main copper producing company in Chile. Since this is almost the

same as the capital share α = 0.32 of the baseline model, we just set αC = α = 0.32. Like-

wise, we set δ C and ϕC at the same levels as for their counterparts in the non-commodity

sector. The two parameters in the process of the commodity price are set to ρC = 0.73

and σC = 0.063 following Fernández et al. (2015) who estimated an AR(1) process using

country-specic commodity prices for various emerging economies that are net commodity

exporters. Finally, we choose AC and adjust the nonstochastic steady state value of At so

that, in the steady state, the total amount of aggregate investment in the model with com-

modities, X + X C , equals the amount of new capital in the model without commodities;

and also so that the value of mining output as a fraction of total home output is equal to

13.36 percent. The latter gure is the average of the commodity production to GDP ratio
for Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru using estimates from Fernández et al. (2015).

   Figure 9 presents impulse responses to a one percent favorable shock to commodity

prices, P C . Intuitively, one would expect an exogenous increase in the commodity price to

raise protability in the export sector, increasing investment and capital accumulation there,

and also lead to increased consumption. The impulse responses are indeed consistent with

such expectations. Total investment increases, and the price of capital Q jumps up. Note,

however, that investment in the non-commodities sector falls on impact. This is not too

surprising given the increase in Q, and is reminiscent of "Dutch Disease" models.

   The increase in total investment demand and the price of capital lead to by now familiar

eects on the capital goods production side, as well as the behavior of bonds and loans. As in

the baseline model, both bonds and loans increase, with the bonds to loans ratio increasing

over its steady state value for about a year. Again, two forces are key: the increase in capital

goods production leads to an expansion of both modes of nance; at the same time, the return

to bank equity goes up, which makes bank nance relatively more costly to holdings and

provides an incentive to switch from loans to bonds.

   We see, therefore, that the dynamic behavior of bonds and loans in emerging economies


                                              33
can be a response to improvements in the prices of those countries' main export goods. Also,

the mechanism by which such shocks aect bonds and loans when we add commodities to

the model is quite similar to the one in the baseline model. In that sense, the analysis of

this section complements and reinforces the insights from our specication of the supply of

new capital goods.

    The model presented in this section can and should, of course, be extended in several

plausible directions. Also, one may want to investigate whether commodity prices are a better

(or worse) candidate than world interest rates in accounting for the observed dynamics in the

data; or whether the two kinds of shocks have reinforced each other in that regard. These

extensions are, nevertheless, beyond the scope of the present paper.



6    Final Remarks


One of the most important macroeconomic developments in emerging economies in recent

years has been the considerable increase in their reliance on foreign nancing. This has

led to a rise in the stock of international debt and has generated a lively debate about its

desirability. A benign view postulates that this is a natural response to favorable external

conditions and relatively favorable investment prospects in these countries. According to a

less optimistic view, reminiscent of previous crises in emerging economies, larger foreign lia-

bilities are dangerous and place these countries in a precarious position. A novelty, however,

of this increase in foreign debt comes from the fact that most of it has been linked to private

corporate debt, mainly in the form of direct bond issuance.

    To shed light on these new developments from a theoretical perspective, we have built

a tractable and intuitive dynamic model for a small open economy with endogenous de-

termination of direct versus indirect nance. The endogenous nancing choice is modeled

from rst principles under the presence of dual moral hazard (on the part of corporates as

well as banks) using the seminal static model of Holmström and Tirole (1997) as a point of



                                              34
departure.

   The model oers an intuitive economic explanation of the joint dynamics of bonds and

bank loans in the data. Exogenous forces, in the form of low world interest rates or high

commodity prices, increase the demand for capital goods, raise their relative price and rms'

protability. For a given level of corporate equity, this raises the pledgeable income and allows

for growth in both corporate bonds and bank loans stocks. At the same time, however, the

return to the equity of the banking sector goes up, reecting its scarcity and slow pace of

adjustment. Hence bank nance becomes relatively more costly than direct nance and,

accordingly, the ratio of corporate bonds to bank loans goes up.

   This analytical setup allows therefore to rationalize the benign view of the increase in

bond issuance in foreign capital markets by corporates in emerging markets during the period

of low global interest rates and high commodity prices. This holds insofar as corporates have

taken advantage of an additional margin of adjustment (bond issuance) when facing shocks.

The model, however, should not be viewed as evidence for this benign view, as it has relied

on several strong assumptions that prevent a normative analysis. Most notably, it does not

feature currency mismatches, so it is not suitable to evaluate the potential balance-sheet

eects associated with uctuations in exchange rates. Also, as it assumes that corporate

borrowing is solely for productive purposes, it does not incorporate the possibility of arbitrage

and carry trade that some empirical evidence suggests.

   We have also made some further simplifying assumptions for tractability that future

research ought to relax. In particular, we have assumed that the distribution of equity

across investing branches is given by exogenous idiosyncratic shocks. We did so to ensure

that the distribution of equity changes over time only through its rst moment Ktf . Relaxing

it would be computationally hard although would allow us to understand the intertemporal

interaction between the distribution of rms and their borrowing needs. Finally, we have

assumed that investment projects and their nancing, are all resolved within the period.

This simplies the analysis, but loosens the mapping between the model's variables and the


                                               35
empirical ones.



References


 [1] Adrian, T, P. Colla, H. S. Shin, 2012. "Which Financial Frictions? Parsing the Evidence

    from the Financial Crisis of 2007-9", National Bureau of Economic Research, No. 18335.

    (also NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2012, Vol. 27)

 [2] Aguiar M., and G. Gopinath, 2007. "Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is

    the Trend", Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 115, pages

    69-102.

 [3] Aikman, D., and M. Paustian, 2006. "Bank capital, asset prices, and monetary policy",

    Bank of England, Working Paper 305.

 [4] Alfaro, L., G. Asis, A. Chari, U. Panizza, 2016. Lessons Unlearned? Corporate Debt in

    Emerging Markets. Mimeo

 [5] Axtell R. L., 2001. "Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes", Science, vol. 293, pp.1818-

    1820

 [6] Bastos, F. R., Kamil, H., Sutton, B., 2015. Corporate nancing trends and balance

    sheet risks in Latin America: taking stock of "The Bon(d)anza". IMF Working paper

    No. WP/15/10

 [7] Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, Simon, 1999. "The nancial accelerator in a

    quantitative business cycle framework", Handbook of Macroeconomics, in: J. B. Taylor

    & M. Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 21,

    pages 1341-1393, Elsevier.

 [8] Besanko, D. and G. Kanatas, 1993. "Credit Market Equilibrium With Bank Monitoring

    and Moral Hazard", Review of Financial Studies 6 (1), 213-232.

                                            36
 [9] Bolton, P. and D. S. Scharfstein, 1996. "Optimal debt structure and the number of

    creditors", Journal of Political Economy, 1-25.

[10] Bruno V. and H.S. Shin, 2015. Global dollar credit and carry trades: a rm level analysis.

    BIS WP No. 510

[11] Caballero J., A. Fernández, J. Park, 2016. "On Corporate Borrowing, Credit Spreads

    and Business Cycles in Emerging Economies. An Empirical Investigation", Mimeo

[12] Caballero J., U. Panizza, A. Powell, 2016. The Second Wave of Global Liquidity: Why

    Are Firms Acting Like Financial Intermediaries. BID WP No. 641

[13] Caputo, R. and R. Chang, eds., "Commodity Prices and Macroeconomic Policy ",

    Central Bank of Chile Series on Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies,

    2016

[14] Chen, N.-K., 2001. "Bank net worth, asset prices, and economic activity", Journal of

    Monetary Economics 48, 415436

[15] ihák M., A. Demirgü£-Kunt, E. Feyen, R. Levine, 2013. "Financial Development in

    205 Economies, 1960 to 2010", National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., NBER

    Working Papers 18946, April

[16] Crouzet N., 2015. Aggregate Implications of Corporate Debt Choices, Mimeo, Kellogg

    School of Management, Northwestern University, April

[17] De Fiore F. and H. Uhlig, 2011. "Bank Finance versus Bond Finance", Journal of Money,

    Credit and Banking, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 43(7), pages 1399-1421, October.

[18] De Fiore, F. and H. Uhlig, 2015. "Corporate debt structure and the nancial crisis",

    ECB-WP 1759 (JMCB Forthcoming).

[19] Denis, D. and V. Mihov, 2003. "The choice among bank debt, non-bank private debt and

    public debt: Evidence from new corporate borrowings", Journal of Financial Economics.

                                              37
[20] Diamond, D. W., 1991. "Monitoring and reputation: the choice between bank loans and

    directly placed debt", Journal of political Economy, 689-721.

[21] Fernández A., and A. Gulan, 2015. "Interest Rates, Leverage, and Business Cycles in

    Emerging Economies: The Role of Financial Frictions", American Economic Journal:

    Macroeconomics, American Economic Association, vol. 7(3), pages 153-88, July.

[22] Fernández A., M. Klein, A. Rebucci, M. Schindler, M. Uribe, 2015. "Capital Control

    Measures: A New Dataset", NBER Working Paper No. 2097

[23] Gozzi, J. C., Levine R., Schmukler, S. L., 2010. Patterns in international capital raisings.

    Journal of International Economics 80, 45-57.

[24] Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, G. Human, 1988. "Investment, Capacity Utilization, and

    the Real Business Cycle", American Economic Review, American Economic Association,

    vol. 78(3), pages 402-17, June.

[25] Holmström, B. , and J. Tirole, 1997. "Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and

    the Real Sector", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 112(3), pages

    663-91, August.

[26] Kehoe, T. and F. Meza, 2012. "Catch-up growth followed by stagnation: Mexico, 1950

    2010", Working Papers 693, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

[27] Meh, C. and K. Moran, 2010. "The role of bank capital in the propagation of shocks",

    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 34(3), 555-576.

[28] Neumeyer, P. A., and F. Perri, 2005. "Business cycles in emerging economies: the role

    of interest rates", Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 52(2), pages 345-380,

    March.




                                               38
[29] Powell A., 2014. "Global Recovery and Monetary Normalization: Escaping a Chronicle

    Foretold?", 2014 Latin American and Caribbean Macroeconomic Report, Inter-American

    Development Bank, Washington DC, March

[30] Quandt, R., 1966. "On the Size Distribution of Firms", American Economic Review,

    vol. 56, pp. 416-432

[31] Rajan, R. G., 1992. "Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and arm's-

    length debt", The Journal of Finance 47 (4), 1367-1400.

[32] Repullo, R. and J. Suarez, 2000. "Entrepreneurial moral hazard and bank monitoring:

    A model of the credit channel", European Economic Review, vol. 44(10), 1931-1950

[33] Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe, 2003. "Closing small open economy models", Journal

    of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 61(1), pages 163-185, October

[34] Shin, H., 2013. "The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and Its Impact on Emerging

    Economies", Mimeo, Princeton University

[35] Turner, P. 2014. "The Global Long-Term Interest Rate, Financial Risks and Policy

    Choices in EMEs", BIS Working Paper No. 441. Monetary and Economic Department,

    Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland.




                                           39
              Figure 1: Stock of foreign corporate debt in Latin America




Notes : Units are billion USD. Red (bottom) areas indicate the stock of outstanding bank loans
and blue (top) areas indicate outstanding corporate bonds, both measured on residence basis.
Vertical lines indicate the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Sources: Powell (2014) and BIS.
               Figure 2: Global Interest rates for Emerging Economies.




Notes : Vertical line indicates the collapse of Lehman Brothers. The 10 Year U.S. bond rate
is deated using the University of Michigan Consumer Survey Ination Expectations. EMBI
spread is the J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. Sources : Bloomberg and University of
Michigan.
           Figure 3: Impulse responses to one percentage point drop in R∗ .




Notes  : All variables plotted are percentage deviations from the non-stochastic steady state, unless
indicated that they are in levels. This applies to the IRFs for the three categories, cutos and the
bond-to-loan ratio. Horizontal dashed lines denote steady state values of the variables plotted in
levels.
        Figure 4: Simulation of debt following R∗ shocks, 3Q 2004 - 4Q 2015.




Notes : In the simulation the real interest rate shocks, proxied by tted residuals from an AR(1)
process on the real ex ante 10 year US bonds rate, are fed to the model. The left panel plots
the total amount of corporate external debt implied by the model, whereas the right panel splits
this debt into stocks of bank loans BLt and bonds CB t . All simulated series are in levels and
normalized to 100 for the rst period of the simulation. Vertical line indicates the collapse of
Lehman Brothers. Sources : Bloomberg, University of Michigan and authors' computations.
Figure 5: Simulation of consumption and investment following R∗ shocks, 3Q 2004 - 4Q
2015.




   Notes : In the simulation the real interest rate shocks, proxied by tted residuals from an AR(1)
   process on the real ex ante 10 year US bonds rate, are fed to the model. All simulated series are
   in levels and normalized to 100 for the rst period of the simulation. Vertical line indicates the
   collapse of Lehman Brothers. Sources : Authors' computations.
Figure 6: Counterfactual impulse responses to one percentage point drop in R∗ with high c.




   Notes : c is higher by 1/3 relative to the benchmark. All variables plotted are percentage deviations
   from the non-stochastic steady state, unless indicated that they are in levels. This applies to the
   IRFs for the three categories, cutos and the bond-to-loan ratio. Black lines denote the benchmark
   and red lines denote the counterfactual. Horizontal dashed lines denote steady state values of the
   variables plotted in levels.
Figure 7: Counterfactual impulse responses to one percentage point drop in R∗ with low B .




   Notes : B is lower by 10% relative to the benchmark. All variables plotted are percentage devia-
   tions from the non-stochastic steady state, unless indicated that they are in levels. This applies
   to the IRFs for the three categories, cutos and the bond-to-loan ratio. Black lines denote the
   benchmark and red lines denote the counterfactual. Horizontal dashed lines denote steady state
   values of the variables plotted in levels.
   Figure 8: Commodity Prices and Interest Rate Spreads in Emerging Markets.




Notes : The left panel plots the price indices for each of the three broadest categories of commodity
goods: raw agricultural products, metals and fuels. The right panel plots country-specic com-
modity price indices for Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru alongside the Latin American
EMBI spread. The original series are smoothed using a centered rolling moving average window
of 6 months. Vertical lines indicate the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Sources : IMF, Bloomberg
and Fernández et al. (2015)
  Figure 9: Impulse responses to one percentage increase in commodity price P C .




Notes  : All variables plotted are percentage deviations from the non-stochastic steady state, unless
indicated that they are in levels. This applies to the IRFs for the three categories, cutos and the
bond-to-loan ratio. Horizontal dashed lines denote steady state values of the variables plotted in
levels.
                    Table 1: Calibrated parameters.
Parameter             Description                 Value               Source
    ϕ           cost of capital adjustment         4.602     Fernández and Gulan (2015)
   Ψ̃             risk premium elasticity         0.001    Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003)
    β          rate of return to bank equity      1.0364         ihák et al. (2013)
   pH       high probability of project success     0.99       Meh and Moran (2010)
   pL       low probability of project success      0.96        min. satisfying β > ppHL
    α           Cobb-Douglas capital share          0.32     Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)
  K/Y        capital-to-quarterly output ratio       8         Kehoe and Meza (2012)
   βh           Households' discount factor       0.9852         found endogenously
    δ                 Depreciation rate           0.025          found endogenously
   A                         TFP                      1             normalization
   H                      labor time                0.33     Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)
   Q                   price of capital              1              normalization
  X/Y           investment to output ratio          0.2                  Data
  C/Y          consumption-to-output ratio         0.746     Fernández and Gulan (2015)
   R∗        foreign interest rate on HH debt     0.49%         Data (non-annualized)
    τ              GHH labor parameter              1.6       Neumeyer and Perri (2005)
    σ               relative risk aversion           2       Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)
  ρR ∗            persistence of R∗ shock         0.9837        Data (non-annualized)
   ρA              persistence of A shock          0.95       Neumeyer and Perri (2005)
  σR ∗              std dev. of R∗ shock           0.001        Data (non-annualized)
   σA                std dev. of A shock           0.01
                Table 2: Matched empirical nancial ratios.
Condition                                       Model Target               Target Source
 Bank operating costs to bank assets                     0.0032 0.0078         World Bank GFDD
 Bank assets to bank equity                              9.7639 10.6444        World Bank GFDD
 Holding assets to holding equity                        4.7582 1.7100 Fernández and Gulan (2015)
 Gross foreign bank loans stock to GDP                  11.64% 19.28%                  BIS
 Gross foreign corporate bond stock to GDP 5.48%                  6.28%                BIS
 FOC of the holding                                         0         0            equation14
Notes : For ow variables, quarterly (non-annualized) data is used. For the "FOC of the holding", 0
indicates that the equation is exactly satised (i.e. LHS − RHS = 0).
   Table 3: Calibrated nancial parameter values.
Parameter           c      b     B      σG   i = KIf   R
Calibrated value 0.0030 0.0011 0.0031 2.2789 92.3384 1.0149
Table 4: Counterfactual steady state.
 Variable       Benchmark High c Low B
       i            92.3384         77.2777 92.3520
       I            3.6931           3.1759      3.7098
      Q             1.0000           1.0007      0.9998
      X             0.1756           0.1753      0.1757
      K             7.0240           7.0128      7.0266
        K
      r             4.000%         4.0028% 3.9994%
      Y             0.8780           0.8772      0.8782
      C             0.6550           0.6544      0.6645
         f
     K              0.0400           0.0411      0.0402
     Km             0.0105           0.0135      0.0097
       ā           8.8869           7.3821      7.9702
       a            3.3610           2.8481      3.3763
       ¯
 Category 2         0.0294           0.0331      0.0270
 Category 3         0.0179           0.0219      0.0202
     CB             0.0481           0.0501      0.0558
     BL             0.1022           0.0989      0.0945
 Notes : In the "High c" counterfactual the monitor-
 ing cost parameter c is increased by 1/3 relative to the
 benchmark. In the "Low B " counterfactual the private
 benet parameter B is reduced by 10% relative to the
 benchmark. In both counterfactuals all other parame-
 ters are kept unchanged and endogenous variables are
 allowed to adjust.
