NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CASH FOR CARBON:
A RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL OF PAYMENTS FOR
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES TO REDUCE DEFORESTATION
Seema Jayachandran
Joost de Laat
Eric F. Lambin
Charlotte Y. Stanton
Working Paper 22378
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22378
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We thank Robin Audy, Rebekah Chang, Alejandro Favela, Stephen Kagera, Meg Kearns, Lydia
Kim, Pricilla Marimo, Ellen Moscoe, Suanna Oh, Alexander Persaud, Jaye Stapleton, and Nancy
Thomas for outstanding research assistance; Chimpanzee Sanctuary Wildlife Conservation
Trust, Government of Uganda National Environment Management Authority, Innovations for
Poverty Action (including Pia Raffler and Doug Parkerson), International Institute for
Environment and Development, Nature Harness Initiatives, and Katoomba Group for
collaborating on the project; Rebecca Dizon-Ross, Kelsey Jack, Cynthia Kinnan, Molly
Lipscomb, Lee Lockwood, Dave Marvin, Stefano Pagiola, and several seminar participants for
helpful comments; and the Global Environment Facility, through the United Nations
Environment Programme, and the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) for funding.
Jayachandran also thanks the National Science Foundation for funding (SES-1156941). The
views expressed in this article are not necessarily those of the partner organizations, funders, their
members, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Seema Jayachandran, Joost de Laat, Eric F. Lambin, and Charlotte Y. Stanton. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cash for Carbon: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Payments for Ecosystem Services to
Reduce Deforestation
Seema Jayachandran, Joost de Laat, Eric F. Lambin, and Charlotte Y. Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 22378
June 2016
JEL No. O10,O13,Q23,Q54
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates a Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES) program in western Uganda that
offered forest-owning households cash payments if they conserved their forest. The program was
implemented as a randomized trial in 121 villages, 60 of which received the program for two
years. The PES program reduced deforestation and forest degradation: Tree cover, measured
using high-resolution satellite imagery, declined by 2% to 5% in treatment villages compared to
7% to 10% in control villages during the study period. We find no evidence of shifting of treecutting to nearby land. We then use the estimated effect size and the "social cost of carbon" to
value the delayed carbon dioxide emissions, and compare this benefit to the program's cost.
Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu
Joost de Laat
Porticus Foundation
joostdelaat@gmail.com

Eric F. Lambin
Department of Earth System Science
Stanford University
elambin@stanford.edu
Charlotte Y. Stanton
Carnegie Institution for Science
charlottestanton@gmail.com

1

Introduction
Deforestation is responsible for 12% to 15% of anthropogenic carbon emissions, making

it the second largest source of carbon emissions after fossil fuel combustion (Canadell et al.,
2007; Van der Werf et al., 2009). Trees absorb carbon dioxide through photosynthesis, and
store the carbon in their biomass. When a tree is cut down, it stops absorbing carbon dioxide,
and, as it decomposes or is burned, its store of carbon is released into the atmosphere.
Reducing carbon emissions is, of course, crucial for mitigating climate change. Curbing
deforestation is believed to be one of the most cost-effective ways to do so (Stern, 2006;
Nabuurs et al., 2007). The reason is simple: Most deforestation today occurs in developing
countries, and the opportunity cost of averted deforestation in such settings—for example,
forgone subsistence farming on the cleared land—is often much lower than the cost of behavioral or technological changes to reduce carbon emissions in high-income countries.
Addressing deforestation in developing countries is, thus, a key pillar of international
climate policy. REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) is
a United Nations mechanism through which developing countries are rewarded financially for
preservation of forestland; annually, about $500 million dollars flow to developing countries
(Silva-Chávez, Schaap, and Breitfeller, 2015).1 The Paris Agreement negotiated in 2015
bolstered the role of REDD+ in climate policy (United Nations FCCC, 2015).2
To put REDD+ into action, one needs to identify effective on-the-ground interventions
that reduce deforestation. This paper provides the first rigorous evaluation of a promising
and popular type of intervention, namely financial incentives for forest-owning individuals or communities to keep their forest intact. This type of policy is called Payments for
Ecosystem Services (PES); payments are made conditional on voluntary pro-environment
1

A commonly used definition of forest is an area at least 0.5 to 1 hectares in size with tree crown cover
exceeding 10% to 30% of the area (United Nations FCCC, 2002). Deforestation is a reduction in the amount
of land that meets the definition of forest, while forest degradation is selective tree-clearing that does not
reduce the amount of land that meets the definition of forest. In this paper, we use the term deforestation
to encompass deforestation and forest degradation.
2
Article 5 states that “Parties are encouraged to take action to implement and support, including through
results-based payments... policy approaches and positive incentives for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation...in developing countries.”

1

behaviors (Ferraro and Kiss, 2002; Wunder, 2007; Engel, Pagiola, and Wunder, 2008). PES
is the environmental version of a well-known policy instrument in developing countries, conditional cash transfers (CCTs), which are more commonly used to promote child health and
education.
Despite the widespread use and growing popularity of PES, its effectiveness and costeffectiveness are open questions. Individuals might be unresponsive to the incentives, leading
to small impacts. In addition, even if some people respond to the incentives, cost-effectiveness
could be low if, absent the payments, many participants would have engaged in the incentivized behavior anyway. In the case of PES, this problem of inframarginality is often called
“additionality”: How much additional forest cover does a PES program actually cause? Another concern is that individuals will simply shift their tree-cutting from land covered by the
PES contract to other nearby land.
This paper is a randomized evaluation of a PES intervention that was piloted precisely
to measure the causal impacts on forest cover. The PES program offered private owners of
forestland in western Uganda payments if they refrained from clearing trees. The program
was designed and implemented by a local non-governmental organization (NGO). The study
was carried out in 121 villages with private forest owners (PFOs); 60 of the villages were
randomly selected to be in the treatment group. In treatment villages, the PES program
was marketed to PFOs and they were eligible to enroll. Over the two-year pilot program
from 2011 to 2013, for each hectare of forest they owned, enrollees received 70,000 Ugandan
shillings (UGX), or $28 in 2012 US dollars, per year if they complied with the contract.3 The
implementing NGO employed forest monitors who conducted spot checks of enrollees’ land
to check for recent tree-clearing. The program also offered additional payments in exchange
for planting tree seedlings.
We measure the impact of the program on forest cover by analyzing satellite imagery.
Specifically, we tasked a very high resolution commercial satellite, QuickBird, to take images
of the study region at baseline and endline and classified each pixel as tree-covered or not
3

The average exchange rate during the study period was approximately 2500 UGX = 1 US dollar.

2

using object-based image analysis, a remote-sensing technique for cases where pixels are
smaller than the objects of interest. The QuickBird pixel size is 2.4 by 2.4 meters, smaller
than the crown of a typical mature tree. By comparing PFOs’ land in treatment and control
villages, we can assess how many additional hectares of tree cover the program generated.
We find that the PES program significantly reduced deforestation.4 Tree cover declined
by about 7% to 10% between baseline and endline on PFOs’ land in control villages, but only
by 2% to 5% in treatment villages. The effect size corresponds to 0.27 additional hectares
of tree cover per eligible program participant. These results are robust across different
specifications. We also estimate village-wide effects, and find that PFOs did not simply
shift their tree-clearing to other land in the village. We also show that there is no evidence
of leakage of deforestation to government forest reserves and no evidence of the program
affecting deforestation in control villages.
The above estimates are intent-to-treat effects, i.e., treatment effects per eligible PFO.
Program take-up was 32%; the compliance among enrollees, as assessed by the implementing
NGO, was 80%. Surprisingly, the intent-to-treat proportional reduction in deforestation is
larger than the take-up rate, suggesting that enrollees had higher-than-average counterfactual
deforestation. Thus, we do not find evidence that PFOs who were anyway planning to keep
their forest intact enrolled in the PES program at an especially high rate.
What is also surprising is that the take-up rate was only 32% given there was no penalty
for signing up and not complying. Most of the low take-up seems to be explained by insufficient marketing of the program. In our endline survey, many PFOs reported that they
were unaware of the program or did not know how to sign up. In addition, some PFOs were
wary of signing the PES contract, fearful that it was a ploy to steal their land. Only a small
minority said they were uninterested in complying so did not take up, which is consistent
with relatively little selection into the program based on low counterfactual deforestation.
After presenting the program impacts on tree cover, we provide a rough assessment
of cost-effectiveness in terms of averted carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions. We estimate that
4

Seedlings planted as part of the program still had small tree crowns at endline, so avoided deforestation
rather than reforestation accounts for the vast majority of the gain in forest cover that we estimate.

3

for each $0.25 in payments, or $0.57 in total program costs, a ton of CO2 emissions due to
deforestation was delayed. We then calculate the externality benefit of the delayed emissions,
using a “social cost of carbon” (SCC) of $39 (in 2012 US dollars) per ton (Interagency
Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, 2013). The SCC is the benefit of permanently
averting CO2 emissions, while this 2-year program’s benefit was to delay deforestation and
emissions. To quantify the delay, we need to make assumptions about deforestation after the
program ends, which we do not observe in our data. Our base case scenario assumes PFOs
deforest at a 50% higher rate than usual after the program ends, converging to the control
group after four years. The social benefit of the delayed CO2 emissions is then $1.11 per
ton, or roughly 2 times the $0.57 program cost.5
We repeat the calculation for a range of assumptions. At one extreme, if PFOs catch
up on their backlog of avoided deforestation the moment the program ends, the benefitcost ratio falls to 0.7. At the other extreme, if PFOs pause their deforestation during
the intervention and then resume deforesting at their typical rate, not an accelerated rate,
after the program ends, then the benefit cost-ratio rises to 12.3. This last scenario, which
represents a permanent delay in deforestation, is the most relevant one for extrapolating to
a permanent or longer-duration program.6
Note that the calculations above quantify the gross reduction in CO2 from delayed
deforestation in our sample, but the net reduction in global CO2 emissions from the program
depends on behavioral responses that are beyond the scope of what our study can measure
(e.g., How much less charcoal did urban consumers use? Which fuel types did they shift
to?). Moreover, the general equilibrium effects of such a program depend on how widely it
is scaled up. Nonetheless, our finding that PES appears to be an effective way to reduce
CO2 emissions stands in sharp contrast to assessments of most approaches; few other policies
5
We assume a uniform rate of deforestation absent the program. Carbon from cleared trees is not emitted
instantaneously; we assume the average time from tree-clearing until CO2 emissions is 10 years. The SCC is
projected to rise over time at 1.9% per year (Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton, 2011; Interagency Working
Group on Social Cost of Carbon, 2013). It rises because of growth in income per capita and population, and
because the marginal damage from a ton of emissions is higher when climate change has progressed further,
e.g., when global temperatures are higher (Nordhaus, 2014). We use a 3% discount rate.
6
See Section 6 for discussion of the additional assumptions needed to value a permanent delay in deforestation, as well to extrapolate to a permanent program.

4

come close to breaking even. For example, policies in the United States such as hybrid and
electric vehicle subsidies or ethanol subsidies have costs per ton of averted CO2 that far
exceed the SCC (Knittel, 2012; Gayer and Parker, 2013).
We complement the remote sensing analysis by measuring program impacts via a household survey. There are several noteworthy findings from the survey data. First, consistent
with the remote sensing results, self-reported tree-clearing was much lower in treatment villages. Second, treated PFOs took steps to protect their land from encroachers, decreasing
others’ access to it and patrolling it more vigilantly. Third, the program did not seem to
have appreciable effects on participants’ consumption or other measures of current economic
well-being, which is not too surprising. The large impacts on forest cover imply that PFOs
did reduce deforestation and hence forwent income; the PES payments offset this income loss
but did not, on net, enrich them. At the same time, because participation was voluntary, the
program is unlikely to have impoverished them, although a participant might choose lower
temporary income in exchange for building up assets, i.e., owning more intact forest. Note
that unlike many CCTs, this program, by focusing on landowners, did not target the very
poorest in these communities, and the payment amount in fact scaled up with the size of the
landholding. Thus, the program may have widened within-village wealth inequality. The net
welfare benefits of the program depend on not just the CO2 impacts, but also these possible
unintended negative effects as well as other positive impacts such as increased biodiversity
and income redistribution from international donors to a developing country.
Climate change is one of, if not the most, significant environmental challenge we face,
yet we lack evidence on what policies can mitigate it cost-effectively. The main contribution
of this paper is to provide evidence on this important question. We assess a widely-used
approach to reduce carbon emissions, providing some of the most rigorous evidence to date
evaluating any type of policy aimed at reducing carbon emissions. Scholars have noted the
need for high-quality evaluations of environmental policies in general and, given its growing
popularity among policy makers, PES in particular (Greenstone and Gayer, 2009; Ferraro
and Patanayak, 2006; Ferraro et al., 2015).

5

The most widely studied PES project is Costa Rica’s Pago por Servicios Ambientaless
(PSA). Pattanayak, Wunder, and Ferraro (2010) review the literature on PSA and conclude
that “studies give widely divergent results,” and many have serious methodological limitations. Many case studies report large, positive impacts on forest cover, but likely suffer
from omitted variable bias. The most convincing studies use covariate or propensity-score
matching methods, but even here, the estimated impacts on forest cover range from very
small to moderately large (Arriagada et al., 2012; Robalino and Pfaff, 2013). PES programs
in China, Mozambique, and Mexico, among other settings, have also been studied (Uchida
et al., 2007; Hegde and Bull, 2011; Alix-Garcia, Shapiro, and Sims, 2012).
The paper is also related to recent randomized evaluations of tree-planting programs
(Jack, 2013; Jack et al., 2015) and other studies on forest conservation in developing countries
(Foster and Rosenzweig, 2003; Edmonds, 2002; Somanathan, Prabhakar, and Mehta, 2009;
Burgess et al., 2012; Alix-Garcia et al., 2013; Assunção et al., 2014). More broadly, we
contribute to the literature in economics on environmental issues in developing countries
(Greenstone and Jack, 2015). Finally, this paper has links to the literature evaluating CCTs,
differing from most previous studies through its focus on environmental protection (Fiszbein,
Schady, and Ferreira, 2009).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the study sample,
randomization, and PES program. Section 3 then describes the data sources, and section 4
provides descriptive statistics on the sample and lays out the empirical strategy. Section 5
presents the results on the impacts of the PES program on deforestation and other outcomes,
and section 6 translates the impacts into averted carbon emissions and assesses program costeffectiveness based on the social cost of carbon. Section 7 presents concluding remarks.

2
2.1

Study design and description of PES program
Study setting
The study was conducted in 121 villages in two districts in western Uganda, Hoima and

Kibaale. Forests cover an eighth of Uganda’s land area, concentrated in the western region.
6

Uganda’s deforestation rate between 2005 and 2010 was 2.7% a year, the third highest in the
world (FAO, 2010). The pace of deforestation is even faster on privately-owned land, which
represents about 70% of the forest in Uganda (NEMA, 2008). As in much of Africa, the
main drivers of deforestation in the study region are subsistence agriculture and domestic
demand for timber and charcoal (Fisher, 2010).
In addition to reducing atmospheric CO2 , forests also increase biodiversity. Many species
are threatened by deforestation in western Uganda, notably chimpanzees, an endangered
species that is important for Uganda’s tourism industry. Other benefits of forest conservation
include watershed protection and reduced siltation and flooding (Nabuurs et al., 2007).

2.2

Sample of villages and forest owners
To determine the study sample, we first conducted a census of all private forest owners

(PFOs) in all villages with forest in Hoima (late 2010) and northern Kibaale (early 2011).
Villages with forest were identified using Landsat satellite imagery overlain with administrative boundaries. Our field team visited these villages, met with the LC1 chairperson (elected
village head), explained the study, and asked him to assemble 3 to 4 knowledgeable PFOs.
This group then drew a rough map of the village and listed all the people who owned forest
in the village. While most PFOs do not have a formal land title, which family de facto owns
each plot of land is generally agreed upon within the village; the most common form of land
dispute is among family members. The field team then followed up with at least 3 spot
checks per village. Through this process, we identified 189 villages in Hoima and 91 villages
in Kibaale with at least 1 PFO.
We narrowed this set of 280 villages to our sample of 121 villages by first excluding
villages with fewer than 6 or more than 25 PFOs.7 We then excluded parishes (the administrative unit above a village) with only 1 eligible village because we had not yet determined
whether a lottery to choose treatment villages would be conducted in each parish or each
7

We excluded villages with more than 25 PFOs because the project had a fixed budget for payments,
and, with the village as the unit of randomization, additional PFOs per village add only limited statistical
power. We excluded villages with fewer than 6 PFOs due to the fixed cost of working in a village and desire
to have statistical power to measure village-level effects.

7

subcounty (administrative unit above a parish). We excluded two parishes in Kibaale district
with very little intact forest; these were the only parishes with forest in their subcounties,
so excluding them reduced the geographic spread of the study. Finally, one subcounty (19
villages) was set aside for a pilot.8
We then conducted a baseline survey of PFOs in the sample villages in April to May
2011. In these villages, 1449 PFOs had been listed in the census, and we completed baseline
surveys of 1174 (81%) of them. The main reasons for non-response were that we could not
locate the PFO, or he stated that he was not a PFO. Some PFOs also refused to participate.
An additional criterion to be in our final sample is that we collected valid GPS coordinates
for the PFO’s home at baseline. GPS coordinates allow us to identify the PFO’s home in the
satellite imagery and, thus, are necessary for having valid remote sensing data. The main
reasons for missing GPS data were malfunctioning of the GPS units or enumerator error.
The sample for our analysis comprises the 1099 PFOs who completed the baseline survey
and for whom we have GPS coordinates.

2.3

Randomization
After the baseline survey, 60 of the villages were randomly selected to be in the treatment

group. The randomization was conducted via public lotteries held in each of the 7 subcounties
in our sample. In advance of each lottery, we divided the sample villages in the subcounty
into two sets, balanced on covariates.9 The LC3 chairperson (elected head of the subcounty)
or a stand-in drew one of the two lists out of a bin. This selected list constituted the treated
8

Kyabigambire was chosen as the pilot subcounty because the implementing NGO had close ties to the
community and conducted its other activities there. At the NGO’s request, four villages where they had very
close ties were guaranteed the program. In the other 15 villages, we conducted a pilot of the baseline survey,
subcounty lottery, program implementation, and endline survey; five villages were chosen for the treatment
group. The lottery and program launch occurred in June 2011, two months before the main program launch.
9
We first generated permutations that divided the villages into two sets differing in size by no more
than one village. In subcounties with few sample villages, we constructed all possible permutations and
for subcounties with many villages, for computational reasons, we generated a random sample of 1000
permutations. We then tested for balance on four village-level variables: number of PFOs in the sample,
distance to a road, average per capita income, and average size of landholding. We considered the two sets
of villages balanced if the standardized difference in the mean of each variable was less than 0.25. For each
subcounty, among the balanced permutations, we randomly chose one to use in the public lottery. This
procedure of prespecifying the set of balanced randomizations has advantages over re-randomizing until a
threshold level of balance is achieved or choosing the most balanced permutation (Imbens, 2011).

8

villages. The lotteries occurred between August and December 2011. Of the 1099 PFOs in
the sample, 564 reside in treatment villages, and the remaining 535 are in control villages.

2.4

PES program
The PES program was funded via a grant from the Global Environment Facility, through

the United Nations Environment Programme, to the Ugandan government’s National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). NEMA subcontracted the design, implementation, and management of the two-year program to a Ugandan conservation non-profit,
Chimpanzee Sanctuary and Wildlife Conservation Trust (CSWCT). CSWCT’s main activity is operating a chimpanzee refuge near Entebbe, but a secondary activity is promoting
conservation of the chimpanzees’ natural habitat in western Uganda. Prior to running this
PES program, their work in western Uganda with PFOs included community education
about conservation and promoting alternative livelihoods to agriculture such as beekeeping.
After the lotteries occurred, we gave CSWCT the list of treatment villages, and they
implemented the program. They rolled out the program, subcounty by subcounty, beginning
in August 2011 and reaching the last subcounty in January 2012. Their first step when
entering a community was to hold a parish-level meeting for eligible PFOs to advertise and
explain the program. They then worked with interested PFOs to verify their forest land,
measure its area, and determine their eligibility. They explained and helped PFOs fill out
and sign the PES contract form. For those who signed up, CSWCT monitored their land
via spot checks and made annual payments to those who complied with the contract.10 The
monitoring occurred through in-person spot checks once every one or two months, during
which the CSWCT employee checked for fresh tree stumps or other signs of cleared forest.
The terms of the PES contract were set by CSWCT, with input from other project
partners and using PES programs in other countries as a guide. The contract stipulated
that the PFO would conserve his entire existing forest and could not cut down any mediumsized trees (trees with a trunk diameter at breast height (DBH) of 10 to 50 centimeters (cm)).
10

Some PFOs who signed up for the program are not in our sample, either because we did not identify
them as PFOs in our census or they did not complete our baseline survey.

9

He was allowed to cut selected mature trees (>50 cm DBH), determined by the number of
mature trees per species in a given forest patch. This provision was to give PFOs a small
amount of leeway in case of emergencies. Participants were allowed to cut small trees (< 10
cm DBH) for home use and to gather firewood from fallen trees.
An important consideration in designing the contract was that it be simple enough to
explain to PFOs and to assess compliance. Hence, the contract is much blunter than what
would be prescribed for “optimal” forest management. Its goal was to incentivize improved
forest management relative to the status quo. This tradeoff between nuanced, multi-faceted
requirements and the feasibility of monitoring compliance is inherent to all PES programs,
and essentially all incentive contracts.
Enrollees who complied, as determined by CSWCT’s monitoring, received a cash payment of 70,000 UGX ($28) per hectare of forest per year. The average amount of forest area
owned is 2 hectares, yielding a payment of $56 a year for compliance, which is equal to 5%
(16%) of average (median) annual household income, as reported in the baseline survey.11
To gauge how this payment level compares to the opportunity cost of keeping forest intact,
a large tree that can be used to make lumber sells for $20 to $40. At baseline, 29% of PFOs
reported earning revenue from timber products in the past one year, and among these, the
mean (median) revenue was $151 ($40). The second type of forgone income is from cultivation that would have occurred on cleared land. While most households consume all of the
crops that they grow, among households that sell crops for cash, self-reported income is in
the range of $30 to $100 per hectare of cultivated land; if a PFO clears new land, he usually
clears one or two 40 square meter (0.16 hectare) plots.
11

Costa Rica’s PAS program, launched in 1997, and Mexico’s Pagos de Servicios Ambientales Hidrológicos
(PSAH) program, launched in 2003, are two of the major deforestation PES programs worldwide, and a
comparison to them is useful (Wunder, Engel, and Pagiola, 2008). Both make annual cash payments like the
CSWCT program. The payment level (in nominal USD) is $65 per hectare (ha) per year for PAS (1.2% of
Costa Rica’s 2006 GDP per capita) and $27 to $36 per ha per year (0.4% to 0.6% of Mexico’s 2003 GDP per
capita) for PSAH. The $28 per ha per year payment in the CSWCT program is 4.7% of Uganda’s 2011 GDP
per capita. PSA requires a minimum forest area to enroll of 2 ha, and PSAH requires 50 ha; the CSWCT
program did not have a minimum size. PAS and PSAH offer five-year contracts; the CSWCT contract
length was two years. Monitoring for PSA and PSAH is done via annual remote sensing and periodic onthe-ground spot checks, while CSWCT used frequent on-the-ground monitoring. Among other differences,
PSAH deemed forest with tree density less than 80% ineligible, and PSA required fencing the enrolled forest.

10

PES enrollees also had the option to dedicate up to 2 hectares of cleared forest to
reforestation. CSWCT provided the seedlings, and the PFO received 70,000 UGX per hectare
per year if the seedlings survived. About half of enrollees took up this option. We focus
on the averted deforestation component of the program because it was more significant in
terms of payments, take-up, and contributions to tree cover. However, when comparing the
amount of money paid to the amount of avoided deforestation, we include the payments for
reforestation, as this extra option and payment might have induced some PFOs to enroll.
(PFOs were not allowed to take up just the reforestation component; all enrollees were
required to avoid deforestation on their forest land.)

3

Data

3.1

Satellite data
Our main outcome is forest cover on the sample households’ land. We analyze satellite

images of the study region taken at baseline and endline to identify forest cover, or more
precisely, tree cover. We do not use the restricted definition of forest based on a minimum
contiguous area covered by trees, as we are interested in the total effect on tree cover, inclusive
of selective cutting of trees within the forest (degradation) and any shifting of tree-clearing
from “official” forest to other land.
3.1.1

QuickBird satellite images

The data source for measuring tree cover is QuickBird satellite imagery. QuickBird is
a commercial satellite that captures images with a multispectral resolution of 2.4 by 2.4
meters. We tasked the QuickBird satellite to take images of our 2461 square kilometer study
region at baseline and endline (at a cost of $23 per square kilometer per wave).
QuickBird cannot image an area as large as our study region on one flyover. Thus our
baseline and endline image each consist of five to six vertical strips taken during north-tosouth flyovers on different days. It required multiple passes over some strips to obtain an
image that, in aggregate for the study region, had less than 15% cloud cover, which is the
quality standard that the vendor guarantees.
11

Most of the baseline images were collected in May to June 2011. Due to an extended
rainy season, the last strips of the image were collected in December 2011 and January
2012, which is a few months after the program was rolled out. This timing would likely
attenuate our estimated program effects; relative to control villages, treated villages should
(and do) look more forested at baseline if the program has been in place and has been having
impacts for a few months, which attenuates the treatment effect size that is estimated. In
the analysis, we show that the results are robust to restricting the sample to observations
where the lottery occurred after the baseline image was taken (and indeed these results are
larger).
We obtained our endline images while the program was still in effect. At scale-up, this
type of PES program would likely be in place indefinitely or at least for a long duration, but
this trial PES program lasted for two years. Once the financial payments end, PFOs have
no incentive not to deforest their land, and thus a zero impact after the program is over does
not mean that the program did not delay carbon emissions. The estimate of interest for a
temporary program is to measure the postponement of deforestation it caused.
To avoid delays in the endline images such as occurred at baseline, we tasked the satellite
to begin taking images in December 2012. The first strip was taken in December 2012, and
most of the area was imaged between January and March 2013. The program was in place
through at least August 2013 in all treatment villages. We estimate effects when the program
had been in place for on average 1.5 years.
3.1.2

Remote sensing analysis

The remote sensing analysis was carried out by the Stanford Spatial Analysis Center.
The initial step was to pre-process the images, for example to combine the image strips that
comprise the overall baseline or endline image of the study region and to adjust for solar
zenith angle and Earth-Sun distance at acquisition time. This step and subsequent ones
were applied to the image area within the study village administrative boundaries, which
were obtained from the Ugandan Bureau of Statistics.
Then the images were analyzed to classify each pixel as having tree cover or not. This

12

was done via object-based image analysis (OBIA), using the eCognition software program
(Benz et al., 2004). In OBIA, the image is first segmented into polygons, or objects, with
spectral and spatial homogeneity. The researcher chooses several parameters for the segmentation algorithm. A key parameter is scale, or how homogeneous each polygon should be;
the parameter is called scale because requiring polygons to be more homogeneous will result
in smaller-sized polygons, all else equal. Other parameters govern how much to emphasize
homogeneity in color versus shape (e.g., compact shapes, smooth borders). The researcher
sets the parameters, looks at the results generated by the segmentation algorithm, and then
readjusts the parameters until there is a good match with validation data collected in the
field (described in the next subsection). The goal is for the polygons to correspond to real-life
objects or features of the landscape such as a tree crown or a segment of a dirt road.
OBIA is used for analysis of very high resolution images, i.e., <5 meter resolution. More
precisely, OBIA is designed for when the objects of interest are larger than the pixel size. At
very high resolution, pixel-by-pixel analysis can lead to classification errors due to the high
degree of spectral variation within a class (each pixel comprising a tree crown will have a
different spectral response); OBIA reduces this misclassification. More importantly, OBIA
takes advantage of the rich information contained in the relationship between adjacent pixels
(Blaschke, 2010). For example, the shape, size, and context of a cluster of pixels help us
identify it as a tree.
After segmentation, the polygon or object is the unit of analysis for classification. In our
case, the goal is to classify each object as tree, non-tree, or cloud cover. (Pixels for which the
landscape is obscured by clouds become missing data in our analysis.) The classification step
uses a knowledge-based expert system in which the researcher defines a mutually exclusive
and collectively exhaustive set of classes and a rule set for assigning objects to classes.
The rules use several attributes of the objects such as color, shape, and size. In practice,
classification is not done after the segmentation is finalized; the entire process is iterative, and
the researcher visually inspects the classification results to refine the rules and parameters.12
12

Specifically, we used a change detection algorithm in which we first segmented and classified the baseline
image, and then segmented the combined multidate images, using the initial classification as an object

13

We validated the classification rules and improved them by using ground-based data
collected from field plots. To define the rules, we applied a classification and regression tree
(CART) algorithm which determined the best rules for using the object attributes to predict
forest classification, and “trained” the CART system with some of the ground-based data
and validated it using the rest of the ground-based data.
3.1.3

Ground-based forest measurements

After an initial rough classification of the study area using baseline Landsat satellite
images, we sampled 440 geographic locations in the study area and conducted ground-based
forestry measurements in spring and summer 2012. The ground measurements were conducted by a Ugandan forestry NGO, Nature Harness Initiatives (NAHI). NAHI followed
the standard protocol for conducting a forestry inventory of a 20 meter by 25 meter plot.
They identified all trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of 10 centimeters or more,
recorded the DBH, and estimated crown height and crown diameter. They also counted the
number of trees of each species.
3.1.4

Landsat data

To improve statistical precision and adjust for any pre-trends in deforestation, we also
use Landsat satellite images from the pre-intervention period, specifically from 1990 and
2010. Landsat is a US-government run satellite system with an image resolution of 30
meters. Given this coarser resolution, we use a pixel-by-pixel technique and calculate the
probabilistic fraction of each pixel that is photosynthetic vegetation. The classification does
not make a distinction between trees and other photosynthetic vegetation such as grass.
However, the technique we employ, the Carnegie Landsat Analysis System, was designed to
detect deforestation and forest degradation using Landsat images (Asner et al., 2009).
3.1.5

Unit of observation and missing data

The main unit of observation in our regression analysis is the PFO. The remote sensing
analysis produces a classification of each pixel in the study area, and to convert this to PFOattribute in the multidate processing (Desclée, Bogaert, and Defourny, 2006). We classified objects as
persistent tree cover, persistent non-tree, tree gain, tree loss, or cloud-covered. Pixels with cloud cover at
either baseline or endline are treated as missing data.

14

level data, we overlay polygons that represent each PFO’s land. While we do not have the
actual boundaries of their land, we have the geolocation of their home and their self-reported
landholding. As a proxy for their land, we use a circle, centered on their home, that is twice
as large as the area of land they own. Note that homes are spread apart in the typical village,
as opposed to clustered together; an individual’s land is typically contiguous to their home.
We use a circle larger than the actual land owned so that we are likely to include all or
most of the land they own and nearby land to which they might shift their tree-cutting. If
the land circles excluded much of their land, an estimated reduction in deforestation could
simply reflect shifting of tree-cutting from near their home to the periphery. On average,
PFOs own 10.8 hectares of land, so the average size of the circles we analyze is 21.6 hectares.
We also show the results using circles that are 1 and 3 times the size of the landholding, and
because PFOs’ estimates of the area of their land might be inaccurate, we also use circles
that are equal-sized for each PFO, based on the median land size of 5.3 hectares. Note that
1 PFO has missing data for the amount of land owned and 5 PFOs reported owning no land;
for these observations, we have data for a circle around their home using the sample-median
land size but not self-reported size.13
Each circle contains many pixels, and we use the number of pixels classified as treecovered to calculate the total area of tree cover for the PFO. There are two sources of missing
data when we calculate this aggregate measure for each PFO. The first is that some of the
landscape is obscured by cloud cover at either baseline or endline. (In the change-detection
remote-sensing algorithm we use, pixels with cloud cover at either baseline or endline are
treated as missing, so the rate of missing data is identical at baseline and endline.) For
most of the sample, cloud-free data are available for a subset of the PFO’s land area. For
98 PFOs, or 9% of the sample, the entire land circle is covered by clouds when using land
circles that are twice the self-reported land area. These are missing observations. Appendix
Table A1 breaks down the sample by availability of different outcome data.
Missing data is uncorrelated with treatment status; the location of cloud cover is essen13

These PFOs reported owning forest in the screening questions at the start of the survey, and 3 of them
reported owning land at endline.

15

tially random for our purposes. Note that, mechanically, smaller PFO circles are more likely
to have completely missing data. Appendix Table A2 shows that attrition due to missing
satellite data is uncorrelated with treatment status or program take-up, but is correlated
with land size (column 4). Conditional on land size, the observations with missing satellite
data are similar to the main sample (column 5).
A second more minor reason for missing data is that for some PFOs, part of their land
circle falls outside the village boundaries and therefore we do not have forest classification
for that segment. This leads to 4% missing data on average and no cases where the entire
observation is missing.
To recap, for the majority of our PFOs, some but not all of their land circle has valid
data, i.e., cloud-free and within the village boundaries. Conditional on having some data, the
average proportion of the land with valid data is 79%. Our outcome measure is, therefore,
an aggregate measure based on a sample rather than the universe of pixels representing the
land. For statistical efficiency, in the estimation of program impacts, we weight observations
by this sampling rate, i.e., the proportion of the PFO’s land for which we have remote-sensing
data; in practice, the unweighted estimates are similar.
We also conduct analyses at the village level in which the polygon is the administrative
boundary of the village. We have less statistical power to estimate program effects when
we analyze the entire village because only a portion of land in a village is owned by PFOs.
However, the village-level analysis is useful for investigating within-village spillovers. For
the village-level data, there are no cases of entirely missing data.

3.2

Survey data
Our baseline survey took approximately 1 to 1.5 hours for a respondent to complete

and asked about characteristics of the forest owner’s land, his past tree-cutting behavior,
attitudes toward the environment, consumption, and other topics. We also recorded the
location of the PFO’s home using hand-held GPS devices.
We conducted a similar survey at endline and use these data to measure program impacts
on outcomes other than objective forest cover such as self-reported tree cutting, whether the
16

PFO restricted others’ access to their land, and socioeconomic outcomes such as expenditures
and child health. We also asked questions about the program such as why treatment PFOs
did or did not take up the program.
At endline, we successfully re-surveyed 1020 (93%) of the 1099 baseline PFOs. The
survey completion rate was higher in control (95%) than treatment villages (91%), and in
particular, PFOs in treatment villages who did not take up the program were less likely to
participate, as shown in Appendix Table A2. Some of them had moved or died, but most
just did not want to participate in the survey; anecdotally, PFOs who were wary of outsiders
were less likely to participate in both the program and the endline survey. Thus, for the
survey-based results, we calculate Lee bounds on the treatment effects (Lee, 2009).

3.3

Administrative data on program enrollment and payments
Our final data source is the administrative records of the implementing partner, CSWCT.

For each of our baseline PFOs, we know whether he enrolled in the program, how much forest
area he enrolled, and how much he was paid each of the two years of the program. We also
have data on how much land PFOs set aside for reforestation, how many trees they planted,
how many survived, and the payment received for this activity.

4
4.1

Descriptive statistics and empirical strategy
Descriptive statistics
Table 1 summarizes key baseline variables from the PFO survey and satellite data and

tests for balance between the treatment and control groups. The first two columns report
variable means and standard deviations for the treatment and control subsamples, and the
third column reports the normalized difference in means (treatment mean minus control
mean, divided by the pooled standard deviation).
Regarding balance, none of the 18 variables tested has imbalance at the 10% significance level. Also, the magnitudes of the normalized differences are small, well below the
conventional threshold for imbalance of 0.25 (Imbens and Wooldridge, 2007).

17

PFOs, on average, are 47.5 years old and have 8 years of education. The next variable
listed is the self-reported “log” of the land area owned by the PFO. The variable uses the
inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, which approximates the log function but accommodates zeros. In levels, the mean (median) land area for the sample is 10.8 (5.3) hectares.
About 85% of PFOs report having cut trees in the three years preceding the baseline
survey. There are two broad reasons to cut trees. One is because the tree products are
valuable. Large trees can be converted into lumber, medium-sized or crooked trees can be
burned to make charcoal, or small trees can serve as building material for huts. Most of
the trees for lumber and charcoal are sold to timber and charcoal dealers and feed into a
national market, with much of the end use in urban areas. The second reason to cut trees
is because the cleared land can then be used for other purposes, almost always cultivation
in this setting. About 24% of our sample had deforested to use the land for cultivation, and
71% had done so to use or sell the timber products. PFOs often cut down and sell trees
for emergency cash to pay for unexpected costs such as hospital bills or large, infrequent
expenses such as school fees. About a quarter of the sample reports having done so. On
average, revenue from timber products in the previous year is 110,000 UGX or $44.
The baseline survey asked several other questions related to land and conservation.
About 18% of the sample rented out part of the land they owned. One in ten were currently
involved in an environmental program, a little more than half agreed that deforestation was
a problem in the community, and a small number (5 percent) agreed with the statement
that it is necessary to damage the environment to improve one’s life. (Not surprisingly, this
small minority has very low program take-up.)
The next rows summarize variables based on the satellite imagery. The amount of area
classified as tree-covered in the PFO’s land circle averages 4.1 hectares, which represents
about one fifth of the land area. The average percent change in photosynthetic vegetation
in the pre-intervention period from 1990 to 2010 is 3.6%.
While our survey sample comprises only PFOs, anecdotally, PFOs are richer than nonPFOs in their village. Consistent with this, among PFOs, we find that the larger the amount

18

of forest owned, the higher baseline per capita income is. Thus, this program, by virtue of
targeting landowners, is regressive within the community (but progressive on a global scale
because funds were being transferred from international donors to a developing country).

4.2

Empirical strategy
Using the data described above, we estimate the following equation via ordinary least

squares regression to quantify the impacts of the PES program:
T reeCoverij = α + βT reatj + γBaselineT reeCoverij + X1ij · δ + X2ij · µ + εij .

(1)

The outcome is the amount of tree cover at endline on the land owned by PFO i in village
j after the intervention has been in place for roughly one and a half years. As a proxy for
the land owned by the PFO, we use a circle of land surrounding his home. The regressor of
interest is T reat which equals 1 in the treatment villages and 0 in the control villages. The
coefficient β is the effect of the PES program, which is hypothesized to be positive.
We control for baseline tree cover as well as the vector X1 , which encompasses variables
related to our stratification procedure, in all specifications. X1 comprises subcounty fixed
effects, as the randomization was stratified by subcounty, and the village-level variables
we sought baseline balance on in our randomization: number of PFOs, average household
earnings per capita, distance to a road, and average land size (Bruhn and McKenzie, 2009).
X2 are additional control variables we include in our preferred specification, namely 1990
and 2010 measures of vegetation on the PFO’s land, based on Landsat images (to control for
any pre-trends in deforestation) and dummy variables for the date of the baseline satellite
image. Because the treatment varies at the village level, we adjust for non-independence of
errors within a village, i.e, we cluster on village.
In the regressions, we weight observations by the proportion of the PFO’s land with
non-missing satellite data. As described in the previous section, because of cloud cover (and
to a lesser degree because of land lying outside village boundaries), in the estimation sample
we have data for on average 79% of the land circle. The proportion varies from less than

19

1% to over 99%; the histogram is shown in Appendix Figure A2. In essence, we have an
aggregate outcome variable measured with a sampling rate that varies by observation, so to
improve efficiency we weight by this sampling rate (Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge, 2015).
We also estimate a model where the outcome is the change in tree cover between baseline
and endline, i.e., that modifies equation (1) by constraining γ to be equal to 1. In addition, we
estimate proportional effects using the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation, which
approximates the log function but is defined at 0 (Burbidge, Magee, and Robb, 1988). We
also show results where the unit of observation is the village.
In addition, we examine survey-based outcomes, estimating an equation analogous to
(1). We control for the baseline outcome in cases where it was collected. We include a
dummy variable for observations with missing baseline values, and impute the baseline value
to be the sample mean for those observations.

5
5.1

Impacts of the PES program
Program take-up
Of the 564 PFOs in our sample in treatment villages, 180, or 32%, enrolled in the PES

program. In addition, 6 PFOs in control villages (1%) enrolled; they resided in control
villages but owned forest in treatment villages. Sampling and assignment to treatment were
based on the village of residence, but CSWCT allowed a PFO to enroll any land located in
a treatment village. Table 2, column 1, estimates the effect of treatment on take-up as a
regression; residing in a treatment village increases take-up by 31.9 percentage points.
Column 2 reports the treatment effect on PES payments (the total payments over the
two years), which was 90,000 UGX, or $36. (In the tables, monetary amounts are reported
in units of 10,000 UGX, which is $4). Thus, per PFO who enrolled, the average payment
was $113 ($36 ÷ 31.9%). Most of these payments (89%) were for avoided deforestation, with
the balance for reforestation. On average, a treated PFO received 25.4% of the amount he
was eligible for (column 4), implying that enrollees earned on average 80% of their eligible
amount. Some enrollees violated the contract and received no payment, some fully complied
20

and received 100%, and some partially complied (e.g., their seedlings died) and they received
partial payment, at the discretion of CSWCT.14
It is surprising that program take-up was so low. Enrollment confers option value to
the PFO, even if he is unsure whether he wants to comply; if he then does comply, he will
receive money, and if he does not, while he receives no payment, there is also no punishment.
Moreover, with imperfect monitoring, there is a chance of a false positive in which the PFO
deforests, CSWCT assesses that he complied, and he gets paid.
To better understand why take-up was low, the endline survey asked treatment-village
PFOs why they did or did not sign up for the program. The overwhelming reason for lack of
take-up is mundane: Two thirds of PFOs who did not enroll were unaware of the program or
did not know what it was about (see Appendix Figure A1). CSWCT’s marketing efforts did
not succeed in informing all PFOs about the program. Similarly, the logistics of enrolling
were a barrier to enrollment. CSWCT collected the signed contracts on a particular day in
each village, and if a PFO was unaware of this process or absent that day, he missed, or at
least thought he had missed, his chance to enroll. Together, these reasons account for 77%
of non-enrollment. These implementation problems could likely be addressed in future PES
programs, leading to higher take-up.
About 11% of non-enrollment is due to more fundamental reasons. Many PFOs found
the PES contract complex and difficult to understand. In particular, many were worried
that the contract might be a ploy to grab their land. While in future programs it might be
possible to explain the PES contract more thoroughly to PFOs and assuage their concerns,
this barrier to enrollment is rooted in lack of formal property rights, concerns about theft
and corruption, and low levels of education, factors which are common in many of the
low-income settings amenable to deforestation PES programs. The remaining 12% of nonenrollment is because the PFO preferred deforesting to the financial incentives so simply was
not interested; CSWCT deemed him to not have eligible forest; or miscellaneous reasons.
Besides asking PFOs why they did not take up the program, we can also use the base14

In unreported results, we find that enrolling in the PES program did not crowd out participation in
other environmental programs. No comparable program was offered in the area at the time.

21

line data to assess the determinants of take-up. Few PFO characteristics predict take-up, as
shown in Appendix Table A3, which is consistent with take-up being largely related to supply
factors such as marketing rather than demand. Four of the characteristics we examine are
significantly correlated with take-up. PFOs with more land, and less tree cover conditional
on land owned, are more likely to enroll. In addition, PFOs who had cut trees for emergency or lumpy expenses recently were less likely to take up the program; as discussed by
Jayachandran (2013), a limitation of PES programs that offer a steady stream of payments
to preserve forest (or other environmental assets) is that even if the net present value of
the payments exceeds the revenue from selling the timber, liquidity-constrained PFOs might
choose immediate money over future PES payments. Also, the small minority who believe
it is necessary to damage the environment to improve life have much lower take-up.
Finally, we test whether take-up is systematically higher for those with lower counterfactual deforestation. To do so, we use the control group and regress the change in tree
cover on the variables in Appendix Table A3, column 1, and use the results to calculate the
predicted change in forest cover for treatment PFOs. Column 4 shows that take-up of the
program is unrelated to predicted deforestation, again suggesting no selective take-up by
those who would have anyway kept their forest intact.15

5.2

Remote-sensing results

5.2.1

Impacts of the PES program on forest cover

The main results of the paper are presented in Table 3. Here we examine the effect of
the PES program on tree cover. All columns control for the baseline value of the outcome
and stratification controls (subcounty fixed effects and village-level variables that were balanced before randomization). Column 2 onward additionally control for the area covered by
photosynthetic vegetation in 1990 and 2010 and dummy variables for the date of the baseline
satellite image.
As context for interpreting the treatment effects, it is valuable to first understand the
15

The predicted change in tree cover has a standard deviation of 1.05, so the coefficient implies that when
the variable is one standard deviation lower (i.e., more deforestation), take-up is 2.6 percentage points lower.

22

business-as-usual patterns of deforestation. In the control group, the average tree loss per
PFO between baseline and endline is 0.35 hectares, which is 8.7% of baseline tree cover.
This corresponds to 5.8% loss per year. Note that this rate of tree loss is higher than most
estimates of Uganda’s rate of forest loss, which are based on changes in the edge of the forest.
Our high-resolution data detects additional loss of trees due to selective tree-cutting within
the forest, i.e., forest degradation.
Column 1 shows that the PES program caused an increase in tree cover at endline,
relative to the control group, of 0.25 hectares per treatment PFO. The treatment group
experienced net tree loss, but significantly less than the control group. Column 2 adds in
control variables for pre-baseline vegetation, and the results are similar; the effect size is
0.27 hectares.16 This effect is statistically significant at the 5% level. This is our main
specification, which we use later in the paper for heterogeneity and cost-benefit analyses.
The coefficient on the baseline forest cover variable is close to 1, which is not surprising
because a tree that is not cut down or does not die will grow a bit over two years, but is
largely persistent. As such, the estimates are similar when estimated in changes (column 3).
The magnitude of the treatment effect represents over half of their baseline to endline
decrease in tree cover. This effect size is large, even larger than the take-up rate (although
we cannot statistically reject that the effect size is the same as or less than the take-up rate).
This suggests that the payments were not simply inframarginal to behavior, and, in fact,
those who took up the program would have deforested more than the typical PFO, absent
the program, which is quite surprising.
One partial explanation for the large effects is that some non-enrollees thought they
were enrolled in the program, and these PFOs might have avoided deforestation based on an
incorrect belief that they would be paid if they did so.17 In the endline survey, we asked the
16
The unreported coefficient on 2010 vegetation is positive, and the coefficient on 1990 vegetation is very
similar in magnitude and negative, both with p-values < 0.01. These patterns indicate that, first, the
Landsat vegetation variable provides additional information on baseline tree cover, and, second, vegetation
loss in the two decades prior to the study is predictive of a loss in tree cover over the study period.
17
These could be cases where the PFO misunderstood the procedure to enroll or where CSWCT made
a mistake in not registering their contract. In any case, they did not receive any monitoring or payments,
according to CSWCT’s records.

23

treatment group if they were enrolled in the program. Of the 384 non-enrollees, 46 reported
being enrolled. Meanwhile, 20 of the 180 actual enrollees (those who enrolled according to
CSWCT’s records), reported that they were not enrolled. Thus, self-reported take-up was 5
percentage points ((46-20)/564) higher than official take-up. Note that these patterns could
be due to measurement error in our survey data rather than PFO misperceptions.
In addition, a small part of the tree gain could be from the reforestation component
of the program. On average 0.1 hectare was set aside for reforestation per treated PFO,
although the number of surviving trees per PFO was only 10 , as shown in Appendix Table
A4. Seedlings would not have grown large in two years, but suppose each had a crown area
of 5 square meters or 0.0005 hectares (which is likely an overestimate). This would mean
that reforestation explains 0.005 hectares of the forest gain.
Another possible effect that would increase the effect size is if the program had positive
spillovers to non-enrollees in treatment villages. For example, village norms about treecutting or about barring others from taking trees from one’s land might have changed.
5.2.2

Robustness of the results

The appendix presents several robustness checks on the main results. Appendix Table
A5 examines proportional effects on tree cover using the IHS transformation. The treatment
caused a 4.4% increase in tree cover, which represents about 61% of the 7.3% average reduction in tree cover in the control group. Note that this deforestation rate in the control
group and proportional treatment effect size are somewhat smaller than when estimated in
levels, implying that PFOs with a larger amount of baseline tree cover have a higher rate of
deforestation and larger proportional treatment effect.
Appendix Table A6 shows unweighted results, which do not take into account the extent
of missing remote sensing data. The results are similar to the main results.
Appendix Table A7 addresses the skewness of the land area distribution by dropping
the top 1% of PFOs in terms of baseline forest cover. (The results are similar when dropping
outliers in terms of endline forest cover or baseline land ownership). Not surprisingly, the
results in levels are smaller in magnitude than in the main results, but remain statistically

24

significant. The effect size corresponds to deforestation being 57% lower in the treatment
group than in the control group. The last three columns of Appendix Table A7 use equallysized land circles for each PFO that are based on the median land area in the sample, as
an alternative approach to ensure that large PFOs are not driving the result. In addition,
PFOs’ self-reports on land area are often inaccurate, and using the median size removes this
noise (but also removes signal to the extent they are accurate). The median circles are on
average smaller (because of the skewed distribution), and the magnitudes of forest cover in
both the treatment and control group are smaller in levels, but the proportional change in
forest cover is similar to the main results.
Appendix Table A8 estimates the effects using alternatively-sized land circles. The first
three columns show the results using circles whose area is the PFO’s land area; unless the
PFO’s landholding is exactly a circle centered on his home, these circles will omit much
of their land. We continue to find statistically significant treatment effects, though not
surprisingly, the amount of tree gain in hectares is smaller; the circles are half the size, and
the coefficient is 56% of the size, suggesting that these circles are too small to encompass
the area where the program is having impacts. The next three columns show the results
using circles that are 3 times as large as the PFO’s land area. Again, we find positive,
statistically significant impacts on tree cover. While these circles are 50% larger than our
main specification, the treatment effect is only 31% larger, which suggests that circles twice
as large as the landholding encompass most of the PFO’s land and the area where the
treatment effects occur.
As described in the data section, we placed an order for the baseline QuickBird images
in May 2011, requesting that the study region be imaged as soon as possible. The majority of
the region was imaged in May and June, but some of the area was not imaged until December
2011. The subcounty lotteries occurred between August and December 2011, which means
the baseline image was taken after randomization in some cases. Hence, our arguably most
important robustness check is to restrict the sample to cases where the subcounty lottery
occurred after the date of the baseline satellite image. When we do so, we continue to

25

find positive, statistically significant effects on tree cover, as shown in Appendix Table A9.
The time span between baseline and endline images is longer in this subsample compared
to the full sample (because we have dropped observations with late baseline data), so with
a constant rate of deforestation, more deforestation should occur in the control group in
this subsample, and, likewise, more deforestation should be averted in the treatment group.
Indeed, we find a larger treatment effect than in the full sample, as well as a higher amount
of deforestation in the control group.
In summary, the results are robust to various potential concerns about the estimation.
5.2.3

Threats to validity

One concern in interpreting the treatment effect on tree cover is that PFOs might have
simply shifted their deforestation to other land. The results presented above are net of several
potential forms of such leakage. First, if PFOs preserved the land that CSWCT classified
as forest and that was regulated under the PES contract but cut down other patches of
trees on their land, our results measure the net effect because they examine the entire land
owned by PFOs rather than just their natural forest. Second, the fact that the land circles
we examine are larger than the land owned means we incorporate increased tree-clearing on
nearby land as well. Third, there could be within-village shifting from one PFO to another.
The low take-up rate suggests there was ample scope for this behavior; one way to game
the PES program is for two PFOs to agree that one will enroll, the other will not, and they
will do their joint tree-clearing on the non-enrollee’s land. (Only one treatment village had
100% take-up). If the PFOs who engaged in this behavior are in our sample, then we also
incorporate this type of shifted tree-clearing through our intent-to-treat estimates.
Our PFO-level results, however, do not net out displacement of deforestation to others
in the village who are not in our sample. To examine this potential concern, we also estimate
village-level effects. By village-level, we do not mean that we sum up to the village level the
land circles for the PFOs in our sample, but rather we use the entire area of the village, as
defined by government boundaries. The last two columns of Table 3 present these results.
While we have considerably less statistical power in this analysis, the treatment effects

26

are positive and marginally significant when estimated in changes (column 5).18 To assess
whether there are within-village spillovers, we can compare the village-level point estimate
to the PFO-level estimate. Column 4 indicates a 4.31 hectare aggregate gain in tree cover
per treatment village. In the analogous PFO-level specification (Table 3, column 2), we
estimated a 0.273 hectare increase per PFO. We have on average 9.1 PFOs per village in
our sample, but this underestimates the number of eligible PFOs because some did not
complete our baseline survey. Our census identified 12.0 PFOs per village, and multiplying
this number by the PFO-level effect of 0.273 gives an aggregate effect of 3.27 hectares per
village. The signature of within-village displacement would be if this 3.27 hectare effect
among PFOs were larger than the village-level effect based on the boundaries of the village.
Instead it is similar to and in fact smaller than the village-level estimate of 4.31 hectares.19
Thus, we find no evidence that tree-cutting merely shifted within the village.
PFOs who lived near government forest reserves had an additional option to (illegally)
take more trees from the reserves. However, Appendix Table A10, columns 1 and 2, which
examine treatment effect heterogeneity based on distance to the forest reserves or the village
being contiguous to the forest reserves (which applies to 17 of the 121 villages) show no
evidence of this behavior. To recap, we find no evidence of PFOs simply shifting their
deforestation within-person or within-village or to government forest reserves, which suggests
the PES program in fact led to additional forest cover.
Another possibility that would bias the results is if the program had spillover effects on
control villages. The results would be biased upward if the program increased deforestation
in the control group. For example, treatment PFOs might have sought trees from control
villages (although this seems unlikely given that there was untapped potential to procure
trees from non-enrollee PFOs within their village). A more likely form of spillover is higher
demand in control villages from outside timber dealers because supply had dried up in
18

The lower power is not surprising given that the land owned by the PFOs in our sample comprises, on
average, only 21% of the total land in the village.
19
Instead of scaling by eligibility, one can also scale by the percent of program enrollees who are in our
sample, which is 60%. Applying this scale factor to our PFO-level results predicts a 4.13 hectare gain in tree
cover per village, which is again smaller than our actual village-level estimate.

27

treatment villages. Another possible spillover is that the control group was upset about not
receiving the program and reacted by deforesting more than usual. To test for these three
mechanisms, we examine whether there is greater tree loss in control villages that are closer
to treatment villages. We find no evidence of such spillovers, as shown in Appendix Table
A10, column 3. While this test sheds light on local spillovers, it does not assess if there
were region-wide effects. For example, there could be an aggregate increase in demand for
timber in all of our control villages caused by the PES program. The study region feeds into
a national timber market, and the PES program was relatively small, so the program seems
unlikely to have had large general equilibrium effects, although such effects would be more
pertinent if the program were scaled up. Even though we cannot identify price effects that
are aggregate to our study region, we did ask questions on the endline survey about visits
by timber dealers. Columns 4 and 5 of Appendix Table A10 show that there was no increase
in visits by timber dealers in control villages relative to treatment villages.
Of course, the reduction in deforestation in the study region might also be offset by
increases outside the region. The premise of this and other PES programs is that demand
for timber products is not fully inelastic, so program effects will not just be undone elsewhere.
People will reduce consumption or substitute toward options with a lower carbon footprint.
For example, if PFOs clear less forest for subsistence farming, their demand for food might
be met by farms with much higher agricultural yield.
A different type of concern is related to PFOs’ expectations. PFOs were told that the
program would last for two years, and the study results might or might not lead to program
continuation and expansion in a few years. In the control group, behavior might not reflect
“business as usual” if PFOs anticipated getting the program in the future. A priori, these
anticipation effects could go in either direction. Perhaps PFOs who thought it was likely the
program would come to their village kept their forest intact to be eligible for the program
(which would bias the estimates toward 0), or perhaps they wanted to deforest while they
could (bias away from 0). Similarly, the impacts in the treatment group might vary with their
expectations. Some PFOs might have thought the program would last forever, and because

28

non-compliers were not allowed to rejoin the program later, this misperception about the
program horizon would have raised the valuing of complying in the short run. The last two
columns of Appendix Table A10 examine these possible effects due to expectations. First, we
examine whether deforestation in the control group varies with whether the PFO thinks the
program will come to his village, which we asked on the endline survey in control villages.
Second, we examine whether the program effects are larger for PFOs in the treatment group
who think the program will last longer than it actually did; we asked this question on the
endline survey in treatment villages. We do not find evidence that either of these types of
expectations affected how much PFOs deforested.
5.2.4

Heterogeneous impacts

Having shown the average treatment effects, we next examine heterogeneity in the effects
by baseline characteristics. We first analyze how the effects vary with the initial amount of
forest. The direction of this heterogeneity is not clear a priori. On the one hand, those with
more forest have more potential forest to keep intact, which could lead to larger program
impacts. On the other hand, the fact that more of their forest is intact suggests they may
have deforested less in the past, so they might have lower counterfactual tree-cutting and
smaller program effects. We find that the first of these possibilities is more relevant: Tree
gain is larger for PFOs with more tree cover at baseline (Table 4, column 1). Column 2
shows this same pattern holds using the proportion of land that is tree-covered.
The next four columns examine heterogeneity by whether and why the PFO reported
clearing trees recently. Those who had cut trees recently exhibit larger treatment effects,
and this seems to be more true for those who cut trees for timber products as opposed to
cultivation. Column 6 shows that, despite the lower take-up among those who cut trees
for emergency or lumpy expenses discussed earlier, the intent-to-treat effect on forest cover
seems to be larger for them (but statistically insignificantly). Column 7 shows that the
higher the revenue from timber products at baseline, the larger the treatment effect.
The pattern seen across the first seven columns is that if a characteristic is predictive of
more deforestation in the control group between baseline and endline (negative main effect of

29

Characteristic), it is also associated with more averted deforestation in the treatment group
(positive interaction effect). Column 8 tests for this pattern more comprehensively. Using
the control group, we regress the change in tree cover on several baseline characteristics
(the same ones used to predict take-up in Appendix Table A3). We then use the results to
calculate the predicted change in forest cover for both control and treatment PFOs.20 The
negative interaction effect in Column 8 indicates that the PES program caused larger gains in
forest cover for treated PFOs whose forest loss, absent the program, would have been larger.
This pattern reaffirms what earlier results suggested: To first approximation, enrollment in
the program was unrelated to predicted counterfactual deforestation, enrollees complied and
refrained from deforesting, and as a result, the largest program impacts are seen for those
who would have deforested the most had the program not been offered to them.

5.3

Household survey results
We now turn to examining outcomes using the endline household survey data.

5.3.1

Self-reported tree-cutting and other behaviors related to land

Self-reports by PFOs corroborate the remote-sensing result that the intervention reduced
deforestation. As seen in Table 5, treatment group PFOs are less likely to have cut any trees
in the past year. An important caveat is that PFOs might have given inaccurate answers, for
example if enrollees thought that admitting to tree-cutting on the survey would jeopardize
their PES payouts.
Attrition from the endline survey was higher in the treatment group than in the control
group, and in particular, treated PFOs who did not take up the program were less likely to
participate in the survey. As such, attrition likely biases upward the magnitude of the treatment effects. We therefore also present Lee bounds on the treatment effects for the survey
results. The lower-magnitude bound provides a conservative estimate of the effect.21 Table
20

The predicted value used as the regressor for control group observations is estimated excluding that
observation itself to avoid bias (Abadie, Chingos, and West, 2013).
21
Lee bounds make a monotonicity assumption about attrition: Treatment status affects selective attrition in only one direction. With more attrition in the treatment group, the upper (lower) bound assumes
that selective attrition in the treatment group is by those with high (low) outcome values, and thus trims
observations in the control group with high (low) outcomes such that the attrition rate is equalized between

30

5, column 1, shows that the point estimate for cutting any trees is -0.14 in the untrimmed
sample, and the smaller-magnitude Lee bound is -0.10.
Deforestation to clear land for cultivation and to obtain timber products both seem to
have decreased, although there are wide bounds on these estimates. Columns 5 to 7 show
that in the treatment group, total revenue from timber products is lower by 2.89 million
UGX ($116), or 23 log points, and there is a 4 percentage point (27%) lower likelihood of
receiving any revenue from timber in the past year. These point estimates are based on
the untrimmed sample and are suggestive, but the Lee bounds indicate that we cannot say
anything conclusive about these outcomes.
Complying with the PES contract entails reducing one’s own tree-cutting, but in our
context, where others are given access to forest or might encroach on it, complying also
means ensuring that others do not clear trees on one’s land. As seen in Table 6, there is a
roughly one third drop in the likelihood of allowing people to gather firewood from the forest
(even though gathering fallen wood was allowed under the contract). There is no significant
decrease in access granted to others who take trees from the land (though the point estimate
is suggestive of such an effect). The program significantly increased how much PFOs patrol
their land, as seen in column 3. While preventing illegal activity, in principle, should be
done by the state, this role often falls to the individual in this context. PFOs have a private
incentive to prevent theft of their forest even absent the PES program, but the program
seems to have increased the value of doing so and induced more patrolling. Treatment PFOs
did not respond to the program by fencing their land, however.
A reduction in others’ right to gather firewood and access PFOs’ land is very likely a
regressive effect. In our study region, it is the norm for landowners to let poorer neighbors
gather firewood or very small trees (“poles”) for building material. Thus, the program could
have had a negative impact on non-forest-owners, unless PFOs found some other way to
make transfers to their poorer neighbors.
Interestingly, the program also seems to have affected perceived property rights: Treated
groups (Lee, 2009).

31

PFOs are more likely to report that their ownership of their forest strengthened in the past
two years, though the point estimate is small and the lower bound estimate is insignificant
(column 5). The program neither increased nor decreased disputes with neighbors about
land (column 6).
5.3.2

Socioeconomic impacts

The last set of survey outcomes we examine is related to economic well-being. In
principle, the program could have either increased or decreased current income. The PES
payments could have enriched PFOs, or they could have tolerated a reduction in current
income in exchange for wealth accumulation in the form of intact forest. In any case, the
net effect is unlikely to be large in magnitude. The payment levels were chosen to be of
the same order of magnitude as monetary opportunity costs, and the treatment caused a
reduction in deforestation so payments were not inframarginal to behavior. Thus, it seems
unlikely that the program would lead to a large increase in income, except perhaps for those
with a particularly low opportunity cost, where a smaller payment would have sufficed to
induce their reduction in deforestation, leaving them with inframarginal cash on the intensive
margin. At the same time, because take-up was voluntary, decreases in permanent income are
unlikely, and credit constraints or impatience probably prevented most PFOs from incurring
a large decrease in current income, even if the value of their forest assets increased.
Measuring income is difficult because most individuals are self-employed or casual laborers, so we use expenditures as a proxy for current income. Table 7, columns 1 to 3, examine
spending in three broad categories: food, non-food, and alcohol and tobacco. The survey
asked about spending in the past 30 days or 6 months in several finer categories, and we
aggregated the data after harmonizing the lookback period. We do not find strong evidence
of either an increase or decrease in expenditures. Non-food spending shows a positive effect
but the lower bound effect is insignificant; the point estimate of a 5.3% increase is equivalent
to 10,900 UGX ($4.35) per month. Column 4 examines the respondent’s self-reported status
on a 9-point income ladder, relative to his community. The point estimate is suggestive of
an increase in self-reported relative income, but the result is not particularly strong.

32

Another effect the program might have had was on borrowing. Those who would have
cleared trees for large spending needs might have switched to taking out loans, or if the
program increased current income, it could have, in turn, decreased the need to borrow. We
find no impact on loans (column 5). Finally, columns 6 and 7 examine two measures of child
health, malaria and diarrhea. We find some suggestive evidence that the program decreased
the self-reported rate of child diarrhea. Overall, we interpret the results in Table 7 as
providing weak evidence that the program may have had some, but not major, positive effects
on economic well-being of eligible PFOs and stronger evidence that it did not significantly
decrease their economic well-being.

6

Cost-effectiveness
We next convert the program’s effect on tree cover into averted CO2 emissions, calculate

the monetary value of the averted emissions, and compare this benefit to the program costs.
Amount of delayed CO2 emissions
The program averted 0.268 hectares of deforestation per PFO eligible for the program.
This estimate uses our intent-to-treat gain in tree cover from our main specification (Table
3, column 2) and subtracts 0.005 hectares potentially due to reforestation.22 The average
duration from baseline to endline was 1.5 years, but the payment data we use are for 2
years of compliance. To be conservative, we ignore the fact that the amount of averted
deforestation likely accumulated during the remaining half year of the program.
We use Global Forest Map satellite-based estimates of biomass in forests, available at a
30-meter resolution, to estimate the biomass and carbon in forestland in our study villages;
the average is 153.5 tons of carbon per hectare (World Resources Institute, 2016).23 The carbon stored in other vegetation (e.g., agricultural cultivation) is negligible compared to trees,
so this amount also represents the change in carbon stocks from tree-clearing (Houghton,
2007). To be conservative, we ignore the flow of carbon that trees absorb, assuming the
22

We ignore the CO2 that the newly planted trees absorb during the intervention, as the amount is small.
This value is the carbon per hectare of forest with at least 67% tree cover whereas our effect size is in
hectares of tree cover, so we might be underestimating the carbon stored per hectare of tree cover.
23

33

forest is close to carbon-neutral if it remains intact.
Combining these numbers, averted carbon per eligible PFO is 41.1 tons. Equivalently,
the averted CO2 is 150.7 tons. (A CO2 molecule is 3.67 times as heavy as a carbon atom.)
Program costs per ton of delayed CO2 emissions
The average payment per PFO (inclusive of payments for reforestation) is $37.70 over
the two years of the program.24 Thus, the program paid $0.25 ($37.70 ÷ 150.7 tons) to delay
each ton of CO2 emissions.25,26 We assume this full amount is a program cost, but note that
payments in excess of the amount required to gain compliance are not true economic costs.
Payments to PFOs are not the only program cost. There are also costs for monitoring
enrollees’ forests and for program administration. Monitoring costs were $88 per program
enrollee, or $28 per eligible PFO.27 We assume an additional cost per eligible PFO of $30
for marketing of the program and overall program management. We further assume a 10%
transaction fee for PES payments. Combining these assumptions, the administrative costs
amount to $0.41 per averted ton of CO2 .
The monitoring costs could be considerably lower at scale-up because, for the sake of
the randomized trial, the program was rolled out in a geographically dispersed set of villages.
It seems reasonable that with greater geographic density, monitors could conduct 2 rather
than 1 spot check per day.28 In this case, the administrative costs of the program would be
$0.32 per averted ton of CO2 .
Thus, our best guess of the total program costs at scale-up—incentive payments plus
administrative costs—is $0.57 per averted ton of CO2 .
24

This number is slightly higher than our full-sample estimate of $36 (Table 2, column 2). The estimate
of impacts on tree cover is based on the 995 PFOs with non-missing remote sensing data, and their forest
area is slightly larger than average because small land circles are more likely to be fully cloud-covered. The
average payment among the subsample with non-missing remote sensing data is $37.70.
25
One might want to include potential payments to the net 5% of non-enrollees who thought they had
enrolled but were not paid. Scaling up by (32%+5%)/32% yields $0.29 in payments per ton of CO2 .
26
If we use our village-level instead of PFO-level estimates for this calculation, we find a lower cost: $0.19
in payments per averted ton of CO2 .
27
CSWCT hired forest monitors who each covered 30 enrollees. Monitors were paid $90 per month, and
for transportation, were given on average two bicycles each. Adding in repair costs, the bicycles cost $480
per monitor over the course of the program.
28
A forest monitor was supposed to conduct 1 spot check every one or two months per PFO; at once per
6 weeks, he conducted slightly fewer than 1 spot check per day, assuming 25 work days per month.

34

Social benefit per ton of delayed CO2 emissions
The amount paid to avert carbon emissions can be compared to the “social cost of
carbon” or SCC (which is, more precisely, the social cost of CO2 ). The middle estimate used
by the United States EPA for 2012 is $39 (in 2012 USD).29
The SCC represents the benefit of permanently averting carbon emissions. While this
program was intended to be a prototype of what could be a permanent program, it only ran
for two years. The program effects we estimate represent a delay in tree-cutting. To quantify
the delay length, we need to make assumptions about deforestation after the program ended,
which we do not have direct measurements of. Our base case scenario assumes that PFOs
deforest at a 50% higher rate than usual after the program ends until they catch up on all
their postponed deforestation, thus undoing the 2 years’ worth of treatment effects over 4
years. The average delay in deforestation in this scenario is 3 years, assuming a uniform
rate of deforestation. We also consider two more extreme scenarios. First, we assume PFOs
catch up on all their delayed deforestation immediately when the program ends, in which
case the benefits are for a delay of, on average, 1 year. Second, we assume PFOs resume
their normal rate of deforestation after the program ends, rather than an accelerated rate;
this is equivalent to a permanent two-year delay in both the deforestation that would have
occurred during the intervention as well as all later deforestation.30
When a tree is cleared, its carbon is not all immediately emitted into the atmosphere.
We assume that the average lag between tree-cutting and carbon emissions is 10 years.31
The value of avoided future emissions depends on both the discount rate (which decreases
the value) and the growth rate of the SCC (which increases the value). We use 3% for the
29

This value is the average SCC across the three integrated assessment models used by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and assumes a discount rate of 3%, which is the EPA’s median scenario.
The SCC for 2010 and 2015 are $33 and $38 in 2007 US dollars (USD); interpolation gives a SCC for 2012
of $35 in 2007 USD, or $39 per metric ton of CO2 in 2012 USD.
30
We assume that PFOs clear their forest at the same rate we observe between baseline and endline (8.7%
of their stock of trees every two years) until their forest is depleted. The amount of deforestation that is
delayed for two years, discounted back to the present, is 2.55 hectares per PFO, or 9.4 times the amount
observed during the intervention.
31
The exact time profile depends on many complex factors and is beyond the scope of this paper. A
10-year delay is consistent with 45% of the biomass being burned with immediate release, 45% decomposing
with a mean survival of 15 years, and 10% being used as lumber with the carbon stored for 30 years.

35

discount rate (the EPA’s middle rate) and 1.9% for the growth of the SCC, based on EPA
projections (Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, 2013).
Putting these assumptions together, the discounted benefit of delaying a ton of CO2 ’s
worth of tree-cutting for our base case (treatment effects undone after 4 years) is $1.11. The
CO2 benefits are twice as large as the program costs.
If, instead, PFOs catch up on their backlog of avoided deforestation the moment the
program ends, the benefit-cost ratio falls to 0.7. Alternatively, if PFOs resume deforesting
at their typical rate after the program ends, the benefit cost-ratio rises to 12.3. This last scenario of a permanent two-year delay in deforestation is the relevant one for extrapolating to
a longer-lasting program: If the program effects we observe over two years persist with a permanent intervention, the net present cost to permanently avert a ton of CO2 would be $3.10,
much less than the social cost of carbon. Note that this is a very tentative extrapolation.32
Table 8 summarizes the PES program costs and benefits per ton of averted CO2 emissions for our base case, the two extreme scenarios discussed above, and several alternative
scenarios. Note that these cost-benefit numbers have a wide confidence interval. Not only
do we need to make assumptions about deforestation after the program end, but the amount
of biomass in forests and the effect of the program on tree cover are measured with error.
But these figures suggest that, under most assumptions, the program costs are lower than
the social benefit of the delayed tree-cutting and CO2 emissions.
Another way to benchmark the program is to compare it to other environmental programs. Per ton of averted CO2 , this program is considerably less expensive than most
alternative policies in place in the US to reduce carbon emissions such as hybrid and electric
car subsidies; per averted ton of CO2 , those two policies cost 4 to 24 times as much as the
carbon benefits they generate (Knittel, 2012; Gayer and Parker, 2013). Alternative programs
in developing countries are also often cost-ineffective; for example, per ton of averted CO2 ,
32

We assume the payments needed to deter deforestation rise over time at the same rate as the SCC. The
costs might rise faster than this rate if the opportunity cost of avoided deforestation is convex in the delay
length or grows rapidly due to rising prices of timber products. The restrictions on tree-cutting in the PES
contract were tailored to the two-year duration; one would likely want to modify the contract conditions for
a longer-duration program.

36

giving households incentives to upgrade their refrigerators and air conditioners in Mexico
costs over 10 times the SCC (Davis, Fuchs, and Gertler, 2014).
A very important caveat is that these cost-benefit calculations do not quantify the
carbon impacts of behavioral responses beyond tree-cutting in the study area. For example,
how much less fuel do urban consumers use? What fuel sources do they substitute toward?
Many of these impacts occur outside the study area and are beyond the scope of this study.
In addition, while our analysis does not detect general equilibrium effects, such effects could
be important if PES programs were implemented at large scale.
Beyond averted CO2 , there are also other benefits of the program. For example, the
program redistributes from the wealthy to the poor. While PFOs are not poor relative
to their neighbors, they are poor in global terms. If funded through international carbon
markets, PES program costs—both the payments to PFOs and even the administrative costs
incurred by local organizations like CSWCT—would represent income distribution. We did
not find large improvements in consumption for participants, but they accumulated wealth
in the form of a more valuable forest, with no apparent loss to current income. Another
benefit that we cannot quantify with our study design is increased biodiversity, for example
through a higher likelihood of the chimpanzee population surviving. Biodiversity is valuable
to society per se and, in the case of chimpanzees, boosts Uganda’s tourism revenue.
On the opposite side of the ledger, the program has other costs besides program implementation costs. As seen in our survey results, one effect of the program was that PFOs
gave their neighbors less access to their land to gather firewood. Most of those affected in
this manner are the poorest, landless individuals in the community, and the program could
have made them worse off. Moreover, even if the program did not decrease anyone’s absolute wealth (inclusive of access to others’ forest), it likely increased within-village inequality
because those eligible for the program were relatively wealthy to begin with.

37

7

Conclusion
This paper evaluated an important policy tool being used to mitigate climate change,

namely Payments for Ecosystem Services in which financial incentives are given to keep
forest intact. While the logic of using financial incentives to reduce deforestation is wellestablished, a concern with such a program is that many of the payments will be inframarginal
to behavior, so the program will have minimal impact on deforestation per dollar spent.
We measure causal impacts of a PES program in Uganda through a randomized controlled trial in which 60 of 121 study villages received the two-year program. Using highresolution satellite images, we find that the program led to a sharp reduction in deforestation.
Our cost-benefit calculations suggest that the program costs were less than the social benefit
of the delay in CO2 emissions from deforestation that was generated by the program.
Thus, in this setting, PES was effective and did not suffer the problems of inframarginality or leakage that could potentially dampen its cost-effectiveness. Future research is needed
to assess longer-term programs. It is possible that if PFOs learn that monitoring is imperfect or if their initial pro-environment motivations for complying fade, the impacts of the
program would also fade. Nonetheless, we view our results as a proof-of-concept that PES
programs can be a cost-effective way to avert deforestation in developing countries—and
hence a powerful tool to mitigate climate change.

38

References
Abadie, A., M. M. Chingos, and M. R. West (2013): “Endogenous Stratification in
Randomized Experiments,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alix-Garcia, J., C. McIntosh, K. R. Sims, and J. R. Welch (2013): “The Ecological Footprint of Poverty Alleviation: Evidence from Mexico’s Opportunidades Program,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 417–435.
Alix-Garcia, J. M., E. N. Shapiro, and K. R. Sims (2012): “Forest Conservation and
Slippage: Evidence From Mexico’s National Payments for Ecosystem Services Program,”
Land Economics, 88(4), 613–638.
Arriagada, R. A., P. J. Ferraro, E. O. Sills, S. K. Pattanayak, and
S. Cordero-Sancho (2012): “Do Payments for Environmental Services Affect Forest
Cover? A Farm-Level Evaluation from Costa Rica,” Land Economics, 88(2), 382–399.
Asner, G. P., D. E. Knapp, A. Balaji, and G. Páez-Acosta (2009): “Automated
Mapping of Tropical Deforestation and Forest Degradation: CLASlite,” Journal of Applied
Remote Sensing, 3(1), 033543–033543.
Assunção, J., M. Lipscomb, A. M. Mobarak, and D. Szerman (2014): “Electrification, Agricultural Productivity and Deforestation in Brazil,” Discussion paper.
Benz, U. C., P. Hofmann, G. Willhauck, I. Lingenfelder, and M. Heynen
(2004): “Multi-Resolution, Object-Oriented Fuzzy Analysis of Remote Sensing Data for
GIS-Ready Information,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 58(3),
239–258.
Blaschke, T. (2010): “Object Based Image Analysis for Remote Sensing,” ISPRS Journal
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 65(1), 2–16.
Bruhn, M., and D. McKenzie (2009): “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice
in Development Field Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
1(4), 200–232.
Burbidge, J. B., L. Magee, and A. L. Robb (1988): “Alternative Transformations to
Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 83(401), 123–127.
Burgess, R., M. Hansen, B. A. Olken, P. Potapov, and S. Sieber (2012): “The Political Economy of Deforestation in the Tropics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4),
1707–1754.
Canadell, J. G., et al. (2007): “Contributions to Accelerating Atmospheric CO2 Growth
From Economic Activity, Carbon Intensity, and Efficiency of Natural Sinks,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(47), 18866–18870.

39

Davis, L. W., A. Fuchs, and P. Gertler (2014): “Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a
Large-Scale Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 6(4), 207–238.
Desclée, B., P. Bogaert, and P. Defourny (2006): “Forest Change Detection by
Statistical Object-Based Method,” Remote Sensing of Environment, 102(1), 1–11.
Edmonds, E. V. (2002): “Government-Initiated Community Resource Management and
Local Resource Extraction From Nepal’s Forests,” Journal of Development Economics,
68(1), 89–115.
Engel, S., S. Pagiola, and S. Wunder (2008): “Designing Payments for Environmental
Services in Theory and Practice: An Overview of Issues,” Ecological Economics, 64(4),
663–674.
FAO (2010): “Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010, Main Report,” Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Ferraro, P. J., M. M. Hanauer, D. A. Miteva, J. L. Nelson, S. K. Pattanayak,
C. Nolte, and K. R. Sims (2015): “Estimating The Impacts of Conservation on Ecosystem Services and Poverty by Integrating Modeling and Evaluation,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 112(24), 7420–7425.
Ferraro, P. J., and A. Kiss (2002): “Direct Payments to Conserve Biodiversity,” Science,
298(5599), 1718–1719.
Ferraro, P. J., and S. K. Pattanayak (2006): “Money for Nothing? A Call for Empirical Evaluation of Biodiversity Conservation Investments,” PLoS Biology, 4(4), 482–488.
Fisher, B. (2010): “African Exception to Drivers of Deforestation,” Nature Geoscience,
3(6), 375–6.
Fiszbein, A., N. R. Schady, and F. H. Ferreira (2009): Conditional Cash Transfers:
Reducing Present and Future Poverty. World Bank Publications.
Foster, A. D., and M. R. Rosenzweig (2003): “Economic Growth and the Rise of
Forests,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 601–637.
Gayer, T., and E. Parker (2013): “The Car Allowance Rebate System: Evaluation and
Lessons for the Future,” Economic Studies Policy Brief, Brookings Institution.
Greenstone, M., and T. Gayer (2009): “Quasi-Experimental and Experimental
Approaches to Environmental Economics,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 57(1), 21–44.
Greenstone, M., and B. K. Jack (2015): “Envirodevonomics: A Research Agenda for
an Emerging Field,” Journal of Economic Literature, 53(1), 5–42.

40

Greenstone, M., E. Kopits, and A. Wolverton (2011): “Estimating the Social Cost
of Carbon for Use in US Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation,” Discussion
paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hegde, R., and G. Q. Bull (2011): “Performance of an Agro-Forestry Based Paymentsfor-Environmental-Services Project in Mozambique: A Household Level Analysis,”
Ecological Economics, 71, 122–130.
Houghton, R. A. (2007): “Balancing the Global Carbon Budget,” Annual Review of
Earth and Planetary Sciences, 35, 313–347.
Imbens, G. (2011): “Experimental Design for Unit and Cluster Randomized Trials,” Lecture
notes prepared for International Initiative for Impact Evaluation.
Imbens, G. W., and J. D. Wooldridge (2007): “What’s New in Econometrics,” NBER
Mini-Course Lecture Notes, Lecture 1.
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (2013): “Technical Update on the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis under Executive Order
12866,” United States Environmental Protection Agency Technical Support Document.
Jack, B. K. (2013): “Private Information and the Allocation of Land Use Subsidies in
Malawi,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3), 113–35.
Jack, B. K., P. Oliva, C. Severen, E. Walker, and S. Bell (2015): “Technology
Adoption Under Uncertainty: Take-Up and Subsequent Investment in Zambia,” Discussion
paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jayachandran, S. (2013): “Liquidity Constraints and Deforestation: The Limitations of
Payments for Ecosystem Services,” American Economic Review, 103(3), 309–313.
Knittel, C. R. (2012): “Reducing Petroleum Consumption from Transportation,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 26(1), 93–118.
Lee, D. S. (2009): “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on
Treatment Effects,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071–1102.
Nabuurs, G. J., et al. (2007): “Forestry,” in In Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of
Climate Change. Contributions of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. by M. Apps, and E. Calvo. Cambridge
University Press, New York, NY.
NEMA (2008): “The State of Environment Report for Uganda 2008: Sustainable Environment for Prosperity,” Report, Uganda National Environment Management Authority.
Nordhaus, W. (2014): “Estimates of the Social Cost of Carbon: Concepts and Results
from the DICE-2013R Model and Alternative Approaches,” Journal of the Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists, 1(1/2), 273–312.

41

Pattanayak, S. K., S. Wunder, and P. J. Ferraro (2010): “Show Me the Money:
Do Payments Supply Environmental Services in Developing Countries?,” Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy.
Robalino, J., and A. Pfaff (2013): “Ecopayments and Deforestation in Costa Rica: A
Nationwide Analysis of PSA’s Initial Years,” Land Economics, 89(3), 432–448.
Silva-Chávez, G., B. Schaap, and J. Breitfeller (2015): “REDD+ Finance Flows
2009-2014: Trends and Lessons Learned in REDDX Countries,” Report, Forest Trends.
Solon, G., S. J. Haider, and J. M. Wooldridge (2015): “What Are We Weighting
For?,” Journal of Human Resources, 50(2), 301–316.
Somanathan, E., R. Prabhakar, and B. S. Mehta (2009): “Decentralization for
Cost-Effective Conservation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(11),
4143–4147.
Stern, N. (2006): The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Uchida, E., J. Xu, Z. Xu, and S. Rozelle (2007): “Are The Poor Benefiting
From China’s Land Conservation Program?,” Environment and Development Economics,
12(04), 593–620.
United Nations FCCC (2002): “Report of the Conference of the Parties on Its Seventh
Session, Held at Marrakesh From 29 October to 10 November 2001,” Conference report,
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
United Nations FCCC (2015): “Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change,” 21st Conference of Parties, Paris, France.
Van der Werf, G. R., D. C. Morton, R. S. DeFries, J. G. Olivier, P. S. Kasibhatla, R. B. Jackson, G. J. Collatz, and J. Randerson (2009): “CO2 Emissions
From Forest Loss,” Nature Geoscience, 2(11), 737–738.
World
Resources
Institute
http://www.globalforestwatch.org.

(2016):

“Global

Forest

Watch,”

Wunder, S. (2007): “The Efficiency of Payments for Environmental Services in Tropical
Conservation,” Conservation Biology, 21(1), 48–58.
Wunder, S., S. Engel, and S. Pagiola (2008): “Taking Stock: A Comparative Analysis
of Payments for Environmental Services Programs in Developed and Developing Countries,” Ecological Economics, 65(4), 834–852.

42

Table 1: Descriptive statistics and randomization balance

Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

Std. diff.
(3)

Household head’s age

47.499
[13.605]

47.589
[14.659]

0.003

Household head’s years of education

7.715
[4.003]

7.931
[4.187]

-0.056

IHS of self-reported land area (ha)

4.062
[1.021]

4.004
[0.968]

0.053

Self-reported forest area (ha)

1.727
[3.318]

2.068
[12.413]

-0.042

Cut any trees in the last 3 years

0.845
[0.362]

0.858
[0.350]

-0.031

Cut trees to clear land for cultivation

0.236
[0.425]

0.241
[0.428]

-0.016

Cut trees for timber products

0.704
[0.457]

0.721
[0.449]

-0.037

Cut trees for emergency/lumpy expenses

0.250
[0.433]

0.292
[0.455]

-0.088

IHS of total revenue from cut trees

1.238
[2.118]

1.397
[2.248]

-0.085

Rented any part of land

0.163
[0.370]

0.198
[0.399]

-0.091

Dispute with neighbor about land

0.218
[0.413]

0.206
[0.405]

0.035

Involved in any environmental program

0.100
[0.301]

0.111
[0.315]

-0.035

Agree: Deforestation affects the community

0.539
[0.499]

0.548
[0.498]

-0.014

Agree: Need to damage envi. to improve life

0.064
[0.245]

0.043
[0.204]

0.089

Tree cover in land circle (ha)

4.355
[12.466]

3.845
[9.178]

0.050

Weighted tree cover in land circle (ha)

4.403
[11.643]

3.999
[8.252]

0.057

% of land circle with tree cover

0.199
[0.161]

0.209
[0.157]

-0.044

% change in vegetation, 1990–2010

0.035
[0.066]

0.037
[0.058]

-0.016

564
60

535
61

Observations (forest owners)
Number of villages

Notes: The table reports subsample means with standard deviations in brackets. The last column reports the
regression-adjusted difference in mean between the treatment and control subsample divided by the pooled standard
deviation, and an asterisk denotes that this difference has a p-value less than 0.10. The standardized difference and p-value
are based on a regression with subcounty fixed effects, with clustering at the village level. IHS denotes the inverse hyperbolic
sine transformation of the variable. Weighted forest cover is the mean weighted by the proportion of the forest owner’s land
43
with valid satellite data.

Table 2: Program take-up

Treated
Control group mean
Observations

Amount
Proportion
paid for
of eligible
avoided
amount
deforestapaid
tion
(3)
(4)

Take-up

Amount
paid

(1)

(2)

0.319∗∗∗
[0.030]

8.991∗∗∗
[1.862]

7.962∗∗∗
[1.799]

0.254∗∗∗
[0.026]

0.011
1,099

0.416
1,099

0.403
1,099

0.007
1,099

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01. All columns include subcounty fixed effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to
balance the randomization: number of PFOs in baseline sample, average weekly earnings per capita,
distance to the nearest main road, and average size of the reported land nearest the dwelling. Amount paid
and Amount paid for conservation are in 10,000 UGX. Outcome data are from CSWCT administrative
data.

44

Table 3: Effect of PES program on forest cover

PFO-level land circles

Village boundaries

Tree cover
(ha)
(1)

Tree cover
(ha)
(2)

Change in
tree cover
(3)

Tree cover
(ha)
(4)

Change in
tree cover
(5)

Treated

0.246∗∗
[0.109]

0.273∗∗
[0.107]

0.273∗∗
[0.107]

4.315
[2.660]

4.650∗
[2.607]

Baseline outcome

0.998∗∗∗
[0.034]

1.005∗∗∗
[0.072]

3.650
No
995

3.650
Yes
995

Control group mean
Control variables
Observations

0.953∗∗∗
[0.026]
-0.349
Yes
995

155.530
Yes
121

-13.371
Yes
121

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village in columns 1 to 3 and are heteroskedasticity-robust in
columns 4 and 5. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All regressions and
means are weighted by the proportion of available satellite data. Tree cover is measured in hectares (ha).
All columns include subcounty fixed effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to balance the
randomization. The control variables included in columns 2 to 5 are the 1990 and 2010 area covered by
photosynthetic vegetation and dummy variables for the date of the baseline satellite image. The first 3
columns use a land circle centered on the PFO’s home that is twice his self-reported land area, and the
next 2 columns use village boundaries.

45

Table 4: Heterogeneous effects on forest cover

Heterogeneous treatment effects on tree cover by:
Abovemedian
tree cover
in land
circle
(1)

% of land
circle with
tree cover

Cut any
trees in
the last 3
years

(2)

(3)

IHS of
Cut trees
Cut trees
Cut trees
total
to clear
for emerfor timber
revenue
land for
gency/lumpy
products
from cut
cultivation
expenses
trees
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Predicted
change in
tree cover
(8)

46

Treat × Characteristic

0.469∗∗
[0.200]

1.964∗∗
[0.927]

0.429∗∗
[0.171]

0.032
[0.133]

0.344∗∗
[0.167]

0.408∗
[0.220]

0.122∗∗∗
[0.043]

-0.694∗∗
[0.295]

Treated

0.021
[0.070]

-0.157
[0.150]

-0.092
[0.138]

0.269∗∗
[0.119]

0.021
[0.126]

0.147
[0.091]

-0.015
[0.081]

-0.006
[0.086]

Characteristic

-0.578∗∗∗
[0.199]

-3.001∗∗
[1.176]

-0.329∗∗
[0.131]

0.071
[0.116]

-0.334∗∗
[0.139]

-0.411∗∗
[0.196]

-0.105∗∗∗
[0.038]

0.523
[0.352]

Observations

995

995

993

995

995

995

993

994

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. The outcome variable in all columns
is endline tree cover, which is measured in hectares. All regressions are weighted by the proportion of available satellite data. All columns include
subcounty fixed effects, four village-level baseline variables used to balance the randomization, the baseline outcome, 1990 and 2010 photosynthetic
vegetation, and dummy variables for the baseline satellite date. In column 8, predicted tree loss is the predicted value from the regression reported in
Appendix Table A3, column 3.

Table 5: Effects on self-reported tree-cutting

Any
IHS of total
revenue
revenue
from cut
from cut
trees in the
trees
last year
(6)
(7)

Cut any
trees in the
last year

Cut trees
to clear
land for
cultivation

Cut trees
for timber
products

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Treated

-0.140***
[0.034]

-0.034*
[0.018]

-0.090***
[0.030]

-0.027**
[0.013]

-28.929
[21.639]

-0.232*
[0.118]

-0.041*
[0.021]

Baseline outcome

0.116***
[0.039]

0.065***
[0.023]

0.134***
[0.029]

0.028*
[0.016]

0.023
[0.040]

0.143***
[0.031]

0.069***
[0.024]

Lee bound (lower)

-0.162***
[0.035]

-0.041**
[0.018]

-0.107***
[0.030]

-0.031**
[0.013]

-31.575
[22.719]

-0.312**
[0.120]

-0.050**
[0.022]

Lee bound (upper)

-0.103***
[0.033]

0.012
[0.016]

-0.048*
[0.028]

0.021*
[0.010]

5.905**
[2.339]

0.065
[0.105]

0.003
[0.020]

0.453
[0.498]
1,018
994

0.085
[0.279]
1,018
994

0.339
[0.474]
1,018
994

0.069
[0.254]
1,018
994

32.900
[446.503]
1,018
994

0.823
[2.033]
1,018
994

0.152
[0.359]
1,018
994

Cut trees
Total
for emerrevenue
gency/lumpy from cut
expenses
trees

47
Control group mean
Control group SD
Observations
Observations (Lee bounds)

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All columns include subcounty fixed
effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to balance the randomization. Total revenue from cut trees is in 10,000 UGX. IHS denotes
inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. For observations where the baseline outcome is missing, we impute the value as the sample mean, and include
in the regression a dummy variable for observations with imputed baseline values. Outcomes refer to the previous one year; baseline values refer to
the previous three years.

Table 6: Effects on land use and protection of land

(1)

Decreased
access to
others who
take trees
from forest
in last 2
years
(2)

-0.170***
[0.033]

0.039
[0.024]

Allow others
to gather
firewood
from own
forest

Treated

Claim to
Had dispute
Increased
Has any
ownership of
with
level of
fence around
forest
neighbors
patrolling
land with
became
regarding
the forest in
natural
stronger in
land in last
last 2 years
forest
last 2 years
2 years
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.109***
[0.039]

0.036
[0.033]

0.071**
[0.033]

-0.014
[0.025]

0.013
[0.089]

Baseline outcome
48

0.102***
[0.031]

Lee bound (lower)

-0.185***
[0.033]

0.033
[0.025]

0.094**
[0.040]

0.006
[0.033]

0.049
[0.032]

-0.024
[0.026]

Lee bound (upper)

-0.146***
[0.032]

0.063**
[0.025]

0.132***
[0.040]

0.054
[0.033]

0.082**
[0.033]

0.027
[0.023]

0.427
[0.495]
976
957

0.202
[0.402]
980
965

0.378
[0.485]
984
965

0.667
[0.472]
1,020
998

0.663
[0.473]
999
982

0.140
[0.347]
1,020
998

Control group mean
Control group SD
Observations
Observations (Lee bounds)

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All columns include subcounty fixed
effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to balance the randomization. For observations where the baseline outcome is missing, we
impute the value as the sample mean, and include in the regression a dummy variable for observations with imputed baseline values. For columns
with no baseline coefficient reported, the variable was not collected in the baseline survey.

Table 7: Socioeconomic effects

Has
Child was
outstanding
sick with
loan or
malaria in
repaid a loan last 30 days
in past year
(age 0-15)
(5)
(6)

Child was
sick with
diarrhea in
last 30 days
(age 0-5)
(7)

IHS of food
expend. in
last 30 days

IHS of
non-food
expend. in
last 30 days

IHS of alcohol/tobacco
expend. in
last 30 days

9-step
income
ladder

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.065
[0.074]

0.156**
[0.066]

-0.010
[0.062]

0.214*
[0.114]

-0.009
[0.024]

-0.031
[0.029]

-0.064**
[0.032]

Baseline outcome

0.527***
[0.037]

0.648***
[0.028]

0.334***
[0.029]

0.381***
[0.036]

0.233***
[0.032]

0.182***
[0.040]

0.090
[0.068]

Lee bound (lower)

-0.029
[0.070]

0.053
[0.064]

-0.072
[0.060]

0.064
[0.114]

-0.049**
[0.023]

-0.105***
[0.029]

-0.118***
[0.033]

Lee bound (upper)

0.144*
[0.075]

0.215***
[0.064]

0.090
[0.059]

0.432***
[0.110]

0.011
[0.025]

0.042
[0.030]

0.034
[0.030]

2.524
[1.177]
Households
1,020
998

4.363
[1.354]
Households
1,020
998

0.613
[1.026]
Households
1,020
998

4.034
[2.080]
Households
1,016
994

0.770
[0.421]
Households
1,019
996

0.401
[0.490]
Children
2,266
2,145

0.202
[0.403]
Children
498
470

Treated

49

Control group mean
Control group SD
Sample
Observations
Observations (Lee bounds)

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All columns include subcounty fixed
effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to balance the randomization. IHS denotes inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. For
observations where the baseline outcome is missing, we impute the value as the sample mean, and include in the regression a dummy variable for
observations with imputed baseline values. The outcome in column 4 is the respondent’s rating of his income relative to others in his community on a
9-step ladder. In column 6 and 7, each observation is a child and child age-in-years fixed effects are included. Column 6 controls separately for the
baseline prevalence among children 0 to 7 and 8 to 15 years old.

Table 8: Cost-benefit analysis

Scenario

Benefit
per ton of
CO2

Cost per
ton of
CO2

Costbenefit
ratio

50

1. Base case: Program effects undone over 4 years

$1.11

$0.57

0.51

2. Program effects accumulate for final 6 months

$1.11

$0.43

0.38

3. Program effects undone immediately

$0.37

$0.57

1.52

4. Deforestation resumes at normal rate (permanent delay)

$0.74

$0.06

0.08

5. Program effects undone over 2 years

$0.74

$0.57

0.76

6. Avg time until emissions is halved to 5 years

$1.17

$0.57

0.48

7. Avg time until emissions doubled to 20 years

$1.00

$0.57

0.57

8. Monitoring rate remains at 1 spot check per day

$1.11

$0.66

0.59

Notes: This table compares the costs of the PES program, measured per ton of averted CO2 emissions, with the social benefit of the averted
emissions. The base case assumes (a) no further treatment effects during the 0.5 years between endline satellite data collection and program end (b)
an average 3-year delay in deforestation (treatment effects undone over 4 years) (c) average time from tree-cutting to CO2 emissions of 10 years, and
(d) a monitoring rate of 2 spot checks per monitor per day. Row 2 modifies (a) to assume the treatment effects accumulate at the same rate in the
final 0.5 year as was observed in the first 1.5 years. Row 3 modifies (b) to assume a 1-year delay in deforestation (treatment effects undone the day
the program ends). Row 4 modifies (b) to assume the averted deforestation and all subsequent deforestation are delayed by the 2-year duration of the
program. Row 5 modifies (a) to assume a 2-year delay in only the averted deforestation during the intervention (treatment effects undone over 2
years). Row 6 and 7 modify (c) to shorten and lengthen the gap between tree-cutting and emissions. Row 8 modifies (d) to assume 1 spot check per
monitor per day. See section 6 for further discussion.

ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION
Data Appendix
Household survey
Endline respondents: In 53 cases, the endline respondent was a different member of the household
than the baseline respondent. In 18 of these cases, the baseline respondent had died, in 3 cases he
was too ill to participate, and in 22 cases he was temporarily or permanently away from the
village. The remaining 10 cases are miscellaneous reasons.

Remote sensing analysis
Procurement of images: The QuickBird satellite is operated by DigitalGlobe. We contracted with
an image reseller, Apollo Mapping, to task our images.
Top-of-atmosphere reflectance: Calculations for top-of-atmosphere reflectance, which accounts for
factors such as solar zenith angle and Earth-Sun distance at acquisition time, were done following
DigitalGlobe’s “Radiance Conversion of QuickBird Data” technical documentation.

Variable construction
IHS transformation:
The inverse hyperbolic sine transformation is the function
√
2
f (x) = ln(x + x + 1). Except for values of x close to 0, it approximates ln(x) + ln(2). Before
transforming the QuickBird variables with the IHS function, we rescale the variables in levels such
that the 10th percentile of the baseline value using actual-sized circles is 1. We apply the same
procedure to the Landsat variables, forest area, and baseline per capita income. For baseline per
capita income, the raw 10th percentile is 2500 UGX, and we use the same scale factor for all other
monetary values before applying the IHS transformation. The results are insensitive to the scale
factors used.
Food, non-food, and alcohol/tobacco expenditures: The categories for food were as follows: tea;
soda; milk; sugar; meat; fish; rice; beans; salt; snacks and meals consumed outside home; other
foods. the categories for non-food were as follows: petrol and diesel; paraffin; body soap; clothing
soap; other cosmetics, combs, razors; transport (excluding petrol and diesel); air time and use of
public phones; domestic assistant or farm help; funeral expenses; shoes and sandals; clothing and
bedding (not including school uniforms); livestock care (medicine, food, enclosures); school fees
(not including uniforms and supplies); school supplies; bride price expenses; religious tithes.
Distance to forest reserves: Distance to forest reserves is the shortest distance between the PFO’s
home and the boundaries of government forest reserves.
Number of treatment villages within 5 kilometers: For calculating the number of villages near
village A, any other village is considered within 5 km if any portion of its polygon is within 5 km
distance of village A’s centroid.

Cost-benefit calculation
Tons of carbon per hectare: Global Forest Watch uses Landsat data to estimate the biomass in
forests globally at a resolution of 30 meters. The most recent data at this resolution are from
2000. We calculate the average carbon per hectare in forests with at least 67% forest cover within
our study village boundaries. The value is 307 tons of above-ground biomass per hectare, and we
apply the standard factor of 0.5 to obtain tons of carbon per hectare.

51

Appendix Figure A1: Reasons for not taking up the program

6.7%2.5%
3.8%
5.4%
9.9%
4.1%
67.5%

Unaware of program or what it is

Fear land grabs/distrust NGOs

Didn’t know how to sign up

Want to cut trees/low payment

Deemed ineligible by CSWCT

Contract too complicated

Other

Notes: This figure is based on responses to questions asked on the endline survey to non-enrollee PFOs in
treatment villages. PFOs were asked if they were aware of the program. Those who were aware but said
they did not enroll were asked their reason for not enrolling.

52

Appendix Figure A2: Proportion of PFO’s land with valid remote sensing data

Notes: The figure shows a histogram of the proportion of sample PFOs’ land that has available satellite
data. PFO land is proxied by a circle twice as large as his self-reported land area. The main source of
missing data is cloud cover. Area outside the study villages is also missing remote sensing data.

53

Appendix Table A1: Sample attrition

Number of PFOs
Treatment
group

Control
group

Total

Baseline survey (with GPS location of PFO home)

564

535

1,099

Baseline survey and satellite land circle

508

487

995

HH reports owning no land

2

3

5

Didn’t report land area

0

1

1

Entire land circle has cloud cover

54

44

98

Baseline survey and endline survey

512

508

1,020

Baseline survey, satellite land circle, and endline survey

463

464

927

Notes: The top row represents our full sample and the following rows state the number of PFOs with
available endline and satellite data (broken down by reason for missing satellite data).

54

Appendix Table A2: Determinants of sample attrition

All PFOs
(1)

PFOs with
PFOs with
missing
missing
satellite data endline data
(2)
(3)

Std. diff.
(1-2)

Adj. std. diff.
(1-2)

Std. diff.
(1-3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Household head’s age

47.543
[14.122]

47.500
[13.555]

44.671
[14.772]

0.035

-0.070

0.207*

Household head’s years of education

7.820
[4.093]

8.330
[4.223]

7.385
[3.845]

-0.147

-0.270**

0.119

IHS of self-reported land area (ha)

4.034
[0.996]

3.543
[1.348]

3.804
[1.165]

0.540***

Self-reported forest area (ha)

1.893
[8.978]

1.213
[2.500]

1.197
[1.450]

0.072*

-0.088

0.078**

Cut any trees in the last 3 years

0.851
[0.356]

0.760
[0.429]

0.772
[0.422]

0.273**

0.165

0.271**

Cut trees to clear land for cultivation

0.238
[0.426]

0.231
[0.423]

0.152
[0.361]

0.022

0.018

0.199*

Cut trees for timber products

0.712
[0.453]

0.596
[0.493]

0.696
[0.463]

0.254**

0.165

0.088

Cut trees for emergency/lumpy expenses

0.270
[0.444]

0.212
[0.410]

0.316
[0.468]

0.136

0.082

-0.047

IHS of total revenue from cut trees

1.315
[2.183]

1.030
[2.176]

1.086
[1.992]

0.094

-0.010

0.135

Rented any part of land

0.180
[0.384]

0.096
[0.296]

0.139
[0.348]

0.257***

0.132

0.082

Dispute with neighbor about land

0.212
[0.409]

0.173
[0.380]

0.266
[0.445]

0.118

0.081

-0.148

Involved in any environmental program

0.106
[0.307]

0.071
[0.259]

0.013
[0.114]

0.148*

0.103

0.335***

Agree: Deforestation affects the community

0.544
[0.498]

0.531
[0.502]

0.434
[0.499]

0.045

0.068

0.246**

Agree: Need to damage envi. to improve life

0.054
[0.226]

0.071
[0.258]

0.065
[0.248]

-0.071

-0.077

-0.088

Treated

0.513
[0.500]

0.538
[0.501]

0.658
[0.477]

-0.072

-0.098

-0.324***

Take-up

0.319
[0.467]

0.250
[0.437]

0.154
[0.364]

0.171

0.124

0.306*

Tree cover in land circle (ha)

4.105
[10.978]

3.070
[3.901]

0.121*

% of land circle with tree cover

0.204
[0.159]

0.211
[0.150]

-0.004

% change in vegetation, 1990–2010

0.036
[0.062]

0.027
[0.060]

0.153

Observations

1,099

104

0.253*

79

Notes: The table reports subsample means with standard deviations in brackets. Column 4 reports the regression-adjusted
difference in mean between the full sample and the observations with missing satellite data divided by the pooled standard
deviation. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. The standardized difference and p-value are based
on a regression with subcounty fixed effects, with clustering at the village level. Column 5 is the regression-adjusted
standardized difference when IHS of land area is included as a control variable. IHS denotes the inverse hyperbolic sine
transformation of the variable. Column 6 reports the regression-adjusted standardized difference between the full sample and
the observations with missing endline data. Summary statistics for Take-up are based on the treatment group only.

55

Appendix Table A3: Determinants of program take-up in treatment group

Take-up

Take-up

(1)

(2)

Change in
tree cover
(3)

Household head’s age

0.002
[0.001]

0.003
[0.003]

Household head’s years of education

0.004
[0.005]

0.001
[0.014]

IHS of self-reported land area (ha)

0.055∗
[0.028]

Self-reported forest area (ha)

-0.004
[0.006]

-0.073
[0.054]

Cut any trees in the last 3 years

0.036
[0.094]

0.038
[0.163]

Cut trees to clear land for cultivation

0.028
[0.057]

0.046
[0.140]

Cut trees for timber products

0.090
[0.076]

0.049
[0.178]

Cut trees for emergency/lumpy expenses

-0.129∗∗∗
[0.041]

0.059∗∗
[0.024]

-0.099∗∗
[0.040]

-0.340∗
[0.195]

-0.010
[0.010]

-0.049
[0.029]

Rented any part of land

-0.046
[0.067]

0.004
[0.175]

Dispute with neighbor about land

0.051
[0.045]

-0.063
[0.109]

Involved in any environmental program

-0.014
[0.079]

0.216∗
[0.125]

Agree: Deforestation affects the community

0.032
[0.039]

-0.037
[0.086]

Agree: Need to damage envi. to improve life

-0.239∗∗∗
[0.075]

-0.200∗∗∗
[0.068]

Tree cover in land circle (ha)

-0.003∗∗
[0.001]

-0.003∗∗
[0.001]

-0.403
[0.346]

1.787∗∗
[0.886]

0.285
[0.348]

-0.024
[0.034]

Predicted change in tree cover

Sample
Observations

(4)

-0.318∗∗
[0.135]

IHS of total revenue from cut trees

% change in vegetation, 1990–2010

Take-up

Treatment
group
564

Treatment
group
564

Control
group
486

Treatment
group
564

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All columns
include subcounty fixed effects, and the first three columns include the four village-level baseline variables used to balance the
randomization. Missing independent variables have been imputed with the sample mean, and a dummy variable for missing
56
values is included in the regression. IHS denotes the inverse hyperbolic sine function.

Appendix Table A4: Program impacts on tree-planting

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Have
planted trees
in the past
12 mths
(5)

0.149***
[0.018]

0.101***
[0.016]

31.007***
[3.556]

9.813***
[1.555]

0.168***
[0.040]

Took up
Reforestation
reforestation
area
option

Treated

Total trees
planted

Total trees
survived

Lee bound (lower)

0.156***
[0.041]

Lee bound (upper)

0.198***
[0.040]

Control group mean
Control group SD
Observations
Observations (Lee bounds)

0.002
[0.043]
1,099

0.001
[0.022]
1,099

1.710
[25.339]
1,099

0.933
[16.534]
1,099

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01. All columns include subcounty fixed effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to
balance the randomization. The outcome in columns 1 to 4 are from CSWCT administrative data on
program participation. Reforestation area is measured in hectares. The outcome in column 5 is from the
endline survey.

57

0.282
[0.450]
1,019
998

Appendix Table A5: Proportional treatment effects on forest cover

PFO-level land circles

Village boundaries

Change in
Change in
IHS of tree IHS of tree
IHS of tree
IHS of tree
IHS of tree
cover
cover
cover
cover
cover
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Treated

0.038
[0.024]

0.044∗
[0.023]

Baseline outcome

0.982∗∗∗
[0.006]

0.940∗∗∗
[0.015]

2.866
No
995

2.866
Yes
995

Control group mean
Control variables
Observations

0.044∗
[0.023]

0.042∗
[0.022]

0.043∗
[0.022]

0.947∗∗∗
[0.033]
-0.073
Yes
995

6.936
Yes
121

-0.095
Yes
121

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village in columns 1 to 3 and are heteroskedasticity-robust in
columns 4 and 5. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All regressions and
means are weighted by the proportion of available satellite data. IHS denotes inverse hyperbolic sine. The
outcome is the IHS transformation of tree cover. All columns include subcounty fixed effects and the four
village-level baseline variables used to balance the randomization. The control variables included in
columns 2 to 5 are the 1990 and 2010 area covered by photosynthetic vegetation and dummy variables for
the date of the baseline satellite image. The first 3 columns use a land circle centered on the PFO’s home
that is twice his self-reported land area, and the next 2 columns use village boundaries.

58

Appendix Table A6: Unweighted forest cover results

PFO-level land circles

Village boundaries

Tree cover
(ha)
(1)

Tree cover
(ha)
(2)

Change in
tree cover
(3)

Tree cover
(ha)
(4)

Change in
tree cover
(5)

Treated

0.183∗
[0.099]

0.213∗∗
[0.095]

0.215∗∗
[0.098]

4.519
[2.881]

4.901∗
[2.789]

Baseline outcome

1.004∗∗∗
[0.034]

1.007∗∗∗
[0.067]

3.526
No
995

3.526
Yes
995

Control group mean
Control variables
Observations

0.953∗∗∗
[0.025]
-0.319
Yes
995

146.906
Yes
121

-12.273
Yes
121

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village in columns 1 to 3 and are heteroskedasticity-robust in
columns 4 and 5. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Tree cover is measured
in hectares. All columns include subcounty fixed effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to
balance the randomization. The control variables included in columns 2 to 5 are the 1990 and 2010 area
covered by photosynthetic vegetation and dummy variables for the date of the baseline satellite image. The
first 3 columns use a land circle centered on the PFO’s home that is twice his self-reported land area, and
the next 2 columns use village boundaries.

59

Appendix Table A7: Forest cover results removing outliers

PFO-level land circles
(dropping top 1%)

PFO-level land circles
(median-sized)

Tree cover
(ha)
(2)

Change in
tree cover
(3)

Tree cover
(ha)
(4)

Tree cover
(ha)
(5)

Change in
tree cover
(6)

Treated

0.196∗∗
[0.088]

0.206∗∗
[0.081]

0.240∗∗
[0.097]

0.115∗∗
[0.052]

0.138∗∗∗
[0.051]

0.147∗∗
[0.056]

Baseline outcome

0.898∗∗∗
[0.026]

0.833∗∗∗
[0.042]

0.898∗∗∗
[0.027]

0.877∗∗∗
[0.028]

3.239
No
986

3.239
Yes
986

2.112
No
1,002

2.112
Yes
1,002

60

Tree cover
(ha)
(1)

Control group mean
Control variables
Observations

-0.336
Yes
986

-0.209
Yes
1,002

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All regressions and means are
weighted by the proportion of available satellite data. All columns include subcounty fixed effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to
balance the randomization. The control variables included in columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 are the 1990 and 2010 area covered by photosynthetic vegetation
and dummy variables for the date of the baseline satellite image. The first 3 columns omit the top 1% of observations based on baseline tree cover.
The next 3 columns use land circles that are equal-sized for all PFOs; the size is twice the sample median self-reported land size.

Appendix Table A8: Forest cover results with different-sized land circles

PFO-level land circles (x1)

PFO-level land circles (x3)

61

Tree cover
(ha)
(1)

Tree cover
(ha)
(2)

Change in
tree cover
(3)

Tree cover
(ha)
(4)

Tree cover
(ha)
(5)

Change in
tree cover
(6)

Treated

0.140∗∗
[0.067]

0.155∗∗
[0.066]

0.155∗∗
[0.065]

0.330∗∗
[0.139]

0.363∗∗∗
[0.134]

0.357∗∗∗
[0.136]

Baseline outcome

1.021∗∗∗
[0.062]

1.013∗∗∗
[0.094]

0.962∗∗∗
[0.017]

0.971∗∗∗
[0.042]

1.758
No
973

1.758
Yes
973

5.618
No
1,008

5.618
Yes
1,008

Control group mean
Control variables
Observations

-0.173
Yes
973

-0.539
Yes
1,008

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All regressions and means are
weighted by the proportion of available satellite data. All columns include subcounty fixed effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to
balance the randomization. The control variables included in columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 are the 1990 and 2010 area covered by photosynthetic vegetation
and dummy variables for the date of the baseline satellite image. The first 3 columns use land circles with an area equal to the PFO’s self-reported
land area. The next 3 columns use a land circle with an area equal to 3 times the PFO’s self-reported land area.

Appendix Table A9: Forest cover results in subsample with baseline satellite data collected
prior to randomization
PFO-level land circles

Village boundaries

Tree cover
(ha)
(1)

Tree cover
(ha)
(2)

Change in
tree cover
(3)

Tree cover
(ha)
(4)

Change in
tree cover
(5)

Treated

0.300∗∗
[0.144]

0.407∗∗∗
[0.143]

0.406∗∗
[0.154]

7.959∗∗∗
[2.838]

8.162∗∗∗
[2.729]

Baseline outcome

0.944∗∗∗
[0.032]

0.833∗∗∗
[0.061]

4.095
No
580

4.095
Yes
580

Control group mean
Control variables
Observations

0.979∗∗∗
[0.024]
-0.459
Yes
580

172.841
Yes
78

-16.576
Yes
78

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01. All regressions and means are weighted by the proportion of available satellite data. All columns
include subcounty fixed effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to balance the
randomization. The control variables included in columns 2 to 5 are the 1990 and 2010 area covered by
photosynthetic vegetation and dummy variables for the date of the baseline satellite image. The sample is
restricted to observations for which the baseline satellite image was collected prior to the subcounty lottery.

62

Appendix Table A10: Testing for spillover effects and anticipation effects

Tree
cover

Tree
cover

Tree
cover

(1)

(2)

(3)

Treated

0.202
[0.241]

0.313∗∗∗
[0.112]

Treat × Distance to forest reserve

0.009
[0.035]

Increase
Get visits
in timber
from
dealer
timber
visits last
dealers
2 years
(4)
(5)
0.020
[0.034]

Tree
cover

Tree
cover

(6)

(7)

-0.016
[0.025]

-0.338
[0.339]

Treat × Contiguous to forest reserve

63

0.019
[0.039]

# of treatment villages within 5km

0.076
[0.075]

Believes program likely to come to village

-0.118
[0.112]

Believes program ends in 2015 or later

Sample

All

All

Observations

995

995

Control
group
487

All

All

1,020

1,020

Control
group
487

Treatment
group
508

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by village. Asterisks denote significance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. All columns include subcounty fixed
effects and the four village-level baseline variables used to balance the randomization. In columns 1 to 3 and 6 and 7, regressions are weighted by the
proportion of available satellite data, and the regressions include 1990 and 2010 Landsat photosynthetic vegetation, the baseline outcome, and
dummy variables for the baseline satellite date. The outcomes in columns 4 and 5 are from the endline survey. Column 4 controls for the baseline
outcome; the variable in column 5 was not collected at baseline.

