NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXING WEALTH: EVIDENCE FROM SWITZERLAND
Marius Brülhart
Jonathan Gruber
Matthias Krapf
Kurt Schmidheiny
Working Paper 22376
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22376

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

We are grateful to Jonathan Petkun for excellent research assistance, to Etienne Lehmann, Jim
Poterba and seminar participants at Bristol, Geneva, Kentucky, MIT and Yale for helpful
comments, to the tax administration of the canton of Bern for allowing us to use their micro data
for the purpose of this research, to Raphaël Parchet and Stephan Fahrländer for sharing valuable
complementary data and to Nina Munoz-Schmid and Roger Amman of the Swiss Federal Tax
Administration for useful information. Financial support from the Swiss National Science
Foundation (Sinergia grant 147668) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22376.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marius Brülhart, Jonathan Gruber, Matthias Krapf, and Kurt Schmidheiny. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxing Wealth: Evidence from Switzerland
Marius Brülhart, Jonathan Gruber, Matthias Krapf, and Kurt Schmidheiny
NBER Working Paper No. 22376
June 2016
JEL No. H21,H31
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of wealth taxation on reported wealth. Our analysis is based on data for
Switzerland, which has the highest rate of annual wealth taxation in the developed world. While
the wealth tax base is defined at the federal level, tax rates vary considerably across locations and
over time. We use aggregate data on wealth holdings by canton and individual-level data for the
canton of Bern. Our estimated behavioral elasticities substantially exceed those of the taxable
income literature. We also find that taxpayers bunch below the tax threshold, that observed
responses are driven by changes in wealth holdings rather than mobility, and that financial wealth
is somewhat more responsive than non-financial wealth.

Marius Brülhart
Department of Economics
Faculty of Business and Economics (HEC)
University of Lausanne
1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
marius.brulhart@unil.ch

Matthias Krapf
Department of Economics
Faculty of Business and Economics (HEC)
University of Lausanne
1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
matthias.krapf@unil.ch

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

Kurt Schmidheiny
Universität Basel
Department of Economics and Business
Peter Merian-Weg 6
4002 Basel
Switzerland
kurt.schmidheiny@unibas.ch

The rise in inequality seen in many developed nations over the past four decades has
spurred new interest in the taxation of wealth. Inequality has increased in terms of both income
(Atkinson, Piketty and Saez, 2012) and wealth (Piketty, 2014; Saez and Zucman, 2014). This has
led economists to advocate increased taxation of wealth levels, either annually or at death. Most
prominently, Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2013) have proposed the adoption of an “ideal” combination of taxes on capital, covering annual net worth in addition to capital income and bequests.
Yet, there is as yet very little evidence on the behavioral responses triggered by regular
wealth taxation. This lack of evidence is seen by some economists as a cause for caution. For
example, according to McGrattan (2015, p. 6), “(w)ithout a quantitatively valid theory or previous experience with taxing financial wealth, economists cannot make accurate predictions about
the impact that such taxes will have on either aggregate wealth or its dispersion. Thus, any proposals to tax wealth are, at this point, premature”. Auerbach and Hassett (2015, p. 41) argue that
“we find little support for Piketty’s particular approach … elsewhere in the literature”.
A number of countries have taxes on wealth in its various forms. Most common are regular
taxes on physical property, which are levied by every OECD nation and amount to 3.3 percent of
total tax revenue for the average country.1 More than half of OECD nations have taxes on bequests, but these taxes amount on average to only 0.4 percent of tax revenue. Less common still
are recurrent taxes on personal wealth holdings – the focus of this paper. Such taxes are levied by
only five OECD nations, raising 0.6 percent of tax revenue on average.2 As shown in Table 1,
wealth taxes loom largest in Switzerland (3.3% of tax revenue), followed at some distance by
Luxembourg (1.6%) and Norway (1.1%). Sizeable increases in these wealth taxes could offset
wealth inequality. But they may also significantly distort wealth accumulation and location
choices. Wealth taxes appear to be losing, rather than gaining, political support: Table 1 shows
that of the 14 OECD nations that raised recurrent taxes on wealth in 1995, only 5 still did so in
2014.
There are a host of studies to show that reported income is only modestly elastic with respect to income taxation (see Saez, Slemrod and Giertz, 2012, for a review). Ex ante, it is unclear
whether taxable wealth will be more or less elastic than taxable income. On the one hand, for
1

Real estate taxes account for fully 11.4 percent of tax revenue in the United States but only 0.6 percent in Switzerland. We return to this issue below. All statistics from http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=REV, for the
year 2012.
2
The other major category of property taxation is taxes on financial and capital transactions, which are levied by
virtually every nation (the U.S. being the major exception) and amount to 0.4% of GDP on average.

2

most taxpayers, income is predominantly labor income, which is at least partially in the control
of their employers and not themselves, while wealth levels are arguably more fully in the control
of the taxpayer. Moreover, labor income for the employed is easier for tax authorities to monitor
than are wealth levels. On the other hand, most taxpayers hold the majority of their wealth in
illiquid form (their home), and that is hard to adjust as tax rates change, at least in the near term.
In addition, even liquid assets may be difficult to adjust in large quantities in a short period. Ultimately, the size of the elasticity of wealth to wealth taxation is therefore an empirical question.
As reviewed below, the effect of wealth taxation, either through bequests or through annual
wealth taxes, on taxable wealth has received much less scientific attention. This to some extent
reflects the fact that many countries tax only the very wealthiest individuals, and administrative
data on wealth holdings are not available below the taxable threshold, making it difficult to
measure behavioral responses.
In this paper we address this shortcoming by studying Switzerland, the country with the
largest level of annual wealth taxation, relative to the size of government, in the developed
world. More importantly for our purposes, these wealth taxes are levied from fairly low exemption levels so that data are available for a large share of households. And, even more importantly,
these taxes are all raised at the cantonal level, with no centralized federal wealth taxation. This
leads to sizeable variation both across cantons and within cantons over time. Moreover, within
cantons, different municipalities have “multipliers” which shift wealth taxation up and down
over time.
The final advantage of the Swiss case is that we have available two complementary data sets
that can allow us to study how wealth responds to taxation. The first dataset contains aggregate
taxable wealth by canton and wealth bracket over the decade 2003-2012. This allows us to consider aggregate responses of wealth holdings to rich inter-cantonal time variation in wealth tax
levels and schedules, which is the ultimate response of policy interest. But they do not allow us
to fully understand the underlying dynamics through which wealth changes as tax rates change.
We therefore supplement the national data with individual-level data on wealth holdings
from the canton of Bern. These data provide information for the decade 2001-2011. For each
taxpayer they contain data on wealth holdings as well as a long list of additional items that feature in tax declarations. These data allow us to understand certain mechanisms through which
wealth responds to taxation.

3

Our results from both approaches are consistent: reported wealth holdings in Switzerland
are very responsive to wealth taxation. We estimate that a 0.1 percentage-point rise in wealth
taxation lowers reported wealth by 3.5% in aggregate. Expressed relative to taxable capital income flows, this implies a net-of-tax elasticity of roughly 1.2, which is large compared to the
elasticities typically estimated in the income literature. The elasticity of tax revenues with respect
to tax rates is only -0.2, however, implying that current rates are well below the revenue maximizing rate.
This result is robust to variation in the empirical model, and appears fairly constant
throughout the wealth distribution. We also find no effect of wealth holdings to income taxation.
We find a significant and quantitatively comparable response to taxes on bequests on a per year
basis.
Using the Bern micro data, we also estimate a sizeable response, although one that is only
about two-thirds as large as in the aggregate data. We show that some of this response occurs
through bunching below taxable income thresholds. We also find that this response is driven by
changes in reported wealth and not by mobility. Finally, we show that the response is somewhat
larger for financial assets than for non-financial assets. Taken together, our aggregate and microdata results suggest that there is little distortion to wealth holdings from income taxation, but that
the annual wealth tax has a considerable impact on wealth accumulation.
Our paper proceeds as follows. We begin in Section I with a literature review of the relevant
studies. Section II describes the Swiss institutional context. Section III presents our data and Section IV the empirical strategy. In Section V we show our results from the aggregate data analysis,
while Section VI shows results from the Bern data and discusses the comparability of results.
Section VII concludes.

I

Background: Literature Review

While there is a sizable literature on the measurement and interpretation of reported income responses to income taxation, research on the impact of taxation on the level of wealth holdings
remains scant.
In writing this paper, we became aware of two recent papers that in some respects parallel
our analysis. Seim (2015) uses behavioral responses at tax kinks and detailed administrative data

4

for Sweden to infer the elasticity of taxable wealth with respect to the net-of-tax rate. He finds
elasticities with respect to net-of-tax-wealth that range from 0.1 to 0.3. Those responses however
seem to be attributable entirely to evasion and avoidance. No evidence is found of real responses.
We feel that this approach has a number of limitations relative to our own. First, Sweden
being a unitary state, there is no within-country variation, and moving responses cannot therefore
be estimated. Second, bunching-based estimates have been shown to be potentially less revealing
of long-run (frictionless) responses than reform-based estimates (Kleven and Schultz, 2014).
Third, this approach does not allow the authors to jointly consider the impact of both wealth and
other taxes. Finally, the individuals at the kinks may not be representative of taxpayers at large,
the Swedish wealth tax having applied only to the top four percent of the wealth distribution.3
Zoutman (2015) uses a recent tax reform in the Netherlands for a difference-in-difference
analysis of the response of household savings to changes in the taxation of financial wealth
across samples of different household types. Translated into an elasticity with respect to the netof-tax-rate on an assumed 6% capital return, his results imply a maximum elasticity of about 1.1.
While interesting, the Dutch data offer a similarly limited laboratory to the Swedish case: there is
no intra-national variation, and the impact of wealth and income taxes cannot be separately identified. Moreover, housing wealth is exempt from the Dutch wealth tax.4
Also related is research on the impact of bequest taxation on wealth holdings at death. This
small literature is reviewed in Kopczuk (2009), who concludes that studies based on U.S. data
point to a modest elasticity of taxable estates with respect to the bequest tax rate of between 0.1
and 0.2.
The impact of capital income taxation on the composition of wealth holdings has been studied as well (e.g. Poterba and Samwick, 2003; see Poterba, 2001 for a review). This research
tends to find that the form of savings is fairly sensitive to its taxability, for example with rising
taxes on capital income leading to more savings in tax preferred channels, and with taxes impacting the riskiness of portfolio holdings. But this literature did not focus on the impact of taxation
on the total stock of wealth accumulation.
3

The wealth tax raised 0.7 percent of Swedish tax revenue on average over the sample period 2000-2006. This tax
was abolished in 2007. Due to data constraints, the study omits households with children and wealth in the form of
closely held business assets.
4
Martinez (2016) estimates net-of-tax elasticities of the stock of wealthy taxpayers ranging from 1.9 to 2.4 following a cut in top income and wealth tax rates in the Swiss canton of Obwalden. Her analysis does not allow separate
identification of the effect of wealth taxes. Moreover, Obwalden is a very small canton with a small initial base of
wealthy taxpayers, which likely explains the rather large estimated responses.

5

More broadly, a large literature has emerged on the impact of income taxation on total income (see Saez et al., 2012, for an overview). This literature has generally found modest elasticities of taxable income with respect to net-of-tax rates, with a central range of estimates of 0.1 to
0.4. These studies have furthermore shown that the summary elasticity estimate can mask considerable heterogeneity across various dimensions, such as the income distribution (Gruber and
Saez, 2002; Kleven and Schultz, 2014). A number of studies have suggested that this response is
largely driven by exclusions and deductions from income, rather than real savings or labor supply behavior. But there has been little attempt to decompose the impact of tax changes into capital and labor income.5 And none of this literature has examined the impact of taxation on wealth
holdings.

II

Swiss Institutional Context

As noted earlier, Switzerland is unique in the extent of its reliance on wealth taxation and in the
sub-national nature of that taxation. Switzerland is divided into 26 cantons and some 2,500 municipalities. These sub-federal jurisdictions taken together autonomously raise some 54 percent
of total tax revenue.6
Wealth taxes are cantonal and municipal; there is no federal taxation of wealth. Cantons
have been taxing wealth since the early 18th century.7 Wealth taxes are paid annually on selfreported net wealth, submitted to the tax authorities as an integral part of income tax filings.
There is no institutional reporting of wealth, and tax authorities have no direct access to bank
information except in criminal cases. This in principle offers scope for tax evasion through nonreporting. However, a 35 percent federal withholding tax is applied to income from all financial
assets (mainly interest and dividends). Withholding tax payments are returned upon declaration
of the assets in tax filings (backed up with bank statements). This implies an incentive for declar5

A notable exception is Kleven and Schultz (2014), who find capital income to be two to three times as elastic to
income taxes as labor income.
6
Cantons and municipalities are also largely autonomous in terms of public expenditure. Federal revenue represents
46% of consolidated (federal, cantonal and municipal) tax receipts. The main federal-level tax instruments are value
added taxes (37% of federal tax revenue and the sole prerogative of the federal government), personal income taxes
(16% of federal tax revenue, 17% of consolidated personal income tax revenue) and corporate income (13% of federal tax revenue, 46% of consolidated corporate income tax revenue). The revenue percentages reported in this section are calculated over our main sample period, 2001-2011, and taken from http://www.efv.admin.ch/
e/dokumentation/finanzstatistik/index.php.
7
The federal government raised such taxes intermittently between 1915 and 1957, after which wealth taxation again
became the sole prerogative of the cantons and municipalities (see Dell, Piketty and Saez, 2007).

6

ing financial assets. The strength of this incentive depends on the assets’ rate of return. As long
as the combined capital income and wealth tax bills amount to less than 35 percent of asset returns, it pays to report financial assets. Tax authorities in addition carry out randomized audits
and request documentation for all changes in wealth holdings that are not evidently compatible
with changes in other positions of the tax declaration (income, inheritance, real estate transactions, etc.). To our knowledge, no rigorous estimates exist of the extent of wealth tax evasion in
Switzerland.
Residents aged 18 and over are legally obliged to submit an annual tax filing. All types of
wealth (cash, financial assets, real estate and luxury durable goods) are subject to the same tax,
net of debt (mortgage or other). Standard durable household goods, compulsory pension assets
and a limited amount of voluntary pension savings are exempt from the wealth tax.8 Wealth is
taxed by the municipality and canton of a taxpayer’s main legal residence irrespective of their
nationality, except for real estate, which is taxed where it is located.9 Married couples are taxed
jointly, subject to a different schedule from that applied to single households.
Exemption levels vary by canton. In 2014, they ranged from CHF 25,000 (USD 27,500) in
the canton of Obwalden to CHF 200,000 (USD 220,000) in the canton of Ticino. In the canton of
Bern, which our analysis will mainly focus on, the exemption level stood at CHF 97,000 (USD
107,000) in 2014. Over our 2001-2011 sample period, 30 percent of all Bern taxpayers, and 41
percent of married households, owed a non-zero wealth tax. The wealth tax thus affects much of
the middle class in addition to the wealthiest families. Moreover, in the canton of Bern the
wealth tax is inframarginal: taxpayers above the wealth threshold pay tax on their entire wealth
holdings (less a very small exemption). This creates a “notch” in the wealth tax schedule, which
we will discuss below.
The map of Figure 1 illustrates the considerable variation in wealth tax rates that exists
across cantons. In 2012, top wealth tax rates varied by a factor of almost eight, ranging from 0.13

8

In 2012, the maximum tax-exempt annual contribution to voluntary pension schemes was CHF 6,682 for employees and CHF 33,408 for the self-employed. This ceiling is changed annually in line with inflation.
9
This means that foreign residents (including Swiss nationals) are liable for Swiss wealth taxes only to the extent
that they own real estate in Switzerland. Conversely, Swiss residents do not owe Swiss wealth taxes on real estate
located abroad.

7

to 1.00 percent.10 Wealth taxes are generally highest in the French-speaking cantons of western
Switzerland and lowest in the small German-speaking cantons of central Switzerland.
Figure 2 shows that wealth taxes have been on a general downward trend in recent years,
but there is considerable variation in the size and timing of tax changes. The cumulative changes
in the top wealth tax rate range from -0.46 percentage points to +0.01 percentage points.11 Tax
changes are most pronounced in the central Swiss cantons, among which tax competition has
been particularly intense in the early 2000s; but other, more outlying cantons such as Solothurn
(SO) or Graubünden (GR) have significantly lowered their wealth tax rates as well. The high-tax
western cantons left their rates largely unchanged over the sample period.
The annual wealth tax is the most prominent form of wealth taxation in Switzerland, accounting for 9 percent of tax revenues of cantonal governments. However, other types of wealth
taxation exist. Various taxes on real estate account for 5 percent of cantonal revenues. The complicated nature of these taxes and data limitations make it impossible for us to control for them
effectively in the regressions. 12 Bequest taxes are much smaller, accounting for 2% of revenues.
Tax rates are low in international comparison: the representative tax rate on inheritance (effective average tax rate) was 3.3 percent in 2003 and 3.0 percent in 2008 (data from Brülhart and
Parchet, 2014). Exemptions are relatively low as well: the maximum tax-free bequest to siblings,
for example, is CHF 20,000 (canton of Nidwalden), and the maximum tax-free bequest to nonrelated heirs is CHF 10,000 (several cantons). We will incorporate cross-cantonal variation in the
bequest tax in our aggregate analysis, although there is no variation in this tax to use in our micro-data estimates. Over the sample period we study, 17 cantons had no bequest tax on direct
descendants, 5 cantons had an bequest tax in all years, and 4 had a tax in some years.
The most important source of sub-federal tax revenues is the tax on personal income, which
accounts for 67% of those revenues.13 The personal income tax includes all capital income other
than capital gains, and as such may also have important implications for wealth accumulation.

10

The lowest top wealth tax rate applied in the canton of Nidwalden (NW), while the highest rate applied in the
canton of Geneva (GE).
11
The largest cumulative reduction in the top wealth tax rate was implemented in the canton of Uri (UR), while the
largest increase was implemented in the canton of Neuchâtel (NE). See also Figure 2.
12
Real estate taxes come in three forms that are of similar importance in revenue terms: land taxes (amounting to a
top-up on wealth taxes on real estate), real-estate capital gains taxes (a tax on real estate speculation with rates decreasing in the length of time over which an asset is held) and real estate transaction taxes (akin to stamp duties).
13
See http://www.efv.admin.ch/efv/en/home/themen/finanzstatistik/berichterstattung.html.

8

We will therefore control for income tax rates in our aggregate analysis as well as (implicitly) in
the micro-data estimations.
Cantons have almost complete autonomy over taxation and public spending. The Swiss
constitution assigns taxation rights to the cantons by default, with the federal government allowed to raise taxes only subject to explicit legal provisions to be approved in nationwide referenda. The main constraint on the fiscal autonomy of cantons is a federal law in force since 1993
that standardizes the definitions of tax bases and sets out assignment formulas for taxable income
and assets that need to be allocated across cantons.
Municipalities in most cantons are bound to apply the canton-level tax schedule but are free
to choose the level of taxation by adding their own “multipliers” to the canton-level taxes.14 Arrangements for allocating expenditure responsibilities between the canton and the municipalities
differ, but within their assigned remits, municipalities are largely unconstrained in their expenditure decisions.15
For our aggregate cross-cantonal analysis, we will use data from 2003 to 2012. Over this
period, as shown earlier, there is sizeable variation both across and within cantons, against an
overall trend toward lower wealth tax rates. Over all possible sets of three-year periods in our
data set, the mean change in marginal wealth tax rates is -0.042 percentage points, and the standard deviation of those changes is 0.067 percentage points (see Table 2). Scaled to the mean marginal wealth tax rate in the sample of 0.476 percentage points, this implies an average three-year
change of 8.8 percent, with a standard deviation of 14.1 percent. There is sizeable variation in
income taxation over this period as well, with a mean three-year change in the marginal income
tax rate of -0.79 percentage points. Scaled to the mean marginal income tax rate of 14.69 percentage points, this implies an average three-year change in the representative sub-federal income tax burden of 5.4 percent.

14

Catholic and Protestant parishes are also entitled to apply multipliers to the cantonal schedule. Our data therefore
retain for every municipality the parish multiplier of the denomination that is more strongly represented among the
municipal population, and we consider this as part of the “municipal multiplier”. On average, church tax rates represent around 4 percent of the consolidated (municipal and cantonal) tax rates.
15
The three biggest expenditure items for both cantons and municipalities are education, health and social protection, together accounting for some 60 percent of spending both by cantons and by municipalities. Assignments within these categories are different. Within education, for instance, cantons are mainly in charge of funding secondary
and higher education, while municipalities are responsible for pre-school and primary education.

9

Our second analysis considers individual-level variation in wealth and income taxation in
Bern, the second largest canton in Switzerland, over the 2001-2011 period.16 Figure 3 shows the
variation in top marginal rates across the 382 municipalities in Bern.17 The range is much smaller
than it is nationally, varying from 0.55% to 0.7%. There is not much of a spatial pattern, except
for the fact that the northern, French-speaking municipalities generally have somewhat higher
taxes. During the period of our study, many municipalities changed their multipliers: Figure 4
shows the variation in top marginal rates over our study period. There is no apparent spatial
regularity to changes in municipal multipliers.

III

Data

We work with two complementary datasets. The first one covers all 26 cantons over the 20032012 period. This dataset has the advantage of offering a maximum of identifying variation on
wealth and personal income tax rates, as cantons frequently change their entire tax schedules.
The data report taxable wealth as well as the number of taxpayers in each of 11 brackets of
taxable asset holdings per canton and year, ranging from a bracket for zero net wealth to one for
more than ten million Swiss francs (see Appendix 1 for details). Our main dependent variable is
a canton-year measure of total wealth holdings, taken directly from the original data source.
As our main explanatory variable, we use consolidated (cantonal + municipal) tax rates. We
create a weighted average across wealth intervals using the number of taxpayers in each interval.
We compute both marginal and average tax rates, as behavioral responses might not be the same
with respect to those two measures. For details on the computations, see Appendix 1.
Given the importance of personal income taxes, we also control for those tax rates. As income and wealth are not perfectly correlated, our wealth-interval specific income tax rates are
averages weighted across income intervals, based on a cross-tabulation of wealth and income
levels computed from our individual-level data on the canton of Bern. Finally, given their potential relevance for wealth accumulation, we control for representative bequest tax rates by canton
and year. See Appendix 1 for further details and Table 2 for summary statistics.

16

The population of Bern was one million in 2014, representing some 12 percent of the country as a whole (8.2
million).
17
This is the count of municipalities in 2011. There were a number of mergers over our sample period. We take care
to eliminate potential artificial effects from municipal mergers in our estimations.

10

Our second dataset exploits the universe of individual-level administrative tax records for
the canton of Bern over the period 2001-2011. These confidential data, containing the majority
of items recorded in individual tax declaration, were made available to us in anonymized form by
the cantonal tax administration of the canton of Bern.
In total, this dataset contains 6.84 million observations (taxpayer-years). Married couples
are treated as one taxpayer. However, we lose observations with zero or negative reported wealth
(about a third of taxpayers), and in our main analysis we focus only on taxpayers with initial
wealth above the taxable threshold (also about a third of taxpayers).18 We further reduce the
sample size by computing three-year differences using taxpayers whose marital status did not
change over a given three-year interval, and eliminating all observations from municipalities that
were involved in municipality mergers at some point during our sample period. We are thus left
with a dataset containing up to 1.164 million observations for our baseline estimation.19 We observe a host of useful information, including net wealth, taxable wealth, residence municipality
and marital status.
Summary statistics for these data, aggregated to the municipality-year level for comparability with the cross-canton data, are shown in the second panel of Table 2. The table shows that
Bern is a relatively high-tax canton. The mean marginal top wealth tax rate is 0.73 percent. The
corresponding mean marginal wealth tax rate for a taxpayer with average wealth is 0.53 percent,
which compares to a mean rate of 0.48 percent across all cantons. We also see that the standard
deviation of log wealth tax rates in Bern after conditioning on jurisdiction and year fixed effects
is significantly smaller than that in the cross-canton data (0.012 percent versus 0.047 percent).
The advantage of the Bern data is that they allow us to estimate behavioral responses at a
smaller spatial scale and at the individual level. Most importantly, this makes it possible to estimate moving responses separately from responses by non-movers. We can moreover decompose

18

There seems little reason to be concerned about sample selection bias due to dropping observations with nonpositive wealth, since zero wealth is so far below the taxable threshold of between CHF 92,000 and CHF 97,000
CHF over this time period. It seems highly unlikely that individuals would drop to zero wealth in response to a tax
above this level. Indeed, we find no effect of municipal tax variation on the incidence of having zero wealth holdings.
19
Out of 6.8 million observations in our sample, 4.7 million have positive wealth and 2.2 million have wealth above
the threshold. We use three-year differences, hence we lose the years 2009-2011, leaving us with 1.6 million observations. Moreover, taxpayers leave the sample for various reasons so that we do not observe them three years after
the base year. We also drop taxpayers who change marital status, who move municipalities, or who live in a municipality that was at some point involved in a merger. All these eliminations cost us another 430,000 observations.

11

responses by types of wealth holdings. The major disadvantage of these data is that they offer
considerably less identifying variation than the cross-canton data.

IV

Empirical Methodology

Cross-Cantonal Data
As discussed above, we use data on total taxable wealth as well as weighted-average wealth,
income and bequest tax rates. Those data allow us to estimate several different models of the
impact of wealth taxation on wealth holdings.
We begin with fixed effects estimation of the following log-levels specification:
!
!
!
ln 𝑊!" = 𝛼! + 𝛼! 𝑇!"
+ 𝛼! 𝑇!"
+ 𝛼! 𝑇!"
+ 𝛾! + 𝛿! + 𝜃! ∙ 𝑡 + 𝜖!" ,

(1)

!
!
!
where 𝑊!" is aggregate taxable wealth in canton c and year t; 𝑇!"
, 𝑇!"
, and 𝑇!"
are representative

tax rates respectively on wealth, personal income and bequests; 𝛾! denotes canton fixed effects;
𝛿! denotes year fixed effects; 𝜃! ∙ 𝑡 denotes canton-specific linear time trends; 𝛼! to 𝛼! are parameters to be estimated; and 𝜖!" is a stochastic error term. In some models we consider only the
wealth tax, while in other models we control for the income and bequest taxes. The cantonspecific linear time trends capture any underlying trends that might be driving both wealth accumulation and tax rates. We make the standard assumptions of the fixed-effects panel data model:
strict exogeneity of all explanatory variables and independence of observations across cantons.
All standard errors are therefore clustered at the canton level to account for serial correlation.
In particular, we assume that the wealth tax rate that is the focus of our analysis is exogenous to wealth accumulation. One may be concerned that wealth tax rates are set in response to
wealth holdings, so we consider a variety of approaches to allay this concern. First, we control
explicitly for other taxes that may pick up general tastes for taxation in the canton. Second, we
estimate models both with fixed effects and in first differences, to control for any canton- specific factors that are correlated with both wealth holdings and tax setting. Third, we include cantonspecific trends, so that our results do not reflect underlying secular trends in canton-specific
wealth and taste for taxation. Fourth, we estimate similar models using both cross-canton variation (in the aggregate data) and using cross-municipality data (in the Bern-specific analyses).

12

Finally, we provide a specification check in the Bern data using a group that is exempt from
wealth taxation to show that there is no impact on their wealth holdings.
To parallel our later analysis in the micro data, we also consider equation (1) in three-year
differences. Relative to the baseline model (1), the differences models capture shorter-term adjustments in wealth as opposed to trend changes over time (relative to a canton linear trend).
They also allow us to partition the data more easily according to initial conditions, which we
consider below. A sort of consensus has emerged in the taxable income literature that three-year
intervals strike the optimal balance between allowing sufficient time for the relevant behavioral
responses without excessively blurring the identifying variation (Gruber and Saez, 2002; Kleven
and Waseem, 2013; Kleven and Schultz, 2014).

Bern Micro Data
The major advantage of the micro data for Bern is that we can observe individuals longitudinally.
This allows us to model individual-level changes in wealth directly. Our tax rate measure for
Bern is the maximum combined (cantonal + municipal) rate in each municipality and year. This
is the wealth tax rate according to the cantonal schedule, times the cantonal and local multipliers.
Within Bern, we estimate first-differences models to allow us to separate the impact of
wealth accumulation among stayers versus mobility effects. We regress three-year changes in log
wealth on three-year changes in top wealth tax rates in the taxpayer’s residence municipality, as
well as on municipality and year fixed effects. The cantonal wealth tax schedule was changed
twice during our sample period, in 2008 and in 2011; and the cantonal multiplier changed three
times, in 2002, 2008, and 2009. Given the inclusion of year fixed effects in our differences regressions, however, the identifying variation is almost entirely due to changes in municipal tax
multipliers.20 All standard errors are clustered at the municipality level, given that the key coefficient is identified through time variation in municipal multipliers.

20

See Appendix 1 for details. Just like in the between-canton analysis, we do not account explicitly for real estate
taxation in the Bern data. The real estate transfer tax has remained constant over our sample period and does not
vary across municipalities. The real estate capital gains tax has remained constant over the sample period and varies
across municipalities in proportion to their multipliers. The annual real estate and land tax, while subject to some
idiosyncratic variation across municipalities, falls primarily on corporations and other legal entities such as pension
funds. We also omit bequest taxes, which have become almost insignificant in the canton of Bern, municipal bequest
tax revenues amounting to less than 10 percent of municipal wealth tax revenues.

13

V

Aggregate Results

Base Results
Our main cross-canton estimates are reported in Table 3. We express all taxes in percentagepoint terms, which implies that our estimated coefficients are semi-elasticities with respect to a
one percentage-point rise in the respective tax rate. This choice facilitates comparisons across
coefficients, but it is important to note that a one percentage-point change in the wealth tax corresponds to a very large policy experiment, given that the highest observed wealth tax rate in our
data is 0.87 percent.
Our estimate in the first column indicates that a percentage-point rise in wealth tax rates
leads to a reduction in declared wealth holdings of 34.5 percent, which is statistically significant.
More realistically, a 0.1 percentage-point tax change would lead to a 3.5 percent change in taxable wealth.
In the second column, we include the canton-level marginal income tax rate. This has an insignificant and substantively small impact on wealth holdings. The third column in addition controls for inheritance taxes. This tax has a statistically significant effect, with each percentagepoint rise in the inheritance tax lowering wealth holdings by 1.1 percent.
Comparing the magnitudes of these tax coefficients to each other and to existing estimates
in the elasticity of taxable income literature is not straightforward: the wealth tax is an annual tax
on a stock of wealth; the income tax is an annual tax on a flow of wealth; and the bequest tax is a
one-time tax on a stock of wealth.
One means of interpretation is to ask how large the wealth response is relative to the implied net-of-tax rate on the annual flow of capital income. We do not have exact measures of
asset returns in Switzerland, but evidence from similar nations suggests returns in 2010 of
4-4.5% in France and 7-7.5% in Germany (Piketty and Zucman, 2014). For the purpose of this
illustrative calculation, we assume a rate of return of 6%. The representative marginal (municipal
+ cantonal + federal) income tax rate on high-income households in Switzerland is around 35%.
To this we add the mean average wealth tax rate of 0.5%, which corresponds to 8.3% of a 6%
capital return. Hence, the “keep rate” after consolidated income + wealth taxes is
1-(0.35+0.083) = 56.7%. A 0.1 percentage-point rise in the wealth tax would represent an increase in the tax rate on capital return by 1.7 percentage points from 8.3% to

14

(0.5%+0.1%)/6% = 10%. This in turn implies a fall in the keep rate by 1.7%/56.7% = 3.0%. So,
our estimates imply that a 3% reduction in the keep rate lowers wealth by 3.5%, or an elasticity
of 3.5%/3.0% = 1.16. This is large relative to previously estimated taxable income elasticities.21
It is important to note that this keep-rate elasticity is sensitive to what we assume about the rate
of return. If we assume 3% instead of 6%, the elasticity drops to 0.5; and if we instead assume
10%, the elasticity rises to 2. Interestingly, even the elasticity implied by a 3% return is larger
than the upper bound of the range of estimates for the net-of-tax elasticity of taxable income
(ETI) of 0.12-0.40 reported by Saez et al. (2012).
While keep-rate elasticities are comparable to those in the ETI literature, policy makers
primarily care about the elasticity of the tax base with respect to the tax rate. According to our
baseline estimate and at the mean wealth tax rate of 0.5%, the tax rate elasticity is (-0.3450.5=) 0.18 and hence far to the left of the maximum on the Laffer curve at existing tax rates.
In contrast, we find little effect of the income tax on wealth holdings. We estimate that a 1
percentage-point rise in the marginal capital income tax lowers wealth holdings by 0.1%. This
same percentage-point rise in the capital income tax reduces the keep rate by 1 percentage-point
or 1% / 56.7% = 1.8%. This implies a net-of-tax elasticity of 0.1%/1.8% = 0.06 - only about five
percent as large as the wealth tax elasticity.
It is not surprising that the response of wealth to (capital) income taxation is smaller than
the response to annual wealth taxation, for two main reasons. First, the wealth tax burden is
much more certain than the capital income tax burden. For a given stock of wealth, the change in
tax payments from year to year for a wealth tax will be small. But the change in tax payments on
the return to that capital can swing wildly from year to year based on variation in the rate of return. Second, the wealth tax applies to all holdings (other than pensions), while the income tax
excludes capital gains.
We also find a statistically significant effect of bequest taxes. Although the estimated coefficients appear small, the behavioral responses they imply are not necessarily smaller than those
to the annual wealth tax, since the annual tax is levied many more times than the bequest tax. To
compare the coefficients, we need to consider the pattern of wealth accumulation by age. If all
wealth is accumulated in the year before death, then the coefficients are directly comparable; if

21

According to Saez et al. (2012), the best available estimates point to a net-of-tax elasticity of taxable income
(ETI) in the range 0.12-0.40.

15

all wealth is accumulated 60 years before death, then the annual wealth tax coefficient should –
at a first approximation – be 60 times as large as the bequest tax coefficient. Comparing the coefficients therefore requires computing the years until death for the average dollar of wealth that is
taxed by the bequest tax.22
To do so, we use the micro data from Bern. We calculate average wealth by age and weight
this by the odds of mortality at each age to compute the years until death for the average dollar of
accumulated wealth. For mortality we use the rates we observe in our tax data for Bern. In particular, at each age we compute the ratio of the cumulative sum of wealth to that age divided by
wealth at that age, yielding the years until death for the average dollar of wealth taxed at that age
of death. We then multiply this by the probability of death at each age. This is an imperfect calculation for a number of reasons: we ignore cohort effects in wealth accumulation (although the
age-specific averages are ten year averages); we do not use wealth-weighted life tables; we ignore attitudes to uncertainty and bequest motives; and we do not account for intergenerational
linkages through bequest tax effects on previous generations. Nevertheless, it should give us a
rough order of magnitude in order to compare these estimates.
We find that the years until death for the average dollar of wealth is 38 years. This suggests
that to compare the bequest tax and annual wealth effects, we should multiply the bequest tax
semi-elasticity by 38, yielding an income-tax equivalent net-of-tax elasticity of 1.4. This implied
effect is very similar to that of the annual wealth tax, suggesting comparable effects of the two
types of wealth tax on a per-year basis.

Sensitivity
We consider the sensitivity of these results to a variety of specifications and measurements. We
begin in the remaining columns 4-6 of Table 3 by using the average rather than marginal wealth
tax. We find slightly larger, but overall similar, responses with this alternative tax measure.
Table 4 considers the impact of varying the specification in our aggregate data estimation.
We consider fixed-effects estimates as well as first differences with three-year intervals, which
parallel the micro-data analysis. We also consider models with and without canton-specific time
trends. Our results are very similar in every case. Removing the canton-specific trends leads to

22

We are grateful to Jim Poterba for suggesting this framing.

16

slightly higher estimates, but larger standard errors as well. The estimates in differences are almost identical to those from fixed-effects models.
Table 4 also reports alternative approaches to computing inference. The baseline standard
errors in Tables 3 and 4 are the usual robust (Eicker-Huber-White) asymptotic standard errors
clustered for 26 cantons.23 Tables 3 and 4 report asymptotic p-values and significance levels associated with these asymptotic standard errors based on the t distribution as motivated by Stock
and Watson (2008).24 Table 4 also reports bootstrap p-values from a wild block bootstrap-t that
resamples cantons as clusters. Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008) show that this is the optimal
procedure for 20 to 50 clusters as in our case with 26 cantons. The revised p-values generally
lead to marginally more significant estimates.

Mechanisms
The canton-level data allow us to make some initial conjectures as to mechanisms that are driving the results. We can explore those mechanisms further in the micro data from Bern. We begin
in Table 5 by looking at the effect on the number of wealth taxpayers in the canton, in order to
investigate whether the results are driven by mobility rather than wealth accumulation. We find
no significant impact on the total number of taxpayers, either using fixed effects or firstdifferences models. This suggests that mobility out of the cantons is not driving our findings.
Of course, a mobility response would imply that higher taxes deliver no offsetting utility
gains to residents through higher spending. In a Tiebout sorting model, higher taxes may not
increase mobility because they lead to higher spending that is valued by residents. To address
this, we include cantonal plus municipal public expenditures per capita as a control variable in
columns 2 and 5 of Table 5.25 The coefficient on this variable is not statistically significant, and
its inclusion does not substantively alter the estimated effects of wealth taxation.
Another alternative is that the wealth response may be driven by a response of asset prices;
house prices may adjust in the short run to higher wealth taxes, even if the mobility response is
muted. To investigate this explanation, we include a measure of single-family house prices by
23

We also apply a small sample degree of freedom adjustment, multiplying the variance by Nc/( Nc -1), where Nc is
the number of cantons.
24
This is the correct asymptotic distribution as T → ∞ and a conservative measure as N → ∞.
25
Public expenditures per canton and year are provided by the Swiss Federal Finance Administration online at
http://www.efv.admin.ch/d/dokumentation/finanzstatistik/. We use total expenditures of the canton and its municipalities („Kantone und ihre Gemeinden“) divided by the cantonal population.

17

canton and year.26 We show the results of using this asset price measure as a dependent variable
in columns 3 and 6 of Table 5. We find a negative effect of wealth taxes on housing prices, but
this effect is not statistically significant. Changes in real estate prices therefore do not appear to
drive our estimated elasticities of taxable wealth.27
In Table 6, we further decompose our results for taxpayer counts by wealth. In order to do
so, we use the first difference estimator cut by wealth category. Here we find that there is an increase in the number of taxpayers with wealth below 100,000, while there is a corresponding
decrease in those with wealth above 100,000. Given that there are about twice as many taxpayers
with wealth below 100,000 as above 100,000, these two coefficients average to the zero overall
coefficient we see in column 1. This suggests that some of the reaction that we see for wealth
may be driven by individuals shifting wealth from above to below taxable thresholds, an issue
we will explore further within Bern. At the same time, we find effects above 500,000 and above
1,000,000 that are very similar to those above 100,000, suggesting fairly uniform responses of
wealth taxpayers throughout the wealth distribution.
To summarize these results, we find that higher wealth taxation has a sizeable and significant impact on stocks of wealth holdings. This is in contrast to the insignificant effect of annual
taxes on capital income. Our results do not appear to be driven by canton-level mobility, but
there is a suggestion of individuals responding by dropping below taxable thresholds.

VI

Micro-Data Results from Bern

We next turn to analysis of micro data from the canton of Bern. As noted earlier, we will use
within-canton longitudinal variation in top wealth tax rates, driven by changes in 361 municipalities. We will also exploit these data to more rigorously study bunching below the taxable wealth
threshold, the movement of taxpayers to below the threshold, and moving in and out of municipalities in response to tax changes.
The first column in Table 7 presents our baseline estimates from the three-year difference
specification for “stayers”, meaning those who do not change municipality of residence over any
26

We use a municipality-year-level single family house price index based on hedonic pricing regressions by the real
estate consultancy firm Fahrländer Partner and compute population-weighted means for all cantons using population
data for 2010. The hedonic regressions do not include fiscal variables (for a detailed description, see
http://www.fpre.ch/en/06_immoi/fpre_Indizes_Immo_Methodenpapier.pdf).
27
We do, however, observe significant effects on housing prices of bequest taxes. It would be interesting to investigate this further in future research.

18

given three-year period and who have initial wealth above the taxable threshold. We find that a
0.1 percentage point rise in the annual wealth tax reduces wealth accumulation by 2.3%, which is
roughly two-thirds as large as the corresponding aggregate estimate of 3.4%. This is still a large
effect, and the aggregate estimate is within its confidence interval, which confirms using different data and identifying variation that wealth accumulation is sensitive to wealth taxation.
The next two columns of Table 7 decompose this result into the response of financial and
non-financial wealth. Ex ante, it is unclear which type of wealth should be more responsive. Financial wealth is presumably more liquid and easier to adjust to tax changes. On the other hand,
non-financial assets, and in particular real estate, have values that are harder to “mark to market”
for tax authorities, so if the response is through misreporting, it may show up more readily for
non-financial assets.
In fact, we find somewhat stronger impacts on financial than non-financial wealth. For financial wealth we find that a 0.1 percentage point reduction in the tax burden lowers wealth
holdings by a statistically significant 3%. For non-financial wealth, we find a reduction that is
about half as large and is marginally significant. Given the estimated standard errors, however,
we cannot rule out that these effects are the same.

Movements Around the Taxable Threshold
We next consider responses through movements around the tax threshold. Figure 5 shows the
distribution of taxpayers by thousand Swiss franc buckets around the tax filing threshold, relative
to a fitted polynomial.28 There is obvious bunching at the threshold, with excess mass to the left
of the notch; there is less obvious missing mass to the right of the threshold. To illustrate this
more clearly, Figure 6 zooms to the number of taxpayers within CHF 10,000 of the threshold.
While bunching is evident, the magnitude of the excess mass is fairly small. There are 6,404
taxpayers in the excess mass, or 582 taxpayers per year. This is 0.3% of the 203,000 filers on
average above the notch. Assuming equal movement from the wealth distribution above the
notch to below the notch, this suggests that bunching at the notch accounts for a mere 0.3% reduction in wealth.

28

Following Chetty, Friedman, Olsen and Pistaferri (2012), the counterfactual frequencies were estimated using a 7degree polynomial, where we included all observations outside the bunching area of CHF 15,000 to the left of the
notch value.

19

The first column of Table 8 assesses whether changes in municipal taxes lead to movement
to below the threshold. Specifically, we take the sample of 1.2 million taxpayers who start above
the notch and model the odds of moving below the notch as a function of municipal tax rates. We
find that there is a significant response, with each 0.1 percentage point rise in the tax leading 4%
of wealth holders to move below the threshold. This is consistent with the movements of population from above to below 100,000 that we saw in the cross-canton data.
Of course, even if there were just a uniform reduction in wealth holdings of 2.3% for each
taxpayer following a 0.1 percentage-point rise in the tax, we would expect some movement from
above to below the threshold without any particular response of bunching to higher tax rates.
Over our sample, the simulated share of filers dropping below the threshold from a uniform 2.3%
decrease in wealth accumulation is 0.9% for each 0.1 percentage point rise in the wealth tax.
This implies that more than three-quarters of the effect we show in the first column of Table 8 is
not mechanical.

Impact on Mobility
The next two columns of Table 8 show the effect of changes in municipal taxation on the odds of
moving out of the municipality (where we expect a positive coefficient) or the odds of moving
into the municipality (where we expect a negative coefficient). In fact, we find an insignificant
impact on the odds of moving both in and out of the municipality. Both coefficients are substantively small. The wealth of movers corresponds to 2.6 percent of the wealth of stayers. So a 0.4%
increase in outmoving as a result of a 0.1% increase in wealth tax rates would amount to a 0.01%
change in wealth - very small compared to the overall 2.3%. The estimated effect is even smaller
for wealth changes due to inmoving.
Therefore, we confirm using the longitudinal data that mobility is not a major driver of the
wealth accumulation response.

Specification Check: Non-Wealth Taxpayers
The last column of Table 8 proposes a specification check for our Bern results: looking at the
response of those initially below the taxable threshold. For those taxpayers, there should be little
impact of the change in tax rates. The only effect should be for the small share of taxpayers who

20

would move above the threshold if there were a cut in taxes. At the same time, if municipal multiplier changes are responding endogenously to other local factors, then there could be a strong
correlation with the wealth of this exempt group.
In fact, as we see in the last column, there is a zero coefficient on the wealth holdings of
those below the threshold. Unfortunately, the standard error on this estimate is rather large, so
that it is not statistically different from the main estimate. But the result is at least suggestive that
there are not unobservable correlates of tax rates that are driving the wealth response that we
measure for those above the threshold.

Splits by Initial Wealth
Finally, Table 9 exploits another feature of our micro data: it allows us to decompose the savings
response by initial wealth holdings. We split the sample at the median wealth level of wealth-tax
payers in Bern, which is CHF 308,951. We show effects on total assets for stayers, and divide
that into financial and non-financial assets.
In line with the aggregate data, we find no significant evidence of differential response intensities across wealth levels. The availability of longitudinal data in Bern makes this a more
direct test of initial wealth heterogeneity, but the basic finding remains unchanged.

VII

Conclusions

The growth in wealth inequality in the developed world has led to a renewed focus on redistributive taxation. This focus has included the notion of expanding the package of redistributive tax
tools used by nations to include an annual wealth tax. In fact, OECD nations have been moving
in the opposite direction over the past decade, with most nations abandoning annual wealth taxation. The major exception is Switzerland, which has by far the largest wealth tax in the OECD
relative to the size of government. Despite the policy interest in this area, there is no evidence on
how annual wealth taxes impact wealth accumulation based on variation across multiple jurisdictions.
In this paper we explore the role of annual wealth taxes using policy heterogeneity within
Switzerland. We can draw both on aggregate data reporting wealth holdings across cantons,
matched to cantonal variation in wealth taxes, and on micro data reporting individual-level

21

wealth holdings in one canton (Bern), matched to within-Bern variation in wealth taxes. Both
data sets deliver the same bottom line: wealth holdings are highly sensitive to wealth taxation. A
0.1 percentage-point increase in wealth taxes leads to 3.4% lower wealth holdings in the crosscanton data, and 2.3% lower wealth holdings in the within-Bern data. While comparisons to the
literature on the elasticity of taxable income require some assumptions that allow us to convert
stocks to flows, under reasonable assumptions the response of wealth holdings to wealth taxes
exceeds standard estimates of the elasticity of taxable income. Nevertheless, the elasticity of revenues with respect to the tax rate suggests that the current rate is below the revenue maximizing
rate.
We have a number of other findings as well. First, there is no significant effect of crosscantonal variation in capital income taxes on wealth holdings. As we discuss, this may reflect the
greater certainty of wealth taxes, greater salience, or the exclusion of capital gains from income
but not wealth taxes. Second, there is a significant effect of the bequest tax on wealth holdings.
On a per-year basis, the effects of a bequest tax and an annual wealth tax are comparable. Third,
little of the response appears to arise through taxpayer mobility, either within or across cantons.
Fourth, some of the response is through dropping below the taxable threshold, although most of
the response occurs above the threshold. Finally, financial assets appear more responsive to taxation than do non-financial assets.
Of course, the results from the Swiss context may not fully generalize to other nations. But
the fact that the response occurs primarily through reduced wealth holdings and not mobility
suggests that the localized structure of the Swiss tax does not reduce the applicability of these
findings to other developed nations. Indeed, Swiss cantons and municipalities are mostly small
enough for taxpayers to have a range of jurisdictional (and thus fiscal) options within the same
commuting area: if the mobility response to wealth taxation is weak in such a setting, it is even
likelier to be weak in larger and less decentralized nations.

22

Bibliography
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez (2011) Top Incomes in the Long
Run of History. Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1): 3-71.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin Hassett (2015) Capital Taxation in the 21st Century. American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 105(5): 38–42.
Brülhart, Marius and Raphaël Parchet (2014) Alleged Tax Competition: The Mysterious Death
of Inheritance Taxes in Switzerland. Journal of Public Economics, 111: 63-78.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach and Douglas Miller (2008) Bootstrap-Based Improvements
for Inference with Clustered Errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90: 414-427.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen and Luigi Pistaferri (2011) Adjustment Costs, Firm
Responses, and Micro Vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax
Records. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 749-804.
Dell, Fabien, Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez (2007) Income and Wealth Concentration in
Switzerland over the 20th Century. In: Atkinson, A.B. and T. Piketty (eds) Top Incomes
over the Twentieth Century, Oxford University Press.
Gruber, Jon and Emmanuel Saez (2002) The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and Implications. Journal of Public Economics, 84(1): 1-32.
Kleven, Henrik and Esben Schultz (2014) Estimating Taxable Income Responses Using Danish
Tax Reforms. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4): 271-301.
Kleven, Henrik J. and Mazhar Waseem (2013) Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions
and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 669-723.
Kopczuk, Wojciech (2009) Economics of Estate Taxation: A Brief Review of Theory and Evidence. Tax Law Review, 63(1): 139-157.
Martinez, Isabel Z. (2016) Beggar-Thy-Neighbor Tax Cuts: Mobility after a Local Income and
Wealth Tax Reform in Switzerland, Department of Economics Discussion Paper #2016-08,
University of St. Gallen.
McGrattan, Ellen R. (2015) Taxing Wealth. Economic Policy Paper #15-4, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis.
Parchet, Raphaël (2014) Are local tax rates strategic complements or strategic substitutes? IdEP
Economic Papers #2014/07, University of Lugano.
Piketty, Thomas (2014) Capital in the 21st Century. Harvard University Press.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman (2013) Rethinking Capital and Wealth
Taxation. Mimeo, Paris School of Economics, UC Berkeley and London School of Economics.

23

Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva (2014) Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
6(1): 230-271
Piketty, Thomas and Gabriel Zucman (2014) Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich
Countries, 1700–2010. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129: 1255–1310.
Poterba, James (2001) Taxation and Portfolio Structure: Issues and Implications, in L. Guiso, M.
Haliassos and T. Jappelli, eds, Household Portfolios. Cambridge: MIT Press, p. 103-142.
Poterba, James and Andrew Samwick (2003) Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition:
Evidence from Tax Reforms in the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Public Economics, 87: 539.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod and Seth H. Giertz (2012) The Elasticity of Taxable Income with
Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1):
3-50.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman (2014) Wealth Inequality in the United States Since 1913:
Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data. NBER Working Paper #20625.
Seim, David (2015) Behavioral Responses to Wealth Taxes: Evidence from Sweden. Mimeo,
University of Toronto.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2008) Heteroskedasticity-Robust Standard Errors for
Fixed Effects Panel Data Regression. Econometrica, 76(1): 155–174.
Zoutman, Floris T. (2015) The Effect of Capital Taxation on Household Savings. Mimeo, Norwegian School of Economics (NHH), Bergen.

24

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Wealth Taxes in OECD Countries
1995
2000
2005
Switzerland
2.87
3.10
3.40
Luxembourg
1.59
1.77
1.45
Norway
1.31
1.09
1.02
Iceland
1.16
0.00
0.00
Netherlands
0.54
0.50
0.02
Spain
0.44
0.55
0.42
Sweden
0.41
0.69
0.36
Germany
0.26
0.03
0.01
France
0.25
0.38
0.40
Italy
0.21
0.00
0.00
Denmark
0.19
0.00
0.00
Finland
0.08
0.28
0.18
Austria
0.06
0.00
0.00
Greece
0.05
0.00
0.00

2010
3.42
1.39
1.12
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

2014
3.32
1.47
0.76
0.00
0.00
0.33
0.00
0.00
0.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Notes: in percent of total tax revenue; only OECD countries that had
non-zero wealth taxes in 1995; source: OECD Revenue Statistics (code
4210, Individual Recurrent Taxes on Net Wealth)

25

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Obs

Mean

Levels
Standard deviation
Overall One-way Two-way

Min

Max

First differences, 3-year intervals
Mean Std. dev.
Min
Max

A. Cross-canton data
Taxable wealth (in million CHF)
level
260 50,005 62,941 10,131
7,819 2,717 366,768
6,671
9,413 -2,657 57,108
log
260 10.226
1.141
0.161
0.083 7.907 12.812
0.143
0.116 -0.061
0.739
Number of taxpayers
level
260 183,791 188,324 11,662
9,020 8,816 873,247
7,665
9,789 -2,150 50,056
log
260 11.591
1.119
0.040
0.019 9.084 13.680
0.037
0.022 -0.019
0.126
Marginal wealth tax rate (in %)
level
260
0.476
0.177
0.063
0.047 0.126
0.855
-0.042
0.067 -0.302
0.009
Average wealth tax rate (in %)
level
260
0.401
0.151
0.053
0.038 0.121
0.742
-0.037
0.056 -0.245
0.008
Marginal income tax rate (in %)
level
260 14.692
2.748
0.904
0.489 8.247 21.121
-0.786
0.724 -3.460
0.318
Inheritance tax rate (in %)
level
260
0.655
1.470
0.667
0.637
0 5.900
-0.187
0.851 -5.900
0.000
Public expenditures per capita (CHF)
level
260 13,977
3,293
825
720 9,864 28,324
298
1,327 -5,573
7,140
log
260
9.522
0.209
0.054
0.047 9.197 10.251
0.020
0.086 -0.255
0.290
Housing price index
level
260
166.3
58.7
29.1
16.4
83.6
440.6
24.8
18.7
3.2
97.5
log
260
5.064
0.305
0.140
0.048 4.425
6.088
0.137
0.059
0.028
0.332
B. Bern data
Aggregate wealth (in million CHF)
level
3'971
335
1'243
221
219
1 20'857
27
293 -1'865
8'887
log
3'971
4.627
1.393
0.106
0.079 0.223
9.945
0.067
0.108 -0.334
1.502
Number of taxpayers
level
3'971
1'078
3'448
106
99
12 58'930
36
106
-712
1'877
log
3'971
6.078
1.232
0.052
0.041 2.485 10.984
0.031
0.053 -0.258
0.348
Marginal top wealth tax rate (in %)
level
3'971
0.728
0.077
0.032
0.012 0.517
0.873
-0.054
0.065 -0.227
0.087
C. Bern data individual level
Wealth (in million CHF)
level
2'864'958
0.362
7.315
7.311
7.311
0
3'543
0.041
6 -2'017
3'535
log
2'521'365 11.346
1.907
1.890
1.890
0 21.988
0.161
0.879 -12.782 13.079
Wealth if initial wealth above tax threshold (in million CHF)
level
1'213'008
0.767
9.010
8.999
8.999
0
3'345
0.059
6 -2'017
1'950
log
1'207'834 12.739
1.052
1.034
1.034 0.000 21.931
0.017
0.478 -12.185
8.730
Marginal top wealth tax rate (in %)
level
2'864'958
0.747
0.058
0.049
0.015 0.517
0.873
-0.053
0.063 -0.227
0.087
Notes: One-way standard deviation means the variation after controlling for canton fixed effects (cross-canton data)
or municipality fixed effects (Bern data); two-way standard deviation means variation after controlling for both
canton/municipality and year fixed effets.

26

Table 3: Effect of Wealth Tax Rate on Taxable Cantonal Wealth
[1]
[2]
-0.336
Marg. wealth tax rate (%)
-0.345 **
(0.163)
(0.200)
Avg. wealth tax rate (%)

[3]
-0.347
(0.198)

[4]

[5]

[6]

*

-0.415
(0.208)

-0.423 *
(0.246)
Marg. income tax rate (%)
-0.002
-0.001
-0.001
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.013)
-0.012 ***
Inheritance tax rate (%)
-0.011 **
(0.004)
(0.004)
Year fixed effects
x
x
x
x
x
x
Cantonal linear time trends
x
x
x
x
x
x
N
260
260
260
260
260
260
N cantons
26
26
26
26
26
26
Notes: Fixed effects regressions of aggregate wealth (in logs) on tax rates. Standard errors in parentheses clustered for
cantons. Significance * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
*

-0.405
(0.248)
-0.002
(0.013)

Table 4: Effect of Wealth Tax Rate on Taxable Cantonal Wealth, Comparing Specifications and P-Values
Cantonal time trends
No cantonal timetrends
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
A. Fixed effects estimation
Marg. wealth tax rate (%)
-0.345 **
-0.336
-0.347 *
-0.388
-0.424
-0.428
(asymptotic stand. error)
(0.163)
(0.200)
(0.198)
(0.240)
(0.336)
(0.332)
[asymptotic p-value]
[0.044]
[0.106]
[0.092]
[0.118]
[0.219]
[0.210]
[bootstrap p-value]
[0.006]
[0.075]
[0.054]
[0.112]
[0.253]
[0.251]
Marg. income tax rate (%)
-0.002
-0.001
0.006
0.007
(asymptotic stand. error)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.029)
(0.029)
[asymptotic p-value]
[0.899]
[0.937]
[0.840]
[0.823]
[bootstrap p-value]
[0.919]
[0.936]
[0.842]
[0.832]
Inheritance tax rate (%)
-0.011 **
-0.008
(asymptotic stand. error)
(0.004)
(0.007)
[asymptotic p-value]
[0.011]
[0.266]
[bootstrap p-value]
[0.000]
[0.103]
N
260
260
260
260
260
260
N cantons
26
26
26
26
26
26
B. First difference estimation with 3-year intervals
Marg. wealth tax rate (%)
-0.362 **
-0.359 *
-0.385 *
-0.401 **
-0.409
-0.423
(asymptotic stand. error)
(0.167)
(0.207)
(0.205)
(0.179)
(0.241)
(0.239)
[asymptotic p-value]
[0.040]
[0.095]
[0.072]
[0.034]
[0.102]
[0.089]
[bootstrap p-value]
[0.005]
[0.043]
[0.032]
[0.014]
[0.126]
[0.105]
Marg. income tax rate (%)
-0.001
0.001
0.001
0.003
(asymptotic stand. error)
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.018)
(0.018)
[asymptotic p-value]
[0.967]
[0.930]
[0.936]
[0.874]
[bootstrap p-value]
[0.962]
[0.930]
[0.927]
[0.876]
Inheritance tax rate (%)
-0.013 ***
-0.011
(asymptotic stand. error)
(0.004)
(0.004)
[asymptotic p-value]
[0.006]
[0.012]
[bootstrap p-value]
[0.000]
[0.001]
N
182
182
182
182
182
182
N cantons
26
26
26
26
26
26
Year fixed effects
x
x
x
x
x
x
Cantonal linear time trends
x
x
x
Notes: Fixed effects regressions of aggregate wealth (in logs) on tax rates. Cluster-robust asymptotic standard errors in round
parentheses, clustered for cantons. P-values (asymptotic and wild bootstrap-t with 5000 replications) in square parantheses.
Asymptotic significance *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

27

*

**

Table 5: Effect of Wealth Tax Rate on Number of Taxpayers and on Housing Price
Fixed effects
First differences, 3-year interval
Estimator:
Number of
Housing
Number of
Housing
Dependent variable:
taxpayers (log)
price (log)
taxpayers (log)
price (log)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
Marg. wealth tax rate (%)
-0.0044
-0.0056
-0.0206
-0.0098
-0.0112
-0.0254
(0.0218)
(0.0214)
(0.0622)
(0.0255)
(0.0257)
(0.0697)
Marg. income tax rate (%)
-0.0022
-0.0023
0.0045
-0.0019
-0.0021
0.0072
(0.0020)
(0.0020)
(0.0063)
(0.0022)
(0.0021)
(0.0087)
0.0007
0.0007
-0.0053
Inheritance tax rate (%)
0.0015
0.0015
-0.0066 ***
(0.0012)
(0.0012)
(0.0021)
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
(0.0027)
Public expenditures, total (log)
0.0081
0.0086
(0.0188)
(0.0211)
Year fixed effects
x
x
x
x
x
x
Cantonal linear time trends
x
x
x
x
x
x
N
260
260
260
182
182
182
N cantons
26
26
26
26
26
26
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered for cantons. Significance * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

28

*

43

29

Table 6: Effect of Wealth Tax Rate on Number of Taxpayers, Effect by Wealth Groups
All
Wealth ≤ 100,000
Wealth > 100,000
Wealth > 500,000
Wealth > 1,000,000
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
Marg. wealth tax rate (%)
-0.0201
-0.0098
0.0947 **
0.1056 ** -0.2423 ** -0.2296 ** -0.2919 ** -0.2169 ** -0.2455 ** -0.1780
(0.0234)
(0.0255)
(0.0396)
(0.0449)
(0.0927)
(0.0917)
(0.1109)
(0.1021)
(0.1119)
(0.1244)
Marg. income tax rate (%)
-0.0019
-0.0016
-0.0032
-0.0143
-0.0108
(0.0022)
(0.0052)
(0.0083)
(0.0109)
(0.0109)
Inheritance tax rate (%)
0.0007
0.0025
-0.0035
-0.0056
-0.0011
(0.0015)
(0.0025)
(0.0030)
(0.0035)
(0.0034)
Mean of aggregate wealth (in m CHF)
50,005
2,306
47,700
12,456
20,203
Mean of number of taxpayers
183,791
122,212
61,579
164,410
175,547
Mean of marg. wealth tax rate (%)
0.48
0.50
0.50
0.54
0.55
Year fixed effects
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Cantonal linear time trends
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
N
182
182
182
182
182
182
182
182
182
182
N cantons
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
Notes: First difference estimation with 3-year intervals of number of taxpayers (in logs) on tax rates. The marginal wealth and income tax rates are weighted average tax
rates for wealth intervals above 100k in columns [3] to [6], above 500k in columns [7] and [8] and above 1m in columns [9] and [10]. Standard errors in parentheses clustered
for cantons. Significance *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 7: Effect of Wealth Tax Rate on Wealth by Type
Stayers, initial wealth above threshold
Δ log(net wealth)
Δ log(financial
Δ log(nonwealth)
financial wealth)
[1]
[2]
[3]
Δ top wealth tax %
-0.226 ***
-0.296 **
-0.156 *
(0.074)
(0.108)
(0.088)
Municipality fixed effects
x
x
x
Year fixed effects
x
x
x
N
1,164,056
1,104,284
889,080
Notes: The dependent variable is 3-year change in indicated type of wealth. The
explanatory variable is the 3-year change in top wealth tax rate in 361 municipalities.
Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses. Significance
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table 8: Odds of Dropping and Moving, and a Placebo Test
Initial wealth above threshold
initially below
Stayers
Stayers and movers
Stayers
dropping below odds of moving odds of moving
Δ log(net
threshold
out
in
wealth)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Δ top wealth tax %
0.039 *
0.042
0.005
(0.023)
(0.198)
(0.129)
Δ top wealth tax % destination
-0.017
(0.023)
Municipality fixed effects
x
x
x
x
Year fixed effects
x
x
x
x
N
1,158,725
1,207,417
979,483
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether somenody dropped below the wealth tax
threshold if they were initially above in column [1], an indicator for moving in columns [2] and [3], and the
3-year change in indicated type of wealth in column [4]. The explanatory variable is the 3-year change in
top wealth tax rate, either in original or in destination municipalities. Standard errors clustered at the
municipality level are in parentheses. Significance * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table 9: Effect of Wealth Tax Rate on Wealth by Type and Group
Stayers
Δ log(net wealth)
Δ log(financial
Δ log(nonwealth)
financial wealth)
[1]
[2]
[3]
A. Taxpayers with wealth 308,951 CHF or less
Δ top wealth tax %
-0.202 ***
-0.237 *
-0.172
(0.071)
(0.127)
(0.158)
N
581,957
545,316
393,382
B. Taxpayers with wealth above 308,951 CHF
Δ top wlth tax %
-0.230 **
-0.327 **
-0.161
(0.098)
(0.138)
(0.102)
N
582,099
558,968
495,698
Municipality fixed effects
x
x
x
Year fixed effects
x
x
x
Notes: The dependent variable is 3-year change in indicated type of wealth. The
explanatory variable is the 3-year change in top wealth tax rate in 361 municipalities.
Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses. Significance
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

30

Marginal Wealth Tax Rate (in %), Wealth > 10 mio, 2012
(1,1.1]
(.9,1]
(.8,.9]
(.7,.8]
(.6,.7]
(.5,.6]
(.4,.5]
(.3,.4]
(.2,.3]
[.1,.2]

SH
BS

TG
ZH

BL
AG
JU

AR
AI

SO
SG

ZG
LU

SZ

NE

GL

BE

NW
OW
UR

FR
VD

GR

TI

VS

GE

Figure 1: Top marginal wealth tax rates across Swiss cantons, 2012. Marginal tax rate on wealth > CHF 10 million, in
percent. Tax rates are consolidated across municipal and cantonal levels, with municipal rates calculated as averages across each canton’s municipalities weighted by the number of taxpayers. White areas are lakes.
Marginal Wealth Tax Rate (in %), Wealth > 10 mio, Change 2003-2012
(.4,.5]
(.3,.4]
(.2,.3]
(.1,.2]
(0,.1]
(-.1,0]
(-.2,-.1]
(-.3,-.2]
(-.4,-.3]
[-.5,-.4]

SH
BS

TG
ZH

BL
AG
JU

AR
AI

SO
SG

ZG
LU

SZ

NE

GL

BE

NW
OW
UR

FR
VD

GE

GR

TI

VS

Figure 2: Change in top marginal wealth tax rates across Swiss cantons, 2003-2012. Change in marginal tax rate on
wealth > CHF 10 million, in percentage points. Tax rates are consolidated across municipal and cantonal levels,
with municipal rates calculated as averages across each canton’s municipalities weighted by the number of taxpayers. White areas are lakes.

31

Top marginal wealth tax rates across municipalities in the canton of Bern, 2011
(.67,.69]
(.65,.67]
(.63,.65]
(.61,.63]
(.59,.61]
(.57,.59]
(.55,.57]
(.53,.55]
[.51,.53]

Figure 3: Top marginal wealth tax rates across municipalities in the canton of Bern, 2011. Marginal tax rate on
wealth > CHF 10 million in percent. White areas are lakes.
Top marginal wealth tax rates across municipalities in the canton of Bern, Change 2001-2011
(.2,.25]
(.15,.2]
(.1,.15]
(.05,.1]
(0,.05]
(-.05,0]
(-.1,-.05]
(-.15,-.1]
(-.2,-.15]
[-.25,-.2]

Figure 4: Change in top marginal wealth tax rates across municipalities in the canton of Bern, 2001-2011. Change in
marginal tax rate on wealth > CHF 10 million in percentage points. White areas are lakes.

32

Figure 5: Bunching below the threshold. Frequency of taxpayers per 1,000 CHF bracket relative to the notch compared to a
counterfactual distribution based on a 7-degree polynomial regression, including all observations outside the bunching area of
CHF 15,000 to the left of the notch value.

Figure 6: Bunching within CHF 10,000 around the threshold. Same as in Figure 5, but for a smaller window.

33

Appendix 1: Data
Cross-Canton Data
Data on aggregate taxable wealth by canton are taken from the Swiss Federal Department of Finance (“Gesamtschweizerische Vermögensstatistik der natürlichen Personen” available online at
https://www.estv.admin.ch/estv/de/home/allgemein/dokumentation/zahlen-und-fakten/
steuerstatistiken/gesamtschweizerische-vermoegensstatistik-der-natuerlichen-person.html). These data report the number of taxpayers as well as the aggregate taxable wealth per canton and
year in 11 different brackets of taxable wealth (0, 1 - 50k, 51 - 100k, 101 - 200k, 201k - 500k,
501k – 1,000k, 1,001k - 2,000k, 2,001k – 5,000k, 5,001k – 10,000k, over 10,000k). We use the
sum over the 11 wealth brackets as dependent variable.
Data on tax rates are taken from the Swiss Federal Tax Administration (“Steuerbelastung in den
Gemeinden”
available
online
at
https://www.estv.admin.ch/estv/de/home/allgemein/
dokumentation/zahlen-und-fakten/steuerstatistiken/steuerbelastung.html). These data report average tax rates (cantonal, municipal and parish) on wealth and income for 3 types of taxpayers
(unmarried taxpayers without children, married couples without children, married couples with 2
children), 20 wealth levels (20k, 25k, 30k, 40k, 50k, 75k, 80k, 100k, 150k, 200k, 250k, 300k,
400k, 500k, 600k, 800k, 1,000k, 2,000k, 5,000k, 10,000k) or 8 income levels (6k, 10k, 20k, 50k,
100k, 200k, 500k, 1,000k), respectively, for a sample of municipalities. Parchet (2014) completes these data to cover all municipalities, allowing us to work with the universe of municipalities within each canton. We use the parish tax rate of the dominant religious denomination in the
municipality. We first aggregate the combined municipal average tax rates to the level of the
canton by calculating averages of the municipal rates, weighted by the number of taxpayers per
municipality. We then approximate marginal tax rates on wealth and income by calculating finite
differences of the implied tax payments at the observed levels of wealth and income, respectively. We then take a weighted average of the prevailing average and marginal wealth tax rates
within each wealth bracket. We also assign average and marginal income tax rates to wealth
brackets by using a cross-tabulation of wealth and income from the individual-level data from
the canton of Bern. We finally calculate the main explanatory variables as weighted averages of
the average and marginal income and wealth tax rates across wealth brackets. We use timeaveraged aggregate wealth in each wealth bracket and canton as weights.
For bequests, we take statutory rates on an inheritance of CHF 500,000 (USD 550,000) by a direct descendant. This measure has been found to be highly correlated with a broader weighted
average of statutory bequest tax rates across multiple bequest sizes and heir types (Brülhart and
Parchet, 2014).
Cantonal population figures are taken from the Swiss Statistics (“Bilanz der ständigen
Wohnbevölkerung nach Kantonen” available online at http://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/portal/de/
index/themen/01/02/blank/data/01.html).
In our estimations, we do not take account of real estate taxation, even though three such taxes
exist in Switzerland: real estate transfer taxes, real estate capital gains taxes, and annual taxes on
the value of real estate and land. However, within our sample period there was minimal panel
variation in all three types of taxes at the cantonal level. The one significant change was that the
34

real estate transfer tax was abolished in three cantons (Zurich in 2005, Schwyz in 2009, Solothurn in 2011). We have explored the implication of adding a dummy variable for the existence
of this tax and found it to have no discernible impact on our results.
The only substantial change in the real estate capital gains tax during our sample period occurred
in the canton of Schwyz, where the tax was lowered substantially. Apart from this reform, there
were no changes in legislation, and all variation that there may have been, was due to cantonal
and municipal tax multipliers. We, therefore, do not control for this tax.
Finally, there are regular real estate and land taxes. Seven cantons (Zurich, Schwyz, Glarus, Zug,
Solothurn, Basel-Land, Aargau) did not use this tax throughout our sample period. In the other
cantons, the tax is levied either by the canton or by the municipalities. In the cantons with municipal property taxes, these can be either compulsory or optional up to an upper limit set by the
canton. We observe little variation in the cantonal legislation during our sample period. The canton of Graubünden raised the upper limit of the range allowed for municipal property taxes from
0.1 to 0.2 percent, but the overall effect of this change is unclear. Similarly, the canton of St.
Gallen changed the admissible range for the municipality property tax rates from 0.03-0.1 percent to 0.02-0.08 percent. Other than that, there were no changes.
Note that real estate taxes are likely less relevant for individual behavioral responses in Switzerland than in other countries. A major share of property taxes in Switzerland is paid by corporations and other legal entities, such as pension funds. In many cantons, tax rates differ between
private individuals and legal entities. In the canton Valais, for example, municipalities levy a
property tax of 1 tenth of a percent on property held by private individuals and of 1.25 tenths of a
percent on property held by legal entities. On top of that, the canton itself levies a property tax of
0.8 tenths of a percent on legal entities only. In the canton of Neuchâtel, there are a cantonal
property tax and an optional municipality property tax, which are both, however, collected from
legal entities only.
Bern Data
The data set from the canton of Bern contains information on all tax returns filed over the period
2001 to 2011. By default, each entry in the database contains all information from a tax filer’s
tax declaration for a given year. In total, the file includes 6,842,924 entries, i.e. on average
622,084 entries per year.
Entries do not necessarily coincide with calendar years. If a taxpayer’s characteristics that may
affect their marginal tax rates change during a calendar year, then there will be separate entries
within calendar years. Each entry therefore has a starting date, which can be either January 1 or
the day following an event that is relevant for the taxpayer’s marginal tax rate, and an end date,
which can be either a tax-relevant event or December 31. Events that affect marginal tax rates
include changes in family status (marriage, divorce, death of spouse), birth of children or children leaving the household, relocations to and from other countries, relocations to and from other
cantons within Switzerland, relocations across municipalities within the canton of Bern, and own
death.

35

We ignore all entries that do not end with December 31, because only information at the end of
the year is relevant for our study. In our baseline regressions, we look at behavioral responses
that happen over three-year intervals. We only use taxpayers whose marital status did not change
during the revenant observation period. As tax rates depend on marital status, marriage and divorce could be endogenous to taxation. Moreover, married couples also file their tax returns
jointly, which makes it impossible to follow individuals as they change marital status.
Wealth in principle includes everything a taxpayer owns valued at market prices, with the exception of tax exempt private retirement savings up to an annual cap (CHF 6,682 in 2011). Real estate values are officially established by cantonal appraising officers. These appraisals are made at
the moment of transactions and after major transformation or renovation work. Our main dependent variable is “net wealth”, which reflects a household’s wealth after subtracting debt.
From net wealth, we subtract CHF 17,000 (CHF 18,000 in 2011) if the taxpayer is married, and
CHF 8,500 (CHF 9,000 in 2011) for each minor in the household, in order to obtain taxable
wealth, which will determine taxpayers’ position relative to the exemption level.
Net wealth includes real estate located outside the canton of Bern and hence not taxed in Bern.
The database therefore also contains a variable “effective wealth”, which equals net wealth excluding all real estate holdings outside the canton of Bern. This is the wealth measure we use to
compute our baseline dependent variable. The data allow us to decompose this variable into financial assets (Wertschriftenvermögen), other assets (gross wealth minus financial assets), and
debt.
There are one basic schedule for wealth tax rates and two basic schedules for income tax rates,
one for married couples and one for singles. During our period of interest, the basic income and
wealth tax schedules have changed twice, from 2007 to 2008 and from 2010 to 2011. These
changes were simultaneous. In order to obtain actual tax rates, the rates of the respective basic
schedule are multiplied by two scalars, one set by the canton and one set independently by each
municipality (the “multipliers”).
The cantonal multiplier was changed three times between 2001 and 2011. First, from 2001 to
2002, a number of tasks were shifted from the municipalities to the canton, which led to an increase in the cantonal multiplier from 2.3 to 3.06, whereas the population-weighted average municipal multiplier fell from 2.62 to 1.88. The cantonal multiplier was lowered again to 2.96 in
2008, and raised back to 3.06 in the following year. The population-weighted average municipal
multiplier decreased constantly and slightly during the observation period to 1.81 in 2011. There
was, however, substantial variation in movements in municipal multipliers across municipalities
and years.
In addition to their basic multipliers, municipalities apply specific shifters to households declaring themselves to be Protestant or Catholic. As we do not know individual-level religious affiliations, we multiply the basic marginal tax rates with the sum of the municipal multiplier and a
church tax multiplier applied by the majority denomination of the respective municipality. The
only municipality with a Catholic majority (throughout the 11 years in our panel) was Moutier;
all other municipalities had Protestant majorities.

36

Due to mergers, the number of municipalities in the canton of Bern decreased from 400 in 2001
to 383 in 2011. We exclude observations on taxpayers based in municipalities affected by the 15
municipal mergers during two-year windows before and after these mergers took place. In some
cases, the newly created municipalities received the name and identifier of one of the original
municipalities. In other cases, the new municipalities were given new names and identifiers. In
total, we have 401 municipality identifiers in our sample, of which we use the 361 that were unaffected by mergers.
Bern taxpayers have to pay wealth taxes only if their taxable wealth exceeds a certain threshold.
During our sample period, this threshold increased from CHF 92,000 to CHF 94,000 in 2008,
and then again to CHF 97,000 in 2011. Once the exemption level is exceeded, the marginal tax
rate at the threshold applies also for wealth below the exemption. This leads to a jump in average
tax rates and a spike in marginal tax rates at the threshold.
A number of high net worth taxpayers are attracted to Bern by the canton’s generous use of tax
exemptions on “non-dom” foreign nationals (most pronouncedly in the high-end resort of
Gstaad). These taxpayers pay wealth taxes only on their tangible assets (real estate, luxury
goods) at their tax residence but are not obliged to report their worldwide wealth and earnings.
We therefore drop those taxpayers from the sample.

37

