NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMIC DEMAND ESTIMATION IN AUCTION MARKETS
Matthew Backus
Gregory Lewis
Working Paper 22375
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22375

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016

This revision is a substantial departure from our earlier working papers, motivated by many
thoughtful comments. We are grateful to Dan Ackerberg, Chris Adams, Susan Athey, Lanier
Benkard, Steve Berry, Gary Chamberlain, Matt Gentzkow, Phil Haile, Ken Hendricks, Hugo
Hopenhayn, Ariel Pakes, Maher Said and Robert Zeithammer for their comments, and to
conference and seminar participants at Columbia, FTC Applied Micro, Haas, Harvard/MIT,
IIOC, Johns Hopkins, LSE, Michigan, Microsoft Research, NBER- CEME, Stanford/SITE/
SIEPR, Toulouse, UBC, UCLA, UCSC, UCSD and Yale. Danyang Su provided excellent
research assistance. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22375.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Matthew Backus and Gregory Lewis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Demand Estimation in Auction Markets
Matthew Backus and Gregory Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 22375
June 2016
JEL No. C57,D44,L0
ABSTRACT
Economists have developed empirically tractable demand systems for fixed price markets. In
contrast, empirical auction techniques treat each auction in isolation, ignoring market
interactions. We provide a framework for estimating demand in a large auction market with a
dynamic population of buyers with unit demand and heterogeneous preferences over a finite set
of differentiated products. We offer an empirically tractable equilibrium concept under which
bidders behave as though they are in a steady-state, characterize bidding, and prove existence of
equilibrium. Having developed a demand system, we show that it is non-parametrically identified
from panel data, and that this result is robust to typical data limitations, reserve prices, random
coefficient demand, public signals that refine beliefs about market conditions, unobserved
heterogeneity, idiosyncratic preferences, and random latent outside options. We apply the model
to estimate demand and measure consumer surplus in the market for compact cameras on eBay.
Our analysis highlights the importance of both dynamic bidding strategies and panel data sample
selection issues when analyzing these markets.

Matthew Backus
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 619
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
matthew.backus@columbia.edu
Gregory Lewis
Microsoft Research New England
1 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glewis@microsoft.com

1

Introduction

Most goods and services are sold at fixed prices. Yet auctions are used as the allocation
mechanism in a wide variety of contexts, including procurement contracts, treasury bills and
the granting of oil drilling and spectrum rights. Technology companies such as Facebook,
Google and Microsoft sell advertisers access to online consumers through display and search
advertising auctions. And though the majority of eBay’s revenue now comes from fixed price
listings of new goods, they still sell a large number of goods (both in absolute and dollar
terms) by auction.
These markets share many common features. Buyers get multiple purchase opportunities
over time, either for exactly the same product (e.g. in search advertising where a product
is a keyword), or for close substitutes (e.g. in treasury bill auctions). This allows bidders to
intertemporally substitute, making participation and bidding decisions in light of the option
value of waiting for future purchasing opportunities. Both bids and participation choices
will reflect individual-specific preferences over the heterogeneous products available. For
example, in highway procurement, Lewis and Bajari (2011) document matching between
contractors and contract based primarily on distance and contract size, while in online labor
markets, employers are more likely to award contracts to workers from their own country
(Krasnokutskaya et al., 2016).
In the fixed price context, an influential discrete choice demand estimation approach has
been developed that models how buyers with unit demand and heterogeneous preferences
decide which goods to purchase (e.g. Berry (1994), Berry et al. (1995), Gowrisankaran and
Rysman (2009)). However, until recently, there has been no analogous work in the empirical
auctions literature, which has generally focused on the analysis of a repeated cross-section
of static auctions for identical products. The goal of this paper is to fill this gap.
A “whole-market” approach that incorporates dynamics and product differentiation can be
important for policy counterfactuals. For example, in setting optimal reserves, a static
model of second-price sealed bid auctions would suggest that when a monopolist changes her
reserve price policy, she should expect no change in buyer behavior (it is weakly dominant
for a buyer to bid their valuation regardless). By contrast, in our dynamic setting, a new
reserve price policy will affect buyer’s continuation values, and therefore bids throughout
the marketplace. Reserve prices will also have an effect on the endogenous set of incumbent
bidders. And without taking product differentiation seriously, we cannot use auction data to
1

say much about cross-price elasticities, or how an increase in the supply of one good would
affect the transaction prices of other goods (see Newberry (2015) for evidence that increased
supply depresses prices on eBay).
The present paper analyzes a model that is very closely related to the above work on fixed
price markets, but with a data-generating process that is given by equilibrium play in a
dynamic auction market. Vis-à-vis that literature, our approach is analogous to the secondchoice demand estimation approach of Berry et al. (2004) because we use bids placed by
the same bidder on different products. This is informative about the joint distribution of
valuations or, in the parlance of the fixed-price market literature, cross-elasticities. The
auction format also allows us to credibly identify a region of the distribution of valuations
that we often struggle with: the right tail. This region can be hard to identify in fixed–
price markets because of limited variation in characteristics (in particular, prices); for the
subset of buyers whose choice behavior doesn’t change over the support of observed prices,
identification is entirely parametric. To put it more succinctly, we can’t invert an inequality,
but we can invert bids.
Here we offer what we hope is a comprehensive analysis of our model: we characterize
participation and bidding decisions, prove existence of equilibrium, offer a number of nonparametric identification results, and apply the model to measure consumer surplus in the
market for compact cameras on eBay. Along the way, we deal with many of the methodological issues that are likely to arise in similar models of auction markets.
Specifically, we consider a model of repeated second-price auctions of differentiated products,
in which buyers with unit demand and heterogeneous, perfectly persistent and privately
known multidimensional valuations for a finite set of types of good must work out when to
participate and how much to bid. Persistence of preferences is a realistic feature of many
auction markets, but causes game theoretic problems that do not arise in fixed price markets.
So-called “leakage effects” are a particular concern, whereby a bidder’s bid today may reveal
their valuation to other bidders, affecting the evolution of future play (this remains true even
when other bidders cannot observe rival bids; less information just implies a harder filtration
problem for the bidders and the outside analyst).
When markets are “small” (in the sense that there are few bidders in the market), the approach of the dynamic games literature has been to simply assume that everything persistent
is commonly known, and that all private shocks are iid (see e.g. Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer

2

(2003), Aguirregabiria and Mira (2007), Bajari et al. (2007), Pakes et al. (2007); Fershtman
and Pakes (2012) is a recent exception). But in “large” markets (i.e. many anonymous
bidders), it is attractive to instead assume that players form beliefs about their rivals in a
simpler way. Here we assume that bidders simply take the distribution of rival bids for each
product as given and optimize against this, forming neither more refined beliefs (by conditioning on other information available to them) nor considering the possibility of trying to
manipulate the evolution of this distribution with their bid. An equilibrium is a fixed point
in which bidders optimize given their beliefs about rival bids, and those beliefs are consistent
with the long run time-averages of equilibrium play, i.e. the stationary distribution. This is
similar to ideas elsewhere in the literature, such as the model of belief formation in Krusell
and Smith (1998) and the oblivious / mean-field equilibrium concept of Weintraub et al.
(2008) and Iyer et al. (2014).
In equilibrium, losing bidders “win” the opportunity to play the game again tomorrow. The
optimal strategy requires that bidders bid their valuation less their continuation value whenever this is positive, and otherwise not participate. A bidder’s valuation is thus identified
by adding their bid to their continuation value. In other words, to estimate demand, one
must estimate continuation values. We show that these can be learned from observing a
bidder’s “pseudo-type” — their optimal bid on each product — as well as the distributions
of competing bids and the exit and supply processes.1
The existence of an inversion from bids to types is often sufficient to prove identification
in static auctions (e.g. Guerre et al. (2000), Athey and Haile (2007)): when each bidder
bids exactly once, the distribution of pseudo-types is just the distribution of bids, which
is observed. But when bidders bid multiple times, they may win (an therefore exit) before
recording a “complete,” or invertible, history consisting of a bid on every product (i.e. before
their pseudo-type is known). The probability of reaching a complete history varies with
type, so we need to correct for selection in measuring the distribution of pseudo-types. By
combining this new selection correction idea with the familiar inversion approach, we are
able to bound demand. Our identification result is pointwise up to the set of bidders who
prefer not to participate in some auctions.
In subsequent sections, we extend the model to cases with limited data, reserve prices,
1

A common refrain in the empirical auctions literature is that losers’ payoffs are “normalized to zero.”
We view this as a strong assumption, rather than a normalization. In our model the continuation value that
bidders anticipate when they lose is not constant across bidders, but instead depends on their private type.

3

random coefficient demand, public signals that refine beliefs about market conditions, unobserved heterogeneity, idiosyncratic preferences and random latent outside options. Most of
these extensions are reasonably straightforward given the tools developed earlier, as well as
results on deconvolution used in Li and Vuong (1998) and Krasnokutskaya (2011). The main
exception is the case with outside options and endogenous exit, which is harder. There we
show that observable differences in the exit rate across bidders imply a first order separable
differential equation that can be used to identify differences in their outside options.
The final section of the paper applies this framework to data from eBay’s compact camera
market. We document that substitution over time and across cameras with different levels of
resolution occurs in this market, and that there is both observable and unobservable heterogeneity within cameras of a given resolution. We model preferences as a linear combination
of a random taste for a camera and a random taste for camera resolution, and estimate the
distribution of these random coefficients. We show that our estimated model is able to match
the data well, and then use it to calculate consumer surplus. We find that consumer surplus
is twice as large as we would have estimated had we ignored continuation values, $6.04 per
bidder rather than $2.73. We chose the application for its expositional value rather than any
policy implications: it gives us the opportunity to show how our methodology can be implemented with limited data; how it fares under unobserved heterogeneity, and to illustrate
that dynamics and substitution are important for understanding auction markets.
Literature Review. The paper is related to various strands of literature. Jofre-Bonet
and Pesendorfer (2003) was the first paper to attack estimation in a dynamic auction game.
Subsequent to this, a number of papers have looked at dynamics on the eBay platform specifically. Budish (2008) examines the optimality of eBay’s market design with respect to the
sequencing of sales and information revelation. In Said (2009), the author investigates efficiency and revenue maximization in a similar setup through the lens of dynamic mechanism
design. Zeithammer (2006) developed a model with forward-looking bidders, and showed
both theoretically and empirically that bidders shade down current bids in response to the
presence of upcoming auctions of similar objects. Ingster (2009) develops a dynamic model
of auctions of identical objects, and provides equilibrium characterization and identification
results. Sailer (2006) estimates participation costs for bidders facing an infinite sequence
of identical auctions. Nekipelov (2007) analyzes a model where bidders attempt to prevent
learning by late bidding, while Hopenhayn and Saeedi (2016) develop and estimate a model

4

in which bidder’s bidding opportunities and valuations evolve dynamically within an auction according to a Markov process. Bodoh-Creed et al. (2013) employ our methodology in
analyzing the optimal fee structure for the eBay platform. Hendricks and Sorensen (2014)
offer a model, similar to our own but in continuous time and with a single product type, and
analyze the efficiency of the eBay trading mechanism.
Relative to this literature, our main contribution is the focus on sequential auctions of
heterogeneous objects, where bidders have multidimensional persistent private valuations.
In short, we are focused on developing a demand system. This is also a topic of interest in
other recent papers. Adams (2009) examines the problem of nonparametric identification
when differentiated products are sold by simultaneous auction, and Krasnokutskaya et al.
(2014) develop a model of participation and bidding in an online labor market. Our paper
differs from these papers in allowing buyers to participate repeatedly and dealing with the
dynamic issues this creates. One of the advantages of using a dynamic model is that we
are able to make use of panel data in estimation, rather than treating it as a repeated
cross-section, which allows identification of individual bidder preferences.
Paper Structure. The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we introduce the
basic model, and prove existence of and characterize equilibrium. Sections 3 and 4 discuss
non-parametric identification of the basic model and a series of extensions. Section 5 presents
our application, while Section 6 concludes.

2

Model and Equilibrium Analysis

We consider a market in which competing products are sold by second-price sealed bid
auctions. These auctions are held in discrete time, with either zero or one good auctioned
per period over an infinite horizon. Since our focus is on demand, we assume for simplicity
that supply is random and exogenous. Bidders have unit demand, and enter the market with
private and perfectly persistent valuations for each of the objects. They are inattentive, and
are active in any particular period with constant probability. When active, they choose
whether or not to participate in the current auction, and how much to bid. We show that
they bid their valuation less their continuation value, and assume they assess the latter based
on the steady-state distribution of supply and competing bids, rather than on current market

5

conditions (e.g. the number of competing bidders in the current auction). Winning bidders
exit the market with certainty, while losing bidders exit with constant probability.
We have chosen this set of assumptions to match some features of the market for digital
cameras on eBay, which is our empirical application. In any eBay category (such as digital
cameras), there are many different products sold by auction to a large number of anonymous
buyers.2 Although these auctions typically last for many days, and thus overlap — so that
at any given point in time there are many auctions occurring simultaneously — they finish
at different ending times, in sequence. As Bajari and Hortaçsu (2004) and Hendricks and
Porter (2007) have noted, this timing, combined with the way the proxy bidding system
works, imply that eBay is well approximated as sequence of second-price sealed bid auctions.

2.1

Environment

We formalize the above description of the environment in what follows:
Supply. There are J distinct kinds of goods sold in a market, indexed by j = 1 . . . J. We
denote the set of products by J . In each period t, a good may be available for purchase.
Supply is exogenous and Markov, with the current product jt drawn from a stationary
multinomial distribution conditional on the lagged product jt−1 . We allow for the possibility
that no product is available in a given period, and so supply can be summarized by a square
transition matrix Q of size J + 1 × J + 1, where the entry Qj,k gives the probability product
k will be supplied next when j is currently offered (and the last row and column give the
cases where no product is offered now and will be offered later, respectively). We assume
moreover that the multinomials have full support, so that regardless of what was supplied
at t − 1, it is possible that any of the J products (or nothing) is supplied at t. When a good
is available, it is sold by second-price sealed-bid auction.
Demand. At the beginning of each period, Et buyers enter the market, where Et is sampled
independently over time from a distribution FE with support {0, 1, 2 . . . E}. Each buyer has
unit demand, and has a perfectly persistent value for each of the goods summarized by a
privately known vector of valuations x = (x1 , x2 · · · xJ ) ∈ RJ . This value is drawn iid across
buyers on entry according to a distribution F with strictly positive density over its support
2

eBay hides the identity of the bidders by replacing parts of the username with asterisks.

6

X = [0, x]J . The new entrants combine with the population of buyers from previous periods
to form a cohort of bidders of size Nt . To ensure that the maximum number of buyers N is
bounded, we assume that when Nt = N , no-one enters (Et = 0).
New entrants are always active; the remaining incumbent members of the cohort are active
in each period with iid chance τ . Active buyers participate in the current auction (if one
is held), observing the product currently under auction, and placing a weakly positive bid
b ∈ R+ . We assume that the good sells only if the highest bid is strictly positive, so a
buyer can always opt-out of an auction by bidding zero. Agents are risk-neutral and have
quasi-linear utility, receiving a total payoff of xj − p for buying a good j at price p, and zero
otherwise. If an auction is held and a bidder wins the auction, they exit the market. All
other active bidders exit with probability (1 − r) (i.e. r ∈ (0, 1) is the survival rate). Inactive
bidders do not exit. We assume that agents do not discount future payoffs, although the
exogenous exit probability effectively leads to discounting. We discuss bidder beliefs and
strategies in the next section.

2.2

Analysis

We begin our analysis by looking at the buyer’s incentives. In our application to the compact
camera market on eBay, it seems reasonable to assume that buyers have simple models of
the competition they face. We formalize this idea by assuming that bidders believe that the
distribution of the highest competing bid is equal to the historical average and best respond
accordingly (this assumption or some variant is implicitly used in the existing literature
(Ingster, 2009; Hendricks and Sorensen, 2014)). Let Bj1 be a random variable denoting the
highest bid in an auction for good j, and let G1j be its cumulative distribution function.
Assumption 1 (Beliefs about competing bids). Following any history of play, bidders
believe that the highest rival bid in an auction for good j has distribution G1j .
This is a sensible way for bidders to form beliefs, though it is non-standard. Agents in games
are usually modeled as Bayesian, and so would condition on the recent bidding history and
any other observables in their information set (e.g. the number of competing bidders in the
current auction) to update their prior and form a posterior over the current distribution of
types in the market.3 We have elected to model bidder beliefs in this way both because
3

Even if this data was hidden a bidder could learn from their own experience over time (e.g. a bidder

7

it substantively simplifies the game theory, and because the gap between the behavior of
sophisticated Bayesian bidders and those that obey assumption 1 is probably small.
Just as information about competitor valuations has no effect on the optimal bid in a static
second-price auction, knowing the current distribution of types in the market is useful only
to the extent that it predicts future competition, which determines continuation values.
Since bidders participate only intermittently and eBay is a large market with high turnover
of market participants, current market conditions have little predictive power for future
competition. Assumption 1 is thus a good approximation to the behavior of Bayesian bidders
in this marketplace, though the model can be extended to weaken this assumption and allow
bidders to condition on other state variables (see section 4.3.2).
Under this assumption, the only payoff relevant-information in each period is the bidder’s
type and the current object under auction (we show this below). So without loss of generality
a pure strategy is just a vector β : X → RJ , a bid on each product as a function of type, with
jth coordinate βj . Moreover, let µβj (·) denote the ergodic measure of the first-order statistic
of bids, which depends on β.4 We can think of this measure as capturing the time-average
we would compute if we picked a β and simulated the market for an arbitrarily long time.
We are now in a position to define what it means for the market to be in equilibrium (subject
to our restriction on beliefs):
Definition 1 (Equilibrium). A pure strategy equilibrium is a tuple (β e , {G1j }) such that
(Optimality) β e (x) is a best response for type x given beliefs {G1j (b)}j∈J , and
e

(Consistency) for every j, G1j (b) = µβj ([0, b]).
The definition mirrors the requirements for a Bayes–Nash equilibrium: play must be optimal
given beliefs, and beliefs must be consistent with play. The consistency requirement explicitly
connects beliefs, as specified by Assumption 1, to the distribution of the highest bid on each
product implied by rivals’ strategies.
who lost yesterday might reason that competition was fierce yesterday, and may still be so today). This
gives rise to a winner’s curse effect (Budish, 2008). There is some evidence that this kind of learning occurs
on eBay: Coey et al. (2015) show that bidders tend to (modestly) increase their bids in subsequent auctions
for the same product, although they attribute this to deadlines rather than learning.
4
In an earlier version of this paper, we proved that for any β, such an ergodic measure exists, is unique
and converged to at geometric rate - details available on request. The speed of convergence makes us more
confident that the data is drawn from the recurrent ergodic class.

8

We can now specify the buyer’s decision problem. It is dynamic, since losers may have an
opportunity to bid at a later date. The relevant state variables are just the buyer’s type
and the product–type currently being auctioned, since Assumption 1 implies that this is
sufficient for beliefs about the highest competing bid (which together with the bid determines
allocations and payments). These state variables are Markov, and so the buyer faces a
Markov decision problem.
e ≡ P∞ τ (1 − τ )s−1 Qs . This is the distribution over
Define the state transition matrix Q
s=1
products a bidder bidding on j today expects to see when they are next active. Notice
e will converge to the
that as τ → 0 (so that bidders are infrequently active), each row of Q
steady-state distribution of supply, which we denote by π. Let vj (x) be the continuation
value of a bidder of type x who is active and bidding on product j. Then we can write down
a Bellman equation:

Z
vj (x) = max
+
b∈R

!
1(b ≥ Bj1 ∨ b > 0)(xj − Bj1 ) + 1(b < Bj1 ∨ b = 0)r

X

ej,k vk (x) dG1j (Bj1 ).
Q

k

(1)
The first term in the integral represents the case where the bidder submits the largest nonzero
bid, winning the auction and obtaining surplus equal to current valuation less a payment
given by the second-highest bid (potentially zero). The second term represents the case
where the bidder loses and survives to bid another day, obtaining their continuation value
for the next period in which they will be active. These events determined by the realization
of the highest competing bid, which by Assumption 1 the bidder believes to be distributed
according to G1j . Solving the above maximization problem, we get:
Lemma 1 (Best Responses). Suppose that beliefs satisfy Assumption 1. Then a bidder’s
expected payoff is maximized by bidding their valuation less continuation value if this is
positive, and otherwise bidding zero:
βj (x) = max{xj − r

X

ej,k vk (x), 0}.
Q

(2)

k

When βj (x) is zero or interior to the support of G1j , the best response is unique. Moreover,
βj (x) is continuous, increasing in xj (strictly when βj (x) > 0) and decreasing in xk for k 6= j
(strictly when βj (x) > 0 and βk (x) > 0).
9

(a) Two Bidding Functions

(b) Three Bidders

Figure 1: These figures offer an illustration of the bidding strategies described by Lemma
1 in a two-dimensional example. In panel 1(a) the two functions represent optimal bids on
product 1 as a function of bidders’ valuations for good 1, fixing their valuation for good 2.
Panel 1(b) represents three exemplary bidders: their types {x, x0 , x00 } and their associated
bids {b, b0 , b00 }. See the text for discussion.
In static second price auctions, bidders bid their values so that they are indifferent between
marginally winning (paying their bid, earning zero surplus) and marginally losing (earning
zero surplus). The same logic applies here: bidders must be indifferent between marginally
winning and losing, and since losers receive their continuation value, bids must be equal to
value less continuation value. It is possible that a bidder prefers to wait for a product they
value more highly rather than win the current object at a price of zero, in which case opting
out of the auction by bidding zero is optimal.
The assumption that bids are either zero or interior to the support of {G1j }j∈J is necessary
for uniqueness, since if there is an interval [b, b0 ] on which rival bids are unsupported and
the putatively unique best response falls in this range, any other bid in the range will also
be a best response. Note that the characterization in (2) is implicit — i.e., vj (x) is defined
recursively according to the Bellman equation in (1) — but since the value functions in
Markov Decision Problems are unique (Stokey et al., 1989), the characterization of optimal
bids as valuations less continuation values immediately delivers uniqueness of {βj (x)} (i.e.
that they are functions). Continuity follows from the continuity of payoffs in types. Monotonicity is natural: if a bidder values object j more, they optimally increase their bid for it,
and correspondingly shade their bids on substitute objects down.

10

We offer some graphical intuition for the bidding strategies of Lemma 1 in Figure 1 with a
two-dimensional example. Panel 1(a) depicts the monotonicity properties of optimal bids.
The more a bidder values product 1 the more she bids on it. However, bidders with higher
valuations also shade more; a bidder’s continuation value is monotone increasing in her value
for product 1, which induces the concavity of the function. Increases in her valuation for
product 2 cause a level shift, and may even drive non–participation if x1 is small — or x2 is
large — enough. Panel 1(b) depicts three conjectured bidder types (x, x’, and x”) and their
corresponding bids (b, b’, and b” respectively). The bidder of type x has a high valuation
for both products and therefore shades both of her bids substantially. The bidder of type
x0 gets the same high utility from product 1, but zero utility from product 2. Therefore she
does not participate in auctions of product 2; she prefers to wait for auctions of product 1.
Finally, the bidder of type x00 is unlikely to win in either state of the world, and therefore
shades her bid very little, but participates in both auctions.
Theorem 1 (Existence). A pure strategy equilibrium exists in which strategies are characterized by Lemma 1. When J = 1, there is a unique equilibrium within the class of strategies
characterized by Lemma 1.
The proof is non-trivial. We must find a fixed point in strategy-space: the equilibrium
strategies β e must be a best response to the distributions {G1j }, i.e. the ergodic distributions
of the highest competing bid on each product generated by β e and the entry, supply and exit
processes. To show that such a strategy β e exists, we apply Schauder’s fixed point theorem
on the space of continuous functions on the type space X . Doing so requires some functional
analysis. In the appendix we show that the set of best responses to any continuous bidding
function is uniformly equicontinuous and bounded (a compactness condition), and that the
best response varies smoothly with the bidding function (a continuity condition).
The case with a single product (J = 1) is easier, and we can prove uniqueness of equilibrium.
This is because the types are totally ordered and monotone bidding preserves that ordering,
so that the chance of winning an auction is entirely pinned down by a bidder’s type. As a
result who wins and who loses can be determined without knowing the equilibrium bidding
function, so that the economy admits a unique ergodic distribution of types. Uniqueness of
optimal bids follows from a contraction mapping argument.5
5

That uniqueness result for the single product case is only within the class of strategies characterized by
Lemma 1: somewhat trivially, it is possible to construct an equilibrium in which a point mass of bidders for

11

3

Identification

In this section we state and prove the main theoretical result of the paper, which is that the
demand system outlined above is non-parametrically identified up to constraints imposed
by non-participation (a limitation we make precise below). We think this is useful because
it makes explicit the assumptions that are needed to identify the primitives of the dynamic
game. Our result is constructive, so it also provides some guidance as to a sensible estimation
strategy.
We begin with a scenario in which the econometrician has excellent data and wishes to
estimate the baseline model of Section 2 (we investigate cases with limited data and more
complex demand models in Section 4 below).
Assumption 2 (Observable Data). In every auction, the econometrician observes the
product-type being sold, all positive bids and the identities of the bidders that made them.
Even in this case we assume that the econometrician does not observe zero bids, since
those stand in for non-participation in our model (i.e. non-participation is non-observable).
Despite this, identification of a number of components of the model follows directly. First,
{G1j } is directly observable from the data as the distribution of winning bids on each product.
The supply transition matrix Q is identified by the probability that item k is auctioned
following item j.
The activity rate τ and survival probability r cannot be directly measured from the sample
analogs because some types will optimally choose to not participate even when active. To
deal with this, we measure τ and r from a sample consisting of bidders who have been
observed bidding on every product. Such bidders have revealed themselves to be types that
will participate whenever active. Define for each of these bidders a qualifying time t1i , the
time at which they qualified to be in this subset (i.e. the time at which they bid on the last
remaining product they had not previously bid on). Then for bidders in this sample
r = P(bidder i is observed in any period > t1i |bidder lost in period t1i )

(3)

and,
whom, for some j, βj (x) is neither zero nor interior to G1 — i.e. those who submit supX βj (x)— choose to
bid something arbitrarily larger.

12

rτ = P(bidder i is observed in period t1i + 1|bidder lost in period t1i ).

(4)

Since the RHS of (3) and (4) are observed in the data, from this pair of equations one can
solve for r and τ . Once we have r, Q and τ , we can compute the state transition matrix
e = P∞ τ (1 − τ )s−1 Qs . Next, define the inverse bidding function ξ : RJ → RJ by
Q
s=1

e − rQ)
e −1 G1 (b) b − E[B1 |B1 < b] .
ξ(b) ≡ b + rQ(I

(5)

e and {G1j }j∈J are identified, ξ is also identified.
In view of the above analysis showing that r, Q
Notice that ξ(b) is equal to the vector of of a buyer’s bids plus a second term that is equal
to their vector of continuation values.6 There is a clear intuition for the second term: when
a buyer wins with a bid bj , he gets a payoff equal to his value less the expected payment,
which we can decompose as (bj − E[Bj1 |Bj1 < bj ]) + (xj − bj ). The latter component is equal
to his continuation value (Lemma 1 again, as he only wins if bj > 0), and so the payoff can
be written as (bj − E[Bj1 |Bj1 < bj ]) plus an opportunity to play the game again. The buyer’s
continuation value is thus equal in value to the stream of payments from a set of J annuities,
where the jth pays G1 (bj )(bj − E[Bj1 |Bj1 < bj ]) in expectation whenever j is auctioned. The
e − rQ)
e −1 sums the appropriate discounted geometric series.
pre-multiplication by rQ(I
In view of Lemma 1, this sum in (5) equal to the bidder’s value whenever the bid is positive,
so ξ is an inverse bidding function on the region b > 0. When components of the bid vector
b are zero, however, we still obtain an upper bound on the bidder’s valuation. Combining
this yields
Lemma 2 (Bidder–wise Inversion). Let b = β(x). Then x ≤ ξ(b) with equality on every
dimension j such that bj > 0 (i.e. x = ξ(b) if bj > 0 for all j).
This result characterizes the bidder–wise content of data from an auction market. Should
we observe a complete, strictly positive bid vector, it implies that we can exactly identify
the bidder’s type. In the particular case where J = 1, the inverse bidding function takes the
simple form:
ξ(b) = b +

r
G1 (b)(b − E[B 1 |B 1 < b])
1−r

6

The diligent reader can derive this expression by stacking the Bellman equations from (1) in vector form
and then substituting in the optimal bidding strategies from Lemma 1.

13

the discrete-time analogue to the inverse bidding function in Hendricks and Sorensen (2014).
Given this inversion result, it will be helpful from now on to refer to the bid-vector b ≡ β(x)
e It will suffice to
as type x’s “pseudo–type”. Let the distribution of pseudo–types be F.
e to bound demand F. To see this, define a vector-valued indicator function 1(b > 0)
identify F
with 1j (b > 0) = 1 if bj > 0 and 1j (b > 0) = 0 otherwise. Then by Lemma 2, we have
1(b)ξ(b) ≤ x ≤ ξ(b). These pointwise inequalities translate into bounds on F:
P({b : ξ(b) ≤ x}) ≤ F (x) ≤ P({b : 1(b > 0)ξ(b) ≤ x}).

(6)

The missing part of our identification proof is a way of identifying the distribution of pseudo–
types (and thus the probabilities on each side of the inequality in (6)). With a single product,
this is a simple counting exercise: how many bidders are there who make each bid b (i.e. what
is the bid distribution G(b))? With multiple products this counting exercise is complicated
by selection, because most bidders will exit before placing a bid on every available product.
We deal with sample selection by choosing subsets of the data for which selection can be
explicitly modeled and accounted for. There are many such subsets one could construct in
order to prove identification. For example, one possible subset is the set of all complete bid
vectors. The (joint) distribution of complete bids is observable, but selected: pseudo–types
with high b1 (e.g.) will typically bid on product 1 and then win and exit, and therefore have
low density in the selected sample of complete bid vectors.
One problem with this conditioning set is that there are many paths a bidder can take to make
a complete bid vector, and so calculating the probability of this event requires enumerating
and computing the probability of many paths. So instead we work with the set of bidders
whose history falls into the following set H: they enter when good 1 is available, bid, lose
and survive, then next period good 2 is available, and the bid, lose and survive . . . J is
available, they bid, lose and survive. Such bidders can be identified given the data available
under Assumption 2. Every pseudo–type who participates on every product is almost surely
represented in this set, as every type on the interior of Xe can lose an auction and survive to
bid on a different product. We re-weight the observed frequency of pseudo–types observed
in this subset by the inverse probability of inclusion– a selection correction that will allow us
to learn about the distribution of pseudo–types and, from (6), the distribution of types. To
compute the weights, we need to identify the probability sH (b) that a pseudo–type b ends
up in the set H, which is relatively straightforward for our choice of H:
14

Lemma 3 (Selection correction). Let Assumption 2 hold. Then sH (b) is identified.
Let the joint density of their bids be gH (b). Lemma 3 allows us to re-weight the density
gH (b) to get the density of pseudo–types with b > 0:
gH (b)
fe(b|b > 0) ∝
sH (b)

(7)

But this only characterizes bidders with b > 0. Revisiting our example in Figure 1(b),
bidders of types x and x00 are represented in H, but not x0 , who never participates in auctions
for product 1. Pseudo–types that don’t participate on some products will never enter H
(i.e. sH (b) = 0), and so to move from the conditional distribution to the unconditional
distribution takes a little more work. The idea is to define less restrictive sets H 0 ⊃ H
(e.g. sets of bidders who are observed bidding on product 1) and look for “extra mass” in
those sets generated by these non-participating pseudo–types. In the appendix, we make
this argument formal, applying induction on the cardinality of the set of products each type
participates in, starting from types who bid on every product. Combining these arguments:
e is point
Theorem 2 (Non-parametric identification). Let Assumption 2 hold. Then F
identified and F is partially identified, according to (6).
This result combines the bidder–wise inversion of Lemma 2 with the selection correction
result of Lemma 3. The dynamics of the auction market are important in both steps: in the
first, the inverse bidding function ξ(·) captures bidders shading their bids by the option value
of losing and participating in future auctions; in the second, sH (b) accounts for selection
into our sample, which is inherently dynamic when J > 1.
The reason that Theorem 2 yields partial rather than complete identification is that we
allow for bidder non-participation. If bidders were required to participate (e.g. primary
dealers in US Treasury auctions), then identification would be exact. Moreover, we note
that identification of our model is only incomplete in the left tail of the type distribution,
precisely because it is driven by non-participation. Our identification result is exact in the
right tail, which is typically the relevant region for computing policy-relevant statistics, e.g.
welfare or expected revenue.
Finally, the proof and our exposition above hinged on a specially selected subset of bidders
with history H. We chose this subset for expositional clarity alone: though our identification
15

argument is constructive, in practice we expect that the econometrician will be thoughtful
about which subsets — and therefore which variation in the data — to exploit in light of
their particular application.7 In the same spirit, since the choice of H was expositional, so
too is Lemma 3. One could construct a similar argument for alternative subsets.

4

Extensions

In this we provide characterization and identification results for variations on the basic model.
We begin by showing that the model remains identified with data on only the winning and
second highest bid in each auction, as well as in the presence of reserve prices. We also
show, parallel to the the demand estimation literature for fixed price markets, that the
model is amendable to projection onto product characteristics, as in the random coefficient
utility models of Berry et al. (1995). We then generalize the model to a setting in which
there are additional state variables — beyond the product-type — that may affect bidder
valuations and beliefs. After characterizing bidding behavior in this case, we are also able to
show that the model remains non-parametrically identified in cases with unobserved product
heterogeneity and idiosyncratic payoff shocks. Lastly, we consider a version of the model in
the presence of an unobserved, external fixed price market that agents may purchase from
instead of buying at auction, generating endogenous exit.

4.1

Limited Data

In many real world applications, the data does not contain all bids and identities. Or even
if it does — as in our eBay application here — one may be concerned that not all bids are
serious (in the sense that they are equal to βj (x)), and want to identify the model using data
only on the winning and second highest bid. Haile and Tamer (2003) offer a behavioral model
of ascending price auctions to motivate this concern, and a number of papers have taken
identification under this or similar data limitations seriously (Athey and Haile, 2002; Song,
2004; Menzel and Morganti, 2013; Platt, 2015) We consider the case where the econometrician
observes the two highest order statistics and show that the model remains identified.
7

This argument anticipates the illustrative empirical application of Section 5, where we choose to use only
data for bidders who are observed bidding multiple times. See in particular the discussion of the empirical
design in Section 5.2.

16

Assumption 3 (Limited Data). In each auction, the econometrician observes the product
auctioned, the top two bids and the identities of the bidders placing them.
e {G1 }j∈J , Q, r, τ ) is sufficient to identify ξ(·) and
Lemma 2 still applies, so identifying (F,
j
bound F according to (6). The primitives {G1j }j∈J and Q are still directly observable in the
data. But now the difficulties in identifying r and τ we had earlier are exacerbated by the
fact that a bidder will have (unobserved) gaps in their history whenever they were active but
did not place one of the top two bids. Our data is thus censored. But since the probability
of being censored depends on the distribution of the second highest bids, which is observed,
the parameters τ and r remain point identified (see the Appendix for a proof).
e from the obThus the remaining problem is identifying the distribution of pseudo-types F
served bidding data. Once again, we can think of this as a selection problem. Consider
the subset of bidders whose history falls into the set H 0 (a modified version of H): they
enter when good 1 is available,make the second highest bid (and are thus observed), then
next period good 2 is available, they make the second highest bid . . . good J is available and
they make the second highest bid. Since the event “make the second highest bid bidding on
product j” is measurable with the data promised by Assumption 3, these bidders can be
identified in the data. And by similar arguments to those offered before, we can identify the
probability sH 0 (b) that we need for selection correction. This gives us:
Theorem 3 (Identification under Limited Data). Let Assumption 3 hold. Then F is
partially identified, according to (6).
For further intuition on this result, recall the discussion of our selection of the history H at
the end of Section 3. There are a number of possible histories on which we could have built
our identification result — H was an expository choice, but H 0 is also feasible. As long as
the process by which bidders are selected into the sample can be recovered from observables,
our identification result is robust subject to the emendation of the selection correction.

4.2

Random Coefficients

Let us suppose that the products have fixed (non-time-varying) characteristics, observable
to the econometrician. These are summarized in a J × K matrix Z, where the number of
characteristics K is less than the number of products J. We make two assumptions on Z:
17

that it is of full rank (this is necessary for identification), and that all entries are positive
(this is unnecessary but simplifies the analysis by allowing the inequality in (8) below).
Let bidder i have valuations of the form xi = Zαi , so that their preferences are summarized
by a random coefficient αi (a K × 1 column vector). Instead of sampling valuations x upon
entry from F, we assume that bidders sample their random coefficient α from Fα instead.
We would like to identify the distribution Fα .
This demand structure is a special case of the model in which valuations x come from some
higher-dimensional distribution F, and as a result optimal bidding and the inversion result
in Lemma 2 remain unchanged. We can bound Fα using the more general result in (6):
P({b : ξ(b) ≤ Zα}) ≤ Fα (α) ≤ P({b : 1(b > 0)ξ(b) ≤ Zα})

(8)

where we have simply replaced x in (6) by Zα. Intuitively, the probability that a random
coefficient is lower than some level α is the same as the probability that the valuations are
lower than the corresponding level Zα, and can be bounded in the same way.
Corollary 1 (Identification under random coefficients). Suppose Assumption 3 holds.
Then Fα is partially identified, according to (8).
Though the result is straightforward, it highlights the generality of the type space of our
model from Section 2. As in demand systems for fixed-price markets, projection down to
preferences over characteristic space yields dimension reduction. Since we can partially identify a high-dimensional model with random preferences over products, we can also partially
identify a lower-dimensional model of random preferences for characteristics too.

4.3

Demand with Richer Signals

We now analyze a more substantial variation of the basic model in which we allow for both
public and private signals that affect both beliefs and valuations. This framework is the
basis for two extensions: public signals that affect beliefs about the state of the market and
unobserved heterogeneity in product attributes.
To accommodate this, we need a richer state space. Assume that in each period, a state
variable s ∈ S is publicly observed. This state variable may affect bidder valuations, so we
model a bidder’s valuation as a random function xi (s). Exactly how xi (s) is sampled will
18

depend on the specifics of the model. For example, in the original model, the state variable
was the product-type under auction (i.e. s ∈ J ), so valuations were xi (j) ≡ xi,j where xi,j
was the jth element of xi , and xi was sampled iid across bidders i from F. The state variable
may also affect beliefs about competing bids, so we modify Assumption 1 accordingly:
Assumption 4 (Beliefs with Public States). When the public state is s, bidders believe
that the highest rival bid in the current auction has distribution G1 (·|s).
For example, bidders may believe that when there is a lot of supply of a given good on the
market, the highest competing bid will be lower. Assume also that bidders believe the state
transitions according to an exogenous Markov transition kernel P (s0 |s) (exogenous in that
it is unaffected by the actions in the current auction).
Definition 2 (Equilibrium with Public States). A pure strategy equilibrium is a pair
(β e (·, s), G1 (·|s)) such that:
(Optimality) β e (x|s) is a best response for type x given beliefs G1 (b|s) ∀s ∈ S.
(Consistency) G1 (b|s) = µ([0, b]|s) ∀s ∈ S.
Then by the same logic that we offered for Lemma 1, it is optimal for bidders to bid their
valuation less their discounted continuation value, and we obtain:
Lemma 4 (Best responses, general state space). The equilibrium bidding function β(s)
satisfies:
Z
β(s) = max{x(s) − r

v(s0 )dP (s0 |s), 0}

(9)

where v(s) is the value function, defined according to the Bellman equation:
1

1

1

1

v(s) = max G (b|s)(x(s) − E[B |B < b, s]) + r(1 − G (b|s))
b

4.3.1

Z

v(s0 )dP (s0 |s)

(10)

Public States and Bidder Beliefs

A special case of particular interest is when S = J × {s1 , . . . , sS } and xi (s) = xi,j , i.e. when
the state informs beliefs about competitor play, but does not encode valuation-relevant information. We call attention to this not because it is technically demanding, but because
it remedies a limitation of the baseline model: that it misses the intuition of a dynamic
19

marketplace in which bidders respond to changes in market fundamentals. We can encode
countably sophisticated information into the public state space S, including histories, changing primitives, and foresight.
For instance, suppose that bidders know not only what is being auctioned today, but the
sequence of products that are being auctioned k − 1 periods into the future. Then, S =
J k , and bidders’ continuation values will now depend upon realizations of future supply.
Alternatively, suppose that τ , the re-arrival rate of bidders, evolves over {τL , τH } in a public
and Markov process. Now, S = J ×{τL , τH }. In the τH world bidders face more competition
from more bidders, and so it is useful to let this be reflected in G1 (·|s).
It is straightforward to see that this presents no theoretical difficulty for identification. The
simplest approach is by brute force application of Theorem 2: simply define J˜ to contain
|S| duplicates of the product space J and proceed as before. It is also possible to show,
using a contraction mapping argument, that the full J × |S| bid vector is identified from any
J-vector that includes a bid for each product type.8
4.3.2

Unobserved Heterogeneity and Idiosyncratic Shocks

We now introduce a variant of the model with unobserved product heterogeneity and idiosyncratic taste shocks (this will be useful in the application). In this setting unobserved
product heterogeneity (ξt ) is public and transient, and idiosyncratic taste shocks (εi,t ) are
private and transient. We assume that valuations are:
xi (j, ξt , εi,t ) = xi,j + ξt + εi,t

(11)

where xi,j is sampled as in the basic model, ξt is sampled iid across auctions from Fξ and εi,t
is sampled iid across bidders and auctions from Fε . We assume in addition that xi,j , ξt and
εi,t are mutually independent and that ξt and εi,t are mean zero. We make a full support
assumption on εi,t so that every type x bids on every product with positive probability
(i.e. they participate when they get a sufficiently large idiosyncratic shock). Notice that
a random coefficients model with unobserved heterogeneity and idiosyncratic shocks in the
spirit of Berry (1994) and Berry et al. (1995) is a special case of this model, in the sense
8

This implies that the requirements for a “complete” bid vector are not made more taxing as the econometrician adds public states. Details available from authors upon request. However, the dimension of the
first-stage objects the econometrician must estimate will grow as public states are added.

20

that it projects the valuations xi,j onto characteristics.
We split the identification analysis into two parts: a first step in which we define pseudotypes and show an inversion from pseudo-types to types; and a second step in which we show
that the distribution of pseudo-types is identified.
Inversion. For valuations of the form in (11), Lemma 4 implies we have bids9 :
bi,j,t = max{xi,j + ξt + εi,t − r

X

ej,k vk (x), 0}
Q

k

where the continuation value in the first term depends only on the permanent part of the
state x rather than the transitory iid shocks ξt and εi,t (though the presence of idiosyncratic
shocks creates option value that is included in vk (x)).
Define a pseudo-type vector b̌(x) elementwise according to b̌i,j (x) = xi,j − r

P e
k Qj,k vk (x).

We use the check notation to distinguish the pseudo-types from the bids. The pseudo-type
is the permanent part of the bid vector; positive bids can be written as pseudo-type plus the
two transitory shocks. In contrast to bids, pseudo-types can be negative. We can then write
the bids as:
bi,j,t = max{b̌i,j + ξt + εi,t , 0}
1
1
Let Bj,t
be the winning bid in each auction, and define Ǧ1j as the distribution of Bj,t
− ξt .

In the presence of unobserved heterogeneity, all bidders will adjust their bids by ξt (which
they all value equally), and so the raw distribution of winning bids G1j will have additional
variance relative to the distribution Ǧ1j .
e r and Fε are known.
Lemma 5 (Inversion, general demand). Suppose {Ǧ1j }j∈J , Q,
ˇ b̌), where ξ(
ˇ b̌) = b̌ + rQ(I
e − rQ)
e −1 ǔ(b̌) and
Then x = ξ(
Z
ǔj (b̌) =

Ǧ1j (b̌j + ε)(b̌j + ε − EǦ1j [Bj1 |Bj1 < b̌j + ε])dFε (ε)

As in the basic model, each pseudo-type can be mapped back to an underlying type. But
there are a number of important differences between this result and the earlier one. First,
since pseudo-types can now be negative, this mapping is exact (rather than holding only for
9
Since εi,t is private rather than public information, strictly speaking this is not implied by Lemma 4.
But since εi,t only affects the bidder’s current valuation and nothing else, adding it to the bid is optimal.

21

strictly positive pseudo-types, as in the basic model). Second, the expected utility from the
optimal bid in any period now includes the idiosyncratic shock, both in the continuation
value and in adjusting the bids. The unobserved heterogeneity does not enter expected
utility, as it shifts all bids in an auction up by ξt , and thus the extra valuation of ξt is exactly
canceled out by an additional payment of ξt conditional on winning. Finally, this inversion
cannot be applied bidder-wise to bid vectors, since bid vectors are not pseudo-types (they
now include unobserved heterogeneity and idiosyncratic shocks). Instead, we will apply the
inversion ξ(·) to the distribution of pseudo-types as a whole.
But first we need to identify both Fε and {Ǧ1j }j∈J , as these are required by Lemma 5.
Identifying these objects will require making some deconvolution arguments (Li and Vuong,
1998; Krasnokutskaya, 2011). Let us start with identifying {Ǧ1j }j∈J . Take pairs of bids
placed in the same auction, by bidders that have just entered the data. The pair can be
written as a common part ξt plus a vector of independent shocks (sums of the pseudo-type
and the idiosyncratic shocks). Since all the terms are mutually independent, and E[ξ] = 0,
by Kotlarski’s lemma, the distribution Fξ is identified (Kotlarski, 1967). Then, since each
observed G1j is a convolution of Fξ and the corresponding Ǧ1j , and Fξ is identified, we can
again apply deconvolution to get {Ǧ1j }j∈J .
Next consider identification of Fε . Take a very specific sample: the pair of bids of bidders
who entered the sample, bid on product 1, lost, and bid on product 1 again. So we have:
bi,1,t1 = b̌i,1 + ξt1 + εi,t1
bi,2,t2 = b̌i,1 + ξt2 + εi,t2
with the following statistical structure: all the distinct variables are mutually independent;
ξt1 and ξt2 are drawn from Fξ ; εi,t2 is drawn from Fε ; but εi,t1 is drawn from some other
distribution Feε because the sample is selected: only losing bidders in the first auction (more
likely to be those who drew low ε’s and placed low bids) are in the sample.
This can be written in the form Y1 = M + U1 and Y2 = M + U2 for M = b̌i,1 , U1 = ξt1 + εi,t1 ,
U2 = ξt2 + εi,t2 with M, U1 , U2 mutually independent and E[U2 ] = 0. Applying Kotlarski’s
lemma again, the distribution of U2 = ξt2 + εi,t2 is identified (see also Evdokimov and White
(2012)). This is itself a convolution of the identified Fξ and the unknown Fε , and so by
applying deconvolution again, we identify Fε .

22

Identification of Pseudo-Type Distribution. In view of Lemma 5 and the above dee we can identify
convolution analysis we know that given the distribution of pseudo-types F
e is latent. So let us instead work with the set of bidders with history H, where H
F. But F
is defined as before (i.e. these are bidders who enter when good 1 is available, are active,
bid, lose, survive...). Let GH be the distribution of their bid vectors in those J auctions.
Define the convolution operator ∗ acting on distributions F and G of independent random
R R
variables X and Y by PF ∗G (A) = X Y 1(X + Y ∈ A)dF (X)dG(Y ) for any measurable set
A. Note that F is identified from F ∗ G whenever G is known. Then we have:



e
GH = (F ∗ Fε )|complete ∗ Fξ
where Fε is the distribution of idiosyncratic error vectors and Fξ is the distribution of
unobserved heterogeneity vectors (both J-vectors). We indicate that the distribution of the
convolution of the pseudo-types and the idiosyncratic errors is selected by the process of
looking for bid vectors that are complete in the first J auctions.
Then since GH is observed and Fξ is identified by previous arguments (since the ξt are
iid, the vector hasdistribution equal to the J-product of the marginals Fξ ), the object

e ∗ Fε )|complete is identified. We would next like to get the unconditional distribution
(F
e ∗ Fε . Following the logic of lemma 3, this requires identifying for each draw from F
e ∗ Fε
F
(i.e. for a pseudo-type plus an idiosyncratic shock vector) the probability that such a bidder
ends up in the set H. But since {Ǧ1j }j∈J , Q,r and τ are all identified, the proof goes
e ∗ Fε is identified. One last
through exactly as before. So by applying selection correction, F
e separately. Summarizing:
deconvolution suffices to identify F
Theorem 4 (Identification with Unobserved Heterogeneity and Idiosyncratic Shocks).
Let Assumption 2 hold. For the demand system given by (11), F, Fξ and Fε are all nonparametrically identified.
In view of the many deconvolution operations, and the slow convergence rates of estimators
based on deconvolution, this identification argument cannot be taken directly to data unless
the data set is very large indeed. In our application, where we use a similar demand system,
we impose a number of parametric assumptions to be practical.

23

4.4

Reserve Prices

In many markets, sellers set reserve prices on their items. They do this to avoid selling
them at a price below their best outside use (either retained by the seller, sold in a different
market, or sold in this market at a later date), and to extract more money from buyers.
Sellers may set reserves non-strategically (e.g. at cost, or the $1 starting bid recommended
for many products on eBay), or to maximize expected revenue. They will generally know
everything commonly known by the bidders, which may include characteristics latent to the
econometrician.10 Reserves are sometimes implemented as minimum bids, which restrict
participations to types with sufficiently high values (e.g. on eBay). In other settings (e.g.
online advertising), the reserve may only be applied after the bids have been recorded (“secret
reserves”), in order to adjust allocation and payment.
Reserve prices can be easily accounted for in the model. Suppose that sellers charge reserve
prices on each item sold, drawn iid from distributions {GR
j }. We assume that buyers know the
distributions of reserve prices. Re-define G1j as the conditional distribution of the maximum
of the highest competing bid and the reserve price on product j, and let assumption 1
hold as before. Bids are equal to valuation less continuation value, where the continuation
value is dependent on the distribution of reserve prices. High reserve prices directly depress
continuation values by lowering the likelihood that a bidder is successful in future auctions.
They also mean fewer bidders exiting the market, toughening competition.
For identification, the function ξ(·) still offers a valid inversion, though the distributions {G1j }
are now amended to reflect the reserves. So if we can identify the pseudo-type distribution
e we can bound F. With secret reserves, we can pointwise identify F
e just as before.
F,
On the other hand, with minimum bids, we again face a selection problem: only bids that
clear the minimum bid will be observed. So in the selection correction step, we need to
take into account the reserves in calculating sH (b). Moreover — in contrast to all the prior
analysis — some types might never be observed.11 For example, suppose there is only one
product, and it always gets a $100 reserve. Then types with values below $100 will never
bid. The mass of such types cannot be inferred from the data. This implies that we can only
10

For example, Roberts (2013) explores a model in which an unobserved heterogeneity term ξ is observed
by sellers and used to set reserve prices. He shows that the reserve prices can then be used as controls in
estimating demand.
11
In the baseline model, every type bids on at least one product with positive probability. This remains
true in the limited data case, since there is always some chance of being one of the top two bidders (e.g.
when no other bidders are active that period).

24

e for the subset of types who bid on at least one product with positive probability.
identify F
And even conditioning on types that bid with positive probability, we can only partially
e This translates into weaker bounds on F, though the right tail of valuations will
identify F.
still be well-identified, and this is often what is needed for policy counterfactuals.

4.5

Outside Options

We conclude our extensions with a variation of the model in which there are latent outside
options. We introduce outside options by describing a more general environment with passive
search. In each period t, both new entrants and active incumbents are presented with either
an auction of one of the goods in J (as in the basic model), or an opportunity to buy one of
the goods in J at a fixed price in another market (observed by the bidder, unobserved to the
econometrician). Beliefs about opposing bids in the auction market follow Assumption 1,
and are captured by the distributions GA
j (we switch superscript to indicate “auction”).
Prices in the outside market are stochastic, sampled independently and identically over time
according to product-specific continuous distributions GO
j (where the “O” stands for outside)
with strictly positive density over their support. We make a support inclusion assumption:
A
supp(GO
j ) ⊆ supp(Gj ), so that the highest bid in the auction market would always suffice

to buy the corresponding good in the fixed price market. This assumption seems weak given
our intuitions about the size of price fluctuations in auction versus fixed price markets. We
make use of it in our arguments below.
Search in this environment is “passive” in the sense that active bidders do not actively choose
which product to bid on, nor whether to go to the fixed price or auction market. This is
consistent with our initial model.12 But bidders are sophisticated and take into account
future opportunities when making decisions today.
e is now of size 2J ×2J, indicating the distribution over options that a
The transition matrix Q
bidder participating on some product j in one of the two markets {Auction, Fixed Price} will
encounter when next active. We simplify by assuming that this distribution is independent
of the past state, so that it is multinomial (π A , π O ), where the J-vector π A is the distribution
over the J products offered at auction, π O is the distribution over outside options, and
P A P O
j πj +
j πj = 1. This simplification is substantive: without it we would need to make
inferences about the Markovian transitions between unobserved states in the outside market.
12

See a previous version of this paper for a model with optimal auction entry.

25

The buyer’s decision whether or not to buy at price pj in the fixed price market for good
O
j takes the form of a reservation rule: buy iff pj < bO
j , for bj a reservation value. We can
O
therefore think of the buyer as “bidding” bO
j in the fixed price market, winning when bj

exceeds the price pj and paying pj . This allows us to shoehorn the fixed price market into
our original auction market analysis:
Lemma 6 (Best responses, outside option). The equilibrium bidding function β(x)
satisfies:
βjk (x) = max{xj − rv(x), 0} , k = {A, O}

(12)

where v(x) is the ex-ante value function, defined according to the Bellman equation:

v(x) =

J
X
X
j=1 k={A,O}



πjk max Gkj (b)(xj − EGkj [B 1 |B 1 < b]) + (1 − Gkj (b))rv(x)
b

(13)

Here we take advantage of the iid multinomial state transitions to work instead with an “exante” Bellman equation, where v(x) is the value of an active bidder prior to the realization of
the good/market they’re participating in. As a result, all bids take the form of valuation less
continuation value (if positive), where that continuation value is a scalar function of type.
An immediate implication of (12) is that the buyer’s bid in the auction market and their
reservation value in the fixed price market are identical. Knowing a bidder’s pseudo-type
b (still a J-vector) is therefore enough information to characterize their behavior in both
markets. This insight will help in the identification argument that follows.
Identification. We consider identification where the econometrician has excellent data on
the auction market (i.e. Assumption 2 holds), but knows nothing about the outside market,
nor observes bidder participation in the outside market. As a result, our identification
arguments are based on an analysis of how exit rates vary across pseudo-types, which is
informative as to their outside options.
Let a pseudo-type b be the J-vector of bids on each product (equal across the two markets),
and define the inverse bidding function ξ : RJ → RJ :
J



r X X
k
1
1
k
ξ(b) = b +
πj Gj (bj ) bj − EGkj [B |B < bj ]
1 − r j=1
k={A,O}

26

where once again ξ(b) takes the form of bid plus continuation value, where the continuation
value is equal to a stream of discounted payoffs in both auction and fixed price markets. Given
e (partially identifiable using the exact same argument as
the distribution of pseudo-types F
in Lemma 3), we can partially identify F.
So the only new part of the analysis is showing that ξ(b) remains identified in the presence
of latent outside options. The distribution of winning bids {GA
J } can be identified from the
O
data, as can {πjA } (up to a normalizing factor), but {GO
j , πj } are both latent.

To identify these, we look at how exit rates change with pseudo-types. Define ΠO =
the probability of entering the fixed price market when active, and π
ejO =

πjO
,
ΠO

P

j

πjO ,

the probability

of drawing good j when active in the fixed price market. The probability that pseudotype b exits after participating for a single period in the fixed price market is k(b) =
P O O
ej Gj (bj ), where the first term comes from exogenous exit after losing, and
(1 − r) + r j π
the second from the chance that they buy. So after losing an auction, the probability that a
bidder exits our data is given by:
e(b) =

(1 − r)
| {z }

exogenously exits


ΠO k(b)
+ |{z}
r
ΠO k(b) + (ΠO )2 (1 − k(b))k(b) . . . = (1−r)+r
1 − ΠO (1 − k(b))
|
{z
}
survives
exits in the outside market

We can learn the function e(b) by observing the subsequent exit rates of bidders who have
made complete bid vectors b. The exit rates of “extremal” pseudo-types are particularly
O

(1−r)
informative. One can show e(0) = (1 − r) + r Π1−rΠ
O . Let bj = (0, 0 . . . bj . . . 0) denote a

pseudo-type who bids bj on good j and zero on everything else, and let b̄j be the type who
makes the highest such bid b̄j . By our earlier support inclusion assumption, b̄j purchases j
in the fixed price market with certainty. Then we have
ΠO (1 − r) + rπjO
e(b̄j ) = (1 − r) + r
1 − rΠO
−j
So the J + 1 exit rates e(0) and {e(b̄j )}Jj=1 , can be written as a function of J + 1 latent
P
variables: r and {πjO }, since ΠO is just Jj=1 πjO . In the appendix we show that this system
of equations has a unique solution, so that r and {πjO } are identified.
Finally, consider type bj , who “bids” bj on product j and zero otherwise. Their per-period
probability of exit in the fixed price market is k(bj ) = k(bj ) = (1 − r) + re
πjO GO
j (bj ) and

27

consequently their exit probability upon losing in the auction market is:
e(bj ) = (1 − r) + r

ΠO (1 − r) + rπjO GO
j (bj )

O O
O
1 − r Π − πj Gj (bj )

Take a derivative in bj on both sides of the above equation:
0

0

e (bj ) = r

O
rπjO GO
j (b)(1 − Π )


2
(1 − r ΠO − πjO GO
j (bj ) )

which is a separable first-order ordinary differential equation in GO
j (b). For fixed r, {πj }
and e0 (bj ), this equation has a unique solution for GO
j (b) (see appendix). Then since r,
{πj } and e0 (bj ) are identified, so is GO
j (b) for each j, which by earlier arguments suffices to
identify ξ(·). To use this function to bound the distribution of types F, we need to identify
e which requires a selection correction argument. But the
the distribution of pseudo-types F,
argument in Lemma 3 suffices for this, since the presence of an outside market doesn’t affect
the probability of the particular sequence of events H considered in that proof. Summarizing:
Theorem 5 (Identification with an outside option). Suppose Assumption 2 holds, and
A
that supp(GO
j ) ⊆ supp(Gj ) for every j. Then F is partially identified, according to (6).

5

Empirical Application

We present an application of our identification result to the auction market for compact
cameras on eBay.com. We selected this market as an illustration for several reasons. First,
as noted earlier, the eBay auction design is strategically similar to a sequence of second-price
sealed bid auctions. Second, most consumers only purchase a single camera, so the unit demand assumption seems reasonable. Third, compact cameras are measurably differentiated
in a salient characteristic — namely resolution — which consumers may value differently,
affording us an opportunity to highlight a random coefficients variation of our model. The
demand model we estimate allows for random consumer preferences for resolution in the
spirit of Berry et al. (1995), but in the “pure characteristics” setting of Berry and Pakes
(2007). We estimate the parameters of this model using a maximum likelihood approach
and use those estimates to characterize consumer surplus and optimal bidding strategies.

28

5.1

Data and Market Overview

The eBay Marketplace. eBay is widely considered to be the world leader in online
auctions. Various elements of its platform design, such as the use of proxy bidding agents,
feedback scores and “buy-it-now” offers have been widely copied. At any time, eBay hosts a
large number of object listings from a variety of sellers. Buyers can browse these, either by
navigating through categories delineated by the site, or by directly searching for key phrases.
For example, a search for “digital compact camera” will typically bring up thousands of
listings. Some of these are offered at “buy-it-now,” i.e. fixed, prices. As Einav et al. (2016)
have documented, over 60% of listings on eBay are now at fixed prices (though auctions were
more common at the time our data was collected). We will ignore the presence of a fixed
price market in what follows, effectively ignoring substitution opportunities between the two
markets in favor of focusing on substitution within the auction market.
Restricting to auctions yields a list of items, ordered by time until auction end. These
auctions all end at different times, so bidders face a set of sequential auctions. Unsurprisingly,
there is substantial heterogeneity in the cameras offered, in terms of brand, resolution, zoom
and accessories (to name some of the most salient features). Bidders can research past prices
for different items by searching the completed listings.
Bids are placed through eBay’s proprietary “proxy bidding” system. Bidders enter the
maximum they are willing to pay for the item, and then eBay’s proxy bidding system will
bid up from the current standing price in standardized increments on their behalf until
either their bid is the highest yet entered in the system, or an additional increment would
take them over their maximum. For example, if bidder A enters a bid of $8000 on a camera
where the standing price is $6000 and the highest bid placed in the system by a rival is
$7000, then the system will update the standing price to $7100 ($7000 + $100 increment),
and will record this bidder as the currently high bidder. Under unit demand high bidders
become “committed” to the auctions they enter, in the sense that if they bid in another
auction, there is a risk of winning a second object they don’t need.
Fear of premature commitment is perhaps one reason why bidders tend to bid late in auctions.
For example, on eBay Motors, 75% of bids are placed in the last day of the auction (Lewis,
2007). Similar results have been found elsewhere on eBay and in other auction markets, and
a wide range of alternative explanations for late bidding have been offered (see e.g. Roth and
Ockenfels (2002)). The combination of late and proxy bidding suggest that eBay’s auction
29

market is well approximated as a sequence of second-price sealed bid auctions, so that our
model can be applied to this setting.
Data. We purchased a dataset concerning all sales of digital compact cameras over a 2-year
period from TeraPeak, a data analytics company The data includes attributes of the camera
auctioned (resolution, zoom, brand, product name, bundling of a tripod, extra battery etc),
attributes of the listing (starting price, secret reserve, listing title), and the outcome of the
auction. Each listing may be associated with several bids, all of which we observe — including
the highest bid, which is not visible on the website and typically unavailable in “scraped”
auction datasets from the platform. Market participants are persistent in our dataset — as
in our model — and we observe their attributes (feedback, location) and construct measures
of experience and activity from observed behavior.
We work with a subset of the data, consisting only of new compact cameras, sold in the
3-month period between February 5th and May 6th of 2007. We restrict attention to new
cameras to limit the influence of unobserved heterogeneity, though as we will see, this is still
a substantial problem. We analyze this particular time period because supply was relatively
stable over those 3 months, so the stationarity assumptions implicit in our calculations of
the continuation values are reasonable. We pick cameras with the most common resolution
levels: those with (rounded) resolution between 5 megapixels and 10 megapixels (MP). We
clean the data by excluding auctions with missing data, potential shill bidding, outlying bids
and auctions that are terminated by the first bidder exercising a buy-it-now option (this is
unusual). See the data appendix for further details on sample construction.
This leaves us with a dataset of 19160 auctions, 4387 sellers and 74375 unique bidders.
Summary statistics are presented in Table 1. In the top panel, we summarize the data at an
auction level (i.e. an observation is an auction). The average gap between the winning bid
and the closing price is $10.60. This is a direct estimate of the average consumer surplus
of winning bidders in a static auction model, but we will show that it is a substantial
underestimate once continuation value is taken into account. The probability of sale is quite
high, at 0.95. Those products that do not sell tend to be among the small handful which
employ “secret reserve prices”, whereby the item only sells if the highest bid meets a reserve
price set by the seller but hidden from bidders. On average an auction attracts 7 – 8 unique
bidders, and 16 – 17 bids, though there is substantial variance.
Table 1 also summarizes the data at the seller and bidder level. There are just over four
30

listings for every seller in our marketplace. The distribution of seller shares is skewed, with
large, experienced sellers making up the bulk of listings. However there are many such large
sellers and the seller concentration measure (HHI) remains low at 0.04. On the bidders’ side
we find some motivation for the assumptions of our model Most bidders are unsuccessful in
acquiring an item (the purchase rate is 24.3%), but they are active in the market for nearly a
week and on average are observed bidding in two different auctions, with some participating
in many more than that.13 This repeated participation is not driven by multi-unit demand—
99% of our bidders make one or fewer compact camera purchases.

5.2

Descriptive evidence

Having introduced the data, we now offer some descriptive evidence that indicates our model
is a reasonable approximation to the behavior we see in the market.
Do bidders substitute across products? If bidders generally bid on the same products
repeatedly (or have identical preferences over product characteristics), one might think that
the single-good models familiar from the existing empirical auctions literature may suffice.
So to get some evidence on this, we look for evidence of substitution across products. There
are many distinct products sold in our dataset, but in the demand system below we allow
random coefficients over camera resolution, and so this is the relevant definition of a product
for the purposes of our analysis. We therefore calculate a transition matrix across cameras of
different resolution, shown in Table 2. Each entry in the matrix is the probability (expressed
as a percentage) that a bidder who bids on a camera of the resolution in a given row subsequently bids on a camera with the column resolution. We find that most buyers that bid on
multiple cameras tend to bid on a product with the same resolution next, but the probability
of this is far away from 100%, ranging from 45.5% to 80.5%. When they substitute, they
tend to pick a product of similar resolution (the biggest off-diagonal elements are generally
close to the diagonal).
Do bidders have option value? Another focus of our approach has been to emphasize
dynamic bidding and option values. Option values arise from price fluctuations — a bid that
loses today may win tomorrow. Many economists have the intuition that in large markets
13

We say a bidder is “active” from the start of the first auction they bid in to the end of the last auction.

31

Table 1: Summary Statistics: Online Auctions of Compact Cameras

Auction-Level Data
Winning bid
Closing price
Shipping cost
Starting price
Secret reserve?
Item sold?
Bid count
Number of unique bidders
Camera resolution (megapixels)
Optical zoom
Digital zoom
Comes with accessories
Number of auctions
Seller-Level Data
Number of listings
Number of sales
Seller feedback
Number of sellers
Seller HHI
Bidder-Level Data
Auctions participated in
Incumbent period (days)
Time between bids (days)
Number of purchases
≤ 1 purchase
Bidder feedback
Winning bidder’s age
Number of bidders
Buyer HHI

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

203.0
192.4
18.49
49.83
0.0872
0.949
16.72
7.615
6.912
4.520
4.183
0.477
19160

108.3
97.08
9.482
86.66
0.282
0.220
10.17
3.910
1.279
2.767
1.088
0.499

0.01000
0.01000
0
0.01000
0
0
1
1
5
1
2
0

2900
2025
190
600
1
1
95
34
10.10
18
10
1

4.367
4.120
1001.9
4387
0.0351

51.34
50.99
7145.5

1
0
-1

2677
2664
252861.2

1.962
2.706
4.208
0.243
0.990
82.88
36.27
74375
0.0000636

3.441
5.537
9.640
0.475
0.101
463.8
16.02

1
-0.000746
0
0
0
-999
1.742

186
77.82
93.06
22
1
60013
95.98

Notes: Summary statistics for the full dataset, which consists of all auctions of compact cameras auctions
on a large online platform that ended during the period Feb 5 – May 6, 2007. Observations with missing
product characteristics have been dropped. The “incumbent period” for a buyer is measured as the time
from the start-date of the first auction bid in to the end of the last auction bid in. “Time between bids” is
the gap between the first and second bids by a buyer on different objects, measured only for the subsample
of bidders with multiple bids. “Seller HHI” is the Herfidahl–Hirschman index for sellers, based on their share
of items sold. “Buyer HHI” is the analogous measure for buyers, based on the share of items bought.

32

Table 2: Substitution Patterns for Repeat Bidders

5MP
6MP
7MP
8MP
10MP

5MP
64.8
5.9
2.9
2.6
1.9

6MP
17.3
75.3
8.8
5.4
6.1

7MP
12.3
13.7
80.8
10.2
13.0

8MP
4.2
3.5
5.2
78.3
8.0

10MP
1.4
1.7
2.4
3.6
71.0

Notes: Each entry in the matrix gives the observed frequency with which a bidder who is observed bidding
on the row product is next observed bidding on the column product.

the law of one price holds, and so price fluctuations should be minimal. This is not true
here. The top left panel of Figure 2 shows the median daily transaction prices (including
shipping) on different models of camera, over the sample period. There is quite a lot of
variability — an typical change is 10% — and since it is a median price, this is not driven
entirely by outliers.
To rule out variation based on compositional effects, we drilled down to look at the highest
volume seller’s most popular product (a Kodak Easyshare Z710), and plotted the price series
against time (fluctuations could be within a day), shown in the top right panel of Figure 2.
Prices vary from below $200 to over $250 dollars. Doing some rough back of the envelope
calculations based on the observed price distribution, a bidder with a valuation of $250 (red
dashed line), bidding once a day, with a daily exit hazard rate of 0.5, should optimally shade
their bid down to $238 (green dashed line), because of the option value (and should expect
to pay closer to $225, yellow dashed line). Indeed this option value should be present in
many online markets: Einav et al. (2011) have found the standard deviation in price to be
on the order of 10% of the transaction price in most eBay categories.
We also observe that the average time between bids is just over four days, with many auctions
closing in the meantime. This suggests that bidders are inattentive (i.e. τ close to zero). In
view of this, Assumption 1 seems quite reasonable: information from the current auction is
probably a poor predictor of what conditions will be like the next time the bidder bids.
Is there unobserved product heterogeneity? The way we specify valuations below
incorporates random coefficients over camera resolution, as well as common preferences for
observable camera attributes (e.g. brand) and an unobservable component. To motivate the
33

300

400

Closing Price
200
250

Median Price (incl. shipping)
200
300

Mar 01

Apr 01
Auction closing date
5MP
7 MP
10 MP

150

100
Feb 01

May 01

Feb 01

6MP
8 MP

Mar 01

Apr 01
Auction closing date

Closing price
Optimal bid

May 01

Bidder valuation
Expected payment

Figure 2: Market Dynamics. The left panel shows the median daily price (including shipping) over the
sample period, separately by camera resolution (4MP cameras omitted for clarity). The right panel shows
the closing transaction prices on auctions of a Kodak Easyshare Z710 from a single seller over the sample
period, superimposing over this the valuation, optimal bid and expected payment of a bidder with $250
valuation (see text for more details).

inclusion of this unobserved product heterogeneity, we perform a simple heuristic estimation
exercise. We take bids that have been “normalized” to account for observable heterogeneity
(we explain this process below), and look at bidders who have bid exactly twice on cameras
at two different resolution levels (e.g. 7MP and 8MP cameras). Dividing the difference in
their normalized bids by the difference in the camera resolutions gives us a crude estimate
of this bidder’s willingness to pay for megapixels, and the distribution of differences across
such bidders gives us an idea of the diversity in bidders’ willingness to pay.
Figure 3 presents the density of that statistic computed at the bidder level for this restricted
subset, without any kind of selection correction. While the mean of this distribution is
positive (reassuringly) and the variance is large (motivating heterogeneous preferences for
resolution), there is a troublesome and substantial mass to the left of zero. It is implausible
that many consumers have negative marginal utility from higher resolution cameras, and
we instead interpret this as evidence of unobserved product heterogeneity in our data that
confounds this simple approach (we will offer more direct evidence below).

34

Figure 3: Density of

bi,j1 −bi,j2
.
resi,j1 −resi,j2

This figure presents a kernel density plot of the ratio between the

difference in bids across cameras of two resolution levels and the difference in resolution levels, across bidders.

5.3

Estimation

We construct a demand system in which consumers obtain value from the purchase of a
single camera, a value which has an idiosyncratic component and a common component.
Formally, bidder i’s valuation for product j offered in auction t is given by:
xi,j,t = αi,c + resj αi,r + Zj,t γ + ξj,t
|
{z
} | {z }
idiosyncratic

(14)

common

This combines the random coefficients of section 4.2, and the unobserved heterogeneity
of 4.3.2 and adds some observable common demand shifters Zj,t . Bidder i’s type in our
model, αi , is a double: their fixed utility draw for obtaining any camera (αic ) as well as an
idiosyncratic preference shock for resolution (αir ). The auction-specific term ξj,t captures
unobserved heterogeneity that is observable to all bidders but not the econometrician. We
assume that it is distributed normally with mean zero and variance σξ,j that varies freely with
the resolution type of the camera. The bidder type αi is drawn, iid upon bidder entry, from
the distribution Fα , which is our main estimation target. We assume mutual independence
of (αi , Zj,t , ξj ). On the supply side, we assume that the distribution of arriving auctions is
35

iid multinomial over the product space with a J-vector of probability weights π.
Estimation of supply and exit rates. Estimation begins with the recovery of the survival rate r, and the multinomial supply π. Note that with multinomial supply, the activity
rate τ plays no role in optimal bidding and need not be estimated (whereas with Markov
supply transitions Q, the activity rate drives a wedge between supply transitions and the
e
state transitions Q).
Survival Rate of Bidders (r): We estimate this parameter using a censored negative
binomial model fit to the likelihood of bidder exit using the full sample of bids. A
bidder exits if they do not return to bid again. However we treat this outcome as
censored if the last bid event was in the final six weeks of our dataset.14
Supply (π): π̂ is the observed market share of each of the six resolution types.
Bid normalization. Cameras differ in both observable and unobservable features. The
first step in working with the bids is to normalize out the contribution of observables for
which bidders have common preferences (Haile et al., 2006). Applying our earlier theory to
the valuations in (14), the bidding equation takes the form:
bi,j,t = max{0, αi,c + resj αi,r + Zj,t γ + ξj,t − v(αi,c , αi,r )}

(15)

i.e. valuation less continuation value. Restricting attention to positive bids, and adding and
subtracting ψj ≡ EFα [αi,c + resj αi,r − v(αi,c , αi,r )], we get an estimating equation in reduced
form:
bi,j,t = ψj + Zj,t γ + ei,j,t
where the error term ei,j,t combines an individual-specific deviation in bid from that of the
average type and the common unobserved heterogeneity. Since these are both independent
of Zj,t ), we can estimate γ consistently by OLS with product fixed effects.
14
We maintain the assumption of exogenous exit on the part of bidders, though it could be weakened using
the methods of Section 4.5. While the assumption might seem somewhat unrealistic, we found no evidence
in reduced–form regressions of a systematic correlation between exit of losing bidders and the level of their
bid. In the end, we chose to highlight the extensions that were most necessary to fit the basic features of
the data discussed above.

36

We only run this regression on a subsample of our data, consisting of the two highest bids
in every auction. This is motivated by the behavioral intuition of Haile and Tamer (2003).
Because eBay’s proxy bidding system is formally an ascending auction, the bid of the third,
fourth, or n-th highest bidder may not reflect their intended final bid (what they would
have bid in a sealed-bid auction i.e. valuation less continuation value). It is common for
bidders to “test out” a sequence of ascending bids to see if they can become the standing
high bidder, but if in this process the price comes to exceed their intended final bid then it
will be censored from the dataset. For this reason we restrict attention to the two highest
bids in each auction, who are never censored in this way.
As controls Zj,t we include product line fixed effects, listing attributes including shipping
options, seller feedback, and optional listing features (e.g., sellers may pay a fee for their
results to be highlighted in search results), as well as a set of dummies for resolution, optical
zoom, and digital zoom levels.15 We report results for the main controls of interest in Table
3. They are generally sensible, with bids increasing in seller feedback, decreasing in shipping
costs, and particularly high for listings with free shipping, consistent with the findings of
Einav et al. (2011).
Define the normalized bids ebi,j,t = bi,j,t −Zj,t γ = αi,c +resj αi,r −v(αi,c , αi,r )+ξj,t . We will work
with our estimate of these bids bi,j,t − Zj,t γ̂ in what follows. Consider the difference between
two normalized bids on the same product, by the same bidder in two different auctions.
These should differ only by ξj,t1 − ξj,t2 , and since these random variables are independent of
2
each other, we can estimate the variance of ξj,t as σξ,j
= V ar(bi,j,t − bi,j,t0 )/2 where the RHS

variance is estimated by pooling over all t < t0 pairs available.
Opposing bids. Recall from the identification analysis of section 4.3.2 that the relevant
strategic object for bidders to form beliefs about is {Ǧ1j }, the distribution of the highest
competing bid net of unobserved heterogeneity (since ξj,t just acts as a common bid shifter).
So we need to estimate {Ǧ1j }. Also, for the reasons outlined above, we only want to use the
top two bids in each auction in estimation. This places us in the “limited data” case, and
will require correcting for selection into the top two bids. So we also need to estimate {Ǧ2j }.
We observe the raw distributions of the first and second highest normalized bids {G1j , G2j }
(i.e. the convolution of b̌i,j and ξj,t ). Based on the shape of these, we assume a Gamma
15

Note that we include resolution dummies to avoid omitted variable bias, however we exclude these
coefficients when predicting the normalized bids below.

37

Table 3: First-Stage Normalization Regression
(1)
Winning bid
24.21∗∗∗
(1.913)

Free shipping

Shipping cost

0.405∗∗∗
(0.0446)

Seller feedback (thousands)

0.0665∗∗∗
(0.00764)
0.721
18432

R2
N

Notes: This table presents selected coefficients from the first-stage normalization regression. Unreported here,
the regression also includes dummies for all (rounded) resolution, optical zoom, and digital zoom values, as
well as product-level fixed effects. It also includes a large array of listing attributes such as featured listing
status, whether the seller paid for a scheduled end-time, and dummies for bundled accessories. Note that the
coefficients on the resolution dummies are set to zero before predicting the normalized bids for subsequent
analysis. Standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

distribution for {Ǧ1j , Ǧ2j } with separate shape and scale parameters for each product and
order statistic. We estimate these parameters by method of moments (i.e. we pick these
parameters to match the mean and variance of the distribution of the normalized highest
2
bid, taking our estimates of σξ,j
in the earlier step as given).

We summarize the results of all these preliminary estimation steps in Table 4. We find that
bidders are quite likely to return and bid again upon a loss (r = 0.57). Unobserved heterogeneity varies substantially with resolution type and is particularly important for 10MP
cameras, where we anticipate there is more differentiation of high-end products.
Aside: consumer surplus. Even without estimating the full demand system, at this
point we can already say something useful about consumer surplus. In the static model
consumers bid their valuations whereas in our dynamic setting we have shown that they
shade their bids substantially. This shading will bias static estimates of consumer surplus.16
In the static framework where bj = xj , the difference between the highest bid and the
16

Coey et al. (2015) also make a point of computing consumer surplus in a dynamic framework, although
theirs is based on valuations with “deadlines.”

38

Table 4: First-Stage Parameters

r

0.5646
(0.0014)

π

5mp
0.1382
(0.0033)

6mp
0.3020
(0.0044)

7mp
0.3816
(0.0046)

8mp
0.0934
(0.0028)

10mp
0.0847
(0.0027)

σξ

5mp
15.43
(0.1474)

6mp
12.75
(0.0729)

7mp
14.16
(0.0539)

8mp
11.16
(0.1581)

10mp
22.24
(0.1667)

G(1)

5mp
12.57
(0.5235)

6mp
19.21
(0.5097)

7mp
17.06
(0.4253)

8mp
17.68
(1.0151)

10mp
38.98
(1.7325)

10.04
(0.3798)

8.17
(0.2020)

10.83
(0.2522)

11.86
(0.6243)

7.12
(0.4260)

5mp
11.63
(0.5355)

6mp
18.57
(0.5348)

7mp
16.33
(0.4240)

8mp
15.80
(0.9675)

10mp
44.71
(1.9974)

9.91
(0.4035)

7.81
(0.2070)

10.59
(0.2544)

12.36
(0.6959)

5.83
(0.3753)

k

θ

G(2)
k

θ

Notes: This table presents estimates of the first-stage parameters of the model. See text for estimation
details. Standard errors are presented in parentheses.

second-highest bid is a direct measure of surplus per auction. So for a psuedotype b entering

39

a random auction according to π,
E[CSstatic (b)] =

X

πj {G1j (bj )[bj − E[B (1) |b(1) < bj ]]}

j

To compute this object we take total surplus to be the total sum of {B (1) − B (2) }i , i.e. the
valuation of the first-highest bidder minus the price paid, across all auctions, and then divide
by the total number of bidders. From Table 1 the average difference between the first– and
second–highest bid in our dataset is $10.60, which yields an expected consumer surplus of
($10.60 × (19160 auctions ÷ 74375 bidders) = ) $2.63 per bidder in our dataset.
In the dynamic model, however, bidders shade their bids: bj = xj − rv(b). Note moreover
that, if we take bidders’ beliefs to be correct, v(b) = E[CSdynamic (b)].17 In this setting,
E[CSdynamic (b)] =

X
j

=

X

πj {G1j (bj )[ xj −E[B (1) |b(1) < bj ]] + (1 − G1j (bj ))r
|{z}
P
=bj +

k

Q̃j,k vk (b)

πj {G1j (bj )[bj − E[B (1) |b(1) < bj ]]} +

X

j

|
=

j

{z

=E[CSstatic (b)]

}

|

πj r

X

X

Q̃j,k vk (b)}

k

Q̃j,k vk (b)

k

{z

=rE[CSdynamic (b)]

}

1
E[CSstatic (b)].
1−r

Note that in the second equality, we take advantage of the fact that π is the ergodic distribution of Q, and therefore Q̃π = π for any τ .
This computation yields a substantially larger estimate of consumer surplus per bidder:
((0.4354)−1 × $2.73 = ) $6.04, or $24.35 per auction. This large correction reflects the fact
that the bidders who are most likely to win also shade the most, and therefore it is for these
that the static model most underestimates valuations.
Estimation of Demand. At this stage, we have estimates of π, r and the distributions
{G1j , G2j } of first and second order statistics, after adjusting for observed and unobserved
heterogeneity. We also have a dataset of normalized bids that were themselves first or second
highest bids in auctions, and therefore plausibly equal to valuation less continuation value.
17

This relies on an assumption that τ is sufficiently small that each time a bidder participates, sufficient
time has passed that the market is once again in steady-state i.e. v(b) can be calculated without sophisticated
conditioning on histories. We could be more mathematically precise — as we were in the earlier selection
correction argument — but as we argued when discussing Table 1, τ appears to be small.

40

In principle, we could continue by applying our nonparametric identification strategy from
Theorem 4 directly in estimation, for bidders who are observed bidding on each least two
different products (since the random coefficient is two-dimensional, two different products
suffices for identification). But there are less than 300 such bidders in our dataset, and this
makes the necessary deconvolution analysis unattractive in view of the slow convergence
properties of such estimators (Carroll and Hall, 2004).
So instead we take a parametric approach, assuming that αc and αr are distributed Γ(kc , θc )
and Γ(kr , θr ), respectively. We chose the gamma distribution because our estimation sample
consists of the right tail of bids, i.e. first– and second– highest bids, and so we want a parametric model with flexibility to fit the shape of that tail. Therefore θ ≡ {kc , θc , kr , θr } makes
up the set of parameters of the demand system we ultimately hope to recover. Following
the logic of our non-parametric identification argument, we need to see bidders bid multiple
times in order to identify demand. So we estimate the model using a sample of bidders who
submit either the first or second–highest bid in auctions on exactly two distinct resolution
types, a sample of 264 bidders (very few bidders come first or second on three or more distinct products, so we simplify the analysis by excluding their data). Under our parametric
assumptions, we have the following likelihood of each observation:

Z
L(bi |θ) =







Y
P{Bi |β(α)} 

fξ,j (bj − βj (α)) d F (α|θ) .


 | {z }
P{|Bi | = 2|β(α)}
 demand
{z
} j∈{Bi }
|
|
{z
}
selection probability

(16)

unobserved heterogeneity

where bi is a two-vector, indicating an observed pair of bids by i; Bi is the set of products
bidder i bids on; β(α) is type α’s pseudo-type (i.e. what they would bid on each product
in the absence of unobserved heterogeneity); fξ,j is the density of ξj , assumed normal with
2
mean zero and variance σξ,j
and F (α|θ) is the distribution of α at parameter vector θ.

This likelihood function has three components: the first, P{Bi |β(α)}/P{|Bi | = 2|β(α)} is
the selection probability; the likelihood that a bidder of type α is observed in a subset of
the product space Bi conditional on the event |Bi | = 2, i.e. our sample construction. The
second component of the likelihood function is the deviation of the observed bid b from the
predicted bid β(α) on the components j ∈ Bi , which can be accounted for by unobserved
heterogeneity. Finally, we integrate with respect to the type distribution F (α|θ), the only

41

point at which the parameter vector θ enters.18
Estimating bid functions and selection probabilities. In order to compute the likelihood of any observation at a parameter vector θ, we will need to compute the optimal
bidding function β(α) and the selection probability P{Bi |β(α)}. We start with the optimal
bid function. In the case of iid supply, this is given in Lemma 6 by (12), where the continuation value is defined recursively according to the Bellman equation (13), taking πjO = 0 for
all j. Fix a type α and an associated J-vector of valuations x. We solve for their optimal
bids and associated continuation value by value iteration: given a (scalar) continuation value
v(x), define the following mapping from R+ into itself:
π · (G1 (x − v)(x − EG1 [B 1 |B 1 ≤ x − v]))
Tx (v) =
1 − r ((1 − G1 (x − v)) · π)
where · denotes dot product, and G1 and EG1 are now J-vectors. The continuation value
for type x(α) satisfies Tx (v) = v, and from this we obtain the bidding function β(α) =
max{0, x(α) − v(α)}.
Next, given a bid b associated with the type α, we work out the probability that a particular
bidder is observed in a subset B ⊆ J of the set of possible auctions. The building block
for this is the function P(A, b), defined as the probability that a bidder with bid vector
b, entering in a randomly sampled period, exits before they are “observed” in any auction
outside of the set A ⊆ J . Define P(A, b, j) in the same way, but additionally conditioning
P
on the bidder entering in state j, so that P(A, b) = j πj P(A, b, j). Recalling that we treat
bidders as “observed” only when they make bids that qualify for our estimation sample (i.e.
one of the top two bids in the auction), we can write the latter probability recursively as:
P(A, b, j) = 1(j ∈ A) G1j (bj ) + (1 − G1j (bj ))(1 − r + rP(A, b))

+ 1(j 6∈ A) (1 − G2j (b))((1 − r) + rP(A, b))


(17)

On the first line of the RHS we consider the case where j ∈ A: that bidder will be observed
only in A if they exit immediately (either by winning or exogenously exiting), or survive and
then transition to a new random state, in which case the chance is P(A, b). The second line
18

In principle there is a conceptual problem here if the observations overlap in the sense that some of the
bidders in our estimation sample participate in the same auctions, as this places restrictions on the value of
ξ. In practice this overlap problem does not occur.

42

(a) αr = 0

(b) αr = 20

(c) αr = 0

(d) αr = 20

Figure 4: Estimated Bid Functions and Selection Probabilities. This figure presents bid functions
and selection probabilities as a function of αc , holding fixed αr at two levels: 0 and 20.

is for the case where j 6∈ A, and then the bidder must not be observed in j, so they must
make a bid below the second highest. Given that this is the case, again they must either
exit immediately or survive and we get P(A, b) again.19
Now G1j and G2j are known, and P(A, b) is a weighted sum of the P(A, b, j), so for any (A, b)
we can get P(A, b) as the solution to a linear system with unknowns {P(A, b, j)}j∈J . Then
we can use these objects to compute the probability that a bidder is observed in exactly the
set B. For instance, if we are interested in the probability that a bidder of type α is observed
in a subset B = {2, 4} we can compute P({2, 4}|β(α)} = P({2, 4}, β(α)) − P({2}, β(α)) −
P({4}, β(α)) + P({φ}|β(α)).
19

This calculation assumes that the true state space coincides with the one that bidders use in forming
beliefs. This is not necessary (we could condition on history), but is practical given our data constraints.

43

Figure 4 illustrates the resulting bid functions and selection probabilities when these procedures are applied to our data. The selection probability is for the event that a bidder bids
on exactly two different products (|B| = 2), i.e. that a bidder is selected into our estimation
sample. Panel (a) shows the bid function for a bidder with αr = 0, i.e. a bidder who places
no value on resolution, and consequently bids the same on every product. Their bid function
“peels away” from the 45-degree line. This makes intuitive sense: as αc increases, their
continuation value increases as well, causing them to shade their bids. Panel (b) repeats this
exercise for the case where αr = 20. They now bid differently on each product, with the five
dotted lines showing their bids on the lowest resolution camera (bottom line) up to the top
resolution camera (top line), as αc varies. The shape is largely preserved, except that now
there is a positive intercept because valuations are positive even with αc = 0.
In panels (c) and (d) we show the selection probabilities for these two types of bidders (αr = 0
in (c) and αr = 20 in (d)) as αc varies. The “hump-shape” arises because the probability
of |B| = 2 is increasing at first as the likelihood that the bidder is ever first or second rises,
but later declines as the probability that they win their first auction and exit before bidding
again goes to one.
Optimization. We now proceed to the problem of optimizing the likelihood. Usually one
would proceed by applying some optimization routine in an outer loop to the likelihood (16),
evaluating it by Monte Carlo integration, holding the randomness in the draws of α fixed
across evaluations k (Pakes and Pollard, 1989). But this is computationally costly, as for
many different α draws we will have to evaluate the bidding and selection functions.
Notice that the parameter vector θ enters the likelihood (16) only through the distribution
of random coefficients F (α|θ). This allows us to employ an alternative approach based on
re-weighting. Fixing α, define
P{Bi |b(α)}
hi (α) ≡
P{φ|b(α)}

Y
j∈Bi


φ

bi − bj (α)
σξ,j

!
,

(18)

and note that this object is computable for any α from the results of the first-stage estimation.
Therefore, taking as our objective function the log-likelihood of the dataset, we can write
L(θ, {bi }) =

X

Z
log

i

44

hi (α)dF (α|θ).

(19)

One natural and computationally efficient way to proceed would then be to sample α uniformly from the type space S times (for S the number of draws in the Monte Carlo integration), and then optimize the simulated criterion function by re-weighting their likelihood
contribution according to f (α|θ). Instead, we choose to use importance sampling, i.e. sampling from and re-weighting relative to a user-chosen distribution, denoted G(α). We do this
for two reasons: first, for efficiency — we would like to sample more points from the center of
the true distribution if possible, since this is where the gradient of the likelihood is sharpest.
Second, we would like the sampled distribution to have unbounded support, mirroring our
parametric assumption on F (α|θ).
Let the set of points be drawn from G(α); then we have:
θ̂ = arg max L(θ, {bi }) =

X

θ

i

log

S
X
s=1

hi (α)

f (αs |θ)
.
g(αs )

(20)

We implemented the estimator in two steps: first, we choose G1 to be a normal with very
large variance, and obtained a first estimate θ̃. In a second step, we drew from a distribution
G2 (α) = F (α|θ̃) and re-optimized. This two-step procedure should improve the efficiency
of our estimator, as the second sample should be more centered and thus provide a better
approximation to the integral.

5.4

Results

Estimates from this ML exercise are presented in Table 5. Our results suggest that camera
resolution is the main determinant of consumer utility, but that there is substantial heterogeneity in how consumers value this attribute. They predict a mean taste for cameras of
22.26 with a standard deviation of 51.06, and a mean taste for resolution of 22.75 and a
standard deviation of 6.41. Recall that we have estimated F, whereas the observed bids in
the data (i.e., first- or second-highest bids) will tend to come from bidders sampled the right
tail of the distribution.
As a measure of goodness of fit we also compute moments of the bid distribution that were
not used directly in estimation. In Table 6 we present means and standard errors of the
observed bids by product type as well as means and standard errors as predicted by our
model at θ̂. In order to compute the latter we simulated 10,000 draws from F (α|θ̂) and then

45

Table 5: Demand System Estimates

k̂
θ̂

αc
0.19
(0.06)
117.14
(31.70)

αr
13.73
(1.74)
1.73
(0.22)

Notes: This table presents estimates for {kc , θc , kr , θr }, the parameters governing the distribution of random
coefficient preferences for compact cameras according to the utility function (14).

Table 6: Sample and Simulated Moments from the Bid Distribution

Sample mean bid
Simulated mean bid
Sample standard deviation
Simulated standard deviation

5mp
122.82
120.61
38.56
36.29

6mp
152.51
144.56
38.21
38.96

7mp
181.59
168.25
47.23
43.86

8mp
202.43
192.05
51.18
47.77

10mp
272.07
239.68
48.93
58.23

Notes: This table compares moments from the sample bid distribution to moments that are predicted from
the estimates in Table 5. Simulated moments are computed by taking 100,000 draws from F (α|θ̂), computing
bid vectors for each type, simulating unobserved heterogeneity ξ, and taking a weighted average according
to the probability that each bid is selected into the sample of observed bids.

weighted their bids according to the probability of being observed in each state.
The results in Table 6 suggests that our results fit the data reasonably well, though there
is some divergence, in particular for the higher–end cameras in the market. We believe this
to be largely a function of the parametric compromises we made in order to focus on the
sharply identified set of 264 bidders who bid on multiple different resolution types. However
for 6MP to 8MP cameras, which make up the bulk of our sample, we match these moments
quite closely. Note that the moments are out-of-sample in that they incorporate bidders who
are observed once but then exit; these bidders are not used in estimation.

6

Conclusion

This paper offers a flexible demand system for the study of auction markets as markets.
We developed a notion of equilibrium in such markets and proved its existence, and in turn
were able to characterize the conditions under which bidders’ actions can be inverted to
46

infer their private type. While this is sufficient for identification if we treat auctions as
independent, isolated draws from a distribution, in an auction marketplace we also need
to account for the selection of bidders into the observed and identified set. Subject to the
constraints of non-participation, we are able to partially identify the distribution of types by
explicitly modeling this selection as a function of observable equilibrium objects. We show
that this result extends to accommodate familiar features of auction data and demand models
in fixed-price markets, including data limitations, random coefficient demand, unobserved
heterogeneity, and latent outside options.
The selection correction turns out to be an important source of flexibility in the model. It
allows us to accommodate standard limitations of auction data. It also gives the econometrician flexibility to pick and choose sources of variation in the data — in this case particular
histories — that they trust for identification.
A second important source of flexibility in the model is that we have made all the substitution
between products occur inter-temporally. High-dimensional preferences are thus projected
down to a valuation for the current product and a continuation value which , thanks to
the Markov dynamics of the game, we can model in a straightforward way. These Markov
dynamics also give us the flexibility to extend the state space of the game to incorporate
arbitrary public signals about the state of the market on which bidder behavior may depend.
We illustrated much of this flexibility in an application to the auction market for compact
cameras on eBay. There we estimated the distribution of types for a utility function that
looked a lot like the kind you might estimate in a fixed-price market using standard methods
in industrial organization. While we were able to document a substantial bias in the estimates
of consumer surplus that would come out of an alternative, static model, as well as match
out-of sample moments of the bid distribution, the main objective was to illustrate the kinds
of judgment calls faced by an econometrician applying our method, which can accommodate
a wide array of data limitations, utility functions, information structures, and assumptions
about outside options.
Our contribution — the development of a demand system for auction markets — is meant
to mirror similar work in fixed-price markets, and to a similar end: the structural estimation
of demand allows us to do counterfactuals of both private and public interest. Though we
have developed a flexible framework, there remain several open directions for future work:
we believe that our framework would generalize naturally to multi-unit demand, in which

47

bidders may shade against the opportunity cost of moving further down their marginal utility
curve. This is an important direction for the modeling of ad auctions and treasury auctions.
There are also unmet challenges in the modeling of substitution across auctions within-period
rather than inter-temporally. Auction markets are a pervasive mechanism for the allocation
of goods and services, and beyond our contribution there remains much work to be done to
understand competition between and substitution among them.

References
Ackerberg, D. A., K. Hirano, and Q. Shahriar (2009): “Identification of Time and
Risk Preferences in Buy Price Auctions,” Working paper, UCLA.
Adams, C. P. (2009): “Identifying Demand from Online Auction Data,” Working Paper,
Federal Trade Commission.
Aguirregabiria, V. and P. Mira (2007): “Sequential Estimation of Dynamic Discrete
Games,” Econometrica, 75, 1–53.
Athey, S. and P. Haile (2007): “Empirical Models of Auctions,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Theory and Applications: Ninth World Congress of the Econometric Society, ed. by R. Blundell, W. Newey, and T. Persson, Cambridge University
Press.
Athey, S. and P. A. Haile (2002): “Identification of Standard Auction Models,” Econometrica, 70, 2107–2140.
Bajari, P., L. Benkard, and J. Levin (2007): “Estimating Dynamic Models of Imperfect Competition,” Econometrica, 75, 1331–1370.
Bajari, P. and A. Hortaçsu (2004): “Economic Insights from Internet Auctions,” Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 457–486.
Berry, S. (1994): “Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” Rand
Journal of Economics, 25, 242–262.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 63, 841–890.
48

——— (2004): “Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro and
Macro Data: The New Car Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 68–105.
Berry, S. and A. Pakes (2007): “The Pure Characteristics Demand Model,” International Economic Review, 48, 1193—1225.
Bodoh-Creed, A., J. Böehnke, and B. Hickman (2013): “Optimal Design of TwoSided Market Platforms: An Empirical Case Study of Ebay,” Working Paper.
Budish, E. (2008): “Sequencing and Information Revelation in Auctions for Imperfect
Substitutes: Understanding eBay’s Market Design,” Working paper, Harvard University.
Carroll, R. J. and P. Hall (2004): “Low order approximations in deconvolution and
regression with errors in variables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology), 66, 31–46.
Coey, D., B. Larsen, and B. Platt (2015): “A Theory of Bidding Dynamics and
Deadlines in Online Retail,” .
Einav, L., C. Farronato, J. Levin, and N. Sundaresan (2016): “Auctions versus
Posted Prices in Online Markets,” Working Paper.
Einav, L., T. Kuchler, J. Levin, and N. Sundaresan (2011): “Learning from Seller
Experiments in Online Markets,” Working Paper, Stanford.
Evdokimov, K. and H. White (2012): “SOME EXTENSIONS OF A LEMMA OF
KOTLARSKI,” Econometric Theory, 28, 925–932.
Fershtman, C. and A. Pakes (2012): “Dynamic Games with Asymmetric Information:
A Framework for Empirical Work,” Forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Ecnomics.
Gowrisankaran, G. and M. Rysman (2009): “Dynamics of Consumer Demand for New
Durable Goods,” Working paper, University of Arizona.
Guerre, E., I. Perrigne, and Q. Vuong (2000): “Optimal Nonparametric Estimation
of First-Price Auctions,” Econometrica, 68, 525–574.
Haile, P., H. Hong, and M. Shum (2006): “Nonparametric Tests for Common Values
in First-Price Sealed-Bid Auctions,” NBER Working Paper 10105.

49

Haile, P. A. and E. Tamer (2003): “Inference with an Incomplete Model of English
Auctions,” The Journal of Political Economy, 111, 1–51.
Hendricks, K. and R. Porter (2007): “A Survey of Empirical Work in Auctions,” in
Handbook of Industrial Organization, ed. by M. Armstrong and R. Porter, North-Holland,
vol. III.
Hendricks, K. and A. Sorensen (2014): “The Role of Intermediaries in Dynamic Auction Markets,” Working Paper, University of Wisconsin.
Hopenhayn, H. and M. Saeedi (2016): “Dynamic Bidding in Second Price Auctions,”
Working Paper.
Ingster, A. (2009): “A Structural Study of a Dynamic Auction Market,” Working Paper,
NYU Stern.
Iyer, K., R. Johari, and M. Sundararajan (2014): “Mean Field Equilibria of Dynamic
Auctions with Learning,” Management Science, 60, 2949–2970.
Jofre-Bonet, M. and M. Pesendorfer (2003): “Estimation of a Dynamic Auction
Game,” Econometrica, 71, 1443–1489.
Kotlarski, I. (1967): “On characterizing the gamma and the normal distribution.” Pacific
J. Math., 20, 69–76.
Krasnokutskaya, E. (2011): “Identification and Estimation in Highway Procurement
Auctions under Unobserved Auction Heterogeneity,” Review of Economic Studies, 71,
293–327.
Krasnokutskaya, E., K. Song, and X. Tang (2014): “The Role of Quality in On-Line
Service Markets,” Working paper, Johns Hopkins.
Krasnokutskaya, E., C. Terwiesch, and L. Tiererova (2016): “Trading across
Borders in Online Auctions,” Working Paper, Johns Hopkins.
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867—896.
Lewis, G. (2007): “Asymmetric Information, Online Disclosure and Adverse Selection: The
Case of eBay Motors,” Working paper, Harvard.
50

Lewis, G. and P. Bajari (2011): “Procurement Contracting with Time Incentives: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126.
Li, T. and Q. Vuong (1998): “Nonparametric Estimation of the Measurement Error
Model Using Multiple Indicators,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 65, 135–165.
Menzel, K. and P. Morganti (2013): “Large Sample Properties for Estimators Based
on the Order Statistics Approach in Auctions,” Quantitative Economics, 4, 329–375.
Nekipelov, D. (2007): “Entry Deterrence and Learning Prevention on eBay,” Mimeo, UC
Berkeley.
Newberry, P. W. (2015): “The effect of competition on eBay,” International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 40, 107 – 118.
Pakes, A., M. Ostrovsky, and S. Berry (2007): “Simple Estimators for the Parameters
of Discrete Dynamic Games, with Entry/Exit Examples,” Rand Journal of Economics, 38,
373—399.
Pakes, A. and D. Pollard (1989): “Simulation and the Asymptotics of Optimization
Estimators,” Econometrica, 57, 1027–1057.
Platt, B. (2015): “Inferring Ascending Auction Participation from Observed Bidders,”
Working Paper.
Roberts, J. W. (2013): “Unobserved heterogeneity and reserve prices in auctions,” The
RAND Journal of Economics, 44, 712–732.
Roth, A. E. and A. Ockenfels (2002): “Last-Minute Bidding and the Rules for Ending Second-Price Auctions: Evidence from eBay and Amazon Auctions on the Internet,”
American Economic Review, 92, 1093–1103.
Said, M. (2009): “Auctions with Dynamic Populations: Efficiency and Revenue Maximization,” Working paper, Yale University.
Sailer, K. (2006): “Searching the eBay Marketplace,” Working Paper, University of Munich.
Song, U. (2004): “Nonparametric Estimation of an eBay Auction Model with an Unknown
Number of Bidders,” Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
51

Stokey, N. L., R. E. Lucas, and E. C. Prescott (1989): Recursive Methods in
Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press.
Weintraub, G., C. L. Benkard, and B. Van Roy (2008): “Markov Perfect Industry
Dynamics with Many Firms,” Econometrica, 76, 1375–1411.
Zeithammer, R. (2006): “Forward-looking bidding in online auctions,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43, 462–476.

A

Proofs Appendix

Lemma 1.
Proof. Recall that G1j is the CDF of the highest competing bid for good j. Then we have:
Z
βj (x) = arg max
b∈R+

for ṽj (x) = r


1(b ≥ Bj1 ∧ b > 0)(xj − Bj1 ) + 1(b < Bj1 ∨ b = 0)ṽj (x) dG1j (Bj1 ) (21)

P e
1
j Qj,k vk (x). Consider the RHS of (21). The integrand takes the value xj − Bj

when Bj1 ≤ b and ṽj (x) when Bj1 > b and so can be maximized by choosing b so that the
event Bj1 ≤ b occurs iff xj − Bj1 − ṽj (x) ≥ 0. There are two relevant cases: first, if ṽj (x) > xj ,
then the bidder strictly prefers to lose the auction. In this case they bid zero, equivalent to
non-participation in our framework. Otherwise, b = xj − ṽj (x) maximizes the RHS of (21)
P e
1
and thus βj (x) = max{xj − r j Q
j,k vk (x), 0}. If βj (x) is interior to the support of Gj , then
R
1(Bj1 ≤ b)(xj − Bj1 )dG(Bj1 ) is strictly decreasing, and so the crossing with vj (x) — and
therefore the argmax of (21) — is unique.
For continuity, consider two types x1 and x2 . We know that maxj vj (x2 ) − vj (x1 ) is at most
maxj |x2j −x1j | because x1 can copy the strategy of x2 , getting the same allocations and making
the same payments, so the only difference in value functions comes from the underlying
valuations. Continuity of the value functions immediately follows. Bidding strategies take
the form max{xj − ṽ(x), 0}, and since xj − ṽ(x) is continuous in x and the maximum of two
continuous functions is itself continuous, we are done.
For monotonicity, consider two types x1 and x2 with x1k = x2k for all k 6= j and x1j <
x2j . Now vk (x2 ) − vk (x1 ) ≤ x2j − x1j for all k, since x1 can follow the strategy β(x2 ) and
52

get the exact same payoff as type x2 except when bidding on product j, when they get
a payoff at most x2j − x1j lower. Also vk (x2 ) − vk (x1 ) ≥ 0 for all k since x2 can follow
β(x1 ) and get at least as high a payoff. Then if βj (x2 ) > 0 and βj (x1 ) > 0, we have:
P e
1
2
1
2
1
2
βj (x2 ) − βj (x1 ) = x2j − x1j − r k Q
j,k (vk (x ) − vk (x )) ≥ xj − xj − r(xj − xj ) > 0 proving
the bid function is strictly increasing on this region; and examining the other cases (e.g.
βj (x1 ) = 0) yields that is weakly increasing. Finally, if βk (x2 ) > 0 and βk (x1 ) > 0, then
P e
2
1
βk (x2 ) − βk (x1 ) = −r l Q
k,l (vl (x ) − vl (x )) ≤ 0 which (together with analysis of other
cases) shows the bid function is decreasing in the value of other products and strictly so if
the βj (x2 ) > 0.
Theorem 1.
Proof. We prove existence of a pure strategy equilibrium in continuous strategies. Let C(X )
be the space of continuous functions on X , metrized by the sup norm. Since X is compact,
C(X ) is a Banach space. Moreover C(X ) is convex. Define the best response function Γ(β)
to any strategy β ∈ C(X ) as in Lemma 1, i.e. Γ(β)(x) = max{xj − ṽj (x), 0}, where ṽ depends implicitly on the rival strategies β through the ergodic measure over the distribution
of highest bids µj . Now Γ(β) is uniformly bounded for every β ∈ C(X ), since 0 and x respectively lower and upper bound all best responses for each x, and X is bounded. Moreover,
every β ∈ Γ(C(X )) admits a modulus of continuity of 1, since by the argument of Lemma 1,
types that are ε-close make ε-close best responses to any opposing bid distribution. This
establishes that the set of functions Γ(C(X )) is uniformly equicontinuous, and it follows by
Arzelà-Ascoli that Γ(C(X )) is a compact subset of C(X ).
Next, we need to show that Γ is continuous in β when β ∈ C(X ). The first step is to show that
the distribution of highest bids µj is continuous in β in the weak-* topology, because payoffs
depend on rivals strategies only through the distribution of the highest competing bid. Now,
this distribution arises from the composition of a sequence of functions: µj = g(κj (β(µF ))),
where µF is the underlying type distribution and β is the bidding function, so that β(µF ) is
the distribution of pseudo-types µej . The function κj maps the pseudo-type distribution into
an ergodic distribution over the vector of bids in a auction for good j (a vector of bids of
random length). In earlier working papers we have shown that κj is a continuous function
(i.e. the ergodic distribution is well defined, unique, and smoothly varies with the bids of

53

entrants).20 Finally g maps this distribution into the distribution of the highest bid by taking
the max of each vector, itself a continuous operation. So if f is any continuous bounded
real-valued function, f ◦ g ◦ ξj is also continuous, implying that for β 0 close to β in the sup
norm, f ◦ g ◦ ξj ◦ β(x) close to f ◦ g ◦ ξj ◦ β 0 (x) pointwise, and so certainly Eµj (β) f close to
Eµ0j (β 0 ) f , proving weak convergence.
The second step is to show that if the highest bid distributions are close in the sense of weak
convergence, then so are the best responses. We first argue that the value functions must
be close. Let vj (x, µ) be the value of the game for x starting from an auction for product j,
when the bid distributions are given by µ = {µj }. Since the player can only win once and
exits exogenously at rate (1 − r), this value is upper bounded for every j by the maximum
expected single-period payoff when bidding optimally (over all j). The single-period payoff
R β (x,µ)
is uj (x, µ) = 0 j
(xj − Bj1 )dµj (Bj1 ). So under the sup norm kvj (x)k = supj supx vj (x):
kvj (x, µ) − vj (x, µ0 )k ≤ kuj (x, µ) − uj (x, µ0 )k
Z βj (x,µ)
Z βj (x,µ0 )
1
1
=k
(xj − Bj )dµj (Bj ) −
(xj − Bj1 )dµ0j (Bj1 )k
0
0
Z βj (x,µ)
n Z βj (x,µ)
1
1
(xj − Bj1 )dµ0j (Bj1 ),
(xj − Bj )dµj (Bj ) −
≤ max
0
0
Z βj (x,µ0 )
Z βj (x,µ0 )
o
(xj − Bj1 )dµj (Bj1 ) −
(xj − Bj1 )dµ0j (Bj1 )
0

0

where the last line follows since making the strategies the same across the two different
distributions of rival bids must make one of the terms smaller and so the maximum payoff
differential bigger. Now since the integrands in the final line are continuous, if µ is close to
µ0 in the weak-* topology, the final expression must be close to zero, which proves continuity
by a sandwich argument. This immediately suffices to prove continuity of the best responses
(from their functional form). Putting this all together, we get the required continuity of Γ
in β. So Γ is a continuous mapping from a convex Banach space into a compact subset of
that space, and thus has a fixed point by Schauder’s fixed point theorem.
We prove uniqueness in the case J = 1 by constructing a contraction mapping. Let β and
β 0 be two equilibrium bidding strategies, necessarily monotone and continuous by earlier
results. By definition of equilibrium, Γ(β) = β and Γ(β 0 ) = β 0 . Let v(x, β) and v(x, β 0 )
be the corresponding value functions (dropping the vector notation since there is a single
20

Details available from the authors on request.

54

product). Then Γ is a contraction:
kΓ(β) − Γ(β 0 )k = max(x − rv(x, β)) − (x − rv(x, β 0 ))
x


< max |G1β (β(x)) x − Eβ [B 1 |B 1 ≤ β(x)]
x


1
− Gβ 0 βj0 (x) x − Eβ 0 [B 1 |B 1 ≤ β 0 (x)] |
≤ max G1β (β(x)) Eβ [B 1 |B1 ≤ β(x)] − Eβ 0 [B1 |B1 ≤ β 0 (x)]
x

≤ kβ − β 0 k
where in the third line we use the fact that G1β (β(x)) = G1β 0 (β 0 (x)) for all x. This property
holds because under both strategies the same winner is chosen in each auction (types are
totally ordered), so that the distribution of highest bids is equal across strategies if evaluated
at the bids of a fixed type x in any state s. Therefore Γ is a contraction which guarantees
uniqueness of the fixed point.
Lemma 2.
Proof. Let G1 (b) be the J-vector giving the probability the pseudo-type b will win on each
product (i.e. it stacks G1j (bj )); similarly let E[B1 |B1 < b] be J-vector of expected payments
conditional on winning. Write the vector version of the Bellman equation in (1):

e
v(x) = G1 (b) x − E[B1 |B1 < b] + (1 − G1 (b))rQv(x)


e
e
= G1 (b) b + rQv(x)
− E[B1 |B1 < b] + (1 − G1 (b))rQv(x)

e
= G1 (b) b − E[B1 |B1 < b] + rQv(x)
where in the second line we use the bidding characterization of Lemma 1 to conclude that
e
G1 (b)x = G1 (b)(b + rQv(x)).
Re-arrange terms in the final line to get the value function
as the solution to a linear system:
e −1 G1 (b) b − E[B1 |B1 < b]
v(x) = (I − rQ)



e is invertible (Stokey et al., 1989). Now by definition the
Since r ∈ (0, 1) the matrix (I − rQ)

55

j-th component of ξ is
h
h
i
i
e − rQ)
e −1 G1 (b) b − E[B1 |B1 < b]
e
ξj (b) = bj + r Q(I
= bj + r Qv(x)
j

j

where the last equality follows from the previous display (the
indicates the jh j subscript
i
e
th element of the vector). By Lemma 1, bj = max{xj − r Qv(x) , 0} so if bj > 0 we
h
i
h j
i
e
e
have xj = bj + r Qv(x)
= ξj (b); and if bj = 0 we have xj − r Qv(x)
≤ 0 implying
j
j
h
i
e
xj ≤ r Qv(x)
= ξj (b). Together this gives x ≤ ξ(b) with equality on the dimensions
j

where bj > 0.
Lemma 3.
Proof. Fix a pseudo-type b. Let Aj be the event “b bids bj on product j and loses, j periods
after entry” (e.g. A1 is bidding and losing on product 1 directly after entering). Then
sH (b) = P(H|b) = P(∩Jj=1 Aj ) = P(A1 )P(A2 |A1 )P(A3 |A2 , A1 ) . . . P(AJ |AJ−1 . . . A1 )

Now, P(A1 ) = rτ π1 1 − G1j (bj ) for π1 the steady-state probability that good 1 is sup
plied. And P(Aj |Aj−1 . . . A1 ) = rτ Qj−1,j 1 − G1j (b1 |Aj−1 . . . A1 ) . By Assumption 2, r, τ ,
and Q are identified, as are the conditional probabilities of winning {G1j (b|·)} following the
(measurable) sequences of events {Ak }j−1
k=1 , so sH (b) is identified.
Theorem 2.
e is point identified; the partial identification of F via (6) follows
Proof. We will prove that F
immediately. To do this, we must find the unconditional density fe(b). We will do this
iteratively, starting with pseudo-types who participate on all products (i.e. b > 0), and
proceeding with pseudo-types who participate on all but one product etc. Formally, we will
show that fe(b) is identified by induction on the number of zero elements of b, first showing
that with no zero elements the density is identified (the base step), and then that if the
density is identified for points with n − 1 zero elements, it is also identified for those with n
zero elements (the induction step).
Base step. In the main text we show that fe(b|b > 0) is identified. We also observe the
probability that a randomly chosen bidder will have a history that falls into H, P (H).
56

Putting this together we get
fe(b) = fe(b|b > 0) R

P (H)
sH (b)fe(b|b > 0)db

where the second expression is the probability that a random pseudo-type has b > 0.
Induction step. We must show that if fe(b) is identified for all points b with n − 1 zero
elements, then it is identified whenever b has n zero elements. Fix a b with n zero elements.
Wlog, assume they bid bn on the first J − n products (i.e. bn is a J − n vector) and
do not participate on the rest (i.e. bid zero). Let f n (bn ) be the unconditional density of
R
pseudo-types restricted to the first J − n elements (i.e. f n (bn ) = fe(bn , s)ds).
Consider the event H n , that a bidder enters when good 1 is available, are active, lose and
survive, then next period good 2 is available, they are active, lose and survive . . . good
J − n is available, and they are active, bid, lose and survive. The joint density of the
(J − n)-dimensional bid vector conditional on this event, denoted gH n (bn ), is observed. By
arguments similar to those in Lemma 3, the probability of ending up in that set for any bn ,
denoted sH n (bn ), is identified (note that evaluating this probability does not require a full
J-vector of bids). And proceeding as in the base step, we can get the unconditional density
of the (J − n)-dimensional bid vectors, f n (bn ).
R
R
Now, by definition f n (bn ) = fe(bn , s)ds, which implies that fe(b) = f n (bn )− s6=0 fe(bn , s)ds.
And by the induction assumption, fe(bn , s) is identified whenever s is not identically zero,
R
implying that both f n (bn ) and s6=0 fe(bn , s)ds are known, and so fe(b) is identified.

Theorem 3.
Proof. The text makes most of the required arguments. The missing step is to show that τ
and r are point identified. Let H 0 be defined as in section 4.1; bidders in this set have been
observed in J successive auctions, of products 1, 2, . . . J, coming second each time. Each
such bidder has a known pseudo-type b. Let t1i be the time at which they entered H 0 (i.e. J
periods after entry). Define the events a ≡ “are observed in the auction at t1i + 1” and b ≡
“are observed in the auction at t1i + 2. Let G2j be the distribution of the second-highest rival
bid. Let j1 be the type-of-good auctioned at period t1i + 1 and let j2 be the type-of-good

57

auctioned at t1i + 2. We have:
P (a) ≡ pa = |{z}
r |{z}
τ G2j1 (bj1 |H 0 )
| {z }
survived active
observed

and
P (b) ≡ pb = |{z}
r (1 − τ (1 − rG1j1 (bj1 |H 0 ))) |{z}
τ G2j2 (bj2 |H 0 , did not exit in period t1i + 1)
|
{z
} active |
{z
}
survived
did not exit in period t1i + 1

observed

Let k1 = G2j1 (bj1 |H 0 ), k2 = G1j1 (bj1 |H 0 ) and k3 = G2j2 (bj2 |H 0 , did not exit in period t1i + 1).


pa k 3
pa k 2
pa
From the first equation, rτ = k1 , and substituting into the second yields pb = k1 1 − τ + k1 .
This is linear in τ and therefore has a unique solution.
Corollary 1.
Proof. The event x < Za is by definition F (Za), which by (6) is bounded below by P({b :
ξ(b) ≤ Za}) and above by P({b : 1(b > 0)ξ(b) ≤ Za}. Because Z has only positive entries,
the event x < Za is both necessary and sufficient for the event α < a, which in turn is by
definition Fα (α), yielding the bounds result in (8).
Lemma 4.
Proof. Follows immediately from the first part of the proof of Lemma 1, replacing j subscripts
with functions of s.
Lemma 5.
P e
Proof. From the main text, we have that b̌i,j (x) = xi,j − r k Q
j,k vk (x). Re-arranging and
e
stacking as vectors, x = b̌ + rQv(x),
for v(x) the J-vector of continuation values. By a
e −1 ǔ(b̌)
similar argument to that in the proof of Lemma 2, we have that v(x) = (I − rQ)
where u(b̌) is the vector of expected static surpluses of a type b̌ when bidding on each of the
products, prior to drawing the idiosyncratic shock ε and unobserved heterogeneity ξ. Now
as indicated in the text, each element uj (b̌) is invariant to the realization of ξ, as it shifts

58

all bids in the auction up equally. But ε matters for static surplus. Integrating out:
Z
h

i
1
uj (b̌) = Eε EǦ1j max{0, b̌j + ε − Bj } = Ǧ1j (b̌j + ε)(b̌j + ε − EǦ1j [Bj1 |Bj1 < b̌j + ε])dFε (ε)

Theorem 4.
Proof. The result follows from the arguments made in the main text.
Lemma 6.
Proof. The arguments given in the first part of the proof of Lemma 1 establish that βjk (x) =
P P
e(k,j),(m,l) v m (x), 0}, where the subscript (k, j), (m, l) gives the
Q
max{xj − r J
l=1

l

m={A,O}

transition probability from market k, product j to market m product l. But since supply
e(k,j),(m,l) with π m to get β k (x) = max{xj −
is by assumption multinomial, we can replace Q
j
l
PJ P
m m
r l=1 m={A,O} πl vl (x), 0}. From the definition of the ex-ante value function in (13),
P P
v(x) = Jl=1 m={A,O} πlm vlm (x), and the result follows by making this substitution in the
line above.
Theorem 5.
Proof. The text makes most of the required arguments. There are two missing steps: (i)
showing that the extremal exit rates e(0) and e(b̄j ) are sufficient to identify r and {πjO }; (ii)
showing that the derivatives of the exit rates suffice to identify the price distributions {GO
j }.
Step 1: To simplify notation, define ej ≡ e(b̄j ) and e0 ≡ e(0) and drop “O” superscripts.
P
Π(1−r)+rπ
Recall that ej = (1 − r) + r 1−r(Π−πj )j . Expand Π =
k πk , and multiply through by
P
1 − r( k πk − πj ) to get:
ej (1 − r

X

πk ) = (1 − r)(1 − r

k6=j

X

πk ) + rπj + r(1 − r)

k6=j

Re-arranging and canceling terms:
re(j)

X

πk + rπj = ej − 1 + r

k6=j

59

X
k6=j

πk

Dividing by r:
ej

X

1
(ej − 1 + r)
r

πk + π j =

k6=j

(22)

Fixing r and stacking the equations for each ej (j = 1 . . . J), we have a linear system in
π1 · · · πJ , where the coefficient matrix is of full rank. It thus has either zero or one solution
π1 (r) · · · πJ (r) for each value of r. For the purposes of identification we know there must be
at least one solution corresponding to the parameters of the true DGP, and need to show
that we cannot find two different values of r and corresponding solutions of the linear system
that are consistent with the data.
P
Let Π(r) = k πk (r), and use the remaining equation:
e0 = (1 − r) + r

Π(r)(1 − r)
1 − rΠ(r)

Re-arranging and canceling terms:
1 − e0 = r (1 − Π(r)e0 )
Solving for r:
r=

1 − e0
(1 − Π(r)e0 )

(23)

Let the RHS of (23) be φ(r). Since 0 ≤ Π(r) ≤ 1, we have 1 − e0 ≤ φ(r) ≤ 1, and φ(r)
Π0 (r)e0 (1−e0 )
(1−Π(r)e0 )2
whose RHS, 1r (ej

is continuous in r since Π(r) is continuous in r. Moreover, φ0 (r) =
0

Π (r) is positive (it is the sum of solutions to a matrix equation

> 0, since
− 1 + r) is

increasing in r). This implies that we have at least one solution to (23) (the RHS is below
the LHS at 1 − e0 and above it at 1, both sides are increasing and continuous functions
of r). Call any such solution r∗ . We would like to show it is unique. Notice that we can
rewrite the expression for φ0 (r) as
0

∗

Π0 (r)e0 (1−e0 )
(1−Π(r)e0 )2

0

(r)e0
= φ(r)2 Π1−e
. At r∗ we have φ(r∗ ) = r∗ , so
0

(r )e0
φ0 (r∗ ) = r∗2 Π1−e
. Moreover, since Π(r) is the sum of solutions to (22), it can be written
0
P
as a weighted sum j wj 1r (ej − 1 + r), where the weights depend on the inverse of a matrix

whose entries are equal to 1 or elements of {ej } (i.e. the weights are not functions of r). It
P
P
1−e
e0
follows that Π0 (r) is equal to j wj r2 j . Using this, we get φ0 (r∗ ) = 1−e
j wj (1−ej ). This
0
derivative is not a function of r, so all solutions r∗ share the same derivative φ0 (r∗ ). This
implies a unique solution, since for two monotone continuous univariate functions to intersect
multiple times it is necessary that when they cross, sometimes the one crosses the other from

60

above, and sometimes below, with necessarily different derivatives in these different cases.
Step 2: Fixing a j and dropping the j notation we have:
e0 (b) = r

rπG0 (b)(1 − Π)
(1 − r (Π − πG(b)))2

Solving for G0 (b) and grouping known functions we get:
dG
= h(b)j(G)
db
for h(b) = e0 (b)/(r2 π(1 − Π)) and j(G) = (1 − r (Π − πG))2 . This has solution G(b) =
Rb
RG
J −1 (H(b)+c) for H(b) = 0 h(s)ds and J(G) = 0 j(s)ds. The boundary condition G(0) = 0
implies c = 0 (via J −1 (c) = 0 and thus J(0) = 0 = c), giving final solution G(b) = J −1 (H(b)),
where both h(b) and j(G) are identified by the argument in Step 1, and e0 (b) is observed for
bidders who make complete bids (and moreover e(b) is constant in bidder history, so that
conditioning on bidders who have complete bid vectors does not introduce selection).

B

Data Appendix

B.1

Data Source

We used data from eBay auctions for compact cameras that was purchased from Terapeak,
a private company that uses eBay data to offer analytics tools for sellers on the platform.
Our data included listing, seller, and bidder attributes as documented in Table 1 from the
main text.

B.2

Sample Construction

We restricted attention to auctions for new compact cameras that ended between the dates
of Feb 5 and May 6, 2007. By way of data cleaning we also imposed the following restrictions:
1. We were somewhat concerned that we may have been observing some “shill” bidding
by sellers intent on raising revenues. We used the following rather coarse procedure to
detect such bidding behavior: for any given bidder, if they won at least five auctions
61

and at 80% of them were from the same seller, then we flagged them as a shill bidder.
We excluded all auctions in which a so-designated shill bidder was among the set of
observed bidders.
2. There are many senses in which a bid may be an “outlier”. We excluded all winning
bids that were more than twice the sale price of the listing (either the second-highest
bid or the reserve price, whichever is greater).
3. Though we did not exclude auctions that used the Auction-Buy-it-Now feature, we
did exclude auctions that ended with the execution of the BIN option. This option
disappears once the first bid is made, so those listings function as regular auctions
afterwards. See Ackerberg et al. (2009) for a fuller treatment of Auction-Buy-it-Now
auctions.
4. We drop listings for which we are missing data on attributes (e.g., zoom, resolution),
for which those attributes are unreasonable or technically impossible, or where the
product line is not indicated.

62

