                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES MASS DEWORMING AFFECT CHILD NUTRITION? META-ANALYSIS,
              COST-EFFECTIVENESS, AND STATISTICAL POWER

                                          Kevin Croke
                                       Joan Hamory Hicks
                                            Eric Hsu
                                         Michael Kremer
                                         Edward Miguel

                                       Working Paper 22382
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22382


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016


We are grateful to the Campbell Collaboration deworming team, especially Vivian Welch, for
generously sharing data and information on their work. We thank Harold Alderman, Shally
Awasthi, Don Bundy, Serene Joseph, Chengfang Liu, Scott Rozelle, and Walter Willett for help
interpreting their studies, searching for original data, or supplying us with additional results. We
thank Egor Abramov, Kamran Jamil, Spencer Ma, Cole Scanlon,WenWang, and Kevin Xie for
research assistance. We thank Amrita Ahuja, Harold Alderman, Sarah Baird, Matthew Basilico,
Peter Hotez, Macartan Humphreys, Rachael Meager, Antonio Montresor, and Dina Pomeranz for
helpful comments. Michael Kremer declares that he is a former board member of Deworm
theWorld, a US non-profit organization. He has received no funding from Deworm the World. He
is also a part-time employee of USAID, which financially supports deworming activities. This
paper was written in his academic capacity and USAID had no influence over the writing of this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Kevin Croke, Joan Hamory Hicks, Eric Hsu, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Mass Deworming Affect Child Nutrition? Meta-analysis, Cost-Effectiveness, and Statistical
Power
Kevin Croke, Joan Hamory Hicks, Eric Hsu, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel
NBER Working Paper No. 22382
July 2016
JEL No. C49,I15,I18,O15

                                          ABSTRACT


The WHO has recently debated whether to reaffirm its long-standing recommendation of mass
drug administration (MDA) in areas with more than 20% prevalence of soil-transmitted helminths
(hookworm, whipworm, and roundworm). There is consensus that the relevant deworming drugs
are safe and effective, so the key question facing policymakers is whether the expected benefits of
MDA exceed the roughly$0.30 per treatment cost. The literature on long run educational and
economic impacts of deworming suggests that this is the case. However, a recent meta-analysis by
Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015) (hereafter TMSDG), disputes these findings. The authors conclude
that while treatment of children known to be infected increases weight by 0.75 kg (95% CI: 0.24,
1.26; p=0.0038), there is substantial evidence that MDA has no impact on weight or other child
outcomes. We update the TMSDG analysis by including studies omitted from that analysis and
extracting additional data from included studies, such as deriving standard errors from p-values
when the standard errors are not reported in the original article. The updated sample includes
twice as many trials as analyzed by TMSDG, substantially improving statistical power. We find
that the TMSDG analysis is underpowered: it would conclude that MDA has no effect even if the
true effect were (1) large enough to be cost-effective relative to other interventions in similar
populations, or (2) of a size that is consistent with results from studies of children known to be
infected. The hypothesis of a common zero effect of multiple-dose MDA deworming on child
weight at longest follow-up is rejected at the 10% level using the TMSDG dataset, and with a p-
value < 0.001 using the updated sample. Applying either of two study classification approaches
used in previous Cochrane Reviews (prior to TMSDG) also leads to rejection at the 5% level. In
the full sample, including studies in environments where prevalence is low enough that the WHO
does not recommend deworming, the average effect on child weight is 0.134 kg (95% CI: 0.031,
0.236, random effects estimation). In environments with greater than 20% prevalence, where the
WHO recommends mass treatment, the average effect on child weight is 0.148 kg (95% CI:
0.039, 0.258). The implied average effect of MDA on infected children in the full sample
(calculated by dividing estimated impact by worm prevalence for each study and applying a
random effects model) is 0.301 kg. At 0.22 kg per U.S. dollar, the estimated average weight gain
per dollar expenditure from deworming MDA is more than 35 times that from school feeding
programs as estimated in RCTs. Under-powered meta-analyses (such as TMSDG) are common in
health research, and this methodological issue will be increasingly important as growing numbers
of economists and other social scientists conduct meta-analysis.
Kevin Croke                                Michael Kremer
World Bank                                 Harvard University
1818 H Street, NW                          Department of Economics
Washington DC 20433                        Littauer Center M20
kcroke@worldbank.org                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           and NBER
Joan Hamory Hicks                          mkremer@fas.harvard.edu
CEGA, Center for Effective Global Action
207 Giannini Hall, Univ of CA, Berkeley    Edward Miguel
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310                    Department of Economics
jrhamory@berkeley.edu                      University of California, Berkeley
                                           530 Evans Hall #3880
Eric Hsu                                   Berkeley, CA 94720
Department of Economics                    and NBER
Evans Hall, #3880                          emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
Berkeley, CA 94720
eric.hsu@berkeley.edu
1       Introduction

Soil transmitted helminths (hookworm, whipworm, and roundworm) are estimated to affect 1 in 4
people in endemic countries (Pullan et al., 2014), and at least 1.3 billion people worldwide (Global
Atlas of Helminth Infections, 2016). The intensity of infection is correlated with prevalence, and
highly skewed, so while many infected individuals have light infections, only a minority have the
moderate to severe intensity infections believed to account for the bulk of morbidity (Anderson,
Truscott and Hollingsworth, 2014).
    There is consensus that treatment is safe and effective. Indeed, deworming drugs are the stan-
dard of care for those known to be infected. Because individual collection and testing of stool sam-
ples prior to treatment is prohibitively expensive and logistically impractical in many low-income
contexts, the World Health Organization (WHO) has long recommended mass drug administration
(MDA) in endemic areas. In particular, the WHO recommends annual treatment in areas with
more than 20% prevalence of soil-transmitted helminths, and multiple annual treatments where
prevalence is above 50% (World Health Organization, 2012).
    Studies of the long-term impact of deworming in multiple environments suggest that even under
conservative assumptions and allowing for uncertainty, the expected benefits of MDA exceed the
$0.30 per treatment costs (Ahuja et al. 2015; Baird et al. in press; Croke 2014; Ozier 2015; Bleakley
2007).1 Many development organizations that have examined the evidence have judged deworming
to be highly cost effective, including the Copenhagen Consensus (Hall and Horton, 2008), the
Disease Control Priorities Project (Hotez et al., 2006)2 , Givewell (Givewell, 2013; Givewell, 2014),
the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) (J-PAL Policy Bulletin, 2012), and the World
    1 Givewell calculates the cost of deworming for soil-transmitted helminths in India at $0.30 per
child per treatment, which includes both drug and delivery costs, including the value of staff time
(Givewell (2016)).
    2 We note that while analysts at Givewell identified errors in the calculations of deworming’s

cost effectiveness presented in the Disease Control Priorities Project, their revised calculations also
find it to be a cost effective intervention at $82.51 – $138.28 per DALY (Givewell, 2011).


                                                  1
Bank (World Bank, 1993).
   However, a recent Cochrane Review (Taylor-Robinson et al., 2015), hereafter “TMSDG,” ar-
gues against this long-standing consensus. The Review expresses support for treating those known
to be infected (p. 30), and estimates that single dose treatment for those known to be infected (and
to have moderate intensity infections on average) increases weight by 0.75 kg (95% CI: 0.24,1.26;
p = 0.0038). However, it takes a strong stand on mass drug administration in areas where worms
are endemic, arguing that there is “substantial evidence” that mass treatment has no impact on child
weight or other outcomes. This has led a subset of the TMSDG authors to conclude in other work
that the belief in long-term educational and economic impacts discussed above are “delusional”
(Garner, Taylor-Robinson and Sachdev, 2015).
   Of course, failure to reject the null hypothesis of no effect does not constitute evidence of no
effect. Particularly when treatment is inexpensive and side-effects are mild, studies and meta-
analyses must have adequate power in order to rule out possibly modest effect sizes that would
still render treatment cost-effective. Unfortunately, underpowered meta-analyses are extremely
common in many areas of health research (Turner, Bird and Higgins, 2013), and it is important to
examine when this is the case. In the case of deworming, the cost of MDA for STH is estimated at
just $0.30 per treatment (Givewell, 2016). Since the majority of those treated in MDA programs
will either be uninfected or have only light intensity infections rather than the moderate to severe
infections thought to account for the bulk of STH morbidity (De Silva et al. 2015, Montresor et al.
2015), statistical power to pick up population-wide effects is typically limited (Bundy, Walson and
Watkins, 2013). TMSDG include studies in environments with prevalence below the 20% threshold
at which the WHO recommends deworming, further weakening statistical power by including
estimates from settings where there are few worm infections to begin with.
   In this paper, we first assess statistical power in TMSDG, concluding that it is inadequate to rule
out weight gain effects that would either (i) make MDA cost effective relative to school feeding
programs aimed at similar populations, or (ii) that would be reasonable to expect in MDA pro-


                                                 2
grams, given the estimated impacts in populations that have been pre-screened for infection and
that have moderate intensity infection on average. We then update the work of TMSDG to create
a more comprehensive, and thus better-powered, meta-analysis. The update includes 22 estimates
from 20 studies examining the impact of multiple-dose MDA on child weight at longest follow-
up, twice as many as TMSDG. It includes four studies not identified in TMSDG and additional
data from six studies discussed by TMSDG but not included in their meta-analysis for the child
weight outcome, either using procedures in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of In-
terventions (Higgins and Green, 2011) to extract additional data or contacting the original authors
to obtain additional information.3 Additionally, in three cases, the updated analysis includes im-
proved estimates, for example, by obtaining information on intra-cluster correlation directly from
the original study authors rather than by imputing data from other studies.
   With the full data set, the hypothesis of a common zero effect of multiple-dose deworming on
weight is rejected with p < 0.001. With the TMSDG sample, this hypothesis is rejected at the
10% level, but applying either a study classification approach used in the previous 2012 Cochrane
review or a study classification approach used in earlier Cochrane reviews leads to rejection with
p < 0.01.4 Any one of five other individual updates to the TMSDG data leads to rejection of the
null hypothesis of a common zero effect at the 5% level.
   Using our updated sample, and following TMSDG in including studies from low-prevalence
environments where the WHO does not recommend MDA, mass deworming is estimated to in-
crease child weight by 0.134 kg (95% CI: 0.031,0.236; p = 0.01; random effects estimation). This
effect remains robust (at p < 0.05) when any individual trial estimate is dropped from the meta-
analysis. The result is also nearly unchanged even when simultaneously dropping any two of the
22 estimates: among the 231 possible combinations of two studies that could be dropped simulta-
neously, in 96% of cases the estimated effect remains statistically significant at p < 0.05, and the
   3  In several cases we received data from the Campbell Collaboration, who had themselves di-
rectly contacted the original authors. See Appendix A for details on the source of all new studies.
    4 See section 5.1 for more detailed discussion of these study classification issues.




                                                 3
largest p-value is just 0.067. In areas with prevalence above 20%, where the WHO recommends
MDA, the average estimated impact on child weight is 0.148 kg (CI: 0.039,0.258; p = 0.008; ran-
dom effects). Where the WHO recommends multiple annual MDA (areas with prevalence above
50%), the average estimated weight gain is 0.182 kg (CI: 0.070,0.293; p = 0.001; random effects).
   The implied average effect of MDA deworming on infected children in the full sample (cal-
culated by dividing estimated impact by worm prevalence for each study and applying a random
effects model) is 0.301 kg.5 This average effect likely conceals substantial heterogeneity. Light
infections are often asymptomatic, and only between 2 and 16 percent of the population experience
moderate to severe intensity infections in the studies in our sample that report this information,6 so
implied effects in the subpopulation of those with moderate to severe intensity infections are likely
much larger. For more general context on the implied average effect size of 0.301 kg, the difference
in weight gain for boys at the 25th versus at the 50th percentile of the weight-for-age distribution
between ages 2 and 3 is 0.2 kg (World Health Organization Multicentre Growth Reference Study
Group, 2006).7
   Moreover, this gain comes at modest cost compared to some other common interventions. The
   5  The implied average effect on infected children in the subsamples with 20% and 50% preva-
lence are similar, at 0.249 and 0.276 respectively. The confidence intervals overlap with that of the
full sample.
    6 In particular, Joseph et al. (2015) reports 15% prevalence of any helminthic infection among

preschool aged children at baseline in Peru, with only 1.8% of children exhibiting moderate or
heavy infections, while Miguel and Kremer (2004) report hookworm, whipworm, and roundworm
prevalences of 77%, 42%, and 55%, with 15%, 16%, and 10% prevalence of moderate to severe
infection respectively. Moreover, Miguel and Kremer (2004) use thresholds that are lower than the
WHO thresholds used by Joseph et al. (2015) for moderate to severe intensity infections, suggest-
ing that the comparable prevalence of moderate-severe infections in the Miguel and Kremer (2004)
sample is lower than the figures presented here.
    7 According to WHO growth charts, a boy at the 25th percentile of the weight for age distribu-

tion grows 1.9 kg between age 2 and age 3, while a boy at the 50th percentile grows 2.1 kg over
that year. Note that the difference in weight gain for boys at the 25th versus at the 50th percentile
of the weight-for-age distribution between ages 3 and 4 is also 0.2 kg (World Health Organization
Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group, 2006). In our full sample, the median duration of
follow up at which weight gain is measured is 1 year.



                                                  4
implied weight gain per U.S. dollar of expenditure is 0.22 kg, assuming two MDA treatments per
year. For comparison, the weight gain per dollar of expenditure estimated in RCTs by Galloway
et al. (2009) for school feeding programs is less than 0.01 kg, suggesting that relative to school
feeding, deworming is highly cost effective in increasing weight in school-age children in low-
income countries. This echoes a recent epidemiological study that similarly finds deworming to be
highly cost-effective (Lo et al., 2016).
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information on soil-transmitted
helminths, mass drug administration, and earlier literature, including TMSDG, and assesses whether
TMSDG is adequately powered to rule out cost-effectiveness. Section 3 discusses the sample, in-
cluding criteria for study inclusion, the procedure used to identify studies, and the general princi-
ples guiding data extraction and determination of which estimates to use in the meta-analysis. The
appendix details the application of these principles to individual studies. Section 4 describes our
hypothesis testing and estimation strategy. Section 5 replicates the TMSDG analysis, tests the hy-
pothesis of a common zero effect of multiple dose MDA, and estimates the impact of multiple dose
MDA on child weight, both in environments where the WHO recommends mass deworming and
more broadly. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of implications, methodology, and directions
for future research.



2    Background

The potential health consequences of worm infections are generally agreed to depend on the num-
ber of worms in the body (i.e., infection intensity), rather than a simple binary indicator of infection
status. Infection intensity is highly skewed and is strongly correlated with disease prevalence: in
low prevalence populations relatively few people have severe infections, while many more do in
high prevalence populations (Anderson, Truscott and Hollingsworth, 2014). STH are spread via
eggs deposited in the local environment when individuals defecate in their surroundings or do not


                                                   5
practice proper hygiene after defecating. Due to the transmission mechanism, school-aged children
are especially vulnerable to these worm infections, and also play an important role in spreading
them in the local community (Hotez et al., 2006).
   There is widespread acceptance that those who are known to be infected with intestinal helminths
should be treated. Indeed, this is the standard of medical care (Horton 2000; Keiser and Utzinger
2008; Perez del Villar et al. 2012), and some consider not treating individuals known to be infected
as unethical. New trials of this type are therefore typically not conducted, but TMSDG identify
five trials of single-dose treatment on what the authors term “infected children,”8 and one trial of
multiple dose treatment. The TMSDG meta-analysis found a child weight gain effect of 0.75 kg
across the single dose trials (95% CI: 0.24,1.26; p = 0.0038).9 These trials were largely conducted
in settings with considerable infection intensity: for the 3 (out of 5) single dose studies that report
infection intensities as measured by eggs per gram (epg), all three report mean epg values which
are equivalent to a moderate intensity infection for at least one type of worm (Stephenson et al.
1989; Stephenson et al. 1993; Yap and Steinmann 2014).10
   Because deworming treatment is inexpensive and safe but diagnosis is comparatively expen-
sive (necessitating lab analysis of a stool sample) and logistically difficult in many contexts, the
WHO recommends annual mass treatment in areas where worm infections are above 20% and
multiple treatments annually where prevalence is greater than 50%. Screening for worm infections
requires testing stool samples, which in turn necessitates skilled staff, laboratory facilities, and
re-contacting infected individuals for treatment, which can be challenging in many contexts where
   8  As described in more detail below, this terminology is slightly different than “screened for
infection,” which was the classification used in the previous Cochrane Review (Taylor-Robinson
et al., 2012).
    9 The degree of confidence that TMSDG have in these findings is unclear. At one point in the

text they note that the case for treating infected children is “obvious” (p. 30). However, they
elsewhere describe the meta-analysis results as “low quality evidence” (Taylor-Robinson et al.
2015, p. 2).
   10 These are our calculations, using the infection intensity thresholds from World Health Orga-

nization (2002).


                                                  6
worm infections are endemic. Furthermore, the Kato-Katz test - the most commonly used method
for testing for worms in these regions - has an estimated specificity between 52% and 91% (Barda
et al. 2013; Assefa et al. 2014), suggesting that many infections would go undetected, and thus
presumably untreated, even with proper screening. TMSDG note that screening for worm infec-
tions is not recommended by the WHO because the cost of screening is 4 to 10 times that of the
treatment itself (Taylor-Robinson et al. 2015, p. 7). Taken together, this suggests that a policy of
screened treatment for worm infections would be costly, logistically complicated, and imprecise.
   Subsequent to the WHO recommendation for MDA, a social science literature emerged mea-
suring the longer-term educational and economic impact of deworming. Four studies in three mod-
erate to high prevalence settings – in Kenya, Uganda, and the historical southern United States –
all find substantial long-run impacts of deworming on educational outcomes (Bleakley 2007; Ozier
2015; Croke 2014; Baird et al. in press). Two of these studies also report economic outcomes and
both find positive effects.


   • Croke (2014) finds that Ugandan children exposed to a deworming program originally stud-
      ied in Alderman et al. (2006) have higher math test scores nearly a decade later, with effect
      sizes of over 0.2 standard deviation units.

   • Ozier (2015) finds that infant children who lived in Kenyan communities where older school-
      age children were dewormed show large cognitive test score improvements ten years later,
      presumably due to reduced infection through beneficial spillover effects. The magnitude of
      the effect is 0.2 to 0.3 standard deviation units, which is equivalent to between 0.5 to 0.8
      years of schooling.

   • Using a difference-in-difference estimation methodology rather than a randomized design to
      study a deworming campaign in the U.S. South in the early 1900s, Bleakley (2007) finds that
      deworming led to increased school enrollment and attendance for children, and improved
      literacy and boosted income by 17% for adults who were treated as children.

                                                    7
   • Finally, Baird et al. (in press) estimate that a decade after treatment, males who partici-
      pated in mass deworming in Kenya worked 17% more hours per week and had higher living
      standards, missing approximately one fewer meal per week. Females were approximately
      one-quarter more likely to have passed the primary-school leaving exam and attended sec-
      ondary school. The estimated value of benefits, in terms of the net present value of future
      earnings net of increased schooling costs, exceeds the cost by more than one hundred fold.

   These results suggest that the expected benefits of deworming would greatly exceed its costs
even if one took a conservative approach, assuming a very low probability of effects of the mea-
sured magnitude or assuming that true effects are considerably less than the measured effects
(Ahuja et al. 2015).
   While TMSDG estimate positive impacts of deworming treatment on weight of children known
to be infected, they argue in contrast that there is “substantial evidence” that mass deworming does
not improve weight or other child outcomes. Note that this is a considerably different – and far
more demanding – statement than a claim that the null hypothesis of no effect cannot be rejected
(for instance, due to a lack of statistical power), or that MDA has a positive impact in some settings
but not others.
   TMSDG has been controversial. Campbell et al. (2016) note substantial changes over time in
the way the meta-analysis in the Cochrane Review on deworming is presented (see the evolution
across Dickson et al. (2000), Dickson et al. (2007), Taylor-Robinson et al. (2012), and Taylor-
Robinson et al. (2015)). Campbell et al. (2016) also note that although the text refers to a protocol
(Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015), p.29), they were unable to find a publicly available pre-specified
protocol for the updated review, leading to confusion over the precise hypothesis being tested,
uneasiness over how studies are grouped for analysis, and concern about which studies are included
versus excluded. A number of authors (Campbell et al., 2016; De Silva et al., 2015; Montresor
et al., 2015; Michael et al., 2000) have expressed concern over lack of consideration given to the
effects of different STH species, treatments, and drug distribution strategies.

                                                  8
2.1    Is TMSDG Adequately Powered?

A simple calculation suggests that the TMSDG analysis is underpowered to rule out the possibility
of effects that would make mass drug administration cost effective relative to school feeding. As
noted, the estimated weight gain in kilograms per dollar spent from school feeding is less than
0.01 (from RCT studies; Galloway et al. (2009)). Given the $0.60 per year treatment cost of
deworming in environments where two annual doses are required, an effect of just 0.006 kg would
make deworming cost effective relative to school feeding (setting aside, for the time being, the
issue of other outcomes).
   Examining the random effects meta-analysis estimator that is the focus in TMSDG and taking
as given the variance of the effect across studies TMSDG estimate, and the standard errors TMSDG
report for the underlying studies, the implied Minimum Detectable Effect (MDE) size at 95%
confidence and 80% power is 0.28.11 Using TMSDG’s random effects estimate of 0.08 kg, there
is only 17% statistical power to detect a significant effect at 95% confidence.
   TMSDG also appears to be underpowered to detect effects that might be reasonable to expect
from MDA given the estimated effects TMSDG report in studies of those known to be infected (and
to have moderate intensity infections on average), given the preponderance of individuals with no
infection or light infections in most MDA samples; the average prevalence in their sample of
studies is 46% (among those studies reporting prevalence). The suggestion that there are positive
effects from treating individuals known to be infected, yet no impact from treating populations
  11 These estimates were obtained through a series of Monte Carlo simulations. On iteration k of
the process, we simulate for each study i an estimated effect βik as a draw from N ( µ̂, τ̂ 2 + σ̂i2 ).
Here, τ̂ 2 is the estimated variance of the local effect within the RE model (note that τ̂ 2 is 0.074 in
the TMSDG sample), and σ̂i2 is the squared standard error of the estimated effect in study i. We
vary µ̂ to compute statistical power for different effect magnitudes. Next, we take the simulated
βik (i = 1, ..., N) and apply a random effects model to obtain a simulated point estimate for a given
effect size as well as a standard error. We repeat this process 10,000 times. The reported power of
a test is the proportion of simulations where the null hypothesis that the average effect size is zero
is rejected. The reported 80% MDE is an estimate of the effect size that would deliver a test with
80% power.


                                                   9
containing infected individuals creates an apparent paradox, since if there are effects of deworming
among those known to be infected, then one would expect a smaller, but still positive average
effect of MDA in endemic populations. A simple exercise suggests that this hypothesis cannot
be rejected using TMSDG’s data. Under the assumption that MDA does not affect weight in
uninfected children,12 the implied treatment effect on weight for infected children is given by
dividing the intention-to-treat effect by prevalence. Calculating this effect for each study13 and then
applying a random effects model to the estimated effects on infected children, yields a confidence
interval for the average effect on infected children whose upper end is 0.584 kg. This, in turn, is
well within the confidence interval of (0.24 kg, 1.26 kg) that TMSDG estimate for the effect of
single dose treatment on those children known to be infected and have typical infection intensities
far greater than in the MDA sample. Thus it is impossible to reject even the hypothesis that effects
on weight are proportional to prevalence, let alone the hypothesis that weight gain effects are zero
for the uninfected, and small for those with light infections and substantially larger for those with
moderate to severe intensity infections.
   To understand why statistical power in TMSDG is so low, note first that TMSDG include only
11 treatment effect estimates on the impact of multiple dose mass deworming on child weight at
longest follow-up, three of which have fewer than 100 subjects, and one of which only has 198 indi-
viduals. Larger studies are typically cluster-randomized and while cluster randomization offers the
opportunity to pick up epidemiological externalities, it also limits power. The cluster-randomized
studies have between 48 and 124 clusters, so there are relatively few units of randomization in
some cases.
   Second, in low worm infection prevalence populations, very large samples are needed to have
sufficient statistical power to pick up effects of mass drug administration. A simple statistical rule
  12  This assumption may not hold literally if MDA creates epidemiological externalities, but it
will hold under the null hypothesis.
   13 Note that these calculations include estimated prevalence for two studies in TMSDG’s sample

which do not report prevalence within their study - Alderman et al. (2006) and Awasthi et al.
(2008). See Section 4 for more details.

                                                  10
of thumb is that since statistical power improves with the square root of the sample size, detecting
an effect of given size among a proportion q of a population requires a sample 1/q2 times as large
as among a population in which everyone is infected. If effects were proportional to prevalence,
picking up an effect in a population with prevalence 0.46, for instance, would require a sample
4.7 times as large as in a population in which all are infected. Since low-intensity infections are
expected to have little impact, and since intensity rises non-linearly with prevalence (Anderson
and May, 1985), only a small fraction of the population in low prevalence environments will have
moderate to heavy infections and the necessary increase in sample size may be much larger if
weight gain effects are concentrated among those with moderate-severe intensity infections.14
     Together, these factors imply that it will be important to use the most efficient estimators pos-
sible, for example, by including baseline values of weight when possible rather than just endline
values, in order to improve statistical power. It will also require efforts to employ all the available
studies and data.



3        Sample and data extraction procedures

This section describes trial inclusion criteria, the search procedure for identifying studies, and the
procedures for extracting data from included trials.


3.1      Trial inclusion criteria

Our analysis includes randomized controlled trials of deworming MDA with multiple doses that
include child body weight as an outcome. Following what TMSDG term their “main comparison”
(Taylor-Robinson et al. 2015, p. 4), we consider only trials in which multiple doses of deworming
    14
     Anderson and May (1985) explain that the relationship between prevalence and intensity is
well described by: Mean Intensity = k ∗ (1 − Prevalence)−1/k − k, where k is a parameter repre-
senting the degree of aggregation or dispersion of the parasite in the population. Estimates of k lie
in the range 0.11 to 0.81 (Anderson et al., 2013). Taking the derivative with respect to prevalence
implies that intensity is expected to rise more than linearly in prevalence.

                                                  11
treatment were administered, and include treatment effect estimates from the longest follow-up
reported. We focus on child weight gain because it is an important nutritional outcome which
could potentially be improved over relatively short time horizons.15 Moreover, there is substantial
evidence for this outcome available in existing studies, which we expect to lead to relatively more
adequate statistical power.16 Weight is also highlighted as one of the three primary outcomes
examined in TMSDG (p.11).17 Only trials for which a proper intention-to-treat estimate can be
obtained are included. Therefore, we require that the study (or trial authors, through personal
communication) report outcomes for the population assigned to treatment and comparison groups,
independent of whether they received treatment or not.
   When estimating the mean effect of MDA on weight, we report results both in the set of trials
that take place in settings where the WHO recommends deworming (i.e., those where prevalence of
either hookworm, whipworm, or roundworm is over 20%, which is the threshold for annual MDA,
or 50%, which is the threshold for multiple annual MDA), and in the full sample (for completeness
and comparability to TMSDG).
  15   The studies we consider generally take place in low-income settings where child obesity is not
considered a widespread issue.
    16 For many of the other outcomes they examine, TMSDG include relatively few studies in their

meta-analysis. Only weight (10 studies), height (8), and hemoglobin (9) have more than three
studies that are aggregated in formal meta-analysis. As height deficiencies and stunting are gen-
erally conceived in the nutrition literature as the result of cumulative undernutrition over extended
periods, we considered that height was unlikely to respond to deworming over the course of rela-
tively short run trials (the median length is 12 months). Hemoglobin is an important outcome but
it is most closely associated with hookworm (hookworm infection is the third leading contributor
to the global burden of anemia, whereas neither of the other two STH species rank among the top
causes of anemia (Kassebaum et al., 2013); see also Smith and Brooker (2010). Of the 7 trials in
the TMSDG meta-analysis of hemoglobin (which produce 9 treatment estimates, since two are fac-
torial), only one appears to have any significant hookworm prevalence (Dossa and Ategbo, 2001);
the other six either do not report hookworm prevalence or report very low values, between 1% –
11%.
    17 The other two are hemoglobin and cognition.




                                                 12
3.2     Search procedure

We start with the sample of studies included in TMSDG, as a well-known and oft-cited systematic
review, for their analysis of the impact of multiple-dose deworming treatment of “all children
living in an endemic area” (i.e. mass drug administration or MDA) at longest follow-up on child
weight. We supplement this sample with additional studies we could identify that meet the trial
inclusion criteria above. The Campbell Collaboration generously shared information on additional
trials which they identified for use in their own forthcoming systematic review on the impacts of
mass deworming. Although we do not know exactly which studies the Campbell Collaboration
use in their meta-analysis (which is not yet published), all studies we include were identified by
the Campbell Collaboration and any study that they identified for their analysis of the impact of
multiple-dose MDA on weight was considered for inclusion in our sample.


3.3     Data extraction and choice of estimator

Given the importance of statistical power, we sought to use the most precise unbiased estimator
available. We also followed guidelines in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of In-
terventions (Higgins and Green, 2011). We use the following principles for extraction of data and
selection of estimates from included trials in our analysis below:


 i. If treatment effects are presented without standard errors, standard errors are calculated using
      other presented data (e.g., t-statistics, p-values, or 95% confidence intervals), where possible
      following the formulas provided in the Cochrane Handbook (Higgins and Green 2011, section
      7.7.3.3).

 ii. If results are reported in figures rather than in the text or in a table, Web Plot Digitizer software
      (Rohatgi, 2015) is used to extract numerical estimates from the figures.




                                                   13
iii. If key information on treatment impacts is missing from a paper (and cannot be derived from
   what is presented), original microdata (where available) is used to obtain relevant estimates.
   We also obtain information from trial authors in several cases, through either direct commu-
   nication or thanks to the generosity of the Campbell Collaboration research team.

iv. Where studies report multiple treatment impact estimates, we follow the standard in TMSDG
   and the medical literature of favoring unadjusted estimates. If studies do not report unadjusted
   estimates and we are unable to obtain them directly, but the studies do report treatment effect
   estimates adjusted with standard covariates or baseline values (such as child age and sex),
   these estimates are included in the analysis. (Note that since expected weight gain varies with
   age, including age as a covariate should generally improve precision of the estimates, and that
   including age or other pre-determined variables as a covariate should not induce bias).

v. When there was a choice between treatment effect estimates based on a comparison of endline
   differences and treatment effect estimates based on a comparison of changes from baseline to
   endline, the “changes” estimate is used, since it typically is more precise. Using the single
   difference treatment effect typically leads to a substantial loss of statistical precision: when
   outcomes are highly autocorrelated over time (as is the case for body weight), failure to use
   baseline values in measurements of treatment effects results in far less precise estimates (Ger-
   ber and Green, 2012; McKenzie, 2012). Estimates that take into account baseline information
   remain unbiased, while typically improving precision, and thus are preferable under standard
   statistical criteria, such as under the goal of minimizing mean squared error. Following the
   Cochrane Handbook, when baseline and endline means and measures of variance were present
   but variance of the changes are missing in the original text, the standard error for changes is
   calculated using a correlation coefficient for the value between baseline and endline imputed
   from other studies (Higgins and Green 2011, section 16.1.3.2).

vi. In the event of apparent textual contradictions about key parameter values in a trial (for ex-

                                               14
       ample, language in the study text which reports significant effects versus reported standard
       deviation values which imply non-significant results), we first try to obtain the original micro-
       data to perform the estimation ourselves. Where this is not possible, we assess which statistics
       were the primary focus of reporting in the text and contact the original authors for clarification.

vii. When possible, treatment effect estimates are extracted based on an Analysis of Covariance
       (ANCOVA) model, rather than estimates based on difference-in-difference estimators. The
       Cochrane Handbook states that since ANCOVA estimates “give the most precise and least
       biased estimates of treatment effects they should be included in the analysis when they are
       available” (Higgins and Green (2011), section 9.4.5.2). Properly including baseline weight
       measures in the analysis is also critical in contexts with baseline imbalance (Kerwin, 2015).


   The full sample includes 22 estimates from 20 studies, twice as many as TMSDG. In particular,
the full sample includes four studies not identified in TMSDG or unpublished when their review
was compiled (Gateff, Lemarinier and Labusquiere 1972; Ostwald et al. 1984; Joseph et al. 2015;
Liu et al. 2016); data extracted from six studies discussed by TMSDG but not included in their
meta-analysis for the MDA child weight outcome (Willett, Kilama and Kihamia 1979; Miguel and
Kremer 2004; Ndibazza et al. 2012; Wiria et al. 2013; Stephenson et al. 1993; Gupta and Urrutia
1982); and improved estimates from three studies that are included in the TMSDG meta-analysis
(Sur et al. 2005; Hall et al. 2006; Awasthi and Pande 2001). Note that we classify Stephenson
et al. (1993) as an MDA trial; the Cochrane authors classify it in this way in their 2012 Review
but change the classification system in the 2015 update; we retain the 2012 classification in this
analysis.18 See the appendix for detailed information on each individual study in the full sample.
  18 TMSDG state that “We changed the classification of Stephenson et al. (1989) and Stephenson
et al. (1993). Previously these trials were in the ‘all children in an endemic area’ category, whereas
now they are classified in the ‘children with infection.’ This decision was based on reviewing the
trials with parasitologists and examining the prevalence and intensity of the infection where clearly
the whole community was heavily infected” (Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015) p. 154). It is worth
noting that although TMSDG exclude Stephenson et al. (1993), they include Watkins, Cruz and


                                                    15
4    Hypothesis tests and estimation strategy

In light of TMSDG’s conclusion that there is “substantial evidence” of no impact of deworming
MDA, we first report a test of the hypothesis that the true impact of multiple-dose deworming on
weight is zero in all settings. This involves testing the null hypothesis that B = 0 in a standard
fixed effects meta-analysis estimate:
                                            Ŷi = B + σi                                         (1)

where Ŷ is the estimated effect in study i; B is the true deworming treatment effect, and σi is a
random variable, representing measurement error, assumed to be distributed normally, with mean
zero and a standard deviation equal to the standard error of the estimated treatment effect in each
study. Rejection of this null hypothesis implies that deworming affects child weight in at least
some circumstances.
    We then report the estimated average impact using a random effects model:


                                         Ŷi = B + µi + σi                                       (2)


where B is the underlying true average effect, µi is a normally distributed random variable denoting
the difference between the average effect and the effect in the particular context, and σi represents
measurement error due to sampling variation, which is assumed to be captured in the study-specific
standard errors.
Pollitt (1996); the highest recorded worm baseline prevalence in Watkins, Cruz and Pollitt (1996)
by STH species is 92% (for ascaris); the highest prevalence in Stephenson et al. (1993) is also
92% (for whipworm). Thus this reclassification does not appear to have been done systematically
by worm prevalence. In our view, assessing the merits of the WHO policy by including studies
in environments with prevalence below WHO thresholds while excluding MDA studies in areas
with high prevalence may lead to risk of bias. Since our goal is to examine the effect of MDA, we
retain the 2012 classification. Stephenson et al. (1989) is a single dose deworming trial so does
not enter into the present meta-analysis but Stephenson et al. (1993) has one multi-dose treatment
arm, which we incorporate. See appendix A.3 for more detail.


                                                 16
     Finally, under the assumption that deworming has no effect on uninfected children, one can
calculate for each study an implied estimated effect on weight for infected children as the esti-
mated intention-to-treat effect divided by prevalence. If one takes the estimated prevalence to be
accurate and not subject to measurement error, then standard errors for these estimated effects are
straightforward to compute. One can then apply a random effects model to estimate the average
treatment effect on infected children. In a few cases, a study does not report an exact value for
prevalence, but we are able to identify whether the study has below or above 50% prevalence. If
prevalence is above 50%, we then compute the average prevalence among all studies in the sample
reporting greater than 50% prevalence and assign that value to the study. We proceed similarly for
studies with below 50% prevalence that do not report an exact value for prevalence.19



5        Results

Subsection 5.1 first replicates the results of the TMSDG subsample. Subsection 5.2 tests the hy-
pothesis of a common zero effect. Finally, subsection 5.3 reports estimated effects of MDA on
weight.


5.1      Verifying replication of results in the TMSDG Sample

We call the sample of 11 treatment effect estimates from 10 studies used in the TMSDG meta-
analysis for the impact of MDA on child weight gain the “TMSDG sample.” See Table 1 for
a list of these studies. Figure 1 verifies that our estimation procedure yields results similar to
TMSDG when using this sample. In particular, this figure presents a forest plot with TMSDG
estimates; inserting the effect sizes, standard errors, and sample sizes reported for each of these
studies in TMSDG’s text and figures into the relevant formulas provided in Borenstein, Hedges
    19
    See appendix A.7 for more detail on how prevalence categories were assigned when STH
prevalence was not reported in the study text.



                                                17
and Rothstein (2007) using the R statistical software package replicates the TMSDG results.
   Using the data presented in TMSDG, the hypothesis of a common zero effect of deworming on
child weight gain is rejected at the 10% level (p = 0.089). Figure 1 shows the fixed effect estimate
used to test this hypothesis.
   The null hypothesis of a common zero effect is more strongly rejected when applying either of
two study classification approaches used in previous Cochrane Reviews (prior to TMSDG).

   1. The first versions of the Cochrane Review (Dickson et al. 2000; Dickson et al. 2007) did not
       create separate categories for test-and-treat (i.e. treatment only of children who have been
       diagnosed with STH) and MDA studies (i.e. treatment of the whole population), but rather
       considered all the data together. At a minimum, reporting results with the full sample before
       turning to the subgroup analysis seems reasonable, since if deworming has a positive effect
       on infected individuals, and if there is no effect on uninfected individuals, then deworming
       must have a positive effect on weight in a population that includes infected individuals. In the
       case of the TMSDG dataset, using all of the multiple dose at longest follow-up studies would
       only involve the addition of the one multiple dose study the authors identify but classify as
       separate from the MDA studies - Stephenson et al. (1993).20

   2. The 2012 Cochrane Review changed this approach, however, introducing a distinction that
       effectively distinguished between test-and-treat and MDA studies (Taylor-Robinson et al.
       2012). Applying this classification used in the 2012 Cochrane Review to the studies in
       TMSDG also leads to the inclusion of Stephenson et al. (1993), which was classified as a
       MDA study by Taylor-Robinson et al. 2012 (or, as a “target population treated” study, using
       the language in that review) rather than a test-and-treat study.

   Thus, applying either of these procedures from Cochrane Reviews prior to TMSDG results in
the addition of Stephenson et al. (1993) to the TMSDG sample. With Stephenson et al. (1993)
  20Note that we believe that Stephenson et al. (1993) should be included in the set of MDA
studies, since individuals were treated without first being screened, as discussed in Appendix A.3.

                                                  18
classified in this way but otherwise using the data set in the TMSDG study, the null hypothesis of
a common zero effect is strongly rejected with a p-value of 0.009 (see Table 2).


5.2      Testing the hypothesis of a common zero effect

We now turn to the full sample of 22 treatment effect estimates. Table 3 shows that the null hypoth-
esis of a common zero effect is rejected in the full sample at p < 0.001 in areas with prevalence
above the thresholds at which WHO recommends MDA (20% prevalence) and in areas where it
recommends multiple annual dose MDA (50% prevalence).
      This result is not reliant on the addition of any one study to the TMSDG sample: any one of
six updates leads to rejection of the hypothesis of a common zero effect with p< 0.05 (see Table
2).
      Figures 1 and 2 show point estimates and confidence intervals for the effect of mass deworming
drug administration on weight from each of the studies included in the TMSDG and full sample, re-
spectively, as well as the point estimates and confidence intervals from the fixed effects estimation
needed to test the hypothesis of a common zero effect.
      The rejection of a common fixed effect of zero implies that MDA deworming affects child
weight in at least some circumstances. If effects are positive in some circumstances, then unless
they are negative in other circumstances, average effects must be positive. There is no scientific
reason to believe that deworming has negative side effects on weight. With only one negative
estimate significant at the 5% level out of 22 estimates in the full sample (Figure 2), the patterns
in the data seem consistent with the hypothesis that the true effect of MDA on weight is never
negative. In future work, we hope to more formally examine if this hypothesis can be rejected.
However, for the sake of comparability, we follow TMSDG in the next section by imposing that
the distribution of true effects is normal around some unknown mean.




                                                 19
5.3    Estimating the impact of deworming

Table 3 reports random effects estimates. In the full sample, the estimated weight gain effect is
0.134 kg [CI: 0.031,0.236; p = 0.01]. Of course, the full sample includes trials conducted in
low infection prevalence areas where the WHO does not currently recommend mass deworming.21
In areas with greater than 20% prevalence, where the WHO recommends MDA deworming, the
estimated treatment effect is 0.148 kg [95% CI: 0.039,0.258; p = 0.008]. In areas with more than
50% prevalence, where the WHO recommends multiple doses annually, the estimated effect is
0.182 kg [CI: 0.070,0.293; p = 0.001].
   Our full sample estimate has more statistical power than TMSDG. Using the same approach as
above, we find an MDE of 0.15 kg in the full sample, roughly half the MDE of 0.28 kg using the
TMSDG sample.
   This full sample effect remains robust (at p < 0.05) when any individual trial estimate is
dropped from the meta-analysis, as shown in Table 4. The level of significance with which the
null hypothesis that the mean effect is zero can be rejected remains high even when simultane-
ously dropping any two of the 22 estimates: among the 231 possible combinations of two studies
that could be dropped simultaneously, in 96% of cases the estimated effect remains statistically
significant at p < 0.05, and the largest p value is just 0.067 (not shown). The results are similarly
  21 TMSDG examine outcomes by subgrouping based on infection prevalence, but they split the
data into three subgroups, one containing only two studies, thus limiting statistical power for each
test. In the weight gain multiple dose comparison, TMSDG analyze 5 studies from low prevalence
settings (defined as less than 50% infection), 4 from medium prevalence settings (50% to 70%
prevalence), and 2 from high prevalence settings (over 70% prevalence). They take this tripartite
division from an earlier WHO framework (World Health Organization, 2002). Creating groupings
with only a few studies makes the resulting estimates far less precise. The Cochrane Handbook
notes that “when there are few studies or if the studies are small, a random-effects analysis will
provide poor estimates of the width of the distribution of intervention effects” (Higgins and Green
2011, section 9.5.4). Note that this tripartite division was not pre-specified in the original Cochrane
pre-analysis plan (Dickson, Awasthi and Demmellweek, 1997). Examining all studies conducted
in environments in which the WHO recommends MDA while excluding studies where the WHO
does not recommend MDA would enhance policy relevance.


                                                  20
robust to dropping any one or two studies in the subsample of studies with prevalence greater than
20% and those with prevalence greater than 50%.
   The full sample estimate of 0.134 kg comes from studies with average worm prevalence of
51%. Assuming treatment only affects weight in the worm-infected population, this implies an
average effect of roughly 0.301 kg among those with worms (calculated by dividing estimated
impact by worm prevalence for each study and applying a random effects model).22 This in turn
likely represents the average of a considerably larger effect among the small proportion of those
infected who have moderate or severe intensity infections and a considerably smaller effect among
the majority of those infected, who have light-intensity infections.
   While the average weight gain is fairly modest, it is far from negligible relative to the very
low cost of deworming. Given the estimated effect of 0.134 kg and the estimated cost of $0.60
per person treated for two treatments per year (in the multiple dose context we focus on in this
                                                        $0.60
meta-analysis), the estimated cost per kg gained is    0.134kg   = $4.48 per kg. For reference, it is
worth comparing this to nutritional programs aimed at similar populations, in particular, school
feeding programs. Kristjansson et al. (2007) conduct a Cochrane Review of the impact of school
feeding, and Galloway et al. (2009) combine these results with data on costs to estimate the cost
effectiveness of school feeding. They estimate that over a one year period, “the cost of an extra
kilogram of weight ranged from $112 to $252 in the RCTs and $38 to $86 in the [controlled before-
and-after studies]” (p.177-8). This suggests that just focusing on the weight outcome, deworming
is highly cost effective relative to another widely implemented intervention. As noted by Galloway
et al. (2009), school feeding is implemented in over 72 countries by the World Food Programme
alone. To the extent that school feeding programs aim to produce child weight gain, deworming is
likely to be a highly cost effective option for policymakers who already support school feeding.23
  22  Note that this calculation includes estimated prevalence for three studies in the full sample
which do not report prevalence within their study - Gateff, Lemarinier and Labusquiere (1972),
Alderman et al. (2006), Awasthi et al. (2008). See Table 1 and Section 4 for more details.
   23 Note that this comparison is imperfect for a number of reasons, including that the cost figures

for deworming are for India whereas those for school feeding are based in three African countries.

                                                 21
    Of course, a complete cost-effectiveness analysis of mass deworming treatment would also
need to consider effects on later educational and labor market outcomes, in addition to child weight
gains, and as noted above these are often substantial (Ahuja et al. 2015; Baird et al. in press; Croke
2014; Ozier 2015; Bleakley 2007).



6    Conclusion

We began with the question of whether the expected benefits of mass drug administration according
to WHO guidelines for deworming exceeds the cost.
    To summarize, the null hypothesis of a common effect of zero weight gain from multiple-dose
mass drug administration is rejected at the 10% level using the TMSDG data. Employing either of
two classification systems used in previous Cochrane Reviews would lead to rejection at p < 0.01.
Any one of five other updates to the data leads to rejection of the null hypothesis at the 5% level.
Combining all updates leads to rejection with p < 0.001.
    Reasonable people may disagree about statistical methods for analyzing data. However, at a
minimum, it seems clear that implementing MDA generates child weight gains in some circum-
stances. Since the null hypothesis of a common zero effect is rejected, MDA must have positive
impacts in at least some environments. This implies that if one accepts the standard view that
antihelminthic drugs have no substantial side effects, the expected effect of deworming on child
weight is positive.
    Applying standard approaches from the Cochrane Handbook to a larger set of studies yields an
estimated average effect of deworming on weight of 0.134 kg [95% CI: 0.031,0.236], correspond-
Moreover, both school feeding and deworming may affect other outcomes. However, it is unlikely
that appropriate adjustments for these factors would overturn the conclusion that deworming is
highly cost effective in increasing weight relative to school feeding programs, given that the cost
per kg of weight gain is an order of magnitude higher for school feeding. Moreover, while school
feeding may also promote school participation, deworming, too, has been found to be highly cost
effective in increasing school participation (Miguel and Kremer, 2004).


                                                 22
ing to an estimated average effect of 0.301 kg [CI: 0.071, 0.530] among those with worm infec-
tions. While this effect is modest, it is substantial relative to the cost of deworming, and suggests
that deworming is many times as cost effective as widely implemented school-feeding programs
at improving nutrition among school age children in low-income populations. Moreover, the find-
ings that deworming improves nutrition in at least some environments implies that the literature
on the long-run educational and economic impacts of deworming cannot be dismissed on a priori
grounds, and this literature suggests that the expected benefits of MDA greatly exceed the cost.
   Our results also suggest that the data from studies of mass deworming are consistent with the
data from studies of deworming of those known to be infected, given the much lower prevalence
and intensity of infection in MDA studies than in test-and-treat studies, and the substantial confi-
dence intervals around both the MDA and test-and-treat estimates.
   A key lesson of this paper is that large samples are needed to have adequate statistical power to
pick up a minimum detectable effect (MDE) that corresponds either to 1) what would be expected
as the average effect of MDA in populations in which about half the population is uninfected and
only a small fraction have moderate-severe intensity infections, or 2) what would be needed to
form a policy judgment that the expected benefit of deworming is less than the cost.24 This implies
that analyses which divide up the set of available studies will likely be underpowered, limiting
the scope for further subsample tests. While the results here suggest that overall, multiple-dose
MDA increases child weight, they also suggest that if MDA had similar impacts on weight across
drug type or worm species, a meta-analysis focusing on any one species of worm or drug may
well be underpowered. We therefore think it would be appropriate for any future studies designed
to explore heterogeneity, across worm species or drug type, for example, to report a test of the
hypothesis that the average effect of MDA for each worm species or each drug is the same, rather
  24 The estimated effect in the full sample is about 50% greater than the estimate in the TMSDG
sample, though well within the confidence interval of (-0.11 kg, 0.27 kg) found by TMSDG in their
meta-analysis of the impacts of multiple-dose MDA on weight. However, the confidence interval
shrinks by 47% to (0.03 kg, 0.24 kg) with the full data set. Thus, incorporation of additional
information into the analysis helps address the problem of insufficient power in TMSDG.

                                                 23
than to simply test the hypothesis that the effect of any one individual drug or MDA against any
one species has zero impact on weight. Beyond its relevance for health research, greater awareness
of the limitations of under-powered meta-analyses will become increasingly important as more
social scientists conduct meta-analyses (Vivalt, 2015).
   A further methodological lesson is that it is appropriate to explicitly test the null hypothesis
of a common zero effect. Finally, in evaluating policy, it is appropriate to focus on all mass-
drug administration studies conducted in environments where mass deworming is recommended
under WHO guidelines rather than to mix in studies from environments in which worm prevalence
is sufficiently low that the WHO does not recommend mass treatment, or to selectively exclude
studies of mass drug administration conducted in high-prevalence environments.
   While we have argued that deworming MDA is cost effective based on its impact on child
weight alone, there is evidence that deworming also leads to gains in other outcomes (Ahuja et al.
2015). TMSDG aggregate data from a more limited number of studies for outcomes other than
weight, and some of these are from low-prevalence environments where the WHO does not rec-
ommend deworming, further reducing statistical power. This means that for each outcome assessed
individually, it is typically impossible to reject either the hypothesis of no average effect, or the
hypothesis of effects large enough to make deworming cost effective. In such a setting, it may be
appropriate to consider the joint hypothesis that there is no impact on any of the child outcomes
considered. We hope to do this in future work.
   We have begun to explore heterogeneity of impact with covariates suggested by the scientific
literature, including prevalence and intensity, age, and whether the study design captures epidemi-
ological spillovers. One could also examine heterogeneity by helminth type, drugs used, and co-
morbidities. However, given the limited number of studies and hence limited degrees of freedom,
scope for examining heterogeneity while maintaining statistical power is limited. In future work,
we hope to systematically examine heterogeneity, but here we simply capture heterogeneity using
random effects estimation.


                                                 24
   We follow TMSDG in assuming a normal distribution of the effect of MDA across study en-
vironments, but future work could relax the assumptions of symmetry and normality on the dis-
tribution of effects across studies and estimate these from the data. There is no reason, a priori,
to expect that the distribution of deworming effects follows such a distribution. In fact, the under-
lying science naturally suggests a non-symmetric distribution, with positive effects in some cases
and negligible effects in cases with low prevalence and intensity of infections.
   We hope to examine a Bayesian, rather than frequentist, approach to meta-analysis for policy
analysis in future work. The implicit loss function implied by requiring 95% confidence to under-
take MDA without regard to the statistical power of the test is one in which there is a high cost
of a false positive and a low cost of a false negative. That might be appropriate if, for example,
the Food and Drug Administration were considering a drug that might have side effects. However,
in the deworming context, the drugs have already been through regulatory approval, the monetary
cost of deworming is low, and there is no evidence of serious side effects, while there is at least
some potential that deworming has large long-run benefits (Ahuja et al. 2015). Thus, the cost of a
false positive is low while the cost of a false negative is potentially quite substantial.
   A Bayesian approach to estimating whether the expected benefit of MDA according to WHO
guidelines exceeds the cost would start with a prior on the effect of deworming. Studies of the im-
pact of treatment on those known to be infected provide a natural prior. It would factor in the range
of benefits that have been estimated from deworming, each with an attached probability weight in
order of assess whether summing across the range of potential benefits times their likelihood yields
a benefit greater than the estimated cost. Since the net present value of the long-run educational
and economic benefits has been estimated as more than one-hundredfold that of the cost (Baird
et al. in press), assessing even the subjective probability of these benefits would likely lead to the
conclusion that the expected benefits of MDA exceed their cost.




                                                   25
                                          Table 1: Summary of Studies

Study:                                              Study:         TMSDG             Full       Prevalence       Country
Full Name                                         Short Name     Estimate (SE) Estimate (SE)

1. Kruger et al. (1996)                           Kruger 1996     -0.38 (0.23)      (same)        0.38         South Africa
2. Watkins, Cruz and Pollitt (1996)              Watkins 1996     0.13 (0.11)       (same)        0.92          Guatemala
3. Donnen et al. (1998)                          Donnen 1998     -0.45 (0.17)†      (same)        0.11            Zaire
4. Awasthi, Pande and Fletcher (2000)            Awasthi 2000     -0.05 (0.08)      (same)        0.13            India
5. Dossa and Ategbo (2001)                       Dossa 2001a      0.00 (0.27)       (same)        0.59            Benin
6. Dossa and Ategbo (2001)                       Dossa 2001b      0.00 (0.14)       (same)        0.59            Benin
7. Alderman et al. (2006)                       Alderman 2006    0.15 (0.09)‡       (same)       >50%±           Uganda
8. Awasthi et al. (2008)                         Awasthi 1995     0.98 (0.15)       (same)       ≤20%∓            India
9. Awasthi and Pande (2001)                      Awasthi 2001     0.17 (0.34)     0.17 (0.07)     0.09            India
10. Hall et al. (2006)                             Hall 2006       0.0 (0.07)     0.05 (0.06)     0.84           Vietnam
11. Sur et al. (2005)                              Sur 2005        0.5 (0.47)     0.29 (0.09)     0.54            India
12. Willett, Kilama and Kihamia (1979)            Willett 1979   (not included)   0.16 (0.08)     0.55           Tanzania
13. Joseph et al. (2015)                          Joseph 2015    (not included)   0.04 (0.05)     0.12             Peru
14. Miguel and Kremer (2004)                     Miguel 2004     (not included) -0.76 (0.44)      0.77            Kenya
15. Ndibazza et al. (2012)                      Ndibazza 2012 (not included)      0.01 (0.09)     0.03           Uganda
16. Gupta and Urrutia (1982)                     Gupta 1982a     (not included) 0.027 (0.175)     0.51          Guatemala
17. Gupta and Urrutia (1982)                     Gupta 1982b     (not included)   0.13 (0.15)     0.54          Guatemala
18. Ostwald et al. (1984)                        Ostwald 1984    (not included)   0.70 (0.45)     0.96       Papua New Guinea
19. Gateff, Lemarinier and Labusquiere (1972)     Gateff 1972    (not included)   0.35 (0.13)    >50%o          Cameroon
20. Wiria et al. (2013)                           Wiria 2013     (not included)   0.19 (0.45)     0.75          Indonesia
21. Liu et al. (2016)                              Liu 2016      (not included)   0.03 (0.15)     0.31            China
22. Stephenson et al. (1993)                    Stephenson 1993 (not included)    0.90 (0.18)     0.92            Kenya


   Notes: This table summarizes key features of the studies included in the meta-analysis. We follow the
   meta-analysis literature by referring to studies using the first author and year only, but report full ref-
   erences in the first column of this table. We were able to include Gateff 1972, Gupta 1982, Ostwald
   1984, Ndibazza 2012, Wiria 2013, and Liu 2015 thanks to the generosity of the Campbell Collabora-
   tion deworming review team. Effect sizes are in kg. †The estimated effect for Donnen 1998 was taken
   from TMSDG, who obtained unadjusted estimates from trial authors. ‡The estimated effect size for
   Alderman 2006 was taken from TMSDG, who obtained clustered, unadjusted estimates from trial au-
   thors. ±Alderman 2006 does not report baseline prevalence from the study population, but references
   an earlier study done in the area. ∓Awasthi 1995 did not report baseline prevalence in study, and was
   classified according to two subsequent studies performed in the same region of India (Awasthi 2000 and
   Awasthi 2001). oGateff 1972 does not provide baseline prevalence from within their own study, but is
   classified based on statistics from a local health center mentioned within the trial text. See Appendix A
   for other details on these studies.                26
 Table 2: Tests of the Hypothesis of Common Zero Effect, Adding Updates Individually


      Study                                                        Effect Size       P-value

      1. TMSDG                                                         .061           .089*
      2. TMSDG (using prior Cochrane classifications)                  .092         .009***

      3. Sur 2005                                                      .092         .006***
      4. Willett 1979                                                  .077          .021**
      5. Joseph 2015                                                   .054           .066*
      6. Awasthi 2001                                                  .086         .006***
      7. Ostwald 1984                                                  .066           .069*
      8. Gateff 1972                                                   .082          .019**
      9. Liu 2015                                                       .06           .089*
      10. Stephenson 1993                                              .092         .009***
      11. Wiria 2013                                                   .062           .084*
      12. Ndibazza 2012                                                .054           .105
      13. Gupta 1982a                                                   .06           .09*
      14. Gupta 1982b                                                  .065           .063*
      15. Hall 2006 (ANCOVA)                                           .073          .032**
      16. Miguel 2004                                                  .056           .121
      17. Full Sample (rows 3-16)                                      .111       <0.001***




Notes: This table presents meta-analysis treatment effect estimates for the impact of multiple-dose
mass deworming on weight using a fixed effects model, and the p-values associated with a test of the
null hypothesis of a common zero effect across all studies included in the sample. Row (1) includes
the TMSDG sample of studies (described in the notes of Figure 1). Row (2) adds Stephenson 1993
(classified by TMSDG as a study of “infected children” rather than “all children living in an endemic
area”) to the TMSDG sample, following classification approaches used in prior Cochrane Reviews.
Rows (3) through (16) make the sample changes described for the full sample (described in the notes of
Figure 2) one at a time (holding the remainder of the TMSDG sample constant), and then for the full
                                                  27 to each study by the first author and year; see Table
sample altogether in Row (17). For brevity we refer
1 for the full reference. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                Table 3: Estimated Weight Gain (kg) and Test Results Across Samples

                                                          TMSDG        Full sample       Full with       Full with
                                                                                      >20% prevalence >50% prevalence
                Fixed effect estimate (s.e.)                0.061        0.111             0.142           0.157
                                                           (0.036)      (0.022)           (0.030)         (0.031)
                P-value: test for common zero effect       0.089*      <0.001***        <0.001***       <0.001***
                Random effects estimate (s.e.)              0.078        0.134             0.148           0.182
                                                           (0.098)      (0.052)           (0.056)         (0.057)
                P-value: random effects estimate            0.426       0.011**          0.008***        0.001***
                Number of studies                             11           22               16               14

     Notes: This table presents treatment effect estimates and key test results across the samples discussed in the main text. * p < 0.1, **
     p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
28
    Table 4: Robustness of Random Effects Estimates to Dropping Individual Studies


               Study                     Effect Size     Standard Error      P-value
               Full Sample                  0.134            (0.052)         0.011**
               1. Kruger 1996               0.150            (0.052)        0.004***
               2. Watkins 1996              0.134            (0.055)        0.016**
               3. Donnen 1998               0.158            (0.051)        0.002***
               4. Awasthi 2000              0.146            (0.055)        0.008***
               5. Dossa 2001a               0.137            (0.054)        0.010***
               6. Dossa 2001b               0.140            (0.054)        0.010***
               7. Alderman 2006             0.132            (0.056)         0.018**
               8. Awasthi 1995              0.095            (0.043)         0.028**
               9. Awasthi 2001              0.131            (0.057)         0.021**
               10. Hall 2006                0.139            (0.057)         0.016**
               11. Sur 2005                 0.123            (0.055)         0.024**
               12. Willett 1979             0.132            (0.056)         0.018**
               13. Joseph 2015              0.140            (0.058)         0.016**
               14. Miguel 2004              0.144            (0.052)        0.006***
               15. Ndibazza 2012            0.141            (0.055)         0.011**
               16. Gupta 1982a              0.138            (0.054)         0.011**
               17. Gupta 1982b              0.134            (0.054)         0.014**
               18. Ostwald 1984             0.127            (0.053)         0.016**
               19. Gateff 1972              0.122            (0.054)         0.023**
               20. Wiria 2013               0.133            (0.053)         0.012**
               21. Liu 2016                 0.139            (0.054)         0.011**
               22. Stephenson 1993          0.105            (0.049)         0.031**



Notes: This table presents meta-analysis treatment effect estimates for the impact of multiple dose mass
deworming on weight using a random effects model, dropping one study from the sample at a time
(holding the remainder of the full sample constant). For brevity we refer to each study by the first author
and year; see Table 1 for the full reference. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 29
          Figure 1: Effect of Mass Deworming on Child Weight, TMSDG Sample




Notes: This meta-analysis forest plot includes all studies in the “TMSDG sample”, which is the set
of studies included in Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015) for the study of treating “all children living in an
endemic area” with multiple doses of deworming medication at longest follow-up on the weight gain
outcome, for a total of 11 effect estimates. For brevity, we refer to each study by the first author and
the year; see Table 1 for the full reference. Squares denote the point estimate, and the whiskers show
the 95% confidence interval. Effect sizes and standard errors are taken directly from Taylor-Robinson
et al. (2015), not from the original articles. The point estimate squares are sized according to the weight
each study is given in the fixed effect meta-analysis (calculated according to the precision of the study).
The dotted vertical line represents zero effect. The lower panel displays the estimated effect across all
studies using fixed and random effects models, the p-value associated with a test of the null hypothesis
of a common zero effect across all studies, and the p-value of the random effects estimate.




                                                 30
            Figure 2: Effect of Mass Deworming on Child Weight, Full Sample




Notes: This meta-analysis forest plot includes all studies in the “full sample”, as described in the text,
for a total of 22 effect estimates. For brevity, we refer to each study by the first author and the year;
see Table 1 for the full reference. Squares denote the point estimate, and the whiskers show the 95%
confidence interval. For studies that were included in Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015), effect sizes and
standard errors are taken directly from that meta-analysis, except for the updates described to Awasthi
and Pande (2001), Hall et al. (2006), and Sur et al. (2005). The full sample additionally includes
several studies that were not included in the TMSDG meta-analysis: Gateff, Lemarinier and Labusquiere
(1972), Gupta and Urrutia (1982), Joseph et al. (2015), Liu et al. (2016), Miguel and Kremer (2004),
Ndibazza et al. (2012), Ostwald et al. (1984), Stephenson et al. (1993), Willett, Kilama and Kihamia
(1979), and Wiria et al. (2013). The point estimate squares are sized according to the weight each study
is given in the fixed effect meta-analysis (calculated according to the precision of the study). The dotted
vertical line represents zero effect. † denotes a study with data updated since TMSDG. ‡ denotes a study
not included in TMSDG. The lower panel displays the estimated effect across all studies using fixed and
random effects models, the p-value associated with a test of the null hypothesis of a common zero effect
across all studies, and the p-value of the random effects estimate.




                                                 31
References
Ahuja, Amrita, Sarah Baird, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel and Shawn
  Powers. 2015. “When Should Governments Subsidize Health? The Case of Mass Deworming.”
  The World Bank Economic Review 29(suppl 1):S9–S24.
  URL: http://wber.oxfordjournals.org/content/29/suppl 1/S9.abstract

Alderman, Harold, Joseph Konde-Lule, Isaac Sebuliba, Donald Bundy and Andrew Hall. 2006.
  “Effect on weight gain of routinely giving albendazole to preschool children during child
  health days in Uganda: a cluster randomised controlled trial.” BMJ: British Medical Journal
  333(7559):122–124.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40699371

Anderson, R, J Truscott and TD Hollingsworth. 2014. “The coverage and frequency of mass drug
  administration required to eliminate persistent transmission of soil-transmitted helminths.” Phil.
  Trans. R. Soc. B 369:20130435.

Anderson, RM and RM May. 1985. “Helminth infections of humans: mathematical models, pop-
  ulation dynamics, and control.” Adv Parasitol 24:1–101.

Anderson, Roy M., James E. Truscott, Rachel L. Pullan, Simon J. Brooker and T. Deirdre
  Hollingsworth. 2013. “How Effective Is School-Based Deworming for the Community-Wide
  Control of Soil-Transmitted Helminths?” PLoS Negl Trop Dis 7(2):1–15.
  URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pntd.0002027

Assefa, L. M., T. Crellen, S. Kepha, J. H. Kihara, S. M. Njenga, R. L. Pullan and S. J. Brooker.
  2014. “Diagnostic Accuracy and Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Methods for Detection of
  Soil-Transmitted Helminths in a Post-Treatment Setting in Western Kenya.” PLoS Neglected
  Tropical Diseases 8(5):e2843.

Awasthi, S, R Peto, VK Pande, R Fletcher, S Read and Bundy DA. 2008. “Effects of deworming
 on malnourished preschool children in India: an open-labelled, cluster-randomized trial.” PLoS
 Neglected Tropical Diseases 2(4):e223.

Awasthi, Shally, Richard Peto, S Read, SM Richards, V Pande, Donald A Bundy and DEVTA team.
 2013. “Population de-worming with 6-monthly albendazole: DEVTA, a cluster-randomised trial
 among 1 million preschool children in North India.” The Lancet 381(9876):1478–1486.

Awasthi, Shally and Vinod Kumar Pande. 2001. “Six-monthly de-worming in infants to study
 effects on growth.” Indian Journal of Pediatrics 68(9):823–7.

Awasthi, Shally, Vinod Kumar Pande and Robert H. Fletcher. 2000. “Periodic deworming with
 albendazole and its impact on growth status and diarrhoeal incidence among children in an
 urban slum of India.” Indian Pediatrics 37:19–29.



                                                32
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer and Edward Miguel. in press. “Worms at
  Work: Long Run Impacts of a Child Health Investment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Barda, B., H, Zepherine, L. Rinaldi, G. Cringoli, R. Burioni, M. Clementi and M. Albonico. 2013.
  “Mini-FLOTAC and Kato-Katz: Helminth Eggs Watching on the Shore of Lake Victoria.” Par-
  asites & Vectors 6(220).

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
  American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1):73–117.

Borenstein, Michael, Larry Hedges and Hannah Rothstein. 2007. “Introduction to Meta-Analysis.”.
  URL: https://www.meta-analysis.com/downloads/Meta%20Analysis%20Fixed%20vs%20Random%20effects.p

Bundy, Donald AP, Judd L Walson and Kristie L. Watkins. 2013. “Worms, wisdom, and wealth:
  why deworming can make economic sense.” Trends in Parasitology 29(3):142–148.

Campbell, SJ, SV Nery, SA Doi, DJ Gray, RJ Soares Magalhes, JS McCarthy and et al. 2016.
  “Complexities and Perplexities: A Critical Appraisal of the Evidence for Soil-Transmitted
  Helminth Infection-Related Morbidity.” PLoS Negl Trop Dis 10(5).

Croke, Kevin. 2014. “The long run effects of early childhood deworming on literacy and numeracy:
  Evidence from Uganda.” Working Paper.
  URL: http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/kcroke/files/ug lr deworming 071714.pdf

De Silva, Nilanthi, Be-Nazir Ahmed, Martin Casapia, H. J. de Silva, John Gyapong, Mwelecele
  Malecela and A. Pathmeswaran. 2015. “Cochrane Reviews on Deworming and the Right to a
  Healthy, Worm-Free Life.” PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9.

Dickson, R, S Awasthi, C Demellweek and P Williamson. 2000. “Anthelmintic drugs for treat-
  ing worms in children: effects on growth and cognitive performance (Review).” The Cochrane
  Library (2).

Dickson, R, S Awasthi, C Demellweek and P Williamson. 2007. “Anthelmintic drugs for treat-
  ing worms in children: effects on growth and cognitive performance (Review).” The Cochrane
  Library (2).

Dickson, R, S Awasthi and C Demmellweek. 1997. “Routine Intermittent Anthelminth Therapy in
  Disadvantaged Populations [Protocol].”.

Donnen, P, D Brasseur, M Dramaix, F Vertongen and et al. 1998. “Vitamin A Supplementation but
  not deworming improves growth of malnourished preschool children in Eastern Zaire.” Journal
  of Nutrition 128(8):1320–7.

Dossa, R. A. M. and E. A. D. Ategbo. 2001. “Impact of iron supplementation and deworming on
  growth performance in preschool Beninese children.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition
  55(4):223.


                                              33
Frison, Lars and Stuart J. Pocock. 1992. “Repeated measures in clinical trials: Analysis using
  mean summary statistics and its implications for design.” Statistics in Medicine 11(13):1685–
  1704.
  URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.4780111304

Galloway, R., E. Kristjansson, A. Gelli, U. Meir, F. Espejo and D. Bundy. 2009. “School feeding:
  outcomes and costs.” Food and Nutrition Bulletin 30(2):171–182.

Garner, Paul, David Taylor-Robinson and Harshpal Singh Sachdev. 2015. “Commentary: Repli-
  cation of influential trial helps international policy.” International Journal of Epidemiology
  44(5):1599–1601.

Gateff, C, G Lemarinier and R Labusquiere. 1972. “Chimiotherapie antihelminthique systematique
  au thiabendazole en milieu scolaire africain.” Annales de la Societe Belge de Medicine Tropicale
  52(2):103–112.

Gerber, Alan S. and Donald P. Green. 2012. Field Experiments: Design, Analysis, and Interpreta-
  tion. W.W Norton and Co.

Givewell. 2011.
  URL:        http://blog.givewell.org/2011/09/29/errors-in-dcp2-cost-effectiveness-estimate-for-
  deworming/#actualcosteffectivenes

Givewell. 2013.
  URL: http://www.givewell.org/charities/top-charities

Givewell. 2014.
  URL: http://www.givewell.org/international/top-charities/deworm-world-initiative

Givewell. 2016. “Deworm the World Initiative, led by Evidence Action.”.
  URL:                        http://www.givewell.org/international/top-charities/deworm-world-
  initiative#Whatisthecostpertreatment

Global Atlas of Helminth Infections. 2016. “Soil-transmitted helminths.”.
  URL: http://www.thiswormyworld.org

Goto, Rie, C.G. Nicholas Mascie-Taylor and Peter G. Lunn. 2009. “Impact of anti-Giardia and
  anthelminthic treatment on infant growth and intestinal permeability in rural Bangladesh: a ran-
  domised double-blind controlled study.” Transactions of The Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
  and Hygiene 103(5):520–529.

Gupta, M C and J J Urrutia. 1982. “Effect of periodic antiascaris and antigiardia treatment on
  nutritional status of preschool children.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 36(1):79–
  86.
  URL: http://ajcn.nutrition.org/content/36/1/79.abstract



                                               34
Hall, Andrew, L Nguyen Bao Khanh, Don Bundy, N Quan Dung, T Son Hong and R Lansdown.
  2006. “A randomized trial of six monthly deworming on the growth and educational achieve-
  ments of Vietnamese school children.” Unpublished manuscript.

Hall, Andrew and Sue Horton. 2008. Best Practice Paper: Deworming. Copenhagen Consensus
  Center, Denmark.

Higgins, Julian PT and Sally Green. 2011. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Inter-
  ventions. Cochrane.

Horton, J. 2000. “Albendazole: A Review of Anthelmintic Efficacy and Safety in Humans.” Para-
  sitology 121((Suppl)):S11332.

Hotez, Peter J, Donald A. P. Bundy, Kathleen Beegle, Simon Brooker, Lesley Drake, Nilanthi
  de Silva and Lorenzo Savioli. 2006. Helminth Infections: Soil-transmitted Helminth Infections
  and Schistosomiasis, from Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries (2nd edition).
  World Bank.

J-PAL Policy Bulletin. 2012. “Deworming: A Best Buy for Development.”.
   URL:               https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012.3.22-
   Deworming.pdf

Joseph, Serene A., Martin Casapia, Antonio Montresor, Elham Rahme, Brian J. Ward, Grace S.
  Marquis, Lidsky Pezo, Brittany Blouin, Mathieu Maheu-Giroux and Theresa W. Gyorkos. 2015.
  “The Effect of Deworming on Growth in One-Year-Old Children Living in a Soil-Transmitted
  Helminth-Endemic Area of Peru: A Randomized Controlled Trial.” PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9.

Kassebaum, Nicholas J., Rashmi Jasrasaria, Mohsen Naghavi, Sarah K. Wulf, Nicole Johns, Rafael
  Lozano, Mathilda Regan, David Weatherall, David P. Chou, Thomas P. Eisele, Seth R. Flaxman,
  Rachel L. Pullan, Simon J. Brooker and Christopher J. L. Murray. 2013. “A systematic analysis
  of global anemia burden from 1990 to 2010.” Blood 123(5):615–624.
  URL: http://www.bloodjournal.org/content/123/5/615

Keiser, J. and J. Utzinger. 2008. “Efficacy of Current Drugs against Soil-Transmitted Helminth In-
  fections: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Journal of the American Medical Association
  299(16):193748.

Kerwin, Jason. 2015. “The Effect of HIV Infection Risk Beliefs on Risky Sexual Behaviors:
  Scared Straight or Scared to Death?” Working paper.

Kristjansson, E. A., V. Robinson, M. Petticrew, B. MacDonald, J. Krasevec, L. Janzen, T. Green-
  halgh, G. Wells, J. MacGowan, A. Farmer, B. J. Shea, A. Mayhew and P. Tugwell. 2007. “School
  feeding for improving the physical and psychosocial health of disadvantaged elementary school
  children.” Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1):CD004676.



                                               35
Kruger, M, CJ Badenhorst, EPG Mansvelt, JA Laubscher and AJS Benade. 1996. “The effect of
  iron fortification in a school feeding scheme and anthelminthic therapy on the iron status and
  growth of 6-8 year old school children.” Food and Nutrition Bulletin 17(1).
Liu, Chengfang, Louise Lu, Linxiu Zhang, Renfu Luo, Sean Sylvia, Alexis Medina, Scott Rozelle,
  Darvin Scott Smith, Yingdan Chen and Tingjun Zhu. 2016. “Effect of deworming on indices
  of health, cognition, and education among schoolchildren in rural China: a cluster-randomized
  controlled trial.” Unpublished manuscript.
Lo, N. C., Y. S. Lai, D. A. Karagiannis-Voules, I. I. Bogoch, J. T. Coulibaly, E. Bendavid, J.
  Utzinger, P. Vounatsou and J. R. Andrews. 2016. “Assessment of global guidelines for preventive
  chemotherapy against schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminthiasis: a cost-effectiveness
  modelling study.” Lancet Infect Dis .
McKenzie, David. 2012. “Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments.”
 Journal of Development Economics 99(2):210 – 221.
Michael, E, Alok Bhargava, Don Bundy, Richard Peto, Ed Cooper, Lorenzo Savioli, Maria Neira,
 Marco Albonico, Michael J. Beach, Hababu Mohammed Chwaya, David WT Crompton, John
 Dunne, John P Ehrenberg, Theresa Gyorkos, Jane Kvalsvig, Martin G Taylor, Carlo Urbani,
 Feng Zheng, Paul Garner, Rumona Dickson, Colin Demellweek, Paul Williamson and Shally
 Awasthi. 2000. “Letters to the Editor: Treatment For Intestinal Helminth Infection.” BMJ:
 British Medical Journal 321(7270):1224–1227.
 URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25226175
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
 Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica 72(1):159–217.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer. 2014. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
 Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities, Guide to Replication of Miguel and Kremer
 (2004).”.
 URL: http://emiguel.econ.berkeley.edu/assets/miguel research/46/PSDP-REP 2014-11.pdf
Montresor, Antonio, David Addiss, Marco Albonico, Said Mohammed Ali, Steven K. Ault, Albis-
 Francesco Gabrielli, Amadou Garba, Elkhan Gasimov, Theresa Gyorkos, Mohamed Ahmed
 Jamsheed, Bruno Levecke, Pamela Mbabazi, Denise Mupfasoni, Lorenzo Savioli, Jozef Ver-
 cruysse and Aya Yajima. 2015. “Methodological Bias Can Lead the Cochrane Collaboration to
 Irrelevance in Public Health Decision-Making.” PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9.
Ndibazza, Juliet, Harriet Mpairwe, Emily L. Webb, Patrice A. Mawa, Margaret Nampijja,
  Lawrence Muhangi, Macklyn Kihembo, Swaib A. Lule, Diana Rutebarika, Barbara Apule, Flo-
  rence Akello, Hellen Akurut, Gloria Oduru, Peter Naniima, Dennison Kizito, Moses Kizza,
  Robert Kizindo, Robert Tweyongere, Katherine J. Alcock, Moses Muwanga and Alison M.
  Elliott. 2012. “Impact of Anthelminthic Treatment in Pregnancy and Childhood on Immuni-
  sations, Infections and Eczema in Childhood: A Randomised Controlled Trial.” PLoS ONE
  7(12):e50325.

                                               36
Ostwald, Rosemarie, Mark Fitch, Rainer Arnhold, Jennifer Shield, Louie Dexter, Jan Kilner and
  Richard Kimber. 1984. “The effect of intestinal parasites on nutritional status in well-nourished
  school age children in Papua New Guinea.” Nutrition Reports International 30(6):1409–1421.
Ozier, Owen. 2015. “Exploiting Externalities to Estimate the Long-term Benefits of Early Child-
  hood Deworming.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7052 .
Perez del Villar, L., F. J. Burguillo, J. Lopez-Aban and A. Muro. 2012. “Systematic Review and
  Meta Analysis of Artemisinin Based Therapies for the Treatment and Prevention of Schistoso-
  miasis.” PLoS ONE 7(9):e45867.
Pullan, R. L., J. L. Smith, R. Jasrasaria and S. J. Brooker. 2014. “Global Numbers of Infection and
  Disease Burden of Soil Transmitted Helminth Infections in 2010.” Parasites and Vectors 7(37).
Rohatgi, Ankit. 2015. “WebPlotDigitizer.”.
  URL: http://arohatgi.info/WebPlotDigitizer
Smith, Jennifer L. and Simon Brooker. 2010. “Impact of hookworm infection and deworming on
  anaemia in non-pregnant populations: a systematic review.” Tropical Medicine & International
  Health 15(7):776–795.
  URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3156.2010.02542.x
Stephenson, L. S., M. C. Latham, E. J. Adams, S. N. Kinoti and A. Pertet. 1993. “Physical Fitness,
  Growth and Appetite of Kenyan School Boys with Hookworm, Trichuris trichiura and Ascaris
  lumbricoides Infections Are Improved Four Months after a Single Dose of Albendazole.” Jour-
  nal of Nutrition 123(6):103646.
Stephenson, LS, MC Latham, KM Kurz, SN Kinoti and H. Brigham. 1989. “Treatment with a sin-
  gle dose of albendazole improves growth of Kenyan schoolchildren with hookworm, Trichuris
  trichiura, and Ascaris lumbricoides infections.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hy-
  giene 41(1).
Sur, D, D.R. Sahan, B Manna, K Rajendran and S.K Bhattacharya. 2005. “Periodic deworming
  with albendazole and its impact on growth status and diarrhoeal incidence among children in
  an urban slum of India.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
  99(4):261–7.
Taylor-Robinson, David C, Nicola Maayan, Karla Soares-Weiser, Sarah Donegan and Paul Garner.
  2015. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 7.
Taylor-Robinson, DC, N Maayan, K Soares-Weiser, S Donegan and P Garner. 2012. “Deworming
  drugs for soil-transmitted intestinal Deworming drugs for soil-transmitted intestinal worms in
  children: effects on nutritional indicators, haemoglobin and school performance (Review).” The
  Cochrane Library (11).
Turner, R. M., S. M. Bird and J. P. Higgins. 2013. “The impact of study size on meta-analyses:
  examination of underpowered studies in Cochrane reviews.” PLoS ONE 8(3):e59202.

                                                37
Vivalt, Eva. 2015. “Heterogeneous Treatment Effects in Impact Evaluation.” American Economic
  Review 105(5):467–70.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.p20151015

Watkins, William E., Jos R. Cruz and Ernesto Pollitt. 1996. “The effects of deworming on in-
 dicators of school performance in Guatemala.” Transactions of The Royal Society of Tropical
 Medicine and Hygiene 90(2):156–161.

Willett, Walter, WL Kilama and CM Kihamia. 1979. “Ascaris and Growth Rates: A Randomized
 Trial of Treatment.” American Journal of Public Health 69(10):987–991.

Wiria, Aprilianto E., Firdaus Hamid, Linda J. Wammes, Maria M. M. Kaisar, Linda May, Mar-
 garetta A. Prasetyani, Sitti Wahyuni, Yenny Djuardi, Iwan Ariawan, Heri Wibowo, Bertrand
 Lell, Robert Sauerwein, Gary T. Brice, Inge Sutanto, Lisette van Lieshout, Anton J. M. de Craen,
 Ronald van Ree, Jaco J. Verweij, Roula Tsonaka, Jeanine J. Houwing-Duistermaat, Adrian J. F.
 Luty, Erliyani Sartono, Taniawati Supali and Maria Yazdanbakhsh. 2013. “The Effect of Three-
 Monthly Albendazole Treatment on Malarial Parasitemaia and Allergy: A Household-Based
 Cluster-Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial.” PLOS One 8(3):e57899.

World Bank. 1993. World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. World Bank.
 URL: http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/0-1952-0890-0

World Health Organization. 2002. “Prevention and Control of Schistosomiasis and Soil-
 Transmitted Helminthiasis.”.
 URL: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/42588/1/WHO TRS 912.pdf

World Health Organization. 2012. “Deworming to combat the health and nutritional impact of
 soil-transmitted helminths.”.
 URL: http://www.who.int/elena/titles/bbc/deworming/en/

World Health Organization Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group. 2006. “WHO Child
 Growth Standards: Length/height-for-age, weight-for-age, weight-for-length, weight-for-height
 and body mass index-for-age: Methods and development.”.
 URL: http://www.who.int/childgrowth/standards

Yap, P., Wu F. W. Du Z. W. Hattendorf J. Chen R. Jiang J. Y. and P. Steinmann. 2014. “Effect
  of deworming on physical fitness of school-aged children in Yunnan, China: a double-blind,
  randomized, placebo-controlled trial.” PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 8:e2983.




                                               38
Appendix A             Details on data extraction for the full sample

This appendix describes the full sample of studies included in the primary analysis, and describes
data extraction for these studies, following the general principles outlined in section 3, which were
used to generate the full sample of 22 treatment impact estimates from 20 different trials. Table 1
presents descriptive characteristics of the full sample.
   Appendix A.1 lists the studies included from TMSDG without any updates. Appendix A.2
discusses studies included in the updated analysis which were not mentioned in TMSDG, and
which we presume the TMSDG authors were unaware of. Appendix A.3 describes the process of
incorporating studies that were mentioned in TMSDG but not included in their child weight gain
analysis, for example, by using formulas in The Cochrane Handbook (Higgins and Green, 2011)
to derive standard errors from other reported data. The subsequent sections detail adjustments
to some estimates included in the TMSDG sample: Appendix A.4 discusses cases in which more
precise difference-in-difference estimates could be used instead of simply looking at endline differ-
ences, while Appendix A.5 discusses cases in which ANCOVA estimation could be used. Section
Appendix A.6 describes the process for resolving conflicting information in Awasthi and Pande
(2001). Appendix A.7 explains how studies were classified according to WHO recommendations
for MDA based on helminth prevalence.


Appendix A.1         Estimates adopted from TMSDG

TMSDG include 11 treatment effect estimates from 10 different trials in their meta-analysis of
the impact of multiple dose deworming of “all children living in an endemic area” on weight gain
at longest follow-up. Eight of these treatment effect estimates are included without alteration in
the updated sample: those from Kruger et al. (1996), Watkins, Cruz and Pollitt (1996), Donnen
et al. (1998), Awasthi, Pande and Fletcher (2000), Dossa and Ategbo (2001), Alderman et al.
(2006), and Awasthi et al. (2008). Note that the clustered, unadjusted estimates from Alderman

                                                 39
et al. (2006), and the unadjusted estimates from Donnen et al. (1998), were not contained in the
published versions of the trials, but were obtained by Cochrane authors directly from the original
trial authors. We use these same estimates in our sample.


Appendix A.2          Incorporating studies not mentioned in TMSDG

The full sample employed in this paper additionally incorporates four studies not mentioned in
TMSDG.
   Joseph et al. (2015) was likely not included in TMSDG simply because it was published in
2015, conceivably after the final literature review was conducted for the meta-analysis. The trial
targeted children between ages 1 and 2 in rural Peruvian communities over the course of 1 year.
The study presents a treatment effect and 95% confidence interval from the multiple dose treatment
arm.25 A formula provided in The Cochrane Handbook was used to compute the standard error
(following Principle i in Section 3.3 of the main text).
   Liu et al. (2016), was likely not included in TMSDG simply because it is a new, still unpub-
lished study. This cluster randomized trial targeted school-aged children in China. The unad-
justed difference-in-difference treatment impact estimate, 95% confidence interval, and associated
p-value were obtained from the study authors, thanks to communication facilitated by the Camp-
bell Collaboration. Again, we use a formula provided in The Cochrane Handbook to compute the
standard error (following Principle i in Section 3.3 of the main text).
   The Campbell Collaboration alerted us to the existence of Ostwald et al. (1984) and Gateff,
Lemarinier and Labusquiere (1972). Ostwald et al. (1984) is a trial involving school-aged children
in Papua New Guinea, and Gateff, Lemarinier and Labusquiere (1972) is a study of school-aged
children in rural Cameroon. It is unclear why neither of these studies are mentioned in TMSDG.
Treatment effects and standard errors were calculated using information available in the published
papers and formulas provided in Higgins and Green (2011) (following Principle i in Section 3.3 of
  25   Two treatment arms involved just a single dose of deworming and were not included.

                                                 40
the main text).


Appendix A.3           Incorporating studies mentioned in TMSDG but omitted from

                       weight gain meta-analysis

Six studies mentioned in TMSDG but not incorporated in their meta-analysis for the weight gain
outcome are included in the sample.
    1) Willett, Kilama and Kihamia (1979) is acknowledged in TMSDG, but not included in their
meta-analysis for weight gain, possibly (although it is not entirely clear) because the trial authors
report only an adjusted treatment effect of mass deworming on weight gain or because the standard
errors of the treatment effect are not directly reported in the text. Following TMSDG’s preference
for unadjusted treatment effect estimates, we contacted the trial authors in an attempt to obtain
the microdata in order to extract unadjusted values, but after searching in his archives, Dr. Wil-
lett determined that the original data had been destroyed. We thus include what appears to be an
adjusted treatment effect measure in our full sample (following Principle iv in Section 3.3 of the
main text). The covariates used are baseline weight, study induction date (there were two separate
study intakes), and age at the time of induction. All three of these are likely to improve precision
of the estimates. Although treatment impact standard errors are not directly reported in the study,
information presented is used to calculate standard errors of treatment effects, following the pro-
cedure and formulas in Higgins and Green (2011) (following Principle i in Section 3.3 of the main
text).
    2) Miguel and Kremer (2004) report estimated impacts on weight-for-age z-score, but do not
report estimates for the raw weight outcome. As a result, this study is not included in the TMSDG
sample for meta-analysis on weight. However, the original trial data is publicly available, and we
computed the estimated impact on weight using that data and an ANCOVA specification (following
data extraction principles iii and vii).26 Schools which received treatment for schistosomiasis
   26   Miguel and Kremer (2014) corrects rounding, coding, and typographical errors in the original

                                                  41
(praziquantel) are dropped.
   3) Ndibazza et al. (2012) was not included in the weight meta-analysis in TMSDG, likely
because the study reports only impacts on outcomes derived from weight (weight-for-age and
weight-for-height), but does not present estimates for the raw weight outcomes. The data for this
trial is not publicly available, but the Campbell Collaboration generously shared information on
the raw weight impact from this study obtained through correspondence with the study authors,
allowing inclusion of this trial in our full sample (following data extraction principle iii).
   4) Wiria et al. (2013) is classified in TMSDG as a single dose trial, but this appears to be
erroneous based on our reading of the article. In their abstract, the study authors write “481 house-
holds (2022 subjects) and 473 households (1982 subjects) were assigned to receive placebo and
albendazole, respectively, every three months.” Furthermore, this trial does not report raw weight
outcomes in the study text, although they were measured. The Campbell Collaboration authors had
contacted the original authors and received from them baseline and endline measures of weight and
standard deviations of those values for all study participants under age 16, and generously shared
these estimates with us.27 Wiria et al. (2013) does not report variance of changes, so a correlation
coefficient is required to impute the standard error of the treatment effect. A correlation coefficient
was estimated using a study with author-provided raw microdata of baseline and endline weight
values (Hall et al., 2006). Using this estimated correlation coefficient of 0.89 yields a standard
error of 0.4458 for Wiria et al. (2013).28 We thus incorporate this trial into our sample using data
extraction principles iii and vi.
   5) Stephenson et al. (1993) was included in the 2012 Cochrane Review as a case of mass
paper and presents updated data and results. We use these updated data and refer to updated results
throughout, although we continue to reference Miguel and Kremer (2004) for simplicity.
   27 It is not entirely clear whether the values that were calculated account for clustering, but since

the household clusters had so few children per cluster, additional clustering would not substantially
affect standard errors.
   28 Another trial for which authors provided raw microdata, Goto, Mascie-Taylor and Lunn

(2009), has the extremely similar baseline-endline correlation coefficient of 0.90.



                                                  42
treatment and since we are examining mass treatment studies, we include this study. Prevalence
at baseline was 92%, so while this is a high prevalence community, this was not a test and treat
study, but an MDA study. Departing from the previous review, TMSDG classify this as a study
of “infected children”, and do not include it in their meta-analysis of the effect of “all children
living in an endemic area”. Note that in the 2015 update, the Cochrane Review changed its test-
and-treat category, previously called “screened for infection”, to “children known to be infected.”
The result of this choice is that in the 2015 update, TMSDG no longer classify Stephenson et al.
(1989) and Stephenson et al. (1993) as mass treatment programs.29 The distinction used in the
2012 Cochrane Review, between “test and treat” and “mass treatment”, corresponds more closely
to the decision facing policymakers, and we preserve the original distinction. In doing so, one
treatment effect and standard error from Stephenson et al. (1993) is incorporated in the full sample,
which measured the impact of multiple doses in an unscreened, but heavily infected, population
of Kenyan schoolchildren.30 We are able to calculate this treatment impact and standard error,
following data extraction principle i.
   6) Gupta and Urrutia (1982) was excluded from the TMSDG analysis for reasons that are un-
clear (to us). TMSDG note in the “Characteristics of excluded studies” section that “[There are]
only two units of allocation for relevant comparison. Children randomly divided into 4 groups,
  29  TMSDG state that “We changed the classification of Stephenson et al. (1989) and Stephenson
et al. (1993). Previously these trials were in the ‘all children in an endemic area’ category, whereas
now they are classified in the ‘children with infection.’ This decision was based on reviewing the
trials with parasitologists and examining the prevalence and intensity of the infection where clearly
the whole community was heavily infected” (Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015) p. 154). It is worth
noting that although TMSDG exclude Stephenson et al. (1993), they include Watkins, Cruz and
Pollitt (1996); the highest recorded worm baseline prevalence in Watkins, Cruz and Pollitt (1996)
by STH species is 92% (for ascaris); the highest prevalence in Stephenson et al. (1993) is also 92%
(for whipworm). Thus this reclassification does not appear to have been done systematically by
worm prevalence. In our view, assessing the merits of the WHO policy by including studies in
environments with prevalence below WHO thresholds while excluding MDA studies in areas with
high prevalence may lead to risk of bias.
   30 Stephenson et al. (1989) and the other treatment arm of Stephenson et al. (1993) tested single

dose deworming so are excluded from our analysis.


                                                 43
‘taking care that age distribution was similar in each group”’. The 4 groups were then allocated
1 of 4 different single treatment regimens; no details given.” (p. 97). Following data extraction
principle i, we calculate treatment effects and standard errors from the deworming versus placebo
comparisons (n=78), and the deworming plus giardia treatment versus giardia treatment only com-
parisons (n=80) in the published paper.
   Like TMSDG, the full sample excludes Goto, Mascie-Taylor and Lunn (2009). We received
raw data generously from the study authors (via the Campbell Collaboration). However, the shared
data only contained observations for children who had received the full set of intended doses of de-
worming medicine, rather than all who had been assigned to treatment, regardless of whether or not
they received full treatment. Therefore a valid intention-to-treat analysis could not be conducted
and estimates from this data were not included in the meta-analysis.
   We also follow TMSDG in excluding Awasthi et al. (2013) since the text indicates that the non-
mortality outcomes such as weight were only measured for a subset of children from a randomly
chosen cluster, but that within clusters, measured children were not chosen randomly.


Appendix A.4         Increasing precision using differences-in-differences estimates

Sur et al. (2005) is included in the TMSDG sample using an endline-only comparison. The updated
sample uses additional data from the article in order to calculate a difference-in-difference estimate,
following data extraction principles vi and ii.
   In particular, Web Plot Digitizer software (Rohatgi, 2015) was used to extract difference-in-
difference estimates for Sur et al. (2005) from a figure. Extracting endline values and endline
error bars from the graph nearly exactly reproduces in RevMan software the treatment effect of 0.5
and (abnormally large) standard error of 0.4717 reported in TMSDG (Web Plot Digitizer yields
a treatment effect of 0.53 and a standard error of 0.46). Data from the figure and from p-values
reported in the paper text was used to calculate the standard error of the baseline to endline change
using the same software to extract data from the figure in which baseline and endline values are

                                                  44
reported. This data was combined with the regressions of the treatment effect reported in the paper.
The standard error of the change was calculated following the formulas and procedures in Higgins
and Green (2011), using information on the treatment effect, p-values, and degrees of freedom.31
The change in weight from baseline to endline in Sur et al. (2005) is 0.2925 (note that this is a
smaller treatment effect than the 0.5 difference at endline used by TMSDG). In the text of the
article it explicitly states that the p-value of this change is 0.001.32 The t statistic is calculated
using the p-value and degrees of freedom. Once the t statistic is obtained, the standard error can
be calculated using the following formula:

                                                 treatment e f f ect
                             standard error =                        ,                            (3)
                                                     t statistic

The tinv function in Excel was used to determine that, given a p-value of 0.001 and a sample size
of 683 (and thus 681 degrees of freedom), the t statistic is 3.3048. This, in turn, using equation 1,
implies a standard error of 0.0885. This result takes Sur et al. (2005) from being an outlier with
an extremely large standard error of 0.4717 (despite a relatively large sample of n=683) to having
similar standard errors to the other study in the TMSDG sample with comparable sample size:
Awasthi, Pande and Fletcher (2000), with sample size of 1,045, has a standard error of 0.0760.33
This revised standard error is included in the full sample.
  31  As the change in weight over time is not reported in the text of the paper, the same method
was used that we believe Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015) used to estimate the endline difference in
means, i.e. using data from Figure 1 in the article.
   32 See p. 261 and p. 265 of Sur et al. (2005).
   33 We contacted Dr. Sur to obtain the original micro data from the trial, in order to verify these

calculations directly from the original microdata. Unfortunately, Dr. Sur is now retired and thus
no longer has access to the micro data




                                                 45
Appendix A.5           Use of ANCOVA to account for baseline imbalance in out-

                       come

Among all of the studies included in our meta-analysis, only one reports baseline imbalance in the
weight outcome measure - Hall et al. (2006). Specifically, the control group is heavier, at 20.7
kg, compared to 20.5 kg in the treatment group – a difference which is statistically significant at
p = 0.01 and thus quite unlikely to occur by chance.
   As noted in section 3, the Cochrane Handbook states clearly that when baseline data is avail-
able, the preferred analytical approach is to control for the baseline value of the outcome using
an Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) specification, instead of the difference-in-difference spec-
ification used by the original authors and by TMSDG (data extraction principle vii). A further
advantage of this method is not only that ANCOVA is a more efficient estimator (McKenzie, 2012;
Frison and Pocock, 1992), but that it also reduces bias in cases of any baseline imbalance (Kerwin,
2015). We use microdata obtained directly from the Hall et al. (2006) trial authors in order to
estimate this ANCOVA specification (properly accounting for clustering), and obtain an effect size
of 0.05 (SE 0.06).34


Appendix A.6           Resolving apparently conflicting reporting

In the text of Awasthi and Pande (2001), the authors report conflicting treatment effect estimates,
an issue that was also noted by TMSDG in their meta-analysis (Taylor-Robinson et al. (2015),
p.43). In particular, the text of Awasthi and Pande (2001) states that deworming produced positive
  34  A second issue with this trial relates to the imputation of clustered standard errors. In TMSDG,
the treatment effect values (for a weight gain of 0.00) are included in the meta-analysis using the
results reported in an unpublished manuscript obtained from the trial authors. TMSDG note that
while some estimates were analyzed using methods to account for clustering, the main unadjusted
results in the manuscript did not appear to use clustered standard errors, so they adjust the standard
errors using an ICC that they obtain from Alderman et al. (2006), which was a cluster randomized
trial in Uganda. In this analysis the original trial data are used to calculate, rather than impute, the
clustered standard errors.

                                                  46
and significant effects on weight; the authors write that “Mean (+ SE) weight gain in Kg in control
versus ABZ [i.e. treatment] areas was 3.04 (0.03) versus 3.22 (0.03), (p=0.01)” (p. 823). Later in
the text, however, a similar treatment effect and level of statistical significance, but a different set
of standard errors for the treatment effect, is reported: “The mean weight gain in 1.5 years in the
albendazole plus vitamin A group was 5.57% greater than that in the vitamin A group alone (3.22
KG (SD: 2.03, SE: 0.26) vs. 3.05 KG (SD: 1.47 SE: 0.19) P-value=0.01).” (p. 825).
    We follow data extraction principle vii in consideration of this issue. In their meta-analysis,
TMSDG use the reported treatment effect (0.17 kg), and appear to calculate the standard error
using the second set of values (SE 0.26 and SE 0.19). Based on the p-values calculated from
these numbers, and in contradiction to the p-value of 0.01 reported in the study, TMSDG refer to
these results as not statistically significant, with a standard error of 0.341. By contrast the standard
error is 0.0650 if one uses the p-value of 0.01 and treatment effect of 0.17 to back out a standard
error, following, as in section 3, the formulas and procedures in Higgins and Green (2011), section
7.7.3.3.   35


    Three pieces of evidence were used to assess which estimate to use. First, we consulted directly
with Dr. Awasthi about this issue. She expressed disagreement with TMSDG’s interpretation of the
results, and confirmed that she agreed with the interpretation of the study’s results and calculation
of the study’s results and calculation of the study’s standard errors using the p-values and effect
sizes used here.36 Second, the standard error for the weight outcome presented in the TMSDG
analysis is 0.341, very large for the size of this large trial (124 clusters, and over 2,000 participants).
In fact, this is 1.5 to 3 times larger than the weight outcome standard errors that TMSDG calculate
for other trials in their original sample with only a fraction of the sample size.37 By contrast, if
   35 There is yet a third possible way to calculate standard errors from data reported in this paper.
This would be to use a set of standard errors reported in the abstract (0.03 for both treatment and
control changes from baseline). These figures imply a still smaller standard error of 0.04.
   36 Personal communication, March 23, 2016. Dr. Awasthi also noted that the original micro data

is no longer available.
   37 For instance, Kruger et al. (1996), n=74, SE 0.2241), Watkins, Cruz and Pollitt (1996), n=226,




                                                    47
the standard error is calculated using the p-value and treatment effect (SE=0.0650), this makes it
comparable to the other large cluster RCTs.38 Finally, we note that it is the (statistically significant)
p-value that is reported consistently in the paper, rather than the standard error. Essentially, it is
either the case that the authors entered incorrect measures of variance at one point in the paper, or
one believes that the authors’ interpretation of the full set of study results was incorrect. Given our
correspondence with Dr. Awasthi, the evidence from the standard errors of comparable studies,
and the fact that the p-value is reported consistently in the paper while the standard errors differ,
the standard error derived from the p-value is incorporated into the full sample.


Appendix A.7          Classification of studies by prevalence

Studies are classified according to WHO guidelines for MDA recommendations which are in turn
based on whether helminth prevalence is greater than 20%, in which case MDA is recommended,
and greater than 50%, in which case multiple dose MDA is recommended. Helminth prevalence
in a study is classified based on the maximum prevalence across all worms reported in that study.
Where possible, helminth prevalence level (see Table 1) is classified based on prevalence described
within the study itself, using cutoffs that are appropriate for WHO policy guidelines. One study
in our sample is classified based on prevalence from an earlier study done in the area and which
was used for targeting of the intervention, rather than baseline data collection within the trial itself
(Alderman et al. (2006)). (Another study in our sample, Awasthi et al. (2008), does not report on
prevalence at all, and is classified based on two other subsequent trials conducted in the same area
of India – Awasthi, Pande and Fletcher (2000) and Awasthi and Pande (2001)). Finally, Gateff,
SE=0.1059), Donnen et al. (1998), n=198, SE=0.1665), and the two treatment arms from Dossa
and Ategbo (2001) (n=65, SE 0.265 and n=64, SE=0.1385).
   38 For instance, Hall et al. (2006) (40 clusters, SE 0.0599), Alderman et al. (2006) (50 clusters, SE

0.0892), Awasthi et al. (2008) (50 clusters, SE 0.148)) and the large individually randomized trials
(Sur et al. (2005), n=683, SE=0.0885, Awasthi, Pande and Fletcher (2000), n=1,045, SE=0.076).
We do note, however, that there are two large cluster RCTs in the full sample with comparably
large standard errors: Miguel and Kremer (2004) (73 clusters, SE=0.44 and Wiria et al. (2013)
(954 household clusters, SE=0.45).

                                                   48
Lemarinier and Labusquiere (1972) is classified according to information from local health center
statistics provided in the article, although the authors do not report baseline prevalence in their own
sample.




                                                  49
