                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                 MONETARY VERSUS MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICIES:
                 CAUSAL IMPACTS OF INTEREST RATES AND CREDIT
                CONTROLS IN THE ERA OF THE UK RADCLIFFE REPORT

                                         David Aikman
                                          Oliver Bush
                                         Alan M. Taylor

                                       Working Paper 22380
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22380


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2016, Revised November 2018

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Bank
of England or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors wish to thank – without
implicating – Thilo Albers, Saleem Bahaj, Michael Bordo, Forrest Capie, Matthieu Chavaz,
James Cloyne, Angus Foulis, Julia Giese, Charles Goodhart, Robert Hetzel, Ethan Ilzetzki, Òscar
Jordà, George Kapetanios, Norbert Metiu, Paul Mizen, Duncan Needham, Edward Nelson, José-
Luis Peydró, Jonathan Pinder, Ricardo Reis, Gary Richardson, Albrecht Ritschl, Joan Ros´es,
Peter Scott, Lord Skidelsky, Peter Sinclair, Ryland Thomas, Matthew Waldron, Eugene White,
and Garry Young for helpful conversations, and Casey Murphy, Consgor Osvay, Henrik
Pedersen, and Jenny Spyridi for their excellent research assistance, and the archivists at the Bank
of England, Barclays Bank, HSBC, the Royal Bank of Scotland and the National Archives. We
have benefited from comments of participants at presentations at the NBER Summer Institute, the
Cliometric Society Annual Conference, the American Economic Association Annual Meetings,
the European Economic Association Annual Congress, the Royal Economic Society Annual
Conference, the Federal Reserve conference on economic and financial history, the Oxford-
Indiana Macroeconomic Policy Conference, the 6th EurHiStock Workshop, the CEPR Financial
Markets Symposium, the MNB-CEPR-ESRB Macroeconomic Policy Research Workshop, the
Central Bank of Ireland Economic History Workshop, the INET Young Scholars’ Initiative
economic history conference, the London School of Economics, the University of Cambridge, the
University of Oxford, the University of Bonn, the University of Reading, Rutgers University,
Warwick University, the Bank for International Settlements and the Bank of England.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22380.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2016 Bank of England, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Versus Macroprudential Policies: Causal Impacts of Interest Rates and Credit Controls
in the Era of the UK Radcliffe Report
David Aikman, Oliver Bush, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 22380
June 2016, Revised November 2018
JEL No. E50,G18,N14

                                         ABSTRACT

We have entered a world of conjoined monetary and macroprudential policies. But can they
function smoothly in tandem, and with what effects? Since this policy cocktail has not been seen
for decades, the empirical evidence is almost non-existent. We can only fix this shortcoming in a
historical laboratory. The Radcliffe Report (1959), notoriously sceptical about the efficacy of
monetary policy, embodied views which led the UK to a three-decade experiment of using credit
policy tools alongside conventional changes in the central bank interest rate. These non-price
tools are similar to policies now being considered or used by macroprudential policymakers. We
describe these tools, document how they were used by the authorities, and craft a new, largely
hand-collected data set to help estimate their effects. We develop a novel empirical strategy,
which we term Factor-Augmented Local Projection (FALP), to investigate the subtly different
impacts of both monetary and macroprudential policies. Monetary policy innovations acted on
output and inflation broadly in line with consensus views today, but tighter credit policy acted
primarily to modulate bank lending whilst reducing output and leaving inflation unchanged.

David Aikman                                    Alan M. Taylor
Bank of England                                 Department of Economics and
Threadneedle Street                             Graduate School of Management
London EC2R 8AH                                 University of California
United Kingdom                                  One Shields Ave
david.aikman@bankofengland.co.uk                Davis, CA 95616-8578
                                                and CEPR
Oliver Bush                                     and also NBER
London School of Economics                      amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
o.bush@lse.ac.uk
     Changes in the complex of interest rates . . . should not be precluded, . . . and should, as a
     rule, be regarded as secondary to the technique of rationing the volume . . . of credit . . . .
                                                                        — John Maynard Keynes1


     But, when all has been said on the possibility of monetary action and of its likely efficacy,
     our conclusion is that monetary measures cannot alone be relied upon to keep in nice
     balance an economy subject to major strains from both without and within. Monetary
     measures can help, but that is all.
                                                                          — The Radcliffe Report2


             1.   Introduction: Macropru in the Rear-View Mirror

The Global Financial Crisis and its disappointing aftermath are widely viewed as a case
of macroeconomic policy failure from which lessons must be learned. Yet agreement on
the precise failures and, thus, the necessary lessons, has been elusive in many areas, from
mortgage regulation to fiscal policy, and from global imbalances to central banking. In
the latter case, the role of macroprudential policies remains fraught, with doubts about
whether they should exist, if they work, and how they should be designed and used.3
    Reflecting this range of scepticism, several countries have recently taken quite varied
courses of action in retooling their policy regimes since 2008. For example, facing a heating
up of their housing markets in 2010–12, Sweden and Norway took quite different policy
actions. Sweden’s Riksbank tried to battle this development using monetary policy tools
only, raising the policy rate, and tipping the economy into deflation, as had been predicted
by the dissident Deputy Governor Lars Svensson, who subsequently resigned. Across the
border, the Norges Bank implemented some cyclical macroprudential policies to crimp
credit expansion and moderate mortgage and house price booms, without relying as much
on rate rises, and they managed to avoid an out-turn like that in Sweden. Elsewhere,
other countries display differing degrees of readiness or willingness to use time-varying
macroprudential policies. The Bank of England now has both a Financial Policy Committee
and a Monetary Policy Committee, and the former has already taken actions under Governor
Mark Carney. As Governor of the Bank of Israel, Stanley Fischer utilized macroprudential
policies against perceived housing and credit boom risks, but subsequently as Vice-Chair
at the Federal Reserve his speeches lamented the lack of similarly strong and unified
  1 Keynes   (1978), page 397.
  2 Committee    on the Working of the Monetary System (1959), page 183.
  3 See, e.g., Cochrane (2013); Crockett (2000); Economist (2014); Kennedy (2014); Milne (2014); Tarullo (2013).




                                                      1
macroprudential powers at the U.S. central bank.4 Yet as one surveys these and other tacks
taken by national and international policymakers, two features of the post-crisis reaction
stand out: the extent to which these policy choices have proved contentious even given their
limited scope and span of operation, and the way that the debate on this policy revolution
has remained largely disconnected from any empirical evidence. Of course, the two features
may be linked.
    This paper seeks an analytical approach that might address both of these shortcomings,
by bringing a new and unique array of formal empirical evidence to the table based on
UK experience. To that end, we turn to the last great era of central bank experimentation
with instruments similar to those now being used for macroprudential policy: the postwar
decades from the 1950s to the early 1980s when many types of credit controls were put
in play. In these years – particularly the 1950s and 1960s – economic discourse and
policymaking in the UK were dominated by Keynes’ legacy. The Radcliffe Report is the
most famous example of Keynes’ followers’ scepticism of using short-term interest rates for
macroeconomic control and it endorsed other instruments, notably credit controls, instead.
In our examination of this period, which we dub the “Radcliffe era”, we construct by hand
new quantitative indicators over many decades on the application of such policies in the
UK, including credit ceilings, hire-purchase controls, special deposits, and the “Corset”.5
    To evaluate the impacts of these policies, and to compare them with the impacts of the
standard monetary policy tool of Bank Rate, we then implement a state-of-art econometric
estimation of impulse response functions (IRFs) by developing a new empirical approach
that is also original to this paper, one that we shall refer to as Factor-Augmented Local
Projection (FALP). Our approach unites the flexible and parsimonious local projection (LP)
method of estimating IRFs (Jordà 2005) with the Romer and Romer (2004) approach of
using forecasts to mitigate the selection bias arising from policymakers acting on their
expectations of future macroeconomic developments. To ensure greater robustness, we
also borrow from the factor augmentation approach that has been employed in the VAR
literature (Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz 2005) as a means to control for other information
correlated both with changes in policy and future macroeconomic developments. As part
   4 See  Fischer (2014), who compares macroprudential regimes in Israel and UK with the US, and states:
“It may well be that adding a financial stability mandate to the overall mandates of all financial regulatory
bodies, and perhaps other changes that would give more authority to a reformed FSOC, would contribute to
increasing financial and economic stability.”
   See also Fischer (2015): “The need for coordination across different regulators with distinct mandates
creates challenges to the timely deployment of macroprudential measures in the United States. Further, the
toolkit to act countercyclically in the face of building financial stability risks is limited, requires more research
on its efficacy, and may need to be enhanced.”
    5 We follow Hodgman (1973) and Miller (1973) in referring to instruments such as these as “credit controls”

and use the term “credit policy” to describe these policies taken as a whole.



                                                         2
of this project, we unearthed high quality data, both quantitative and qualitative, which are
crucially important to the credibility of our identification strategy and results. We subject
our results to a range of robustness tests, most of which give us little reason to doubt our
main results.
    What do we learn from this study – about these policies in their own time, and in
terms of lessons for today? In one respect, our econometric evidence suggests that the
policies from the Radcliffe era were actually a bit of a failure judged on their own terms,
when we recall that the policymakers at the time viewed credit policy tools as a substitute
for monetary policy. That is, in the old days the Bank of England thought that it could
use credit controls to fine-tune macroeconomic outcomes in line with the government’s
stated objectives for output, inflation, and so on. But we find only mixed evidence for this
belief. Changes in credit controls did strongly depress lending, and with a much shorter
lag than changes in Bank Rate; but their effects on output (dampened) are somewhat less
robust; and credit controls did not have a significantly negative impact on consumer prices.
At the same time, we find that changes to the policy rate delivered their usual impacts
of conventional sign and magnitude on output and inflation, in full accord with today’s
consensus views and empirical evidence.
    As for today, if a similar set of macroprudential tools were to operate as it did in the
Radcliffe era, it might fairly be said that “it does exactly what it says on the tin”. It would
more strongly modulate credit creation, and yet would have weaker impacts on nominal
GDP and prices than conventional monetary policy.6 Since the underlying IRFs span
different outcome spaces, a major claim by proponents of macroprudential policies now
has at least some evidence behind it. That is, a non-duplicating but complementary mix of
monetary and macroprudential policy tools might curb the credit cycle, and so moderate
financial instability risks, without otherwise pushing the economy unduly off target, or less
so than with only a pure monetary policy action like a leaning-against-the-wind rate hike.


1.1.      Related literature
The effects of credit controls in Britain At the time credit controls were being used,
several British economists studied their macroeconomic effects, albeit using rather dated
techniques. The majority of papers found that the application of credit controls was
   6 Inaddition, today’s macroprudential authorities typically emphasise that their tools have a direct impact
on the resilience of the financial system, which is over and above any impact they may have on credit dynamics
and the financial cycle. That is, by requiring banks and other intermediaries to have higher buffers of capital
and liquidity when risks are judged to be elevated, the financial system will be better placed to weather an
episode of out-sized losses without curtailing essential lending and other intermediation services to the real
economy. See Bank of England (2009) for discussion.



                                                      3
followed by lower bank lending, and although very few papers looked at the impact
on overall activity, a handful found that hire-purchase controls reduced durable goods
consumption. According to Coghlan (1973), for every £1 of special deposits (similar to
remunerated reserve requirements, see Section 3.1) called, lending fell by 62p, although
this effect appeared to be temporary. Subsequently, Melitz and Sterdyniak (1979) reported
evidence that an increase in reserve holdings by the commercial banks (which could be
driven by a call for special deposits) was associated with a rise in the rate of interest on bank
lending. Norton (1969), Artis (1978) and Savage (1978) all found statistically significant
and economically large impacts of credit ceilings on bank lending, while quite a number
of papers reported that hire-purchase controls temporarily depressed both hire purchase
credit and consumption.7
    This paper broadly confirms the results of this literature using modern techniques, but
also goes far beyond it in terms of questions asked and responses examined.

The effects of credit controls across countries The modern literature on credit controls,
which uses more sophisticated econometric techniques, remains small. Largely comprised
of country-specific studies, it tends to find that credit controls depressed lending, while
evidence on other effects is more sparse. Romer and Romer (1993) identify five periods
of credit policy restraint in post-WWII USA from the narrative evidence, which they call
“credit actions”. In response to a credit action, the credit spread rose and the ratio of bank
lending to total credit fell, suggesting a bank lending channel. Industrial production also
fell, although the estimate is not statistically significant. Elliott, Feldberg and Lehnert
(2013) build on this by constructing a US credit policy index with more variation. The
authors’ preliminary analysis finds that tighter credit policies lowered consumer debt, while
loosening did not raise it. Zdzienicka, Chen, Kalan, Laséen and Svirydzenka (2015) extend
this work, finding that both monetary and credit policy had a dampening effect on financial
conditions, but the effect of credit policy was more immediate and shorter-lived.8
    Elsewhere, Monnet (2014) studies the impact of post-WWII macroeconomic policy in
France, using a narrative measure similar to that of Romer and Romer (1993). In periods of
credit restraint, the French authorities used reserve and liquidity requirements and credit
ceilings, as well as non-standard monetary measures such as individual bank discount
ceilings. He finds that a tightening in non-price monetary and credit policy led to a fall
in lending, output and prices and an improvement in the current account balance. In
other work, Monnet (2016) describes the widespread use of similar credit policies in other
   7 E.g., Ball and Drake (1963), Stone (1964), El-Mokadem (1973), Garganas (1975), Cuthbertson (1980), and,

recently, Aron, Duca, Muellbauer, Murata and Murphy (2012) and Scott and Walker (2017).
   8 Other papers including Koch (2015) study individual credit policies in the US such as Regulation Q.




                                                     4
European countries, with the notable exception of Germany. Sonoda and Sudo (2016) study
Japan’s experience of using credit controls called “Quantitative Restrictions”. Although
there is not much variation in the policy, the authors find that these controls reduced
lending and output and raised prices. Emerging markets have for a long time continued to
use credit controls, particularly reserve requirements. Glocker and Towbin (2015) examine
the Brazilian experience and also find that activity falls and prices rise in response to a
tightening in reserve requirements.
    Our study complements this strand of work and goes beyond it in terms of the range of
responses to monetary and credit policy innovations and the techniques we use. Further-
more, Britain is a particularly good case to study for two reasons. First, it is probably the
most comparable case study to most countries using monetary and macroprudential policies
today. This is because, unlike in most European countries at the time, British monetary
policy worked through relatively modern techniques (such as open market operations), but
unlike the US (then and now), credit controls were not very prone to leakages because most
household and business credit was intermediated through banks and near-banks subject to
regulation. Second, we have excellent data, not least the archival evidence we exploit on
the policies themselves, the banks’ responses to these policies, and on the forecasts made
by the Treasury.

The effects of financial shocks Our paper also contributes to a broader debate about the
macroeconomic impact of financial shocks. Whereas in the 1990s, the literature focussed on
the bank lending and broad credit channels of monetary policy, more recently researchers
have analysed financial shocks as an independent source of economic fluctuations.9
    Several papers have focussed on the impact on firms, and through them, aggregate
supply. A subset of these predict that contractionary financial shocks reduce firms’ ability
to borrow, in turn reducing investment and output. Depending on the reaction of monetary
policy, consumer prices can end up rising after a lag (Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist 1999;
Gilchrist and Zakrajšek 2011). Firms also require finance for working capital, for instance
because they need to pay for inputs of production before they receive payment for their
product. Models of the working capital channel tend to find that a reduction in the credit
supply forces firms to produce less, and in turn firms react by raising prices (Carlstrom,
Fuerst and Paustian 2010; Gilchrist, Schoenle, Sim and Zakrajšek 2017). A closely related
literature examines the macroeconomic impact of financial shocks via a household demand
channel. Papers in this literature tend to focus on mortgage borrowing, and predict that
financial shocks move output and consumer prices in the same direction (e.g., Iacoviello
  9 Indeed  Romer and Romer (1993) was a response to other key papers in this literature such as Kashyap
and Stein (1994).


                                                   5
2005). Another recent theoretical paper with relevance for our analysis is Bahadir and
Gumus (2016), in whose setup controls do not directly affect mortgage lending as was true
in the UK in the era we study.10
    While the literature contains evidence in favour of the existence of both the household
demand and firm supply channels, only recently have researchers started to ask which
channel dominates – though the answer might vary, of course, by time and place. Mian,
Sufi and Verner (2017)’s work stresses the household demand channel as a dominant factor
in the US in the 1980s. However, our findings, and those of Glocker and Towbin (2015),
Sonoda and Sudo (2016), and Meeks (2017),11 find little response of consumer prices to
tighter credit policy, suggesting perhaps no clearly dominant channel. In a similar vein,
Barnett and Thomas (2014), who study bank lending and economic activity in post-WWII
Britain using a structural VAR, conclude that “credit supply shocks behave more like
aggregate supply shocks than aggregate demand shocks”, while Bassett, Chosak, Driscoll
and Zakrajšek (2014) report that lending standards shocks in the US in the 1990s and 2000s
did not have an economically or statistically significant impact on prices.

Empirical strategy Along with the data we uncover in this paper, our final contribution
is methodological. We build on the massive literature on estimating impulse response
functions by proposing a Factor-Augmented Local Projection (FALP) approach. We will
wait to set out the related literature alongside the details of this approach in Section 4.1.


                        2.    Credit Policy in the Radcliffe Era

Why were credit controls used and how were they co-ordinated with monetary and other
policies? Answering these questions is important both in designing an empirical strategy to
analyse the effects of monetary and credit policies and in drawing conclusions for monetary
and macroprudential policies today. There are three important pieces of historical context
which shed light on these questions.12
  10 The  authors discriminate between shocks to the supply of credit to the household, tradable and non-
tradable sectors in an open economy. Households borrow consumer credit, which is rationed by a loan-to-
income limit. Firms borrow to pay wages before they receive payment from their clients, up to a fraction of
their physical capital. As above, shocks to the supply of household credit move output and consumer prices
in the same direction on impact. An exogenous fall in the supply of credit to the non-tradable goods sector
reduces output and raises the price of non-tradable goods relative to tradable goods. Assuming the law of
one price holds for tradables, this implies an increase in consumer prices. A reduction in the supply of credit
to the tradable sector again reduces output but now raises the price of tradable goods relative to those of
non-tradables, implying a reduction in consumer prices assuming the law of one price holds.
   11 Meeks (2017) studies the macroeconomic impacts of microprudential regulation in the UK from the 1990s

onwards.
   12 Excellent broader overviews of British monetary policy since 1945 include Dimsdale (1991) and Howson

(2004).

                                                      6
    First, policymakers were highly sceptical about using the central bank interest rate for
macroeconomic control. Although the debate shifted in the 1970s under the influence of
monetarism, it was not until the arrival of the Thatcher government that conventional
interest rate–based monetary policy became the primary tool of macroeconomic policy. This
scepticism was most famously set out in the Report of the Committee on the Working of
the Monetary System (1959), universally known as the Radcliffe Report. Commissioned by
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the outcome of two years of hearings, the Report was
a wide-ranging survey of the structure and operation of the UK monetary and financial
system. Its central messages concerned the objectives and instruments of monetary policy.
The number of scholarly citations it received within ten years of publication – around
2000, including a paper marking its tenth anniversary by Anna Schwartz (Schwartz 1969)
– is testament to the stir it caused in academia.13 Whether or not it led to immediate
significant changes in UK policymaking, it merits a chapter in the official history of the
Bank of England (Capie 2010), not least because it is an excellent guide to official thinking
at the time. Ten years on from its publication, the Bank of England stated clearly that “the
approach to policy has been similar to that of the Radcliffe Committee”.14
    The Radcliffe Report’s prescriptions for the objectives of policy were not controversial.
Above all, policymakers should aim to achieve full employment, stable prices, and external
balance, although the Committee recognised that there may be trade-offs between these
objectives. However, viewed from today’s perspective, the Committee’s views on the
instruments of policy were deeply unorthodox (Batini and Nelson (2009) give an excellent
account of the development of monetary policy doctrine over the period of our study). It
argued that other financial assets were good substitutes for money, so an increase in money
would fall predominantly on demand for financial assets (and hence interest rates) rather
than demand for goods. In favour of this, it cited survey evidence which it claimed showed
that inventories and investment were not particularly responsive to the short-term interest
rate. Or, to paraphrase using a simple model of the time, it believed that the IS curve was
steep (Howson 2004). While a steep IS curve does not imply that traditional monetary
policy is ineffective, this belief did lead to a view that large movements in short-term
interest rates would be needed for a given impact on output.
    The second important piece of historical context cemented the aversion to using short-
term interest rates. This is that the public debt to GDP ratio was extremely high – over 150
per cent of GDP at the beginning of our study and only falling below 50 per cent by the
mid-1970s. Given the public debt position and the fact that a significant portion was owed
to foreigners, the Treasury was extremely keen to avoid macroeconomic policies which
  13 Citation  count from a Google Scholar search.
  14 Bank   of England (1970).


                                                     7
would raise the debt service burden (Hodgman 1973; Fforde 1992; Allen 2014). Although
the Radcliffe Committee refrained from giving a clear view on how the macroeconomy
should be controlled if not via conventional monetary policy, contemporary commentators
agreed that fiscal policy was to be preferred (see, e.g., Gurley 1960; Kaldor 1960).
    Finally, the exchange rate regime – the third key piece of context about the period – is
instrumental in understanding why credit controls were used. Britain had a dollar peg
until 1972, and even after the end of the Bretton Woods regime, the exchange rate was
still heavily managed.15 Britain lurched from one balance of payments crisis to another in
this era (Schenk 2010; Kennedy 2016) as it was unable consistently to run sufficiently tight
macroeconomic policy to maintain its foreign exchange reserves position. The Radcliffe
Committee did acknowledge a role for Bank Rate and credit controls in such “emergency
circumstances”. It could be difficult to achieve the political consensus to tighten fiscal
policy sufficiently in the heat of a crisis, when Bank Rate and credit controls might act
faster anyway. Given the Treasury’s aversion to using Bank Rate, it naturally looked for
alternatives, the most prominent of which were credit controls.
    The choice of instrument was a source of ongoing friction between the Treasury and the
Bank of England over this period. This tension led, in Kareken (1968)’s view, to a kind of
game of chicken, where the two authorities were inclined to put off tighter policy until the
last minute (leading to stop–go policy) as the Treasury did not want higher interest rates
and the Bank did not want to apply controls. The reason for the Bank of England’s distaste
of credit controls is clear – they were difficult to administer, required ongoing attention to
limit leakages, and above all the banks (to which the Bank was close) did not like them. In
the end, the authorities often responded with a policy package which included higher Bank
Rate, tighter credit controls, tax rises, and other tools such as incomes policies.16
    This stop–go pattern can be seen in Figure 1 which shows four key UK macroeconomic
indicators used in our analysis: manufacturing output; consumer price inflation; bank
lending; and Bank Rate. There were pronounced fluctuations in all these variables over the
period. It is particularly noticeable that real activity exhibited very short cycles: activity
peaked locally in 1953, 1955, 1957, 1960, 1964, 1968, 1973, 1976, 1978-79, and 1982.
    The end of the formal peg did give policymakers more autonomy, which they exploited
in 1971–73. A liberalisation of the banking system in 1971 called “Competition and Credit
Control” and Chancellor Barber’s 1972 “dash for growth” budget sparked a vigorous boom
  15 Particularlybefore and after the 1976 crisis.
  16 Aseries of papers written in the 1960s and 70s examined the authorities’ reaction function and confirmed
that Bank Rate, credit controls and tax rates were all used forcefully in response to movements in foreign
exchange reserves and also in reaction to unemployment and consumer prices (Fisher 1968, 1970; Pissarides
1972; Coghlan 1975). Interestingly, Pissarides (1972) finds some evidence of sluggish policy adjustment
(possibly because of political costs of changing policy).


                                                     8
                                          Figure 1: Behaviour of key macroeconomic variables over the period
                                The figure presents time series of four macroeconomic indicators over our sample period.

                                     (a) Manufacturing output                                                    (b) Consumer prices




                                                                                               30
              20
Annual growth rate (per cent)




                                                                                 Annual growth rate (per cent)
                      10




                                                                                                     20
             0




                                                                                        10
  -10




                                                                                               0
              -20




                      1950m1            1960m1     1970m1       1980m1                                 1950m1    1960m1     1970m1     1980m1



                                         (c) Bank lending                                                          (d) Bank Rate
              60




                                                                                               20
Annual growth rate (per cent)
                      40




                                                                                               15
                                                                                 Per cent
            20




                                                                                   10
   0




                                                                                               5
              -20




                                                                                               0




                      1950m1            1960m1     1970m1       1980m1                                 1950m1    1960m1     1970m1     1980m1



                                                                     Notes: See text.




                                                                            9
in both bank lending and output. Inflation, which had been in the 0–10 per cent range
for most of the 1950s and 60s then rose rapidly and peaked at over 25 per cent in 1975.17
The British authorities adopted monetary targets as a constraint on policy in the 1970s
and although the exact timing is disputed,18 there is broader consensus that they were not
effective constraints.19 Instead, balance of payments concerns still played an important role,
particularly in 1976 when an IMF loan was accompanied by a significant policy tightening,
and in 1977 when the Bank of England cut the policy rate and accumulated reserves rapidly
in an effort to prevent sterling appreciation. Furthermore, nonmonetary policies including
credit controls and incomes policies continued to be deployed in response to high inflation.
As Goodhart (1989) notes, by the end of the 1970s, “critics were arguing that the authorities’
adoption of ‘pragmatic monetarism’ and monetary targets had not represented a real
change of heart or of approach”.
    In conclusion, monetary and credit policies were used systematically over the period
of this study, with the balance of payments a key objective. They were used together,
along with fiscal policy and other policies such as wage and price controls. This means
that our empirical strategy must take into account the correlations of monetary and credit
policies with the current and prospective state of the economy, and with each other and
other policies. In terms of policy implications for today, researchers should take account of
changes in the structure of the economy between then and now, particularly the monetary
policy regime.


                3.    Description and Use of Credit Policy Tools

In this section we set out the details and our measurement of the four main cyclical credit
policy tools used in Britain in the era we study:

   • Hire-purchase controls;

   • Special deposits;

   • Credit ceilings; and

   • The supplementary special deposits scheme (the “Corset”).

  17 The  surge in inflation from 1973 to 1975 was not helped by the policy-induced indexation of wages to
retail prices which came in to operation around the same time as the first the oil shock (Miller 1976).
  18 Needham (2015) argues that informal monetary targets came in as early as 1971, in contrast to Capie

(2010) who puts the date at 1976 when the first hard public commitment was made.
  19 Indeed Nelson and Nikolov (2004) attribute the Great Inflation in the UK to monetary policy neglect.




                                                   10
                      Table 1: A summary of credit policy tools used by the UK authorities


 Policy             Description                         Responsible          Scope                          Usage
 instrument                                             authority
 Hire-purchase      Restrictions on terms of hire       Board of Trade (UK   Market-wide                    Used through the
 controls           purchase (instalment) lending       government)                                         1950s,   1960s and
                    for different categories of con-                                                        1970s,   until their
                    sumer goods, including mini-                                                            removal in 1982
                    mum down payments and maxi-
                    mum repayment periods
 Credit ceilings    Short-term quantitative ceilings    Bank of England      London and Scottish clear-     Scheme used on var-
                    on the level of credit extended                          ing banks and other listed     ious occasions in all
                    to the private sector and over-                          banks; restraint letters       three decades until
                    seas. Export finance usually ex-                         also sent to finance houses,   abolition in 1971
                    cluded and lending to house-                             acceptance houses and dis-
                    holds and hire purchase lenders                          count market participants
                    usually particularly discouraged
 Special deposits   Requirements to place interest-     Bank of England      London and Scottish clear-     First used in April
                    bearing deposits at the Bank of                          ing banks; all retail banks    1960, used frequently
                    England                                                  from 1971                      in 1960s and 1970s
 Supplementary      Requirements to place non-          Bank of England      All listed banks and           Scheme activated on
 special deposits   interest bearing deposits at the                         deposit-taking     finance     three occasions: De-
 scheme      (the   Bank of England if interest-                             houses; small institutions     cember 1973; Novem-
 “Corset”)          bearing eligible liabilities grew                        and Northern Irish banks       ber 1976; June 1978
                    faster than a specified rate                             were exempt




    Table 1 provides a summary of these tools, including the authority responsible for
setting each tool, the institutions to which they applied, and their use over the period
we examine. Banks were also subject to various other liquidity requirements, including a
uniform minimum liquidity ratio and cash ratio (Bank of England 1962a). However, the
calibration of these requirements was largely unchanged over the period, and so they have
been excluded from this analysis, aside from robustness tests.20


3.1.     Description of credit policy tools
Hire-purchase controls By the late 1950s, hire purchase, the practice of purchasing
durable goods via instalment credit, had become an increasingly important source of
finance for commercial vehicles, cars, and other consumer durables. For instance, nearly
a quarter of all new cars purchased at this time – and a much higher proportion of
second-hand vehicles – were bought on hire purchase. The Board of Trade, a govern-
  20 From  1946, the clearing banks agreed to maintain a minimum cash-to-deposit ratio of 8%. From 1951, the
clearing banks agreed to maintain a liquid asset ratio of reserves, call money and Treasury and commercial
bills of 28%–32% of their deposit liabilities; from 1957, this agreement was made more precise when the liquid
asset ratio was set at a minimum of 30%; in 1963, this was reduced to 28%. This system was replaced by a
single reserve asset ratio of 12.5% in 1971. The definition was in between the cash and liquid asset ratios
and turned out to constitute a modest easing of the constraint on most banks. In 1981 the reserve asset ratio
requirement was abandoned.


                                                               11
ment department, exercised control over the terms of hire purchase credit by stipulating
minimum down payments and maximum repayment periods for different categories of
goods. These controls were used actively for much of the 1950s, and despite the Radcliffe
Report’s verdict that they were suitable for use only for short periods at times of emergency,
continued to be used throughout the 1960s and 70s until their removal in 1982.
    The principal advantage of hire-purchase controls lay in the reach they provided be-
yond the clearing banks to the specialist hire purchase finance companies that funded
approximately three quarters of the stock of hire purchase debt. While the larger finance
houses took some advances from banks, the majority of their funding came from issuing
deposits.21 Controls on clearing banks’ lending therefore had only a small effect on the
provision of hire purchase credit by finance companies. A second purported advantage
of hire-purchase controls was that they could be targeted: policy changes were frequently
directed at particular classes of good (e.g., cars, furniture, etc.).

Credit ceilings Credit ceilings were used frequently from 1955 to 1971 as an emergency
tool to reduce aggregate demand when balance of payments deficits reached crisis propor-
tions. The modalities of these ceilings were typically set out in letters from the Governor of
the Bank to the main banking and finance associations. The first such request was made in
July 1955, with the banks asked to reduce their lending by 10 per cent by the end of the
year. Typically, the ceilings were accompanied by a request to focus restraint on lending to
the household sector and to maintain or expand lending to export or import-competing
sectors. Usually the banks complied with the ceilings, but on one occasion (in 1969) the
banks were fined for exceeding a ceiling.22 The scope of the ceilings varied over time in
terms of the institutions and types of lending covered, but it was always wide.
    The practical difficulties of implementing credit ceilings were colossal. One problem
lay in extending the scope of the restraint beyond the clearing banks to relevant non-bank
financial intermediaries. Restraint letters were sent to the Finance Houses Association, the
Acceptance Houses Committee, and the London Discount Market Association – but the
Bank had no formal power to enforce its requests to these non-banks. A second problem
arose when the clearing banks repeatedly overshot their lending targets, a fact that they
plausibly put down to customers making use of existing credit facilities (Goodhart 2015).23
  21 In June 1962, deposits accounted for nearly two thirds of large finance houses’ liabilities; smaller finance
houses, by contrast, were more reliant on bank advances to fund their balance sheets (Bank of England 1962b).
  22 On 31 May 1969, the Bank announced that the rate of interest payable on special deposits would be halved

until the ceiling at the time was met.
  23 The lending targets had no statutory basis, as was common with most financial regulation of the time.

According to Capie (2010), the possibility of issuing a formal directive was raised, but dropped for fear of
“changing the nature of the relationship between the Bank and the banks”.



                                                       12
Special deposits Special deposits were introduced as a less intrusive replacement for
ceilings in 1958. They were akin to a remunerated reserve requirement. Banks were
requested to place varying amounts of deposits at the Bank of England, in an amount
proportional to their deposit bases, at an interest rate close to the Treasury bill rate.24 Banks
were given about 60 days on average to meet requests for additional deposits, and about 20
days to comply when policy was loosened. The scheme initially applied to the London and
Scottish clearing banks only but was broadened in 1971.
    The tool was intended to influence banks’ ability to expand credit by acting on their
minimum liquidity ratios: special deposits did not count as liquid assets for the purposes
of calculating these ratios, so a bank whose ratio was near the minimum when the tool was
applied would be forced either to curtail lending or sell investments (typically government
securities). Over time, the authorities tried to restrict banks’ freedom in adjusting to these
calls by requesting that they were not met by selling investments. The tool was first used in
April 1960 and, despite being initially seen as “a temporary arrangement” (Capie 2010),
was frequently used until its abandonment in 1980.

Supplementary special deposits The supplementary special deposits scheme – otherwise
known as the “Corset” – was a second attempt to replace ceilings after they were brought
back in the 1960s. First used in 1973, it was a system of non-remunerated reserve require-
ments tied to the rate of growth of each bank’s interest-bearing sterling deposits or “eligible
liabilities”.25 If eligible liabilities grew faster than the prescribed rate, banks were required
to place non-interest-bearing supplementary special deposits with the Bank. The deposit
requirements were progressively larger the greater the overshoot over the prescribed rate,
ranging from 5 to 50 per cent of the incremental excess eligible liability growth. This had
the effect of forcing banks either to accept lower profits or even losses on their marginal
lending, or else to widen their lending spreads. The scheme applied to all listed banks and
deposit-taking finance houses operating in the United Kingdom, but small institutions and
Northern Irish banks were made exempt.


3.2.    Creating an aggregate credit policy index
To analyse the effects of these instruments, we sum up the overall stance of credit policy
via an aggregate index. We create this index in two steps: first, we code subindices that
characterise the stance of each of the four instruments listed above; second, we summarise
variation across the subindices by combining them using a simple weighting scheme.
  24 There
         was no statutory basis for these requests either.
  25 Interest-bearing
                   sterling deposits were taken to be the marginal source of funding to meet fluctuations in
the demand for credit. For further detail, see Bank of England (1982).

                                                    13
Coding the individual credit controls It is straightforward to characterise the stance of
special deposits, as the tool was varied on a continuous scale.26 The source for the data is
the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin (various issues).
   For hire-purchase restrictions, we create a continuous subindex following the same
method as Cuthbertson (1980). This combines the minimum down payment and the
maximum repayment limit (in months):
                                                                      !
                                                          100 − dit
                                       HPti = dit +                       ,
                                                             Tti
where i is the type of good (cars, commercial vehicles, radios and televisions, or furniture),
dit is the required down payment on good i, and Tti is the maximum repayment period on
good i in months. The final subindex is the sum of all the HPti weighted by the amount
of credit subject to hire-purchase controls financing good type i. The data on minimum
down payments and maximum repayment periods are taken from the Crowther Report
and the National Institute Economic Review.27 For the weighting, we use fixed weights from
the Crowther Report on credit extended in 1966 (around the middle of our sample).28
     Figure 2a presents the time series of these first two continuous subindices, hire-purchase
controls and special deposits.
     We code the other tools in our set – credit ceilings and the supplementary special
deposits scheme – using a binary 0–1 index. Decisions about ceilings were not always made
in public, so we have consulted the Bank of England archives. For example, in December
1969, the Bank of England told the banks privately that they would not be held to the
publicly-announced credit ceiling,so we code this and subsequent months “0” until the
ceiling was next activated in April 1970.29 Tables 2 and 3 set out the policy changes that
occurred and the mapping from these into index values.

Aggregating the subindices We next aggregate the subindices because we expect the
macroeconomic impacts to be similar and because the resulting credit policy index gives us
more variation to exploit than would the four individual subindices.30
  26 One  complication is that banks were given around 60 days’ notice of calls for special deposits before
they were binding. So we could use either announcement dates or implementation dates in our subindex.
We choose the former as we expect that forward-looking banks would have begun adjusting their portfolios
immediately after announcements.
  27 Crowther (1971a), National Institute of Economic and Social Research (1960) and National Institute of

Economic and Social Research (1984).
  28 Crowther (1971b).
  29 Extract from Mr. Hollom’s memo dated 1.1.70 on his talk 31.12.69 with Mr. Wilson and Mr. Piper

(C.L.C.B.), 1st January 1970, Bank of England Archive 3A8/6
  30 In a macroeconomic model, one would most likely model all of these controls as an increase in the cost of

intermediation.


                                                     14
                                             Figure 2: Time series of credit policy indices


The upper panel presents the time series of special deposit rates set by the Bank of England (blue line) and
our index of hire-purchase restrictions set by the Board of Trade (red line). The lower panel presents the
credit policy index.

                                    (a) Special deposit rate and hire-purchase controls index




                                                                                            50
                                6




                                                                                            40
                         Percentage points
                                     4




                                                                                                 30
                                                                                             Index
                                                                                            20
                            2




                                                                                            10
                                0




                                                                                            0
                                                   1960m1       1970m1       1980m1

                                                       Calls for special deposits (LHS)
                                                       HP restrictions (RHS)


                                                    (b) Aggregate credit policy index
                                  4
                                  3
                         Index
                           2      1
                                  0




                                       1950m1           1960m1          1970m1           1980m1


                                                   Notes: See section 3.2 for details.




                                                                   15
                                         Table 2: Classifying credit ceiling notices

 Date               Description of the policy                                                                               Classification
 1955 Jul 25       Chancellor asks the banks to “achieve a positive and significant reduction in the total of bank                1
                   advances outstanding”, which is interpreted as a 10% reduction before the end of the year
 1955 Dec 31       End of the ceiling                                                                                             0
 1957 Sep 19       Chancellor asks the banks that “the average level of bank advances during the next twelve months               1
                   should be held at the average level for the last twelve months”
 1958 Jul 31       End of the ceiling                                                                                             0
 1961 Jul 25       Governor’s letter to Committee of London Clearing Bankers: the level of advances at the end of                 1
                   the year should not exceed that of June”
 1961 Dec 31       End of the ceiling                                                                                             0
 1965 May 5        Governor’s letter to Committee of London Clearing Bankers: advances to private sector should                   1
                   not increase more than 5% during twelve months to March 1966. Letters also sent to other main
                   banking associations
 1966 Feb 1        Governor’s letter to Committee of London Clearing Bankers: until further review, advances,                     1
                   acceptances and commercial bills should not rise above March 1966 levels. Letters also sent to
                   other main banking associations
 1967 Apr 11       Chancellor’s Budget statement: ceiling on lending to private sector would be discontinued forth-               0
                   with for London and Scottish clearing banks, and discontinued for other banks as and when
                   suitable new arrangements had been worked out
 1967 Nov 19       Government announced new measures of credit policy: lending at the latest date for which                       1
                   figures are available will become the ceiling until further notice
 1968 May 23       Bank credit restriction notice: the restrictions requested last November should be modified so as              1
                   to achieve a greater reduction in lending to non-priority borrowers than has so far taken place.
                   Banks are asked not to allow lending to exceed 104% of the Nov 1967 level (i.e., roughly current
                   level) until further notice
 1968 Aug 30       Bank credit restriction notice: lending has fallen below the 104% ceiling; current restrictions must           1
                   continue to be rigorously enforced over the period ahead
 1968 Nov 22       Bank credit restriction notice: the clearing banks are now asked to reduce lending to 98% of its               1
                   mid-Nov 1967 level by mid-Mar 1969; other banks are asked to ensure their lending does not
                   exceed 102% of its Nov 1967 level by Mar 1969
 1969 Jan 31       Deputy Governor’s letter to Committee of London Clearing Bankers: little progress has yet been                 1
                   made towards meeting the revised target for private sector lending set last November; we must
                   now re-emphasise the importance to achieving this target
 1969 May 31       Bank credit restriction notice: latest data show sharp reversal in progress in meeting lending                 1
                   ceiling; Bank has decided to halve the rate of interest payable on special deposits from June 2
                   until banks comply with the ceiling
 1969 Dec 31       Bank of England informs the Committee of London Clearing Bankers in private that it would be                   0
                   content to see lending growth
 1970 Apr 14       Chancellor’s Budget statement: a gradual and moderate increase in lending that has hitherto                    1
                   been subject to ceilings would be consistent with economic objectives; bank lending should not
                   rise by more than about 5% over 12 months from Mar 1970
 1970 Jul 28       Bank credit restriction notice: latest data indicate lending is increasing at a faster pace than April         1
                   guidance. Clearing and Scottish banks reminded that April guidance remains in force and have
                   been asked to reduce lending growth accordingly
 1971 Mar 30       Chancellor’s Budget statement: intention to put forward proposals to change techniques of mon-                 1
                   etary control, but for now necessary to maintain guidelines on lending. Clearing and Scottish
                   banks asked that lending should not rise to mid-Jun 1971 by more than 7.5% above its mid-Mar
                   1970 level
 1971 Jun 30       Bank notice: proposed changes in monetary policy techniques not yet complete, so necessary to                  1
                   extend the guidelines on lending. Clearers asked that lending in mid-Sep 1971 should not exceed
                   its mid-Mar 1970 level by more than 10%. Similar restraint applied to other banks
 1971 Sep 16       Quantitative ceilings abandoned as part of Competition and Credit Control reform package                       0
Sources: Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Bank of England Archive and authors’ calculations.



    It is not obvious how to weight the four controls. We consulted the clearing bank
archives to look for evidence on how the banks reacted to them.31 Interestingly, the banks
appear to have reacted to the different controls in a similar way. Following the application
of a ceiling in 1955, Westminster Bank told its branch managers that “in general, no new or
  31 The   evidence from commercial bank archives is presented in more detail in Bush (2018).


                                                                  16
               Table 3: Classifying announcements under the supplementary special deposits scheme

 Date              Base period               Permissible growth, per month   Rate of deposit              Classification
 1973 Dec 17       Oct–Dec 1973             8% over first 6 months;          Until Nov 1974:              1
                                            1.5% thereafter                  5% for excess of up to 1pp
                                                                             25% for excess of 1–3pp
                                                                             50% for excess of over 3pp
                                                                             From Nov 1974:
                                                                             5% for excess of up to 3pp
                                                                             25% for excess of 3–5pp
                                                                             50% for excess over 5pp
 1975 Feb 28       —                         Scheme terminated               —                            0
 1976 Nov 18       Aug–Oct 1976              3% over first 6 months;         As from Nov 1974             1
                                             0.5% thereafter
 1977 Aug 11       —                         Scheme terminated               —                            0
 1978 Jun 8        Nov 1977–Apr 1978        4% during Aug – Oct 1978;        As from Nov 1974             1
                                            1% thereafter
 1980 Jun 18       —                         Scheme terminated               —                            0
Source: Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin and authors’ calculations.



 increased advances can be made unless they are specifically required for the production of
 exports, for the saving of essential imports, for necessary seasonal commitments or for the
 essential requirements of the defence programme. In particular, advances should not be
 made for capital expenditure or for stockpiling or for increasing production of consumer
 goods”.32 Following the call for special deposits in April 1960, the National Provincial
 instructed its branch managers that “advances which are regarded as analogous to the
‘Personal Loans’ of our competitors must in future be granted in very exceptional cases” and
 that applications for advances to fund capital expenditure should be referred elsewhere.33
 In December 1973, Barclays reacted to the “Corset” announcement by informing its branch
 managers that it was prepared to see a rise of 5 per cent in borrowing limits in priority
 sectors (industry, agriculture, and construction) and it wanted to see a 10 per cent reduction
 in lending to non-priority sectors (banks and other financial companies, property companies,
 and households).34 Hire-purchase controls of course did not directly apply to the banks,
 but even so, they sometimes amended their lending policies accordingly as for example
 in the case of Midland Bank in 1960 which told its branch managers that “it is important
 that attention should be paid to the provisions of the Hire Purchase and Credit Sale Orders
 in those cases where they would apply had the transaction been arranged through hire-
purchase finance instead of by Personal Loan”.35 Interestingly, from the perspective of the
 bank lending channel literature cited above, we found no evidence of banks reacting to
  32 “Advance  Policy”, Circular A.54-1955, 3rd August 1955, Royal Bank of Scotland Archives WES/1302/14.
  33 “Advances”, Circular No. 1960/10, 29th April 1960, Royal Bank of Scotland Archives NAT/914/10.
  34 “Advances”, Head Office Circular No. A.9,955, 21st December 1973, Barclays Archives 29/1603 .
  35 “Personal Loans Service”, S.A.126/1960, 28th May 1960, HSBC Archives UK 1493.




                                                                 17
changes in Bank Rate other than via interest rates on loans and deposits.36
    On the basis of this evidence, and in an effort to keep things simple, we give each of
the four controls an equal weight in the credit policy index. Specifically, we divide the
hire-purchase and special deposit subindices by their mean values when they are on, so
that each of the four controls has a mean value of 1 for periods when they were active.
Then we sum the four subindices and divide by the resulting series’ standard deviation.
The resulting aggregate index is presented in Figure 2b. Of course, this weighting does
contain a healthy dose of judgement, so we use different weighting schemes in robustness
tests described in Section 4.1.


3.3.   Usage of monetary and credit policies
To compare monetary and credit policy actions in our sample, Figure 3a shows the time
series data for annual changes in Bank Rate and annual changes in our aggregate credit
policy index. Monetary and credit policies were clearly used jointly over the period, but the
relationship is far from a one-to-one correspondence even when we look at annual changes.
The correlation between monthly changes in these variables is much lower still, with a
contemporaneous correlation coefficient of 0.3, as seen in Figure 3b.
     Table 4 presents a range of sample statistics on the usage of these policy tools. Over the
full sample, changes in the credit policy index are evenly distributed between tightenings
and loosenings, whereas the distribution of changes in Bank Rate is skewed, with almost
twice as many loosenings as tightenings. Bank Rate hikes are typically twice as large as
cuts, however. Consistent with Figure 3a, the instruments were often adjusted in the same
direction: over the full sample, there were 22 within-month moves in the same direction;
the policies were moved in opposite directions on only 3 occasions. However, there were
still 116 cases where one policy moved but not the other, indicating little correlation overall.


                       4.    Identification Strategy and Data

The primary goal of this paper is to estimate the effects of monetary and credit policies
on the macroeconomy and the financial system. Our empirical approach is motivated by
three challenges we face in achieving this goal. The first – measuring the stance of credit
policy – is discussed in Section 3.2. This section sets out two further challenges and explains
how we overcome them, in so doing introducing Factor-Augmented Local Projections (FALPs)
  36 Whilefar from decisive evidence, this supports Romer and Romer (1993)’s claim that the bank lending
channel of monetary policy is not quantitatively important.




                                                  18
                     Figure 3: The co-movement of monetary policy and credit policy


The upper panel presents twelve-month changes in Bank Rate (blue line) and the credit policy index (red
line). The lower panel presents the cross-correlation between the monthly change in Bank Rate and leads and
lags of the month change in the credit policy index.

                                                                     (a) Bank Rate and the aggregate credit policy index
                                                   10
                         Percentage points / index
                            -5      0       5-10




                                                         1950m1                   1960m1          1970m1        1980m1

                                                                                   Annual change in Bank Rate
                                                                                   Annual change in credit controls


                      (b) Lead-lag relationship between Bank Rate and credit policy index
                         Correlation with monthly ch. in Bank Rate
                                                               0.5




                                                                                                                           0.5
                                            0.0




                                                                                                                           0.0
                         -0.5




                                                                                                                           -0.5




                                                                      -4        -2         0           2          4
                                                                      Lags of monthly change in credit control index


                                                                                      Notes: See text.




                                                                                             19
                   Table 4: Summary statistics on the usage of monetary and credit policy tools

Bank Rate                             Standard deviation                                  3.5
                                      Number of tightenings                               38
                                      Average tightening size                             1.4
                                      Number of loosenings                                72
                                      Average loosening size                              0.6

Credit policy index                   Standard deviation                                  1.0
                                      Number of tightenings                               28
                                      Average tightening size                             0.7
                                      Number of loosenings                                28
                                      Average loosening size                              0.7

Both policies                         Months with moves in same direction                  22
                                      Months with moves in opposite direction              3
                                      Months when only one of the two moves               116
                                      Months when neither of the two moves                231
Source: Authors’ calculations.


into the literature.37 We also present our new monthly macrofinancial data set for the UK,
which we hope will be used widely by other researchers.


4.1.      Identification strategy
Motivation for our approach Our second challenge is that monetary and credit policy
were quite often used together and also in combination with other macroeconomic policies.
As described in Sections 2 and 3, there were 25 occasions when monetary and credit policies
were used together;38 there were also 23 occasions when fiscal policy was used with one or
both of them. To reflect this, we always regress our macroeconomic outcome variables on a
vector of monetary, credit, and fiscal policy variables. In principle, there should be no bias
resulting from this specification. But if we have mismeasured the policies, any correlation
between the policy variables may be a source of bias. To check for this, we dummy out
months with more than one type of policy action in a further set of robustness tests. Other
policies such as incomes policies could also be a source of bias, so we follow the same
dummy strategy in another set of robustness tests.
    The third challenge is that policy actions were taken at least in part in response to
actual or prospective macroeconomic developments. Omitting the information used to
set policy could lead to biased estimates of its impact. We follow Romer and Romer
(2004) by regressing our policy variables on macroeconomic forecasts made at the time in a
first-stage regression. As pointed out by Cochrane (2004), in principle the only right-hand-
side variables which are needed in the first-stage regression are forecasts of the dependent
  37 We  also note that, even though the papers were written independently, in a similar spirit to our paper the
survey chapter by Ramey (2016) (p. 41 and Figure 3.2B) also briefly explores among several identification
schemes the idea of combining recursive LPs with FAVAR controls.
  38 22 in the same direction and 3 in opposite directions from each other.



                                                           20
variable in the second-stage regression. In practice, policymakers might react to information
not reflected by forecasts that is also correlated with future macroeconomic developments.
For this reason and because there are some policy changes in months without forecasts, we
supplement forecasts with factors estimated from a new set of macroeconomic and financial
data. We note that Stock and Watson (2002) showed that factors produce good forecasts
while Bernanke and Boivin (2003) found that Federal Reserve Board forecasts could have
been improved by incorporating such information. We are following Bernanke, Boivin and
Eliasz (2005) in using factors to identify the impact of economic policy.

First stage: constructing policy innovation series In the first stage, we regress Bank
Rate and our credit policy index on macroeconomic forecasts and factors to create policy
innovation series which are no longer correlated with expectations of future macroeconomic
outcomes:39

                          K    L                                  M                   J
  ∆policyi,t = αi +      ∑    ∑ γi,k,l Et [∆xk,l,t ] + δi it +   ∑      ζ i,m Fm,t + ∑ θi,j policy j,t−1 + ei,t ,
                         k =1 l =0                               m =1               j =1


where policyi,t refers to our measures of monetary or credit policy (indexed by i, and j
towards the end of the equation),40 Et [∆xk,l,t ] is the forecast made at time t of the change in
macroeconomic variable x (indexed by k) between the quarter in which the forecast was
made and the forecast horizon l, it is an indicator variable set to zero when forecasts are
available and one otherwise, and Fm,t is one of a number of macroeconomic factors indexed
by m.
    The forecasts used are GDP and the consumer price deflator (i.e., K = 2). We pick
these variables because they correspond closely to the outcome variables in which we are
interested. These variables are reported for quarterly data. In months when forecasts were
produced, we use forecasts for the quarter-on-quarter change in GDP and CPI, zero, one
and two quarters ahead (i.e., L = 2).41 In months without forecasts, we pick the latest
available forecast and adjust the timing as necessary. Before December 1959 we have no
forecasts of quarterly GDP and prices at all. We use a dummy to remove any differences in
means, but rely only on factors for identification over this period.
  39 Romer    and Romer (2004) first employed this approach in the literature and Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016) is
a recent application to UK monetary policy.
   40 i and j both contain monetary and credit policies – i.e. the innovations are based on regressions of each

policy on lags of both policies.
   41 There are two reasons for this choice. First, the data availability is worse for longer-term forecasts. Second,

although the forecasts were generally made under the assumption of unchanged policy, the interpretation
of “unchanged policy” changes over time. So we follow Romer and Romer (2004) in using only near-term
forecasts which are likely to be invariant to the policy assumption used, as policymakers thought there were
lags in the effects of policy.


                                                         21
    The macroeconomic factors are estimated from a large data set described below using
principal component analysis. We use information criteria developed by Bai and Ng (2002)
to guide our choice of factors. Their first three information criteria suggest a range of four
to six factors. We use the first six principal components in our main specification but four
in a robustness exercise.
    Our specification assumes that policymakers observed the current state of the economy,
as measured by contemporaneous factors. This is the conventional timing assumption, as
discussed in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999). We explore an alternative timing
assumption – that policymakers observe data with a one-month lag – in a robustness test.

Second stage: Factor-Augmented Local Projection (FALP) In the second stage, we regress
macroeconomic response variables of interest on the policy innovations estimated in the
first stage, along with control variables. Romer and Romer (2004) and Cloyne and Hürtgen
(2016) used vector autoregressive (VAR) specifications to do this. We use local projections
for two reasons.42 First, local projections do not require the researcher to take a stance on
the number of autoregressive lags to include, and are therefore more robust. Coibion (2012)
showed that the results in Romer and Romer (2004) were quite sensitive to this choice.
Second, local projections allow more flexibility, especially in using more controls without
losing too many degrees of freedom.43 We exploit this advantage in the robustness tests.
    Our specification is:

                                           I               K      L
                  ∆yn,t,t+h = ι h,n + ∑ β h,i,n ei,t +    ∑ ∑ κh,k,l,n Et [∆xk,l,t ] + λh,n it
                                          i =1            k =1 l =0
                            M                                  J
                       +   ∑      µh,m,n Fm,t + νh,n fisct + ∑ ξ h,j,n policy j,t−1 + ηn,t,t+h ,
                           m =1                                j =1


where ∆yn,t,t+h is the change in a response variable (indexed by n) between months t and
response horizon t + h, β h,i,n is the coefficient of interest used to plot impulse response
functions (the responses are composed of a series of β h,i,n coefficients, one for each horizon
h, policy impulse variable indexed by i, and outcome variable indexed by n) and fisct is a
control for fiscal policy discussed in Section 4.2.
    Because we assume that policymakers observed the economy contemporaneously, we
also assume that policy affected the economy with a lag of one month. We explore this
assumption in the robustness test mentioned above.
  42 Jordà(2005) formally introduced local projections into the literature, but Cochrane (2004) also suggested
using a local projections approach (without using the name) in his comments on Romer and Romer (2004).
  43 In an autoregressive setup, one would presumably need to use several lags of each control.




                                                         22
    In the second stage, we control for all of the controls used in the first stage. This means
that we do not need to worry about using regressors generated in the first stage leading
to biased standard errors. This is an application of the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theorem.
Standard errors are calculated using the Newey-West estimator because our errors are
serially correlated. The lag correction is increasing in the horizon in question.


4.2.    Data
Constructing a high quality data set was essential to implementing our identification
strategy. This took considerable effort, and roughly three quarters of the 116 monthly
data series collected were copied out by hand, at least in part, from statistical publications.
Beyond this paper, we hope many other researchers will make use of these data in future.

Policy variables Bank Rate and its replacement, Minimum Lending Rate, are sourced
from the Bank of England website. The sources and construction of the credit policy index
are described in Section 3. The fiscal policy variable shows the expected first-year impact of
fiscal policy announcements such as Budgets on the central government primary surplus,
scaled by expected central government revenue. It is therefore a summary metric of the
change in the fiscal stance. The sources were Financial Statements and speeches made in
Parliament announcing changes in fiscal policy.44

Forecasts We collected forecasts of UK output and consumer prices between 1959 and
1982. As official forecasts of quarterly GDP and consumer prices were not published
over this period, we transcribed unpublished HM Treasury forecasts by hand from the
National Archives. Treasury forecasts were typically produced three times a year, although
they became more frequent in the 1970s and 1980s.45 To fill in some of the gaps, we
supplemented official forecasts with those of the National Institute of Economic and Social
Research (NIESR), a prominent independent research institute, which were published each
quarter.46 In total, our data set contains 114 Treasury forecasts and 71 NIESR forecasts.
Finally, we also use policy dummies in robustness tests. These dummies cover other financial
policies (e.g., one-off reforms such as the Competition and Credit Control liberalisation in
1971) and incomes policies, as well as dummies for fiscal policy changes. The sources were
  44 These data are the basis of Cloyne (2013)’s measure of fiscal policy shocks and are similar to the data

used in Romer and Romer (2010)’s study of the impact of tax policy.
  45 Regular forecasts tended to be in February, July and November. For most of the years in our sample,

these were recorded in Cabinet Office Committee files. However, HM Treasury files also have a number of
draft forecasts, some of which we also include.
  46 NIESR forecasts were published quarterly, except in 1960–61 when they were published every 2 months.




                                                    23
                                                                          Figure 4: Forecasts


The figure presents time series of the forecasts of GDP growth and inflation produced by HM Treasury and
the National Institute for Economic and Social Research (NIESR). Each forecast is the sum of the nowcast and
the one- and two-quarter ahead forecasts and we have annualised them for ease of interpretation.

                                          (a) GDP growth                                                                    (b) Consumption deflator growth
     Annualised growth rate (per cent)




                                                                                        Annualised growth rate (per cent)
                                   20




                                                                                                                20    25
                        10




                                                                                                   10    15
               0




                                                                                             5
    -10




                                                                                        0
                              1950m1     1960m1       1970m1           1980m1                                    1950m1           1960m1       1970m1           1980m1

                                                  HM Treasury                                                                              HM Treasury
                                                  National Institute                                                                       National Institute



                                                         Notes: Missing data are interpolated. See text.


official government documents, various issues of the National Institute Economic Review, the
Bank of England, Ingham (1981), and Capie (2010).
    Figure 4 presents the forecasts we use in the analysis. While there are some exceptions
– notably the 1980 growth forecasts – Treasury and NIESR forecasts are highly correlated
over the period (the correlation coefficient for the GDP forecasts in Figure 4 is 0.70 and for
the inflation forecasts it is 0.96), suggesting that the latter are good proxies when official
forecasts are unavailable.47 This is similar to the finding of Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016),
who find that NIESR forecasts are highly correlated with the Bank of England’s Inflation
Report projections for the period in which both are available. Appendix 1 summarises a
series of articles reviewing the quality of NIESR forecasts over this period, finding that they
were comparable in quality with other leading forecasts.

Factors We have also constructed a new monthly macroeconomic data set for the UK from
1951 to 1982. This 78 variable data set was deployed using principal components analysis to
estimate the factors used as additional controls in the local projections. The data span most
of the key series which policymakers followed then and now, although because the data set
is monthly it is somewhat light on measures of demand and output, many of which are
  47 Theother significant deviation occurs in April 1974 when the Treasury believed that the three-day week
had severely depressed GDP in Q1, so there would be a large bounce-back in Q2.

                                                                                  24
only produced at quarterly frequency. Table A1 in Appendix 2 lists the full data set used to
construct the factors in the FALPs, and describes the transformations we performed before
estimating the factors. Series were seasonally adjusted when necessary using Census X13.
The response variables are all included in this data set, with one exception.48
    The series in the monthly data set were pulled together from a wide variety of inter-
mediate sources, although a high proportion of the series was originally published by the
Central Statistics Office (CSO) or the Bank of England. The most frequently used secondary
sources were Thomas and Dimsdale (2017) and Thomson Reuters Datastream.49


                                         5.   Main Results

In this section, we describe the main results of the paper. After showing the innovations in
Bank Rate and credit controls, we focus on characterizing the responses of lending, output,
and inflation. We also summarise the results of the battery of robustness tests described
above. A Supplementary Appendix presents full results from these exercises.


5.1.       Innovations in monetary and credit policy
In Section 4.1, we described how we constructed two monetary and credit policy innovations
series, using a first-stage regression. The top row of Figure 5 shows the monthly residuals
from this regression for each policy, and the bottom row shows the twelve-month rolling
sum compared with the twelve-month change in the policy series. The top row shows that
we have a lot of variation in our policy innovations series. Indeed, it is immediately clear
from the bottom row that most of the movement in Bank Rate and especially credit controls
is not explained by the right-hand-side variables in our first-stage regression. This probably
reflects policy changes which were driven by exchange rate concerns, and which may not
have been strongly correlated with expected developments in the domestic economy. This
source of variation is very useful in helping us estimate the causal impact of policy.
    The Bank Rate innovation series broadly matches up to the historical narrative, with pol-
icy becoming significantly looser in the early 1970s as Heath blocked monetary tightening
during the Barber Boom (Needham 2015), and again in 1977 when policymakers sought to
prevent sterling appreciation, while the late 1970s saw an abrupt move towards contrac-
tionary policy. The credit control series has a number of mini-cycles, but the loosening in
1971 stands out.
  48 Thelending to GDP ratio is the exception. To construct this series, we used as the denominator a monthly
nominal GDP series created using a temporal disaggregation technique.
  49 Other secondary sources were Capie and Webber (1985), Denman and McDonald (1996), Huang and

Thomas (2016), O’Donoghue, McDonnell and Placek (2006), and Reinhart and Rogoff (2004).


                                                     25
                                   Figure 5: Innovations in monetary and credit policy
                              The figure presents innovations in monetary and credit policy.

                    (a) Bank Rate (monthly change)                            (b) Credit controls (monthly change)
        3




                                                                       2
        2




                                                                       1
Percentage points
            1




                                                                     Index
                                                                       0
     0




                                                                       -1
        -1
        -2




                                                                       -2




             1950m1       1960m1     1970m1       1980m1                    1950m1     1960m1       1970m1        1980m1



                    (c) Bank Rate (annual change)                              (d) Credit controls (annual change)
        10




                                                                       4
Percentage points
               5




                                                                       2
                                                                     Index
       0




                                                                       0
-5




                                                                       -2
        -10




                                                                       -4




             1950m1       1960m1     1970m1       1980m1                    1950m1     1960m1       1970m1        1980m1

                            Annual change in Bank Rate                                  Annual change in credit controls
                            Of which innovations                                        Of which innovations



                                                         Notes: See text.




                                                               26
5.2.   The causal impact of Bank Rate innovations
The left column of Figure 6 presents our FALP-estimated impulse responses of key macroe-
conomic variables following a 1 standard deviation (3.5 percentage point) increase in Bank
Rate. We estimate that there was a large and statistically significant fall in bank lending
in response. Manufacturing output fell persistently, with a mean response of around five
per cent after two years, but returning to its original level within four years. The consumer
price level took longer to adjust; prices were broadly unchanged for 20 months, and then
began to decline persistently thereafter.
    The results are broadly in line with the empirical literature on the effects of monetary
policy. After adjusting for the standard deviation, the estimated responses for output and
inflation are qualitatively similar but have somewhat larger peak impacts than the estimates
by Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016) for Britain in the period 1975 to 2007. The shape of our IRFs
for output and inflation are very similar to those in the U.S. literature such as in Bernanke,
Boivin and Eliasz (2005) and Romer and Romer (2004), but the peak impacts are somewhat
smaller in magnitude.
    The robustness exercises presented in the Supplementary Appendix do not give us
cause to doubt our qualitative results.
    We interpret our results as running contrary to the Radcliffe Committee’s doubts about
the efficacy of conventional monetary policy: our findings indicate that, even in that distant
era, monetary policy had a stable transmission mechanism to output and prices. Moreover,
the causal impacts we identify are close in magnitude to the consensus impacts seen in the
contemporary macro literature.


5.3.   The causal impact of credit control innovations
The right column of Figure 6 presents estimated impulse responses to a 1 standard deviation
innovation in the credit policy index. As this is an index, the size of this increase does
not have a natural interpretation. In response, bank lending is estimated to have declined
persistently and considerably, falling by around 8 per cent after a year. The peak impact
occurred after one year, compared to three years in response to an innovation in Bank Rate.
Manufacturing output is also estimated to have declined, falling by around 2 per cent after
one year. There was no discernible impact on consumer prices.
   While the result for lending appears to be robust, the charts in the Supplementary
Appendix leave some room for doubt about the impact on output, particularly the exercise
in which no weight is put on hire-purchase controls.




                                             27
                           Figure 6: Responses of key variables to monetary and credit policy innovations


The panels present estimated impulse responses of each variable to a one standard deviation in Bank Rate
(first column) and credit controls (second column). The red bold line shows the mean estimated response;
the dark grey region shows the ±1 standard error confidence interval; the light grey region shows the ±2
standard error confidence interval.

                           Impulse: Bank Rate; response: lending                                      Impulse: cred. ctrls.; response: lending




                                                                                           5
                0




                                                                                           0
                -10




                                                                                Per cent
     Per cent

                -20




                                                                                           -5
                -30




                                                                                           -10
                -40




                                                                                           -15
                       0        10        20        30       40   50                              0         10        20        30       40   50
                                     Months after innovation                                                     Months after innovation



                      Impulse: Bank Rate; response: manu. output                                 Impulse: cred. ctrls.; response: manu. output
                10




                                                                                           4
                5




                                                                                           2
                                                                                Per cent
     Per cent
                0




                                                                                           0
                -5




                                                                                           -2
                -10




                                                                                           -4




                      0         10        20        30       40   50                             0         10         20        30       40   50
                                     Months after innovation                                                     Months after innovation



                            Impulse: Bank Rate; response: CPI                                          Impulse: cred. ctrls.; response: CPI
                5




                                                                                           4
                0




                                                                                           2
     Per cent




                                                                                Per cent
                -5




                                                                                           0
                -10




                                                                                           -2
                -15




                                                                                           -4




                       0        10        20        30       40   50                              0         10        20        30       40   50
                                     Months after innovation                                                     Months after innovation



                                                                  Notes: See text.


                                                                        28
5.4. Discussion of response of consumer prices to credit policy innovations
Given the potential importance of our finding that tighter credit controls did not reduce
prices both to macroprudential policymakers today and to our understanding of the history
of this period, we have subjected this result to extra scrutiny. One potential explanation is
that the oil price shocks happened to occur soon after credit controls were imposed. If the
rise in consumer prices was driven by the oil shock and credit controls did not cause the oil
shock, then the rise in consumer prices we find would not represent a causal relationship.
In fact, we can rule out this explanation by controlling for movements in the oil price for
the months after the policy change. When we did this, the response of consumer prices to
credit controls was broadly unchanged.
    Taken at face value, then, these results might not seem consistent with a household
demand channel dominating aggregate supply channels in the transmission of credit policy.
Of course, this might not be surprising when household and especially mortgage credit
were much smaller relative to GDP than they are today, and firm credit played a relatively
bigger role. To check further, we looked for evidence on the channels through which credit
controls affected the economy.
    We focussed our search on two periods: 1955–56, during and after the first instance
of two credit controls being applied at the same time, and 1969–71, when our cumulated
innovations series suggests that credit policy was at its tightest. Not coincidentally, they
were both followed by official reports which, among other issues, examined their impact:
the Radcliffe Report and the Committee of Inquiry on Small Firms (1971), otherwise known
as the Bolton Report. These reports, along with evidence from surveys and newspapers,
suggest that credit controls did affect the economy via a household demand channel, but
also via a working capital channel, and via a business investment channel.
    Evidence on the household demand channel is probably most systematic, because
several papers (cited in footnote 7) have found clear evidence that consumption of the
particular goods targeted by hire-purchase restrictions fell relative to consumption of
other goods. Anecdotal evidence is broadly consistent with this. For example, the Retail
Distributors Association evidence to the Radcliffe Report stated that “undoubtedly when
initial payments [on purchases financed by hire purchase] are raised and the periods of
repayment shortened there is an immediate fall in hire purchase sales”.50 In 1969, the
Times reported a 38 per cent fall in hire purchase sales of vehicles between November and
December 1968, concluding that the falls were “a clear indication that the Government’s
emergency November hire purchase restrictions are having their intended effect” (Smith
1969).
  50 Committee   on the Working of the Monetary System (1960), page 141.


                                                    29
    Working capital problems were clearly affecting some firms in both 1955–56 and 1969–71.
A letter to the Financial Times complained about the credit ceiling: “Can you imagine
anything more absurdly futile? I asked my bank manager whether I was expected to pay
my wages and various supplies with bits of straw and un-threshed grain while I waited to
sell my corn many weeks if not months after the 31st December next?” (Hopton 1955). The
Daily Express surveyed readers on the ceiling’s impact. One replied: “I have a promise of
larger orders in future and the prospect of substantial orders from another source abroad.
But I cannot afford to finance them so I approached my bank manager. But the bank replied:
‘No further credit can be granted in any circumstances’ ” (Daily Express 1955).
    This anecdotal evidence is corroborated by survey evidence. For example, a survey by
the Federation of British Industries (FBI) found that 11 per cent of respondents’ trading
was affected by a lack of external finance in the two years to 1957, while 26 per cent of
 the respondents to the Oxford Institute of Statistics survey reduced their stocks of raw
materials in response to the credit squeeze. By 1969, the Confederation of British Industry
(CBI, successor to the FBI) was regularly asking manufacturers whether credit or finance
was limiting output. Over the period 1969–71, an average of 8.9 per cent responded that
output had been limited this way. This compares to a survey average of 4.3 per cent and an
all-time peak of 9.4 per cent in the three years to July 2011, including the most acute phase
of the Global Financial Crisis.
    There is also evidence on the business investment channel, though it is less systematic
than for the other two channels. Three one-off surveys suggest that the 1955 credit squeeze
had an impact on firms’ capital expenditure. First, the FBI survey cited above showed
that 9 per cent of firms responding had postponed investment on account of difficulty
raising external finance in the two years ending 1955, rising to 16 per cent in the two years
ending 1957.51 Second, a survey by the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce found that 30
percent of members postponed investment between 1955 and 1957, and a quarter of these
blamed credit restrictions.52 Third, a survey of small- and medium-sized manufacturers
by the Oxford Institute of Statistics reported that 23 per cent of respondents had revised
their investment plans in response to the 1955 credit squeeze (Lydall 1957). Meanwhile an
article in the Financial Times reported fears that farmers would reduce spending on tractors
in response to hire purchase restrictions (Financial Times Industrial Correspondent 1956).
Evidence for the investment channel in 1969–1971 is hard to find.
    In our view, this array of evidence that credit controls affected working capital and
business investment, as well as household demand, makes the finding of no significant
response of consumer prices unsurprising.
  51 Committee   on the Working of the Monetary System (1960), page 119.
  52 Committee   on the Working of the Monetary System (1960), page 88.


                                                    30
   In sum, our results suggest that credit controls had strong effects on limiting lending,
and they may have had some effect in dampening output, where they probably operated
through both household demand and firm supply channels. However, it is far from clear
that policymakers’ trust in these instruments’ ability to curb inflation was warranted.


6.    Implications for Monetary and Macroprudential Policies Today

Even though credit policies may not have been used successfully around the time of the
Radcliffe Report, policymakers today might be able to learn from the experience. Central
banks are now grappling with the challenges of a new mission, one that may require them
to use unusual and controversial macroprudential tools alongside interest rate policy. There
is an active debate about the efficacy of macroprudential tools and the appropriate role for
them alongside monetary policy in securing financial stability.53
     Some of the macroprudential tools under consideration today are quite similar to the
tools discussed in this paper. For example, liquidity regulations are similar to special and
supplementary special deposits, while product tools such as loan-to-value regulations are
similar to hire-purchase controls. And just as today, these tools were used alongside the
policy rate, although today policymakers are seeking to achieve a different objective with
macroprudential policy – namely, financial stability.
     If macroprudential policies today work as credit controls did in the Radcliffe era, then
the different macroeconomic impacts we estimate could be a useful guide for policymakers.
First, we could conclude that lending can be controlled without sacrificing control of
inflation, and with somewhat mild impacts on output. Given the different lengths of and
lack of synchronization between business and credit cycles, this could be very valuable.
Second, macroprudential policy may give policymakers more immediate control over bank
lending, compared to standard monetary policy. Third, even if using macroprudential
policy for credit control will probably have consequences for output, this consequence could
still be stabilising if macroprudential policy is tightened in credit booms when output tends
to be firmer and loosened in credit busts when output underperforms (Jordà, Schularick
and Taylor 2013).
     At this juncture, there is much uncertainty about how to measure systemic risk and
hence the efficacy of macroprudential policy in achieving its central objective. Nevertheless,
a number of authors have found that systemic banking crises are routinely preceded by
deteriorations in non-financial private sector balance sheets (e.g., Borio and Lowe (2002);
Schularick and Taylor (2012)). This evidence has been influential in policy circles: the
  53 E.g.,
       Stein (2013); Williams (2014); Korinek and Simsek (2016); Svensson (2017); Aikman, Giese, Kapadia
and McLeay (2018).


                                                  31
                                         Figure 7: Impact of policies on a financial stability risk indicator


The panels present estimated impulse responses of each variable to a one standard deviation in Bank Rate
(first column) and credit controls (second column). The red bold line shows the mean estimated response;
the dark grey region shows the ±1 standard error confidence interval; the light grey region shows the ±2
standard error confidence interval.

                          Impulse: Bank Rate; response: lending to GDP                                       Impulse: cred. ctrls.; response: lending to GDP




                                                                                                      1
                     2




                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                  Percentage points
 Percentage points
                     0




                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                      -.5
                     -2




                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                      -1.5
                     -4




                           0       10        20        30       40      50                                    0       10        20        30       40   50
                                        Months after innovation                                                            Months after innovation



                                                                     Notes: See text.


Riksbank decided to tighten monetary policy because of concerns about the rising ratio of
credit to GDP.
    Given all this, we investigate the effects of both monetary policy and credit policy on
this popular systemic risk proxy as a final response variable of interest using our FALP
estimation framework. We find that, whereas the ratio of bank lending to GDP is estimated
to decline persistently, considerably and robustly following a credit policy tightening, the
estimated response to a Bank Rate innovation is of marginal statistical significance (see
Figure 7 and the Supplementary Appendix).
    Although these results are subject to the Lucas Critique given credit policies were not
used to limit systemic risk in the period we study, the findings suggest that credit policies
may be better suited to curbing increases in the credit to GDP ratio than monetary policy.
If smoothing fluctuations in the credit to GDP ratio is beneficial to financial stability, this
points to directing macroprudential policy in the first instance at achieving financial stability
aims, leaving monetary policy to control inflation.




                                                                             32
                                 Table 5: Summary of our results

      Policy              Credit          Output       Inflation   Credit to GDP ratio

      Bank Rate             ↓↓              ↓↓            ↓↓               ↓
      Credit controls       ↓↓              ↓             —                ↓↓



                                     7.    Conclusion

In this paper, we use a novel econometric technique and a new data set to study the effects
of monetary and credit control policies on macroeconomic and financial outcomes in the
United Kingdom between the 1950s and early 1980s.
    We report two main results. First, we find that monetary and credit policies had
qualitatively distinct effects on four headline macroeconomic and financial variables during
this period. Table 5 summarises these differences. Increases in Bank Rate had robust
negative effects on bank lending, manufacturing output, and consumer prices especially.
By contrast, we find that credit controls – liquidity requirements on banks, credit growth
limits, and constraints on the terms of consumer finance – had a strong negative impact on
bank lending but a less robust impact on output and no discernible effect on inflation.
    Overall, our estimates suggest that monetary and credit policies spanned different
outcome spaces during this period. This result supports the notion that today’s macropru-
dential tools, which are close cousins of the credit policies studied in this paper, might
provide additional independent instruments to help central banks mitigate painful tradeoffs
and better meet both their monetary and financial stability objectives.
    Second, our impulse responses indicate that credit policies had moderating effects on a
key modern-day indicator of financial system vulnerabilities, while the effects of monetary
policy actions were less clear cut. Our results therefore provide some support to the view
that macroprudential policy is better suited to achieving financial stability goals than
monetary policy.




                                                 33
                                           References
Aikman, David L., Julia V. Giese, Sujit R. Kapadia, and Michael McLeay. 2018. “Targeting Finan-
  cial Stability: Macroprudential or Monetary Policy?” Bank of England Working Paper 734.
Allen, William A. 2014. Monetary Policy and Financial Repression in Britain, 1951–59. Basingstoke:
  Palgrave Macmillan.
Aron, Janine, John V. Duca, John Muellbauer, Keiko Murata, and Anthony Murphy. 2012. “Credit,
  Housing Collateral, and Consumption: Evidence from Japan, the U.K., and the U.S.” Review of
  Income and Wealth, 58(3): 397–423.
Artis, Michael J. 1978. “Monetary Policy – Part II.” In British Economic Policy, 1960–74, ed. Frank T.
  Blackaby, 258–303. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bahadir, Berrak, and Inci Gumus. 2016. “Credit Decomposition and Business Cycles in Emerging
  Market Economies.” Journal of International Economics, 103: 250–262.
Bai, Jushan, and Serena Ng. 2002. “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
  Models.” Econometrica, 70(1): 191–221.
Ball, R. James, and Pamela S. Drake. 1963. “The Impact of Credit Control on Consumer Durable
  Spending in the United Kingdom, 1957-1961.” The Review of Economic Studies, 30(3): 181–194.
Bank of England. 1962a. “Bank Liquidity in the United Kingdom.” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
  2(4): 248–255.
Bank of England. 1962b. “Sources of Funds of Hire Purchase Finance Companies 1958–62.” Bank of
  England Quarterly Bulletin, 2(4): 256–262.
Bank of England. 1970. “The Operation of Monetary Policy since Radcliffe.” In Money in Britain,
  1959-1969: The Papers of the Radcliffe Report–Ten Years After Conference at Hove, Sussex, October 1969,
  ed. David R. Croome and Harry G. Johnson, 211–230. London: Oxford University Press.
Bank of England. 1982. “The Supplementary Special Deposits Scheme.” Bank of England Quarterly
  Bulletin, 22(1): 74–85.
Bank of England. 2009. “The Role of Macroprudential Policy.” Bank of England Discussion Paper,
  November.
Barnett, Alina, and Ryland Thomas. 2014. “Has Weak Lending and Activity in the UK Been Driven
  by Credit Supply Shocks?” The Manchester School, 82(S1): 60–89.
Bassett, William F., Mary Beth Chosak, John C. Driscoll, and Egon Zakrajšek. 2014. “Changes in
  Bank Lending Standards and the Macroeconomy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 62: 23–40.
Batini, Nicoletta, and Edward Nelson. 2009. The UK’s Rocky Road to Stability. New York: Nova
  Science.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Jean Boivin. 2003. “Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment.” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 50(3): 525–546. Swiss National Bank/Study Center Gerzensee Conference
  on Monetary Policy under Incomplete Information.
Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz. 2005. “Measuring the Effects of Monetary Policy: A
  Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  120(1): 387–422.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark L. Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The Financial Accelerator in a
  Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In Handbook of MacroeconomicsVol. 1C, ed. John B. Taylor
  and Michael Woodford, 1341–1393. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe. 2002. “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring
  the Nexus.” Bank for International Settlements BIS Working Papers 114.
Bush, Oliver P. H. 2018. “The Great Leveraging in Britain: An Inside Story.” Unpublished.
Capie, Forrest, and Alan Webber. 1985. A Monetary History of the United Kingdom, 1870–1982. Volume
  1. Data, Sources, Methods. London: Allen & Unwin.


                                                  34
Capie, Forrest H. 2010. The Bank of England: 1950s to 1979. Studies in Macroeconomic History, Cam-
  bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst, and Matthias O. Paustian. 2010. “Optimal Monetary
  Policy in a Model with Agency Costs.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(S1): 37–70.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 1999. “Monetary Policy
  Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?” In Handbook of MacroeconomicsVol. 1A,
  ed. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 65–148. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cloyne, James S. 2013. “Discretionary Tax Changes and the Macroeconomy: New Narrative Evi-
  dence from the United Kingdom.” American Economic Review, 103(4): 1507–28.
Cloyne, James S., and Patrick Hürtgen. 2016. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Monetary Policy: A
  New Measure for the United Kingdom.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(4): 75–102.
Cochrane, John H. 2004. “Comments on “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
  Implications”.” Unpublished.
Cochrane, John H. 2013. “The Danger of an All-Powerful Federal Reserve.” Wall Street Journal, 26th
  August.
Coghlan, Richard T. 1973. “Special Deposits and Bank Advances.” The Bankers’ Magazine,
  216(1554): 103–108.
Coghlan, Richard T. 1975. “Bank Competition and Bank Size.” The Manchester School, 43(2): 173–197.
Coibion, Olivier. 2012. “Are the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks Big or Small?” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(2): 1–32.
Committee of Inquiry on Small Firms. 1971. “Report.” London: HM Stationary Office.
Committee on the Working of the Monetary System. 1959. “Report.” London: HM Stationary
  Office.
Committee on the Working of the Monetary System. 1960. “Memoranda 2.” London: HM Station-
  ary Office.
Crockett, Andrew D. 2000. “Marrying the Micro- and Macro-Prudential Dimensions of Financial
  Stability.” BIS speeches, 21.
Crowther, Geoffrey. 1971a. Consumer Credit: Report of the Committee. Vol. 2, London: HM Stationary
  Office.
Crowther, Geoffrey. 1971b. Consumer Credit: Report of the Committee. Vol. 1, London: HM Stationary
  Office.
Cuthbertson, Keith. 1980. “The Determination of Expenditure on Consumer Durables.” National
  Institute Economic Review, 94(1): 62–72.
Daily Express. 1955. “Are the Banks Overdoing the Overdraft Drive?” Daily Express, 22nd August.
Dean, A. J. H. 1976. “Errors in National Institute Forecasts of Personal Incomes, Inflation and
  Employment, 1965-75.” National Institute Economic Review, 78(1): 48–57.
Denman, James, and Paul McDonald. 1996. “Unemployment Statistics from 1881 to the Present
  Day.” Labour Market Trends, 104: 5–18.
Dimsdale, Nicholas H. 1991. “British Monetary Policy since 1945.” In The British Economy since 1945,
  ed. Nicholas F. R. Crafts and Nicholas Woodward, 89–140. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Economist. 2014. “Choosing the Right Pin.” The Economist, 30th August.
Elliott, Douglas J., Greg Feldberg, and Andreas Lehnert. 2013. “The History of Cyclical Macropru-
  dential Policy in the United States.” Unpublished.
El-Mokadem, Ahmed Mohamed. 1973. Econometric Models of Personal Saving: the United Kingdom
  1948-1966. London: Butterworth.
Fforde, John S. 1992. The Bank of England and Public Policy, 1941–1958. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.



                                                35
Financial Times Industrial Correspondent. 1956. “Tractor Sales & Credit Squeeze.” Financial Times,
  28th February.
Fischer, Stanley. 2014. “Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?” Martin Feldstein Lecture, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA., 10th July.
Fischer, Stanley. 2015. “Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy.” Speech at ”Macroprudential
  Monetary Policy,” the 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA., 2nd
  October.
Fisher, Douglas. 1968. “The Objectives of British Monetary Policy, 1951–1964.” The Journal of Finance,
  23(5): 821–831.
Fisher, Douglas. 1970. “The Instruments of Monetary Policy and the Generalized Trade-off Function
  for Britain, 1955-1968.” The Manchester School, 38(3): 209–222.
Garganas, N.C. 1975. “An Analysis of Consumer Credit and its Effects on Purchases of Consumer
  Durables.” In Modelling the Economy, ed. G.A. Renton, 610–642. London: Heinemann Educational
  Books Ltd.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajšek. 2011. “Monetary Policy and Credit Supply Shocks.” IMF
  Economic Review, 59(2): 195–232.
Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael S. Schoenle, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. 2017. “Inflation Dynam-
  ics during the Financial Crisis.” American Economic Review, 107(3): 785–823.
Glocker, Christian, and Pascal Towbin. 2015. “Reserve Requirements as a Macroprudential Instru-
  ment – Empirical Evidence from Brazil.” Journal of Macroeconomics, 44: 158–176.
Goodhart, Charles A. E. 1989. Money, Information and Uncertainty. London: Macmillan.
Goodhart, Charles A. E. 2015. “Competition and Credit Control: Some Personal Reflections.”
  Financial History Review, 22(2): 235–246.
Gurley, John G. 1960. “The Radcliffe Report and Evidence.” The American Economic Review, 50(4): 672–
  700.
Hodgman, Donald R. 1973. “Credit Controls in Western Europe: An Evaluative Review.” In Credit
  Allocation Techniques and Monetary Policy137–161. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Hopton, John G. 1955. “Agriculture and Credit.” Financial Times, 20th August.
Howson, Susan. 2004. “Money and Monetary Policy since 1945.” In The Cambridge Economic History
  of Modern BritainVol. 3, ed. Roderick Floud and Paul A. Johnson, 134–166. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.
Huang,       Huaxiang,      and Ryland Thomas. 2016. “The Weekly Balance Sheet
  of the Bank of England 1844–2006.” Bank of England OBRA dataset,
  https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/research-datasets.
Iacoviello, Matteo. 2005. “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the Business
  Cycle.” American Economic Review, 95(3): 739–764.
Ingham, Mike. 1981. “Appendix: Incomes Policies: A Short History.” In Incomes Policies, Inflation
  and Relative Pay, ed. J. L. Fallick and R. F. Elliott, 264–280. London: Allen & Unwin.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.” American
  Economic Review, 95(1): 161–182.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. “When Credit Bites Back.” Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking, 45(s2): 3–28.
Kaldor, Nicholas. 1960. “The Radcliffe Report.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 42(1): 14–19.
Kareken, John H. 1968. “Monetary Policy.” In Britain’s Economic Prospects, ed. Richard E. Caves,
  68–103. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein. 1994. “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending.” In Monetary
  Policy, ed. N. Gregory Mankiw, 221–261. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                                  36
Kennedy, Frank. 2016. “A Co-operative System? Sterling Crises and the Sterling Area, 1951–67.”
  Unpublished.
Kennedy, M. 1969. “How Well Does the National Institute Forecast?” National Institute Economic
  Review, 50(1): 40–52.
Kennedy, Simon. 2014. “We’re All Macroprudentialists Now as Bubble Policy Dawns.” Bloomberg
  Business, 17th June.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1978. Activities 1940–1946: Shaping the Post-War World: Employment and
  Commodities. Vol. 27 of The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.
Koch, Christoffer. 2015. “Deposit Interest Rate Ceilings as Credit Supply Shifters: Bank Level
  Evidence on the Effects of Regulation Q.” Journal of Banking & Finance, 61: 316–326.
Korinek, Anton, and Alp Simsek. 2016. “Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage.” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 106(3): 699–738.
Lydall, H. F. 1957. “The Impact of the Credit Squeeze on Small and Medium-Sized Manufacturing
  Firms.” The Economic Journal, 67(267): 415–431.
Meeks, Roland. 2017. “Capital Regulation and the Macroeconomy: Empirical Evidence and Macro-
  prudential Policy.” European Economic Review, 95: 125–141.
Melitz, Jacques, and Henri Sterdyniak. 1979. “An Econometric Study of the British Monetary
  System.” The Economic Journal, 89(356): 874–896.
Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. 2017. “How do Credit Supply Shocks Affect the Real
  Economy? Evidence from the United States in the 1980s.” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 23802.
Miller, Marcus H. 1973. “Discussion.” In Allocation Techniques and Monetary Policy137–61. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Boston.
Miller, Marcus H. 1976. “Can a Rise in Import Prices Be Inflationary and Deflationary? Economists
  and U.K. Inflation, 1973-74.” American Economic Review, 66(4): 501–519.
Milne, Richard. 2014. “Central Banks: Stockholm Syndrome.” Financial Times, 19th November.
Monnet, Éric. 2014. “Monetary Policy without Interest Rates: Evidence from France’s Golden
  Age (1948 to 1973) Using a Narrative Approach.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  6(4): 137–69.
Monnet, Éric. 2016. “The Diversity in National Monetary and Credit Policies in Western Europe
  under Bretton Woods.” In Central Banks and the Nation State, ed. O Feiertag and M Margairaz.
  Paris: Sciences Po.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research. 1960. “Chronological Tables.” National Institute
  Economic Review, 10(1): 40–45.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research. 1984. “Calendar of Economic Events, 1960–82.”
  National Institute Economic Review, 107(1): 74–80.
Needham, Duncan. 2015. “Britain’s Money Supply Experiment, 1971–73.” The English Historical
  Review, 130(542): 89–122.
Nelson, Edward, and Kalin O. Nikolov. 2004. “Monetary Policy and Stagflation in the UK.” Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(3): 293–318.
Nield, R., and E. Shirley. 1961. “Economic Review – An Assessment of Forecasts, 1959-60.” National
  Institute Economic Review, 15(1): 12–29.
Norton, W. E. 1969. “Debt Management and Monetary Policy in the United Kingdom.” The Economic
  Journal, 79(315): 475–494.
O’Donoghue, Jim, Carol McDonnell, and Martin Placek. 2006. “Consumer Price Inflation, 1947–
  2004.” Economic Trends, 626: 38–53.



                                                37
Pissarides, Christopher A. 1972. “A Model of British Macroeconomic Policy, 1955–1969.” The
  Manchester School of Economic & Social Studies, 40(3): 245–59.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2016. “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation.” In Handbook of Macroeco-
  nomicsVol. 2A, ed. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, 71–162. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
  Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 1–48.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 1993. “Credit Channel or Credit Actions? An Interpre-
  tation of the Postwar Transmission Mechanism.” Proceedings, Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson
  Hole, 71–116. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
  and Implications.” American Economic Review, 94(4): 1055–1084.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
  Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 763–801.
Savage, David. 1978. The Monetary Sector of the NIESR Model: Preliminary Results. London: National
  Institute of Economic and Social Research.
Schenk, Catherine R. 2010. The Decline of Sterling: Managing the Retreat of an International Currency,
  1945–1992. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
  Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008.” American Economic Review, 102(2): 1029–61.
Schwartz, Anna J. 1969. “Why Money Matters.” Lloyds Bank Review, 94(1): 1–16.
Scott, Peter M., and James T. Walker. 2017. “The Impact of ‘Stop-Go’ Demand Management Policy
  on Britain’s Consumer Durables Industries, 1952-65.” The Economic History Review, 70(4): 1321–
  1345.
Smith, Giles. 1969. “Dealers Gloomy as Sales of Cars on HP Slump by 38pc.” Times, 2nd January.
Sonoda, Katsurako, and Nao Sudo. 2016. “Is Macroprudential Policy Instrument Blunt?” Bank for
  International Settlements BIS Working Papers 536.
Stein, Jeremey C. 2013. “Overheating in the Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement and Policy
  Responses’.” Speech given at the “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why
  Household Balance Sheets Matter” research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
  MI., 7th Feburary.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2002. “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes.”
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 20(2): 147–162.
Stone, J. Richard N. 1964. “Private Saving in Britain, Past, Present and Future.” The Manchester
  School, 32(2): 79–112.
Svensson, Lars E. O. 2017. “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 90: 193–213.
Tarullo, Daniel K. 2013. “Macroprudential Regulation.” Speech at the Yale Law School Conference on
  Challenges in Global Financial Services, New Haven, CT., 20th September.
Thomas, Ryland, and Nicholas H. Dimsdale. 2017. “A Millennium of UK Data.” Bank of England
  OBRA dataset, https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/research-datasets.
Williams, John C. 2014. “Financial Stability and Monetary Policy: Happy Marriage or Untenable
  Union?” Presentation to the Deutsche Bundesbank Conference, Eltville am Rhein, Germany, 5th June.
Zdzienicka, Aleksandra, Sally Chen, Federico Diaz Kalan, Stefan Laséen, and Katsiaryna Sviry-
  dzenka. 2015. “Effects of Monetary and Macroprudential Policies on Financial Conditions: Evi-
  dence from the United States.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 288.




                                                   38
           Appendix 1: National Institute Forecast Evaluations
This appendix contains quotes from a series for forecast evaluation exercises in the National Institute
Economic Review. In summary, the Institute seems to have taken forecasting seriously and its forecasts
were comparable in quality to other leading forecasters.
   Within two years the Institute assessed its forecast (Nield and Shirley 1961), finding that:

      “The Review, since it appears fairly frequently and has attempted always to take a
      view of the future, was probably a significant factor [in the similarity between different
      forecasts, including HM Treasury’s]”
      “Our forecasts compare quite favourably with those made by others. But none was very
      good”

    In 1969, NIESR commissioned an independent academic to evaluate its forecasts (Kennedy 1969),
finding that:

      “The forecasts have done extremely well as qualitative indicators of the rate of economic
      expansion”
      “The main conclusion from this comparison is that there is no startling difference in the
      degree of accuracy achieved by the National Institute’s forecasts, on the one hand, and
      the more formal, econometric model on the other”
      “One reason for investigating the value of the forecasts from the point of view of
      economic policy is that the forecasts are used as a basis for the policy recommendations
      presented in the National Institute Economic Review, and these wield some influence
      on public opinion”
      “A second, and more important point, [sic] is that the mean absolute forecast error for
      GDP is, at 1.4 per cent, rather large in policy terms”

   The year 1976 was the first time that the Review focussed on forecast errors for inflation (Dean
1976), finding that:

      “The most serious error made in the various National Institute forecasts of personal
      incomes and prices has been the tendency to underestimate inflation. This error has
      been less serious for the consumer price index than for the other current prices variables
      studies. It was suggested above that this may be because the cost mark-up approach
      adopted for forecasting prices involves the use of lagged variables, some of which are
      already known at the time of the forecast”
      “Apart from other personal incomes and total personal disposable incomes the National
      Institute forecasts generally outperform the three naı̈ve models tested”




                                                  39
                                     Appendix 2: Monthly Dataset
Table A1 shows the 78 variables in our monthly data set. Variables were seasonally adjusted and
transformed where appropriate. The second column below shows the transformation, with ‘1’
indicating no transformation and ‘2’ indicating that the log difference was taken.

                               Table A1: Variables used in estimating factors
Domestic demand and output                                           Financial markets (cont.)
1         2       Index of production                                40         1         Corporate bond spread
2         2       Mining and quarrying output                        41         1         Call rate (low)
3         2       Manufacturing output                               42         1         Call rate (high)
4         2       Food, drink and tobacco output                     43         1         Bank deposit rate
5         2       Textiles output                                    44         1         Trade bill rate
6         2       Chemicals output                                   45         1         Bank bill rate
7         2       Metals output                                      46         1         Mortgage rate
8         2       Engineering output                                 47         2         Gold price
9         2       Other manufacturing output                         48         2         Oil price
10        2       Gas, water and electricity output                  49         2         Commodity prices
11        1       Number of days lost to industrial stoppages
12        2       Retail sales values                                Money & credit and banking
13        2       Retail sales values - food                         50       2         BoE notes in circulation
14        2       Retail sales values - clothing                     51       2         Bank deposits at BoE
15        2       Retail sales values - durables                     52       2         LCB deposits
16        2       Retail sales values - other                        53       2         LCB retail deposits
17        2       Number of new vehicle registrations                54       2         LCB advances
18        2       Central government expenditure
19        2       Central government revenue                         Prices
20        2       Number of dwellings completed                      55        2         Producer input prices
                                                                     56        2         Producer output prices
Labour market                                                        57        2         Consumer prices
21       2          Employment in the industrial sector              58        2         Consumer prices - food
22       2          Manufacturing employment                         59        2         Consumer prices - alcohol
23       1          Vacancies                                        60        2         Consumer prices - clothing
24       1          Unemployment rate                                61        2         Consumer prices - housing
                                                                     62        2         Import prices
Balance of payments                                                  63        2         Export prices
25         2        Goods export value                               64        2         Economy-wide average hourly wages
26         2        Goods import value                               65        2         Manufacturing average hourly wages
27         2        FX reserves                                      66        2         Economy-wide average weekly wages
28         1        IMF lending to UK                                67        2         Manufacturing average weekly wages
29         1        Other official lending to UK
                                                                     Foreign variables
Financial markets                                                    68         2        US industrial production
30         2        £ per $                                          69         2        US consumer prices
31         2        FF per $                                         70         1        St Louis Fed discount rate
32         2        DM per $                                         71         1        US Treasury bill yield
33         2        £ per $ (black market)                           72         1        US long-term bond yield
34         1        Dollar forward margin                            73         2        German industrial production
35         2        Stock prices                                     74         2        German consumer prices
36         1        Dividend yield                                   75         1        German short-term interest rate
38         1        20 year gilt yield                               77         2        French consumer prices
39         1        Consol yield                                     78         1        French short-term interest rate




                                                                40
