NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRANT ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Sari Pekkala Kerr
William R. Kerr
Working Paper 22385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22385

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

Sari Pekkala Kerr is a senior research scientist at the Wellesley Centers for Women (Wellesley
College). William Kerr is a professor at Harvard Business School and a Research Associate
at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and Bank of Finland. This is a revised
version of a paper prepared for the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth (CRIW)
NBER meeting on December 16-17, 2014, in Washington DC and a draft chapter for the
CRIW-NBER volume Measuring Entrepreneurial Business: Current Knowledge and Challenges,
edited by John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda and Antoinette Schoar. We thank our
discussant Ethan Lewis, the editors, and CRIW-NBER participants for very helpful
comments. We thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, National Science Foundation,
Harvard Business School, and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation for financial support
that made this research possible. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were
Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data
Center. Research results and conclusions expressed are the authors' own and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Census Bureau, the NSF, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are revealed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigrant Entrepreneurship
Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 22385
July 2016
JEL No. F22,J15,J44,J61,L26,M13,O31,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
We examine immigrant entrepreneurship and the survival and growth of immigrant-founded
businesses over time relative to native-founded companies. Our work quantifies immigrant
contributions to new firm creation in a wide variety of fields and using multiple definitions.
While significant research effort has gone into understanding the economic impact of
immigration into the United States, comprehensive data for quantifying immigrant
entrepreneurship are difficult to assemble. We combine several restricted-access U.S. Census
Bureau data sets to create a unique longitudinal data platform that covers 1992-2008 and many
states. We describe differences in the types of businesses initially formed by immigrants and their
medium-term growth patterns. We also consider the relationship of these outcomes to the
immigrants' age at arrival to the United States.

Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu
William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

1

Introduction

Immigrant entrepreneurship is of central policy interest and a frequent hot point in the popular
press. Many policy makers believe that immigrant founders are an important and under-utilized
lever for the revival of U.S. job growth and continued recovery from the Great Recession. Several
local and national policy initiatives have been launched to attract immigrant entrepreneurs (e.g.,
the Thrive competition in New York City, the O¢ ce of New Americans in Chicago, and the White
House Startup America initiative). Some of the policy initiatives focus on speci…c issues that
have been found to limit immigrant entrepreneurs from starting or growing their businesses (e.g.,
language barriers, di¢ culty navigating the legal steps to start a company, or lack of capital to
pilot projects), while others are generally focused on attracting more new businesses into the
country. Policies vary in the immigrant group that they target, ranging from a speci…c focus
on high-skilled immigrant entrepreneurship with venture capital (VC) backing to broad-based
measures that potentially touch many diverse immigrant communities.
Academic research, unfortunately, possesses only a small voice in this debate or policy design. For example, advocates of greater immigrant entrepreneurship mainly cite a few extreme
examples of success such as Sergey Brin, one of the founders of Google, and extrapolate information from some exceptionally in‡uential case studies regarding Silicon Valley and large high-tech
companies (e.g., Saxenian, 1999; Wadhwa et al., 2007). While each of these supporting pieces has
its merits and liabilities discussed below, it is important for rigorous trends and statistics to also
inform this debate. For example, even with respect to Silicon Valley and high-tech companies,
it is not immediately clear what the oft-cited statistics mean— it is likely true that more than
half of the entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley are of immigrant origin, as the surveys suggest, but
the exact same could be said of the undergraduate student populations at most schools in the
San Francisco area. Second, given the substantial heterogeneity in immigrant entrepreneurship,
which comes in just as many ‡avours as native entrepreneurship, it is unsatisfying to focus on
such a narrow population of high-tech entrepreneurs for contemplating possible initiatives.
For economists to be able to aid the policy process, and ultimately improve economic performance in this arena, we need better-grounded estimates on the importance of immigrant groups
for the creation of new …rms, the business activities and growth pro…les of created …rms, and so
on. This study constructs a data platform using Census Bureau administrative data to assist
in this process. The purpose of this chapter is to detail the platform’s components and provide
some early views of the trends for immigrant entrepreneurs and the patterns in their behavior.
We have several audiences in mind. First, we are able to o¤er some new facts to the discussion
of immigrant entrepreneurship that can be useful for policy discussions, although we do not
examine any speci…c policy actions or recommendations about encouraging immigrant entrepreneurship in this study. Second, we hope that others …nd this discussion encouraging for making
progress on this front and that they too seek access to these data through the Census Bureau.

1

Ideally, our paper can provide them a one-stop-shop for what is feasible in the data and how to
build the platform, and this chapter goes into greater depth than is normal for academic papers
on how the platform is built and its traits. Finally, we speak to future e¤orts to enhance these
data. In terms of representative statistics, this platform is likely as good as it gets with today’s
data collection. We describe below a wish list for future data development e¤orts.
Section 2 provides a brief review of the previous empirical literature on immigrant entrepreneurs and their traits. Fairlie and Lofstrom (2014) provide a comprehensive recent review of
this literature strand and statistics from the 2007 Survey of Business Owners (SBO). In this
chapter, relative to prior academic work, we make three contributions. First, our data platform
provides consistent estimates of immigrant entrepreneurship over a long time period (1995-2008)
and across skill levels (e.g., all entrepreneurs, VC-backed …rms). Existing work, even when using
representative national samples, tends to be cross-sectional at a given point in time and focused
on a speci…c skill population, whereas for most purposes the comparisons across time and groups
would be very important. Second, we study the di¤erent dynamics of employment and growth
among immigrant-led businesses compared to those founded by natives. Fairlie and Lofstrom
(2014) conclude that a central research goal for immigrant entrepreneurship is to identify the dynamics of employment growth among these …rms, and our constructed platform makes progress
in this domain. Third and related, we provide a …rst breakdown of these growth dynamics by the
age of immigration to the United States. This last analysis is preliminary and mostly undertaken
to show the potential of the data for observing di¤erences along traits identi…able from the 2000
Census match, but striking nonetheless.
Section 3 details the construction of our data platform. The strength of our study lies in
the ability to use and combine several restricted-access U.S. Census Bureau data sets to create
a unique longitudinal data platform with millions of observations. Indeed, a key purpose of this
chapter is to report on the potential of these data and describe their traits for research purposes. The backbone for our work is the employer-employee data in the Longitudinal EmployerHousehold Dynamics (LEHD) database. The LEHD provides …rm-worker information collected
from unemployment insurance records. From this information, one can observe the birth of new
…rms and their employee composition, including immigration status. We also utilize other data:
[1] the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to assess the employment growth dynamics of
new …rms, [2] the long-form records of the 2000 Decennial Census to collect additional personand household-level traits (e.g., year of arrival to the United States), and [3] external data sets
to identify companies that have VC backing or achieve an initial public o¤ering (IPO). The
resulting data platform can describe many forms of entrepreneurship, ranging from general patterns to "growth entrepreneurs" described in the VC literature. These detailed new data allow
us to study person- and …rm-level patterns in a way that has not been possible to date, and
this section also depicts the variations and limits on the de…nitions of entrepreneurship in the

2

LEHD.1
Section 4 provides our trend estimates. Most of our work focuses on 11 states present in
the LEHD since 1992, which include California and Florida. We estimate 24% of entrepreneurs
in these states from 1995-2008 are immigrants, which broadly corresponds with other studies.
As important, this immigrant entrepreneurship share rises from 17% in 1995 to 27% in 2008.
Our sample, by coincidence, draws from heavy immigration states. Looking at a sample of 28
states present in the LEHD by 2000, we estimate these numbers may be 3% higher than the
total population, with the growth trend being similar. Returning to our focal set of states,
the immigrant share among entrepreneurs receiving VC …nancing is modestly higher, reaching
30% in 2005 compared to 27% for all …rms. In terms of entrepreneurship rates, roughly 2% of
immigrants start a business over a three-year period; 0.1% start a …rm backed by VC …nancing.
These rates are higher than those we estimate for natives, which is re‡ected in the fact that
immigrants constitute 19% of the LEHD workforce in our sample, less than the entrepreneurship
shares reported above.
Section 5 documents basic patterns related to entry, survival, and growth of immigrant
versus native businesses. On the whole, the businesses started by immigrant entrepreneurs
perform better than native businesses with respect to employment growth over three- and six-year
horizons. This is evident in the raw data and mostly persists when comparing immigrant- and
native-founded businesses started in the same city, industry, and year. By contrast, immigrantfounded businesses show no advantages with respect to payroll growth, and may in fact generate
lower-wage job growth. Combining business survival with growth dynamics, immigrants tend to
be engaged in more volatile, up-or-out type dynamics, along the lines described by Haltiwanger
et al. (2013) for young businesses and job creation. Most of this e¤ect is captured by the cityindustry-year choices made for businesses, versus variation in growth patterns within these cells.
Breaking down these aggregate results, the strongest employment growth impacts for immigrants
are found in high-wage businesses and high-tech sectors. Conditional on receiving VC investment,
however, we do not observe greater business survival, better employment outcomes, or higher
likelihood of going public for …rms founded by immigrant entrepreneurs. Businesses founded by
immigrants who came the United States by age 18 have stronger growth patterns than those
founded by immigrants migrating as adults.
Section 6 concludes with a discussion of these …ndings in the larger context of immigration and
entrepreneurship policy. This section also describes enhancements to the platform that would
enable better research e¤orts going forward. Immigration policy is designed and administered at
the national level, with few restrictions on the location choices of immigrants within the United
States. A methodological conclusion from this study is that the LEHD-based platform can
consistently describe immigrant entrepreneurship across many industries, geographies, and skill
1
In a broad review of the immigration literature, Lewis (2013a) raises immigrant entrepreneurship as one of
the key areas requiring further study and notes the key ingredient of employer-employee data for this purpose.
The LEHD is the source of this type of administrative information for the United States.

3

levels. This is an important ingredient for delivering systematic advice about how immigrant
entrepreneurs impact the U.S. economy and where the e¤ects of expansion in admission levels
might be felt. We also …nd that the detail of the LEHD can aid more e¤ective policy advice
for sub-groups of immigrants. The surveys most cited in the public discourse are actually quite
crude in this regard. For example, although Sergey Brin is often used as the showcase example for
immigration reform on high-skilled H-1B policies, he came to the United States as a child, while
the H-1B program is focused on temporary admissions of adults with college-level education.
Our disaggregation by the age at arrival for immigrants indicates this assembled platform can
help begin to disentangle these important details. To be clear, our study stops well short of
making a direct input to immigration policy design on this or other dimensions, but we do …nd
that these data elements are of su¢ cient strength and depth that they can serve as an e¤ective
foundation for future research e¤orts to inform the economic consequences of selection strategies
based upon certain immigrant traits.
On the other hand, we note that there are many places where the LEHD has limits, some
of which may be addressable. For example, here we de…ne entrepreneurship status through initial wage pro…les of …rm employees, which is certainly incomplete. Over short-term horizons,
it would be useful to consider linking LEHD workers to SBO-type data to evaluate the accuracy and bias of derived entrepreneurship de…nitions with greater detail. Similarly, we describe
how links of LEHD workers to external data sources at the individual-level would be powerful
(e.g., entrepreneurs/CEOs contained in the Venture Xpert data, inventors contained in United
States patent data). More challenging, while we are able to make progress towards some of the
important traits of immigrants, we miss completely with the LEHD the essential questions of
immigration visa type (e.g., H-1B, green card), which is strongly emphasized by Hunt (2011) as
a key predictor for choices by immigrants with respect to entrepreneurship. For the evaluation
and design of e¤ective policy, the inclusion of visa status and transitions over time must be at
the top of any wish list.

2

Previous Literature on Immigrant Entrepreneurs

This section provides some background for our study from the academic literature, with Fairlie
and Lofstrom (2014) reviewing the immigrant entrepreneurship literature in a more comprehensive manner. There is a large body of literature showing that general rates of business
ownership are higher among the foreign-born than natives in many developed countries, including the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia.2 Fairlie (2012) and Fairlie and
Lofstrom (2014) also observe that trends in self-employment rates and new business formation
are increasing among immigrants but decreasing among natives in the United States. In closelyrelated work to the current analysis, Hunt (2011, 2015) focuses on skilled immigrants and …nds
2
Studies include Borjas (1986); Lofstrom (2002); Clark and Drinkwater (2000, 2006); Schuetze and Antecol
(2007); and Fairlie et al. (2010).

4

that they are more likely to start …rms with more than 10 employees than comparable natives.
Hunt uses the National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG), which provides a nationally representative sample of persons with a college degree and interesting information about the initial
visa status of immigrants. She …nds that the probability of starting a …rm was highest for those
initially arriving on a study visa or a work visa, versus family reuni…cation. While the level of
detail on the speci…c degrees and entry visas in the NSCG is impressive, the major issues for
researchers trying to describe national trends in immigrant-founded …rms are the small sample
sizes, the lack of longitudinal dimension, and the absence of …rms as a data element.
In parallel to these general patterns, a second research stream focuses speci…cally on immigrant entrepreneurship in the high-tech sector. Saxenian (1999, 2002) documents that up to a
quarter of the high-tech …rms in Silicon Valley in the 1980s and 1990s were founded or being
run by immigrants. Wadhwa et al. (2007) extends this survey analysis to the rest of the country
and other industries to study …rms founded in 1995-2005. They document similar shares of
immigrant-founded companies across the country, although elements of their study are di¢ cult
to generalize.3 Table 1 provides a summary of several related studies on immigrant entrepreneurs. These e¤orts connect into a broader line of work showing the over-representation of skilled
immigrants among certain extreme outcomes in U.S. science and engineering: for example, U.S.based Nobel Prize winners (Peri, 2007), high-impact companies (Hart and Acs, 2011), patent
applications (Wadhwa et al., 2007), members of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering (Stephan and Levin, 2001), and biotech companies undergoing
initial public o¤erings (Stephan and Levin, 2001). It is these kinds of factors that likely drive the
current policy enthusiasm towards immigrant entrepreneurs. On the other hand, with respect to
immigrant high-tech contributions, Hart and Acs (2011) suggest that although immigrants play
an important role, "most previous studies have overstated the role of immigrants in high-tech
entrepreneurship."
Statistics with respect to immigrant entrepreneurship among VC-backed …rms are harder to
assemble. Fairlie (2012) calculates from the 2007 SBO that equally few native and immigrant
business owners rely on any VC funding; more generally, the study …nds that immigrants are
less likely to start a business with no capital and just as likely as natives to start a business with
more than $1 million of capital. Hegde and Tumlinson (2014) and Bengtsson and Hsu (2015)
are recent examples of studies of immigrant entrepreneurship among VC-backed …rms using
ethnic names to distinguish the likelihood of a founder being an immigrant. In an advocacy
3
The sample with responses covers 7% of the approximately 30,000 …rms in the Dunn & Bradstreet data that
were founded in 1995-2005, had sales greater than $1 million, and employed at least 50 persons. Despite the
extensive e¤orts of their research team to reach a subset of companies listed in the Dunn & Bradstreet data,
the study faces a lower response rate, selectivity in terms of which …rms choose to respond, and perhaps limits
regarding the ability of the surveys to reach the right person to answer the questions related to the founders’
origin (as an HR or a PR person might not know whether one of the founders moved to the United States as a
child). Therefore, the researchers extrapolate from their sample to produce nationally representative numbers for
revenue and employment generation. Monti et al. (2007) provide related evidence from Massachusetts high-tech
…rms.

5

piece, Anderson and Platzer (2006) identify the higher immigrant entrepreneur share among
publicly-listed VC-backed U.S. companies.
Related to our focus on entrepreneurs and how immigration in‡uences the supply of these individuals, prior studies show that more-educated business owners run more-successful businesses,
generate more innovations, and grow their …rms faster over time (e.g., Unger et al., 2011). There
is an overall positive relationship between education and business ownership, although the evidence is somewhat mixed as highlighted in the meta-analysis of van der Sluis et al. (2008).
Lofstrom et al. (2014) postulate that this may be due to sorting into industries based on entry
barriers. They …nd that educational credentials of highly educated potential entrepreneurs are
associated with lower probability of small-…rm ownership in less-…nancially-rewarding industries,
while they increase entry into higher-barrier industries o¤ering higher returns.
Immigrants can take a variety of paths into …rm ownership in the United States. Many
skilled immigrants enter the United States for study or paid work and found their company after
several years in the country, while a smaller number enter for the speci…c purpose of opening
a business. Kerr et al. (2015a,b) describe in greater detail how U.S. immigration law and
corporate sponsorship of visas contribute to this career trajectory. Akee et al. (2007) …nd that
pre-migration self-employment in home countries increases the probability of self-employment
by immigrants in the United States and boosts self-employment earnings. Lofstrom (2002)
…nds that self-employment probabilities and earnings for immigrants increase with time spent in
the United States, perhaps even reaching earnings parity with observationally similar U.S.-born
entrepreneurs after about 25 years in the country. The use of repeated cross-sections of Censuses,
however, limits the degree to which the role of assimilation can be separated from selective outmigration. Blau and Kahn (2016) describe cultural factors in‡uencing gender-based rates of
assimilation for work by immigrants.
The spillover e¤ects to native opportunities for opening a business have been examined by
several research teams. Fairlie and Meyer (2003) …nd some evidence that immigration may
negatively a¤ect native self-employment probabilities using the 1980 and 1990 Census records.
Other researchers suggest skilled immigrants generate positive spillover e¤ects in local areas. For
example, recent work points toward positive spillover e¤ects for cities or states when measured
in terms of innovation, publications, and productivity (e.g., Kerr and Lincoln, 2010; Hunt and
Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010; Peri et al., 2015). Lewis and Peri (2015) provide a theoretical framework
and review of literature on the e¤ects of immigration on local areas. Evidence from more
historical contexts are mixed (e.g., Borjas and Doran, 2012; Moser et al., 2014). Kerr (2013)
provides an extended review of literature on skilled immigration and notes the particular gap
around the empirics of immigrant entrepreneurship speci…cally.
Another line of work documents how immigrant entrepreneurs appear to specialize in a
narrower range of industries or occupations compared to native entrepreneurs. Very common
examples from the United States include Korean entrepreneurs for dry cleaners, Vietnamese
6

entrepreneurs for nail care salons, Gujarati Indian entrepreneurs for the motel industry, and
Punjabi Indian entrepreneurs for convenience stores. Chung and Kalnins (2006) provide a …rst
analysis of this specialization for U.S. Indian entrepreneurs, and Patel and Vella (2013) document
patterns more broadly and show earning consequences. Fairlie et al. (2010) provide crosscountry comparisons for some groups. Kerr and Mandor¤ (2015) provide a theoretical model
and empirical evidence of how small group sizes and social isolation can provide comparative
advantages for ethnicities in self-employed sectors where the entrepreneurs bene…t from the tight
networking of their social group.
Compared to this earlier literature, the LEHD-based platform has the capacity to provide
critical and novel information for the enhanced understanding of immigrant entrepreneurship
and the e¤ective calibration of immigration policy. Indeed, even though earlier work has tackled
many important issues, there remain unfortunate gaps in both the big-picture study of immigrant
entrepreneurship and in the depth of insights feasible.
Starting with the big picture, immigrant entrepreneurship is often greatly hyped in both
policy and media circles, and a number of newspaper and business press articles (e.g., Forbes,
New York Times) tout immigrant founders as the solution to the sluggish recovery from the
Great Recession. Similarly, current local and national policy e¤orts seek to attract and support
new …rm formation by immigrants, as noted in the Introduction. Many of the studies in Table
1 are limited by sample designs that are not broadly representative of the economy, or they are
cross-sectional in nature if representative. This creates a credibility challenge for the work, even
when undertaken with the utmost objectivity; the gap gets extremely large with advocacy pieces
or those concentrating only on the most prominent high-tech clusters. Building directly upon
administrative data, an LEHD-based platform can provide a substantially stronger foundation
for its covered states and the credibility necessary for grounding debates around common facts.
The depth is also essential. Some studies, such as Fairlie (2008, 2012) and Fairlie et al.
(2015), provide attractive estimates from the Current Population Survey (CPS) that are the
current best practice for longitudinal series. The CPS is in many respects a solid platform,
given its stable data collection and long series, and we compare some of our work to the CPS
later. The di¢ culty with the CPS is the ultimate depth that it can provide. Its sample sizes of
about 500 thousand adults are large enough to provide annual estimates for states or industries,
but the cell counts become too small when attempting to jointly view these traits. Moreover,
the CPS records cannot be linked to future growth trajectories of the …rms, the use of venture
capital funding, and so on. The CPS relies on founders declaring themselves to be self-employed
and yet also does not measure if other employment is being generated. Thus, while the CPS is
an important and publicly-available resource, the development of an LEHD-based platform that
includes every business in covered states will provide much deeper capacity for statistical and
analytical work. As we describe below, there is no question that the LEHD is far from perfect
in terms of what it can do; on the other hand, if these limitations are acceptable, then the scope
7

of follow-on work becomes extraordinary. This depth is true in terms of potentially publishable
statistics of entry rates, and also in terms of more complex academic questions (e.g., how many
prior employers do immigrants typically have before starting a …rm and how does this prior job
history impact entrant performance).
Reading the anecdotal accounts and collected statistics regarding immigrants being very
involved in high-growth entrepreneurship, it seems natural from a policy perspective to want
to encourage this development. Encouraging immigrant entrepreneurs seems like an essential
prong of science policy, and its mandate reaches the highest levels of government. Yet, the earlier
research has developed only partial data needed to e¤ectively evaluate these policies or enhance
their design. Research based upon case studies or small surveys may identify the trend, but
they fail to build the empirical foundation necessary for con…dence in the design of proposed
legislation and the likely impact of reforms. The data platform introduced here makes signi…cant
headway in that respect as it will utilize and combine universal and unique micro-data sets on
individuals and …rms (LEHD, LBD, and the Decennial Censuses). In short, this provides a
unique platform for the study of immigration and entrepreneurship.

3
3.1

Census Bureau Data and Measurement
Data Platform

The LEHD is the centerpiece of our platform, in combination with the LBD and a person-level
match to the 2000 Decennial Census of Population (Census). These datasets are con…dential,
housed by the U.S. Census Bureau, and accessible via Research Data Centers. Built from quarterly worker-level …lings by employers for the administration of state unemployment insurance
(UI) bene…t programs, the LEHD identi…es the employees of each private-sector …rm in the
United States and their quarterly compensation. It is longitudinally linked at both the …rm and
employee levels, allowing one to model how …rm employment structures adjust over time, how
new entrepreneurial …rms form, and how individuals transition from wage work into entrepreneurship. This rich data source is currently available for 31 states for research purposes, and it
will eventually cover the whole country.
The initial LEHD dates vary by state, and we focus on two samples in this paper. The …rst is
the 11 states that have LEHD records that begin by 1992 or earlier: California, Colorado, Florida,
Idaho, Illinois, Louisiana, Maryland, North Carolina, Oregon, Washington, and Wisconsin. Our
data extend through 2008, and the newest vintage of the LEHD continues coverage until 2011.
Certain analyses are also conducted on a larger set of 28 states present in the LEHD by 2000
as shown in Appendix Table 1 and Figure 1. The larger sample can only be followed over a
short time span, but it helps us understand the impact of state-level variation in immigration
and entrepreneurship rates for the trends presented in this paper, particularly the inclusion of
immigrant-heavy California and Florida among our primary sample.
8

The LEHD Individual Characteristics File (ICF) contains basic information about individuals, such as age, gender, race, place of birth, and citizenship status. Through the Employment
History Files (EHF), one can also discern earnings and employment histories of each person
job-by-job and in aggregate. In addition, unique person identi…ers (PIKs) a¤ord matches of the
LEHD to the individual-level records contained in the 2000 Census of Populations. PIKs are
anonymous identi…ers that match one-for-one with Social Security Numbers. The Census longform responses cover 1/6 of the U.S. population, allowing us to link Census responses for roughly
16% of our LEHD workers. From the 2000 Census, we extract individual-level characteristics
from the Person File and household and housing-unit characteristics from the Household File.
Long-form responses contain very detailed person and household characteristics (e.g., year of
entry into the United States, level of education, occupation, marital status, family composition,
household income by source, etc.). It is important to recognize that while the LEHD covers
employees from the early 1990s through 2008— including new immigrants at the end of the end
of the sample period— the 2000 Census match requires individuals to be living in the United
States by 2000.
We build a tailored dataset for the analysis of immigrant status and entry into entrepreneurship, …rst focusing on the dynamics over time. We take several steps to reduce the set of massive
data records into a manageable platform that properly represents the phenomenon of interest,
and it is important to describe these steps as they have some bearing on our measurements. We
begin by retaining for each individual their main job during the year (i.e., the job from which the
person obtains the majority of their LEHD earnings). We also only retain persons for whom the
average quarterly earnings from the main job are at least $2,000 per quarter. We further restrict
our sample in each year to individuals aged 25 to 50. This age restriction is such that we stay
reasonably far away from retirement decisions— and in particular, the formation of small-scale
businesses as a form of semi-retirement— and concentrate on entrepreneurial activity in the peak
employment years of each person’s working life. Moreover, we require individuals be present in
the LEHD at least three quarters that span two calendar years.
Immigrants are simply identi…ed as those persons born outside of the United States. This
information is available for all LEHD individuals and is based on the Social Security Administration (SSA) Statistical Administrative Records System (i.e., StARS database). Some of these
immigrants may have later been naturalized and become citizens, but that information is not
utilized in this study. This is partly due to our focus and also due to uncertainty about the
updating procedures for this information. By de…ning immigration status through the ICF …les,
we can depict immigrant entrepreneurship consistently over the sample period, including new arrivals. We separately consider information from the match with the 2000 Census, which records
the year when the immigrant arrived into the United States.

9

3.2

De…ning Firm Entry and Entrepreneurs

Our evaluation of entry into entrepreneurship also utilizes the LBD, a business registry that contains annual employment and payroll for all private-sector establishments in the United States
since 1976. The LBD and the LEHD use several levels of establishment and …rm identi…ers:
[1] State Employer Identi…cation Numbers (SEIN), [2] federal Employer Identi…cation Numbers
(EIN), and [3] the overall company identi…er (ALPHA) that the Census Bureau uses to link the
establishments of multi-unit companies together. Following Haltiwanger et al. (2013), we identify for each establishment the …rst year during which the …rm that the establishment belongs to
was observed to be in operation within the LBD. We also create for each …rm the number of employees that the LBD reports were working for this …rm in the initial year.4 Approaching entrant
de…nition in this way accomplishes several things— it builds o¤ of the national LBD database
to avoid issues related to the partial LEHD state coverage, connects SEINs as appropriate into
parent …rms, and ensures a consistent de…nition of entry with prior academic work using the
Census Bureau data. As two examples, this approach ensures our entrepreneurship de…nition
does not include the formation of a new SEIN by an existing multi-unit …rm expanding into an
LEHD state, or the development of new SEINs for tax purposes by existing businesses. With
respect to the broader literature, our approach focuses on the formation of employer establishments, whereas the commencement of Schedule C self-employment activity is unmeasured and
not considered to be entrepreneurship in this sample.5
A very important issue, and the weakest link of these data for the study of entrepreneurship,
is that the LEHD does not designate the founders or owners of …rms. Similarly, compensation
data includes bonus pay but not equity ownership of individuals. We use the term "entrepreneur"
to describe anyone present in the data who satis…es three criteria: [1] in an entering single-unit
…rm per the Haltiwanger et al. (2013) de…nition, [2] present in the LEHD in the …rst year that
the new …rm entered, and [3] among the top three initial earners in the …rm. With respect
to the …rst condition, we require the new …rm be a single-unit …rm in its start year to ensure
that we have complete employment records from the LEHD. By itself, the second condition
focuses on the initial employees of the …rm and will in many cases include early hires. The
third condition then associates entrepreneurship with the top initial earners in the …rm. This
will clearly be inaccurate in some cases, and some entrepreneurs deliberately take low salaries
or no compensation from their …rms early on to conserve funds. On the other hand, as we
describe below, most …rms in our sample are small and are likely reasonably well modelled by
this approach. We also show results that drop the third condition and thereby provide statistics
related to all initial employees in the …rm.
Terms like "entrepreneurship" are also vague with respect to the time dimension. For exam4

The data structure of the LEHD and LBD allow for establishments within each …rm to have di¤erent industries
and locations. In rare cases where required in this study, we de…ne the main industry and main location of a
multi-unit …rm through the facility with the largest number of employees.
5
There is scope for further work on this regard using the Integrated LBD that contains non-employer …rms.

10

ple, a strict application of our three-part de…nition would declare the founder of a new …rm to be
a wage worker starting in the second year of a …rm’s life, yet many still consider Mark Zuckerberg
to be an entrepreneur a decade after the founding of Facebook. For most of our trend statistics,
we accordingly use a three-year window that declares an individual to be an entrepreneur if
their …rm was founded in the prior three years. We still require that the individual had been
present in the year of founding and a top initial earner, the second and third conditions. In fact,
we do not require the individual remain necessarily associated with the …rm, simply that the
…rm and individual persist. We present results that alternatively use a strict one-year de…nition.
Overall, an unfortunate trade-o¤ exists in that longer windows for keeping track of entrepreneurs
result in shorter sample durations, due to the greater number of pre-period years that must be
devoted to determining the initial values. Said di¤erently, if we wanted to declare individuals
to be entrepreneurs if they have founded a business over the prior ten years, the earliest start
date for the LEHD-based sample series is 2001, after the 1990s high-tech boom period that is so
interesting to study.

3.3

Benchmarks for De…nitions

We can use the public-use Survey of Business Owners (SBO) data from 2007 to help benchmark
these choices with respect to the top three earners and their limits. The …le contains over
two million observations on employer and non-employer …rms, and the data contain detailed
information about the …rm and its owners. We focus on employer …rms that mirror the LEHDbased sample built upon UI data, and we drop a small number of …rms where the …rm does not
report whether the …rst-listed owner is a native or immigrant or no ownership data are present
at all. Throughout, we use sample weights to provide population-level statistics.6
We …rst analyze the likelihood that the business represents the owner’s primary source of
personal income. For the full cross-section of single-owner businesses in 2007, this is true for
81.8% of businesses with an immigrant owner and 81.4% of businesses with a native owner.
Similarly, when incorporating businesses with multiple owners, at least one owner reports the
business as the primary income source in 81.9% of …rms where an immigrant owner is present,
very similar to the 81.3% rate in …rms where no immigrant owner is present. When looking at
the most recent entrants (i.e., business founded in 2007), the overall fraction of businesses being
the primary income source unsurprisingly declines due to transition issues, but remains at twothirds. It also tilts modestly towards immigrants— across all 2007 entrants, 70.3% and 64.7%
of immigrant- and native-owned entering businesses constitute the primary ownership source,
respectively, and this di¤erence is statistically signi…cant (t-stat=4.03). Nonetheless, these gen6
Data and descriptions are available at: https://www.census.gov/econ/sbo/pums.html. This is the …rstever SBO Public Use Microdata Sample and it allows researchers to create their own tabulations and analyses
on entrepreneurial activity, including the relationships between …rm characteristics such as sources of capital,
number of owners, …rm size, and …rm age. Going forward, a main data objective is to unite our LEHD platform
with the con…dential version of the SBO.

11

eral patterns are supportive of the use of LEHD records for identifying entrepreneurs, compared
to an environment where most owners only derived very modest sums from businesses (e.g.,
businesses set up for tax purposes, hobby entrepreneurship, or to employ household workers).
We next consider calculations that help evaluate our focus on up to three owners. The news
is again mostly supportive. Across all SBO …rms in 2007, the average number of owners is 1.8,
while for the newest 2007 entrants it is 1.7 owners. With our approach in the LEHD data, the
average owner number is 2.16. This di¤erence comes mostly from underestimating the share
of …rms with a single founder, and in some cases we are including an extra person in some of
our assignments. On the other hand, a non-trivial share of SBO businesses report four or more
owners compared to our cap at three entrepreneurs. Without more information, we must draw
the line at some founder count, and we believe three founders provides the best balance.
This trade-o¤ suggests that we need to examine closely how immigrant owners are distributed
over the owner count distribution to see if scope for bias exists. Focusing on the 2007 entrants,
we …nd relatively uniform rates of an immigrant owner being present: 23.4%, 22.4%, 27.0%,
and 27.3% for …rms with 1, 2, 3, and 4+ owners, respectively. A rising share on this dimension
is to be expected, given our focus on any owner being an immigrant, and the di¤erences are
very modest. This suggests a rather small scope for issues emerging with counting too few or
many owners with our three-person de…nition. This does not resolve the possibility of confusing
employees with owners, to which we return shortly. Among the largest ownership teams for
entering …rms, we do not …nd immigrants being substantially di¤erent in terms of order listed.
For 4+ person teams, the immigrant shares are 20.3%, 14.4%, 13.8%, and 14.2% for the …rst
through fourth positions (max reported) of listed owners. These structures again do not suggest
very substantial issues likely to emerge with a three-person focus compared to using two- or
four-person cut-o¤s.7
As a …nal step, the SBO contains some employment information that we can compare against
the owner counts. As advanced warning, however, two signi…cant issues exist in the analysis to
follow. First, how each …rm chooses to count owners towards employment is unclear. Second,
the public-use SBO …les intentionally introduce noise into the employment data to protect the
identify of …rms. Thus, while we believe the following analysis is quite informative for whether
our de…nition creates a bias for immigrant vs. native businesses, we need to be cautious about
the exact …gures reported. Our approach is simply to de…ne an indicator variable for cases
where we know we would have added an extra employee to our owner/entrepreneur de…nition
because the employment count exceeds the owner count and the owner count was less than three
owners; this is not comprehensive for all possible errors in our de…nition, but it is the most
worrisome. Among the 2007 SBO entrants, this condition is met in 39.4% cases. This number
seems high to us, but we also don’t know really how to evaluate it in light of the noisy data,
7
In our regression sample, our mean immigrant entrepreneur share is 22.6%, with a 2005/1995 growth ratio
of 1.31 (Column 2 of Table 3 that is discussed below). We …nd comparable means and very similar growth ratios
when examining …rms that start with one entrepreneur (23.6%, 1.32) or two entrepreneurs (21.4%, 1.29).

12

etc. What we do take great comfort in, however, is that this fraction is 40.3% for immigrantowned businesses and 39.1% for native-owned businesses, with the di¤erences not statistically
signi…cant (t-stat=0.74). This suggests that we while we may modestly mismeasure levels (e.g.,
identifying too many entrepreneurs), we are unlikely to have a bias by immigration status in
this regard.
Overall, we take comfort in the SBO comparison. Any single rule like our three-person
de…nition will face liabilities, and these tabulations appear to say our calibration is reasonably
balanced. We also note one feature that helps isolate our technique from potential biases where
we may identify an employee as an entrepreneur. Empirical studies of the hiring patterns by
immigrant owners emphasize the strong degree to which they hire from their own ethnic group
(e.g., García-Pérez, 2012; Andersson et al., 2012, 2014; Åslund et al., 2014). Thus, our "false
positive" for an immigrant-owned business is most likely to be an immigrant, and vice versa
for a native-owned business. As an extreme example, our de…nition would be fully robust to
unpaid owners or the inclusion of too many wage earners if the immigrant status of the employees
exactly mirrored that of the true owners. This extreme condition does not hold, of course, but
the quite high rates of concentration among small employers documented in Andersson et al.
(2014) and similar studies are comforting for our design.
A second point of comparison comes from individuals to whom we can link LEHD records to
their responses to the 2000 Census. The long-form collects whether or not an individual declares
themselves to be primarily self-employed in an incorporated …rm, primarily self-employed in
an unincorporated …rm, an employee in a private-for-pro…t …rm, or other categories. Looking
at 2000 for individuals working in an SEIN created since 1995, we …nd that we label as an
entrepreneur 66% of those declaring themselves to be self-employed in an incorporated …rm. By
contrast, we only label as an entrepreneur 29% of those declaring themselves to be self-employed
in an unincorporated …rm. Thus, our de…nition clearly tilts towards incorporated …rms and those
oriented towards employment and possibly growth, capturing a large portion of this group. The
larger deviation, which is not surprising, is that about two-thirds of the overall set of people
we declare to be entrepreneurs are listing themselves as an employee in a private-for-pro…t …rm.
Speci…cally, the composition of our entrepreneurial pool breaks down as 68% saying they are
employed in private-for-pro…t …rms, 28% self employed, and a small residual in other categories.
In many of these new …rms, no one is declaring themselves to be self-employed, which is a
limitation of this approach to de…ning entrepreneurship. We thus …nd it di¢ cult to benchmark
this form of the metric compared to the self-employment breakdown.

3.4

Measuring Firm Dynamics

Our analyses consider the survival and growth of new businesses, which we measure exclusively
through the LBD. This choice, which was not obvious to us at the start of this project, is
important. By measuring outcomes through the LBD, we capture the full employment and
13

payroll growth that the …rm experiences (domestically in the United States). Alternative metrics
based upon SEINs alone can miss substantial …rm adjustments that occur within LEHD states
when they open up new SEIN codes. Moreover, by de…nition, LEHD-based de…nitions of growth
are subject to the state coverage limitations of the database. Thus, in combination with the
discussion above, our strategy can be summarized as follows— [1] …nd single-unit …rm entrants
during 1992-2008 in the LBD that are in a covered LEHD state, [2] collect the initial employment
records that are contained in the LEHD to describe the immigrant-native composition of initial
employees and founders, and [3] return to the LBD for subsequent growth outcomes. This
strategy allows us to retain all entrants and consistently measure growth; fortuitously, it also
lets us use the LBD outcome data to 2011 for growth dynamics even though our version of the
LEHD ends in 2008. The only potential biases will relate to the speci…c set of states that we
observe and how they compare nationally. On the other hand, this strategy would not necessarily
be optimal in cases where one wanted to observe the employment composition of …rm growth
(e.g., the year-on-year subsequent hiring of immigrant or natives).
Our platform describes immigrant entrepreneurship in general and across sub-populations.
We split the sample by low- and high-wage …rms using the median quarterly earnings during
the year of entry. We also de…ne …rms as high-tech if the majority of their employment is in a
three-digit SIC code listed as a high-tech industry in Hecker (1999). Separate characterizations
are also provided by one-digit SIC codes. Given the speci…c academic interest and policy focus
on VC-backed …rms, we identify entrants that receive VC funding by 2005, as recorded in the
Venture Xpert database, using name and geographical-location matching algorithms (Kerr et al.,
2014). As we do not have matches beyond this point, we only study VC-backed entrepreneurship
rates through 2005. Finally, we provide some tentative notes about whether …rms go public by
2005. This information is collected by observing whether the new …rm is later present in the
Census Bureau’s Compustat Bridge File, which was last updated for the 2005 public …rm cohort.

3.5

Additional Discussion

A central goal of this project is the compilation of information and best practices necessary
for using the LEHD for studies of immigrant entrepreneurship. To this end, a detailed data
appendix provides speci…c instructions and commentary for researchers regarding the LEHD,
with a special focus on the …rm-level dimensions and the longitudinal aspect of the LEHD data.
This appendix information extends beyond the present study to also document issues noted in
the Kerr et al. (2015b) study of large …rms. Additional restricted-access materials are available
upon request. The appendix also provides thoughts about other datasets that could improve
upon the entrepreneurship de…nitions developed here.

14

4
4.1

Entrepreneurship Trends
LEHD Statistics

Table 2a presents our core trends using all LEHD workers and a three-year de…nition for entrepreneurship. For these initial tabulations that regard all workers, we do not impose the
single-unit …rm restrictions or similar, keeping a very broad set of data. Column 2 considers immigrant participation rates in new …rms relative to the total immigrant workforce in the LEHD.
Approximately 6.0% of immigrants in the LEHD are working in new …rms born over the prior
three years, with some evidence for a decline in the rate over time. Appendix Table 2a provides
the observation counts that underlie these estimates, which cover 3.2 and 4.6 million immigrants
in 1995 and 2008, respectively. Throughout this paper, observation counts are approximate and
rounded per Census Bureau disclosure requirements. This appendix table also shows that immigrants constitute 19.3% of the LEHD sample during 1995-2008, growing from 16.4% to 21.2%,
and the native rate of employment in new …rms averages 4.6% (versus 6.0% for immigrants).
The native rate is similarly declining after 2005.8
Column 3 documents that 2.2% of immigrants are among the top earners in a new business
and thus declared to be an entrepreneur by our de…nition. Parallel to Fairlie and Lofstrom (2014)
and in contrast to Column 2, this share grows substantially to 2005, before declining some.
Features of the data initialization process for identifying entrepreneurship are more di¢ cult
for 1995 and 1996 for some states, and we are required to use some minor extrapolation for
these initial years for Column 3 in Tables 2a and 2b. These initialization challenges impact
entrepreneurial rate calculations mostly, with upcoming share-based calculations in Columns
4-10 being substantially less sensitive and unadjusted. Similarly, we report the trend statistics
through 2008, but we hesitate to make too much of the declines observed after 2005. Through
2005, the entry rates are overall stable, and we believe some, if not all, of the decline after 2005
can be traced to declines in match rates of new …rms in the Business Registry Bridge between
the LEHD and LBD. That said, to the extent that the trends are real, they would match the
broad secular decline in employment in young U.S. …rms documented by Decker et al. (2014).
Most of our focus is on the share of entrepreneurs who are immigrants, which is not materially
in‡uenced by these issues.
Columns 4-10 consider immigrant shares of activities relative to natives. Columns 4 and 5
repeat the previous two analyses on a relative basis. We estimate immigrants account for about
24% of entrepreneurs and the new employees of …rms in our sample. The immigrant share of new
entrepreneurs rises dramatically in our sample from 16.7% in 1995 to 27.1% in 2008, while the
trend for immigrant shares of initial employees is more modest. Figure 2 graphs these trends. In
8
While the 11 states are present in the LEHD by 1992, the statistics begin in 1995 to allow full initiation of
all of our data and de…nitions. For example, while we can identify from the LBD the full set of young …rms in
1992 (i.e., those born in 1989-1992), we do not know the immigration status of all of their top earners in the …rst
year of the …rm’s life.

15

Column 6, we isolate the top quartile of the initial earnings distribution of start-ups (measured
as quarterly averages). Immigrants tend to create …rms with lower initial earnings, and the
upward trend in immigrant shares for this top quartile is a bit weaker. Some of this pattern
resurfaces below when looking at payroll growth regressions.
A number of studies report the share of …rms with at least one immigrant founder. This often
appears motivated by a desire to have the highest share possible for advocacy pieces, but it may
also stem from a genuine desire to capture the number of businesses touched in some way by
immigrant entrepreneurship. By contrast, our baseline estimates are implicitly allowing fraction
immigrant entrepreneurship in …rms with several starting employees and weighting larger initial
teams more (up to three employees). Columns 7 and 8 show that about 35% of entering SEINs
or LBD …rms have an initial immigrant employee, with Column 7 also implicitly showing that
our LEHD-LBD match is not introducing a bias. Columns 9 and 10 show patterns de…ned over
larger LBD samples. While the results vary somewhat depending on these de…nitions used, the
main message from Table 2a is that the overall time-series pattern of our …ndings remains largely
unchanged— immigrants are accounting for roughly a quarter of entrepreneurs and their share
is increasing with time.
Appendix Table 2a provides complementary statistics for the 28 states present in the LEHD
by 2000. The wider state panel allows us to assess the potential impact of focusing on just 11
states, including two of the nation’s most immigrant-heavy states, California and Florida. Considering the overlapping 2002-2008 period, our longer panel has an average immigrant worker
share of 20.6% compared to 17.3% in the wider sample; likewise the immigrant share of entrepreneurship is 25.4% versus 21.6%. Thus, our "levels" statistics are on the order of 3% higher. On
the other hand, rates of immigrant and native entry are extremely close (5.9% vs. 5.8%, 4.5%
vs. 4.4%), and all of the 2002-2008 trends are very close to each or even stronger in the wider
sample. We thus conclude that our longer state sample may overstate national levels slightly
but are otherwise quite representative. This is due in part to the larger average state sizes in the
longer panel (despite the addition of Texas in the larger set of 28 states), with the 11 baseline
states constituting 57% of the employment in the 28 states during 2002-2008.
Appendix Table 2b shows that the results are robust to de…ning new …rm employment through
the …rst year of business entry only. This narrower de…nition essentially cuts the rate of …rm entry
by two-thirds. The one-year employment rate in new …rms for immigrants is now 2.0%, compared
to 1.5% for natives, a sizeable di¤erential remaining. The immigrant share of employment in
new …rms grows from 17.6% in 1992 to 24.9% in 2008, parallel to our baseline results in Table
2a.
Appendix Tables 3a and 3b report results for one-digit industries. Rates of immigrant entry
are highest in mining & construction (SIC1), wholesale & retail trade (SIC5), and services (SIC7).
Splitting industries at the three-digit level, entry rates tend to be higher for low-tech sectors, but
this pattern is inverted around 2000 during the high-tech boom. A similar pattern is evident for
16

VC-backed entry. Some of these patterns re‡ect inherent di¤erences in entry rates across sectors
and over time, common to immigrants and natives. In terms of share of initial employment,
immigrants have higher relative representation in manufacturing (SIC2-3), wholesale & retail
trade (SIC5), and services (SIC7).
Table 2b repeats Table 2a for the part of our sample of …rms that are backed by VC investors.
About 0.11% of immigrants are starting top earners in VC-backed …rms during 1995-2005. This
share is naturally substantially less than the 2.2% in Table 2a due to the relatively small number
of ventures receiving VC investment. Re‡ecting the VC bubble that peaked in 2000, this rate
is hump-shaped over time with a peak in 2000. Immigrants constitute about 28% of VC-backed
founders, with this fraction increasing over time. The substantial majority of entering VC-backed
…rms have at least one initial immigrant employee, with the more-similar results regarding overall
fractions of founders coming from the fact that VC-backed …rms tend to have larger counts
of initial employees and larger founding teams. On the whole, immigrant entrepreneurship is
somewhat stronger for VC-backed …rms than generally, with 30% of the former being immigrants
compared to 27% overall in 2005.
Our data platform allows us to compare initial immigrant and native employees by [1] their
LEHD characteristics for the full sample and [2] the Census long-form responses for the matched
sample. Appendix Tables 4 and 5 provide these results that we quickly summarize here. On
average, immigrant employees in new …rms tend to be slightly older and more likely to be male,
with lower average LEHD quarterly earnings before, during, and after the founding of the …rm.
By contrast, the average quarterly earnings for immigrants before, during, and after the founding
of VC-backed …rms tends to be higher than their native peers. Looking at respondents matched
to the 2000 Census, immigrants employed in young …rms are more likely to be older, male,
married, and have more children. While less likely to own a home, immigrants are more likely
to own a higher-priced home and rent more-expensive properties. This is partially connected to
immigrants being more likely to live in high-priced gateway cities. The average year of arrival
for our 2000 cross-section is 1984, so that the average tenure in the United States in 2000 is 16
years. These statistics are reasonable and comforting for our match, although we focus most
of our analytical attention elsewhere. We return later to the year of arrival when considering
di¤erences between adult arrivals and those migrating as children.
Fairlie (2013) documents from the 2007 SBO that immigrant-owned businesses represent
13.2% of all businesses in the United States, with $434,000 in average annual sales (compared to
non-immigrant-owned …rm sales of $609,000). Only 28% of immigrant-owned businesses in the
SBO hire outside employees, while the share is even smaller (26%) among the non-immigrantowned businesses. For those that do hire employees, the average number of employees is 8 in
the immigrant-owned businesses and 12 in the native-owned businesses. Among our sample, the
average initial employment for …rms founded by immigrants exclusively is 4.4 workers, compared
to 7.0 workers for …rms launched exclusively by natives. When both types of founders are present,
17

the average is 16.9 workers. Thus, in general, our data appears to match the broad levels and
patterns of the employer …rms in the SBO sample, as well as di¤erences in the typical sizes
between immigrants and natives. Our overall numbers are naturally lower given the focus on
the initial year of the …rm (versus a cross-section of employment patterns in existing …rms).

4.2

CPS Comparison

To check our LEHD-based approach against publicly available survey data, we derive entrepreneurship trends using the Current Population Survey (CPS) Merged Outgoing Rotation Group
(MORG) data from the NBER.9 The data include details about the respondent’s place of birth
starting in 1994, and also reports the class of worker where one of the categories is "self-employed
in an incorporated business". We prepare a CPS sample that matches the traits of our LEHD
work, starting with individuals aged 25 to 50 who live in one of our core 11 states and work in
the private sector. We further limit the data to those persons who are in the labor force and
have a known level of education and potential labor market experience of at least one year. To
stay consistent with the LEHD, we include as immigrants all those who are born outside of the
United States.
Figure 3a …rst compares the immigrant workforce shares evident in the two data sources. The
levels are very comparable, and the trends quite similar, with the CPS trend being modestly
sharper. Figure 3b next compares the immigrant share of the entrepreneurial groups. The
CPS trend includes as new entrepreneurs those who are newly self-employed in an incorporated
business. The levels are more di¤erent here, with the LEHD being consistently at least 3%-4%
higher. Perhaps more important, while both are upwardly sloping, the timings are di¤erent. The
LEHD shows stronger growth during the 1990s, while the CPS picks up more in mid to late 2000s.
We do not have a strong hypothesis regarding the source of these di¤erences, although some of it
may connect to the CPS redesign in 2002-2003. Unreported tabulations include unincorporated
self-employed workers into the CPS entrepreneurial de…nitions, …nding that the resulting trend
sits in-between the two series shown in Figure 3b, with the augmented CPS series retaining its
trend di¤erences from the LEHD.
Figure 3c …nally compares various metrics regarding rates of entrepreneurship for immigrants.
Relative to the immigrant entrepreneurial shares shown in Figure 3b, entrepreneurial rate calculations are substantially more sensitive to de…nitional decisions that can have large impact
on their levels (regardless of data source). From the CPS, we provide at the top of Figure 3c a
measure of the incorporated self-employment rate for immigrants in the sample. This includes
self-employed owners who have held their business for many years, and thus provides a higher
estimate of about 3.5% for the years; this share would exceed 10% if including unincorporated
self-employment. At the bottom of Figure 3c is the Kau¤man Foundation Index that is derived
9
Data available at: http://www.nber.org/data/morg.html. We thank Ethan Lewis for his guidance on this
work.

18

from the CPS through entry into self-employment (Fairlie et al., 2015); due to its focus on entrepreneurial transitions, the rate is much smaller at about 0.4%. For the LEHD, we show our
core measure, where we use a three-year window for counting entrepreneurs, and the one-year
version that is most comparable to the Kau¤man Foundation Index. It is clear that our metrics
fall in between the extremes of CPS-based approaches. We tend to see comparable stability,
and both data sources speak to a growing rate for immigrants compared to natives in terms of
entrepreneurial transitions (which is mostly implied by Figure 3b).10

5

Analysis of Firm Survival and Growth

We next consider di¤erences in the performance of …rms founded by immigrants versus natives.
Table 3 …rst provides descriptive statistics for the sample of …rms used for analytical work
comparable to Tables 2a and 2b. The analytical sample includes …rms founded 1992-2005 in
a Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) within a state present in the LEHD since
1992. Relative to Tables 2a and 2b, several data preparation steps are undertaken to exclude
entrants that are multi-unit LBD entering …rms and entrants lacking complete information for the
considered LBD and LEHD metrics (e.g., reported payroll). The metrics focus on the immigrantnative composition of the top three initial earners. The sample ends with 2005 entrants to allow
observation of LBD outcomes until 2011 and to circumvent any issues with the LEHD-LBD
match (Business Registry Bridge) in later years.
Table 4a shows a basic tabulation of the data over a three-year growth horizon. We include in
this analysis all entering cohorts of …rms during the 1992-2005 period, with outcomes measured
after three years for each entrant (e.g., 2004 employment for a 2001 entrant). In Panel A, each
row represents a separate starting size category in terms of employment. We then tabulate
the share of entrants for each starting size category that grow to the level indicated by column
headers by the third year, with rows summing to 100%. Thus, Column 2 shows that over onethird of …rms close across this time span, while Column 7 shows that very few …rms reach or
exceed 100 employees, especially when starting from the smallest size category. The cells in bold
represent the least moment from initial employment levels, which is the most likely outcome
other than business closure.11
Panel B provides for each cell the average initial immigrant entrepreneurship share for the
…rms in that group. Entrepreneur de…nitions use the top three initial earners, independent of
whether these individuals remain top earners in the …rm across the three years. The Total rows
10
The one-year rolling de…nition of entrepreneurship in the LEHD provides an entry rate that is about twothirds of the three-year basis in Figure 3c. This limited gap is due to the high rate of business failure in the …rst
three years of operation. By contrast, employment in new ventures shows a greater di¤erence, as described above
for Appendix Table 2b. This is because employment counts capture the growth and scaling of surviving ventures
through their …rst three years, in addition to business failure e¤ects. As our identi…cation of entrepreneurs is
…xed from the …rst year of each venture and with a maximum of three founders, this latter e¤ect is not present
and the di¤erences based upon windows is smaller in Figure 3c.
11
The majority of closed businesses are failed companies, but closures also include acquired companies should
the LBD identi…ers change, some of which may be quite successful outcomes.

19

and columns provide the weighted average immigrant entrepreneurship rates for their groups.
The shares in Column 8 decline across starting levels re‡ective of the lower sample average
initial employment for immigrant-started businesses noted above. Panel C similarly provides the
average initial immigrant employment share for grouped …rms independent of initial earnings.
The intriguing initial pattern in the data points to a greater volatility of immigrant entrepreneur outcomes. The immigrant shares are frequently lowest among the bolded cells that
represent static employment levels. In all cases, immigrants are more represented among closed
…rms in Column 2 compared to the bolded cells. Moreover, among the …rms that begin with
5-9 or 10+ employees, immigrant shares are lowest in the bolded cells compared to any other
movement. In the smallest category, which Panel A shows is the most stagnant of the initial size
categories, immigrant shares among those …rms remaining at 1-4 employees closely mirrors the
overall share. Table 4b similarly considers a six-year growth horizon for cohorts, which uses the
LBD data up to 2011 for our 2005 entrants. Over half of entrants fail by year six, which re‡ects
typical start-up life expectancies. The patterns are mostly repeated here, especially in Panel C.
In Panel B, there is less evidence of upside growth outcomes.
While intriguing, these tabulations do not account for general di¤erences in when immigrant
versus native …rms are founded or their other measurable attributes. To address these issues
Table 5a considers regressions of the three-year outcomes that take the form,
Yf;t+3 =

t

+ ImmigrantEntrepreneurSharef;t + Xf;t +

f;t ;

where f and t index …rms and entering cohorts. We include a vector of cohort …xed e¤ects t
and control for the initial attributes of the …rms (Xf;t ) in terms of their starting log employment
and log payroll. Regressions are unweighted and report robust standard errors. Panel A presents
the summary statistics for outcome variables. Panel B provides the baseline regression, with the
last row giving the relative e¤ect of increasing the immigrant entrepreneur share from zero to
one compared to the sample mean.
Column 1 considers …rm survival until the third year. On average, 64% of …rms survive
this long, with immigrant-founded …rms being 0.3% less likely to survive compared to similar
…rms with only native founders. Columns 2-7 consider traits of …rms conditional on surviving
to their third year. We …rst look at employment growth, measuring changes relative to the
…rm’s average in two periods following Davis et al. (1996): [Yf;t+3 Yf;t ]=[(Yf;t+3 + Yf;t )=2]:
This measure is bounded by [-2, 2], prevents outliers, and symmetrically treats positive and
negative shifts. Conditional on survival, …rms founded by immigrants show greater growth.
Columns 3 and 4, by contrast, show no di¤erence in terms of growth of payroll or establishment
counts. The lower payroll growth may indicate lower wage growth, additional jobs being lower
wage, or that partial employment is in greater use. Column 5 alternatively models employment
growth through indicator variables for the …rm achieving more workers than its initial level,
while Columns 6 and 7 are similarly de…ned for the …rm reaching 100 workers or being among
20

the top 10% of …rms in terms of employment in its speci…c industry. These approaches con…rm
the employment growth observed in Column 2. The …nal regression shows immigrant-started
…rms are much more likely to receive VC …nancing.
Panel C takes a more-stringent approach that controls for cohort-PMSA-industry …xed effects, with industry being de…ned at the two-digit level of the SIC classi…cation. This approach
removes any di¤erences between immigrants and natives to found …rms in certain cities or sectors, which can be important for outcomes, and instead compares immigrant outcomes to natives
within these narrow cells. We do not view either approach as an inherently better way to describe
the data, as di¤erences in the choices of locations and industries are as relevant as di¤erences
in within-cell outcomes (e.g., due to di¤erent management practices). In some cases, this choice
has material impacts, while in other cases the results are robust across the variation employed
in the estimates.12
In Panel C, we see that immigrant entrepreneurs are more likely to survive for three years
compared to their closest native peers. The baseline employment growth is substantially diminished in Column 2 compared to Panel A, while some of the binary employment growth outcomes
in Columns 5-7 retain more strength. The most robust outcome is achieving the top decile of
industry employment, which already has a degree of industry-level benchmarking built into it.
Payroll growth is now signi…cantly less than native peers, while establishment count growth is
again ‡at.
Table 5b repeats Table 5a for the six-year outcomes. The relationships in Panel B are quite
comparable to the three-year outcomes, with payroll and establishment count growth now more
evident. Payroll growth is again noticeably smaller than employment growth. In general, there is
greater statistical precision for the results with six-year outcomes, and the relative magnitudes
are larger in size compared to the U.S. average outcomes than earlier. The introduction of
cohort-PMSA-industry …xed e¤ects in Panel C of Table 5b has a similar e¤ect to what it did
for the three-year outcomes. Appendix Tables 6a and 6b repeat these outcomes using simply
the initial immigrant employee share as the explanatory variable, …nding comparable results.
Perhaps the key di¤erence is that the employment growth outcomes are now more robust to the
inclusion of the cohort-PMSA-industry …xed e¤ects.
On the whole, the data paint some interesting di¤erences, albeit tentative and non-causal,
between …rms founded by immigrants versus natives. When incorporating industry and city
choice into the variation, immigrant founders have a greater volatility that somewhat mimics the
up-or-out dynamics of young …rm growth described in Haltiwanger et al. (2013). They fail more
frequently, but generate greater employment growth if they manage to stay in business. Over a
six-year horizon they become more associated with higher payroll and establishment counts, but
12
Our analysis uses the geocoding for the initial PMSA for the business. In a separate context, Kerr et al.
(2015) describe the geographic information in much greater detail for the LEHD and the LEHD-Decennial match.
There is capacity within the LEHD to observe movements over cities for all individuals; for those matched to the
Decennial Census, there is further power to look very closely at the locations of residence versus business. These
dimensions would be very interesting to consider in the immigrant context.

21

these are second-order to employment outcomes. However, much of this action appears to come
through the way in which immigrant entrepreneurs chose locations and industries. Conditional
on these features, they are more likely to survive than their native peers and modestly more
likely to experience employment growth, with payroll growth under-performing comparable …rms
founded by natives.
Unreported estimations consider whether the industry or geography controls are more important for the di¤erences observed across panels in Tables 5a and 5b. The intriguing answer is that
geography plays the central role— and especially one state. This can be expressed in two ways.
First, where a reversal of coe¢ cient direction occurs across panels, the same pattern usually
occurs when just introducing state …xed e¤ects, while this is not true when introducing industry
…xed e¤ects. Second, adjustments in sample composition around the one state’s inclusion or
exclusion can achieve similar shifts as well. We are not able to show these tabulations directly
or name the state due to the requirement that LEHD samples (or di¤erences across two related
samples) contain three or more states. Our internal …les record the state breakout. Thus, in
some respect, the unconditional results evident in Panel B are the perspective taken when one
allows for much of immigrant entrepreneurship to be in one location. This can include possibly
endogenous ‡ows of immigrants for opportunities, and it may re‡ect how immigrant entrepreneurship impacts the state’s economic dynamics. By contrast, the patterns in Panel C of these
two tables are observations that control for these overall regional di¤erences. Both perspectives
are quite important to consider.
To look a little further behind these results, we also conduct several sample splits in Tables
6a and 6b for estimations with and without conditioning on cohort-PMSA-industry …xed e¤ects.
Each coe¢ cient in the tables is from a separate regression. The top row repeats the baseline
speci…cation, followed by splits between low- and high-wage …rms, low- and high-tech sectors,
and then VC backing (non-VC-backed results are not reported since they are so close to the
baseline outcomes). We most focus on Table 6b, where several intriguing di¤erences are present.
First, variation among low-wage and low-tech groups is generally responsible for our conditional
survival relationship. Second, employment growth is generally associated with high-wage and
high-tech sectors. Third, payroll growth compared to natives is never present. Fourth, while
immigrant-founded ventures are more likely to access VC …nancing, they do not display stronger
outcomes conditional on this …nancing. This is in many respects a parallel …nding to our observation that city-industry choice accounts for much of the observed di¤erences in the general
sample. Finally, where employment growth occurs, it is usually about achieving any employment expansion relative to the initial level or reaching the top deciles of an industry, rather than
surpassing the threshold of 100 employees (a benchmark that few newly started …rms make).
This is true for the general and VC-backed samples, suggesting that employment e¤ects due to
immigrant entrepreneurship are more likely to come from accumulated contributions of many
…rms compared to the extreme outcomes of a few high-growth entities that are often emphasized
22

in the popular debate.
In unreported estimations, we also look at the probability of achieving an IPO by 2005, both
in the whole sample and among …rms backed by VC investors. We do not observe di¤erences
for immigrant entrepreneurs in this regard, but we also hesitate to emphasize this result given
the early end date of the Compustat Bridge File for our sample.
While this study does not identify why immigrants might choose riskier city-industry cells,
some preliminary candidates can be listed. One is that the self-selection process of international
migration leads to a pool of foreign-born individuals in the United States who have a greater
tolerance for risk and uncertainty than the average U.S. native. This could lead to di¤erences
in the distributions of businesses started by the two groups with respect to potential growth
outcomes. A second possibility is that immigrants have weaker wage-based options, due to some
combination of factors like limited language skills, reduced acceptance of education credentials,
spatial isolation in ethnic enclaves, social exclusion, or similar (e.g., Lewis, 2013b). These reduced outside options may make immigrants willing to launch a business of any form and venture
into riskier domains. A third, more positive, possibility is that the tight social structures for
some immigrant groups allow them a group-based capacity to enter into riskier domains and rely
on each other, similar to the studies of immigrant entrepreneurial specialization (e.g., Kerr and
Mandor¤, 2015).This comparative advantage could be consistent with bene…ts of immigrantgenerated diversity documented by Ottaviano and Peri (2006), Mazzolari and Neumark (2012),
Nathan (2015), and similar. Another possibility, to complete a …rst and incomplete list, is that
illegal immigration and undocumented workers in immigrant-led …rms have somehow led us to
mismeasure some of the growth/survival properties. We believe the LEHD-based platform provides power going forward to investigate these questions, for example, by taking advantage of the
observation of wage histories before and after entrepreneurial spells to understand outside options. Similarly, the detailed information on country-of-birth can aid analyses of social isolation,
group concentration on entrepreneurship in certain industries, and similar features.
Table 7 provides our …nal analysis, which is fairly brief. One goal of this project is to
evaluate whether the 2000 Census traits can be incorporated systematically into the immigrant
entrepreneurship analysis. Given the policy interest on the age at arrival of immigrants, we
choose this dimension and show some initial tabulations in the transition framework of Tables
4a and 4b. We restrict the sample to start-ups that have immigrant founders, and sample
sizes require that we combine the …nal growth outcomes in Column 6 to achieving 20 or more
employees. The cells now represent the share of immigrant founders in the cell who came to the
United States as children. At starting employment levels of nine workers or less, immigrants
coming to the United States as children are generally associated with better outcomes in terms
of lower closure rates and higher representation among the larger size categories. Immigrants
coming to the United States as children are also more likely to start larger …rms, and among this
largest category they tend to be over-represented among business closures and the …rms that
23

achieve the largest employment outcomes. As important, we form a general conclusion from
this exercise that researchers will be able to split the samples su¢ ciently along traits available
in the 2000 Census match to explore outcomes associated with di¤erent traits of immigrant
entrepreneurs. Tabulations of growth by two or more dimensions (e.g., education and age of
arrival) will quickly become strained, requiring multi-variate regression analysis instead.

6

Conclusions and Future Research

The constructed data platform provides new statistics regarding the patterns of business formation by immigrant entrepreneurs and the medium-term success of those businesses. The
de…nition of an entrepreneur used in this study is in many ways dictated by the coverage of the
LBD and the LEHD, and hence it is useful to compare our calculations and estimates to those
derived from other data sources. Looking back at Table 1, our results tend to fall in the upperend of the estimates for the immigrant entrepreneur share. There are several factors potentially
at work. First, the LEHD data does not identify the actual founders of businesses, and we may
be over- or under-inclusive in our de…nition using the top three initial earners. We have yet to
identify a technique to quantify this e¤ect relative to other de…nitions possible for founders. One
of the most feasible comparisons may be business ownership records in the SBO (e.g., Fairlie,
2008, 2012). Ownership estimates will be higher than entrepreneurship estimates due to the
larger existing stock of native small business owners compared to new …rm formation, and so we
do not expect this di¤erence to close. But through the study of new entrants captured in the
SBO, perhaps the entrepreneurship metrics can be enhanced or their properties better de…ned.
Beyond immigrant shares of entrepreneurs, rates of entry are more di¢ cult to reconcile due
to many alternatives for both the numerator (who is an entrepreneur?) and the denominator
(what population are we comparing this to?). Our data have some distinct traits. First, the
LEHD only includes employer …rms that …le UI records, and thus excludes non-employer …rms
and self-employment. Addition of these individuals will most likely alter the estimated rates by
mainly boosting the numerator. That said, most of the policy focus and academic interest centers
on attracting "growth entrepreneurs" that create jobs, in which case a restriction of the analysis
to employer …rms is actually desired. Second, our denominator focuses on private-sector workers
in the LEHD. This denominator could be also more inclusive by incorporating the entire public
sector or by being expanded to be all working-age adults in the covered states (e.g., drawn from
the Current Population Survey). Using a larger population for the denominator will obviously
reduce our measured rate of entrepreneurship. In general, our calculations seek to provide a new,
longitudinal view into the patterns of immigrant entrepreneurship and not directly replicate nor
necessarily displace …ndings from earlier studies. Our platform sacri…ces on some dimensions
(e.g., state coverage, ownership data) and gains on others (e.g., universal samples, longitudinal
depth, homogeneity across skills).

24

While there has been considerable recent interest in immigrant entrepreneurship, as surveyed
by Fairlie and Lofstrom (2014), the state of the …eld in terms of academic studies is still mostly
wide open. Even establishing the basic facts has been hampered by the availability of largescale, nationally representative longitudinal data that would capture both …rm founders and
their …rms. Below we describe several promising areas for further research, many of which would
bene…t from greater data availability from administrative sources.
First, it would be helpful to build a more solid research foundation for quantifying the magnitudes of immigrant contributions to the creation of new entrepreneurial …rms in the Science,
Engineering, Technology and Mathematics (STEM) …elds. Many immigration policies specifically target this area— e.g., the longer Optional Practical Training (OPT) period for STEMdegree holders— and much of the concern over encouraging immigrant entrepreneurship focuses
here. In doing so, researchers could utilize the employer-employee panel data developed here and
ideally also engage in a more-causal analysis of policy changes a¤ecting high-skilled immigration
in general and post-study immigration of STEM graduates from U.S. universities in the 2000s
and thereafter.
Second, a better understanding of how the existing immigrants in the United States can more
e¤ectively engage in starting new businesses requires careful study of the choices and policy constraints faced by immigrants in their decisions to build and grow new …rms versus being workers
in a larger corporation. We also lack a clear picture of how the successful immigrant founders
enter the United States, which can be for reasons as diverse as schooling, employment, family
reuni…cation, and more. A study of the transitions or the sequence of events explaining entry
by immigrant entrepreneurs and the role of policies in allowing/blocking this transition would
be a helpful start. For example, a frequent policy misconception is that the H-1B immigrants
are responsible for lots of start-ups, and expanding the H-1B cap would boost entrepreneurship.
While it might indeed do so over some horizon, we would anticipate a signi…cant time lag because H-1B workers are tied to their sponsoring employers until a green card is approved, often
taking six or more years. A speci…c evaluation could focus on the transitions of H-1B holders
into entrepreneurship. While the current data platform can provide reasonable approximations
of H-1B holders— e.g., isolating immigrant computer programmers aged 25-30 who were born
in India via the 2000 Census match— a better scenario would be to gain access to the USCIS
records on H-1B visa holders and match them to the LEHD and other Census Bureau data
sources. Other visa categories lend themselves to similar evaluations, including the OPT visas
for F-1 students. A less-intensive alternative is to link smaller sets of individuals like the H-1B
visa lotteries studied by Doran et al. (2015). Accomplishing such linkages may be di¢ cult, but
better-quality data ingredients will result in substantially better advice for policy makers.
Continuing on these themes, it is widely thought that immigrant entrepreneurs contribute
disproportionately to innovation and technological advancement in the United States (similar to
the more-established facts about the role of immigrants for innovation generally). One way to
25

quantify immigrant entrepreneur contributions in the science and innovation arena is the USPTO
patent data (Hall et al., 2001), matched to the person- and …rm-level data sources available
from the Census Bureau. Indeed, while there exist recent studies on the e¤ect of high-skilled
immigration on U.S. innovation, we lack a systematic evaluation of how the creation of new
…rms by immigrant founders contributes to the overall pace and direction of U.S. innovation and
whether these …rms produce di¤erent types of innovations compared to native-founded …rms
(e.g., exploration versus exploitation work). Several studies have made progress on the …rmlevel matching using name-matching techniques (e.g., Kerr and Fu, 2008; Balasubramanian and
Sivadasan, 2011; Akcigit and Kerr, 2010). These studies typically …nd record matching to be
easier for larger …rms than small start-ups. It would be terri…c to have a match of LEHD workers
to the inventor records in the USPTO database. Such a match would enable detailed studies of
technological trajectories for workers (how start-ups relate to the innovative work of their prior
employer), provide greater assurance about the quality of the matches overall, and facilitate
interesting work on immigration and other related labor market policies (e.g., non-compete
clauses).
In a very similar vein, we have also made signi…cant headway towards identifying …rms backed
by VC investors in the Census Bureau data (e.g., Chemmanur et al., 2011; Puri and Zarutskie,
2012). Subsequent work in entrepreneurial …nance frequently focuses on individual entrepreneurs and/or their speci…c VC investors. Individual-level connections of the LEHD workers to
these data would provide a very powerful platform for the study of VC-backed entrepreneurial
outcomes.
While the current study provides some descriptive analyses for a broader set of geographic
areas, a more-detailed analysis of the impact of immigrant entrepreneurship on local job growth
and economic development is warranted. Feldman and Kogler (2010) and Carlino and Kerr
(2015) review the literature on the geography of innovation that has come since Audretsch and
Feldman (1996). Glaeser et al. (2015) consider the general link of entrepreneurship to city
employment growth, and Samila and Sorenson (2011) consider the speci…c case of VC-backed
start-ups. It would be useful to build on this past work to understand the speci…c case of immigrant entrepreneurship. Many cities and local areas are attempting to leverage immigrant
entrepreneurship directly, and we need to know more about the potential e¢ cacy of such e¤orts
and how any stimulus actually accrues. Kerr (2010) …nds that ethnic entrepreneurs are particularly important in the reallocation of inventive activity to be near sources of breakthrough
innovations and their scaling process (e.g., Duranton, 2007); study of these phenomena within
the LEHD data family is quite promising. Similarly, we skip in this study the ethnicity and
immigration status of hired employees due to data features noted above (e.g., the expansion of
…rms across LEHD state lines), and such features would be very natural to incorporate in a local
growth context given the complete de…nitions of employee traits.

26

References
[1] Abowd, J.M., Stephens, B.E., Vilhuber, L., Andersson, F., McKinney, K.L., Roemer, M.
and Woodcock, S. (2008). The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the Quarterly
Workforce Indicators.
[2] Akcigit, U. and Kerr, W. (2010). "Growth Through Heterogeneous Innovations." NBER
Working Paper 16443.
[3] Akee, R.K.Q., Jaeger, D.A. and Tatsiramos, K. (2007). "The Persistence of SelfEmployment Across Borders: New Evidence on Legal Immigrants to the United States."
IZA Discussion Papers 3250, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
[4] Anderson, S. and Platzer, M. (2006). "American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Professionals on U.S. Competitiveness." National Venture Capital Association
Report.
[5] Andersson, F., García-Pérez, M., Haltiwanger, J., McCue, K., and Sanders, S. (2014).
"Workplace Concentration of Immigrants." Demography, 51:6, 2281-2306.
[6] Andersson, F., Burgess, S., and Lane, J. (2012). "Do as the Neighbors Do: The Impact of
Social Networks on Immigrant Employment." Working Paper.
[7] Åslund, O., Hensvik, L., and Skans, O. (2014). "Seeking Similarity: How Immigrants and
Natives Manage in the Labor Market." Journal of Labor Economics, 32:3, 405-441.
[8] Audretsch, D. and Feldman, M. (1996). "R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
and Production." American Economic Review, 86, 630-640.
[9] Balasubramanian, N. and Sivadasan, J. (2011). "What Happens When Firms Patent? New
Evidence from US Manufacturing Census Data." Review of Economics and Statistics, 93:1,
126-146.
[10] Bengtsson, O. and Hsu, D. (2014). "Ethnic Matching in the U.S. Venture Capital Market."
Journal of Business Venturing, 30:2, 338-354.
[11] Blau, F. and Kahn, L. (2016). "Immigration and Gender Roles: Assimilation vs. Culture."
NBER Working Paper 21756.
[12] Borjas, G. (1986). "The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants." Journal of Human
Resources, 21, 487-506.
[13] Borjas, G. and Doran, K. (2012) "The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity
of American Mathematicians." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127:3, 1143-1203.
[14] Carlino, G. and Kerr, W.R. (2015). "Agglomeration and Innovation." In Duranton, G.,
Henderson, V. and Strange, W. (eds.) Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Vol. 5,
349-404.
[15] Chemmanur, T., Krishnan, K. and Nandy, D. (2011). "How Does Venture Capital Financing
Improve E¢ ciency in Private Firms? A Look Beneath the Surface." Review of Financial
Studies, 24:12, 4037-4090.
[16] Chung, W. and Kalnins, A. (2006). "Social Capital, Geography, and the Survival: Gujarati
Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the U.S. Lodging Industry." Management Science, 52:2, 233247.

27

[17] Clark, K. and Drinkwater, S. (2000). "Pushed Out or Pulled In? Self-employment Among
Ethnic Minorities in England and Wales." Labour Economics, 7:5, 603-628.
[18] Clark, K. and Drinkwater, S. (2006). "Changing Patterns of Ethnic Minority SelfEmployment in Britain: Evidence from Census Microdata." IZA Discussion Papers 2495,
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
[19] Cole, R. (2011). "How do Firms Choose Legal Form of Organization." Small Business Administration Release 383, MPRA Working Paper 32591.
[20] Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J. and Schuh, S. (1996). Job Creation and Destruction, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
[21] Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. and Miranda, J. (2014). "The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
28:3, 3-24.
[22] Doran, K., Gelber, A. and Isen, A. (2015). "The E¤ects of High-Skill Immigration on Firms:
Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries." NBER Working Paper 20668.
[23] Duranton, G. (2007). "Urban Evolutions: the Fast, the Slow, and the Still." American
Economic Review, 97, 197-221.
[24] Fairlie R.W. (2012). "Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Small Business Owners, and their Access to Financial Capital." U.S. Small Business Administration Report.
[25] Fairlie, R.W. (2013). "Minority and Immigrant Entrepreneurs: Access to Financial Capital."
In Constant, A.F. and Zimmermann, K.F. (eds.) International Handbook on the Economics
of Migration, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham UK.
[26] Fairlie, R.W. and Lofstrom, M. (2014). "Immigration and Entrepreneurship." In Chiswick,
B.R. and Miller, P.W. (eds.) Handbook on the Economics of International Migration, Elsevier.
[27] Fairlie, R.W. and Meyer, B.D. (2003). "The E¤ect of Immigration on Native SelfEmployment." Journal of Labor Economics, 21:3, 619-650.
[28] Fairlie, R.W., Morelix, A., Reddy, E.J. and Russell, J. (2015). "The Kau¤man Index 2015."
Kau¤man Foundation Report.
[29] Fairlie, R.W., Zissimopoulos, J. and Krashinsky H.A. (2010). "The International Asian
Business Success Story: A Comparison of Chinese, Indian, and Other Asian Businesses
in the United States, Canada, and United Kingdom." In Lerner, J. and Schoar, A. (eds.)
International Di¤erences in Entrepreneurship, University of Chicago Press and National
Bureau of Economic Research, 179-208.
[30] Feldman, M. and Kogler, D. (2010). "Stylized Facts in the Geography of Innovation." In:
Hall, B. and Rosenberg, N. (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Vol.1, Elsevier,
Oxford, 381-410.
[31] García-Pérez, M. (2012). "A Matching Model on the Use of Immigrant Social Networks and
Referral Hiring." Saint Cloud State University Working Papers 2012-21.
[32] Glaeser, E., Kerr, S.P. and Kerr, W.R. (2015). "Entrepreneurship and Urban Growth: An
Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines." Review of Economics and Statistics, 97:2,
498-520.
28

[33] Hall, B., Ja¤e, A. and Trajtenberg, M. (2001). "The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools." NBER Working Paper 8498.
[34] Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. and Miranda, J. (2013). "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large
vs. Young." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:2, 347-361.
[35] Hart, D.M. and Acs, Z.J. (2011). "High-Tech Immigrant Entrepreneurship in the United
States." Economic Development Quarterly, 25:2, 116-129.
[36] Hecker D. (1999) "High-Technology Employment: A Broader View." Monthly Labor Review,
June 1999.
[37] Hegde, D. and Tumlinson, J. (2014). "Does Social Proximity Enhance Business Relationships? Theory and Evidence from Ethnicity’s Role in US Venture Capital." Management
Science, 60:9, 2355-2380.
[38] Hunt, J. (2011). "Which Immigrants are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions
by Entry Visa." Journal of Labor Economics, 29:3, 417-457.
[39] Hunt, J. (2015). "Are Immigrants the Most Skilled US Computer and Engineering Workers?" Journal of Labor Economics, 33:S1, S39-S77.
[40] Hunt, J. and Gauthier-Loiselle, M. (2010). "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2:2, 31-56.
[41] Kerr, S.P. and Kerr, W.R. (2013). "Immigration and Employer Transitions for STEM Workers." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 103:3, 193-197.
[42] Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R. and Lincoln, W.F. (2015a). "Firms and the Economics of Skilled
Immigration." In Kerr, W.R., Lerner, J. and Stern, S. (eds.) Innovation Policy and the
Economy Vol. 15, University of Chicago Press, 115-152.
[43] Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R. and Lincoln, W.F. (2015b). "Skilled Immigration and the Employment Structures of U.S. Firms." Journal of Labor Economics, 33:S1, S109-S145.
[44] Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R. and Nanda, R. (2015). "House Money and Entrepreneurship." NBER
Working Paper 21458.
[45] Kerr, W.R. (2008). "Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology Di¤usion." Review of Economics and Statistics, 90:3, 518-37.
[46] Kerr, W.R. (2010). "Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innovation." Journal of Urban Economics, 67:1, 46-60.
[47] Kerr, W.R. (2013). "U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: Empirical Approaches and Evidence." NBER Working Paper 19377.
[48] Kerr, W.R. and Fu, S. (2008). "The Survey of Industrial R&D–Patent Database Link
Project." Journal of Technology Transfer, 33:2, 173-186.
[49] Kerr, W.R. and Lincoln, W.F. (2010). "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
and U.S. Ethnic Invention." Journal of Labor Economics, 28:3, 473-508.
[50] Kerr, W.R. and Mandor¤, M. (2015). "Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship."
NBER Working Paper 21597.

29

[51] Kerr, W.R., Nanda, R. and Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2014). "Entrepreneurship as Experimentation." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28:3, 25-48.
[52] Lewis, E. (2013a). "Immigration and Production Technology." Annual Review of Economics,
5, 165-191.
[53] Lewis, E. (2013b). "Immigrant Native Substitutability: The Role of Language." In Card,
D. and Raphael, S. (eds.) Immigration, Poverty, and Socioeconomic Inequality. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
[54] Lewis, E. and Peri, G. (2015). "Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions."
In Duranton, G., Henderson, V. and Strange, W. (eds.) Handbook of Urban and Regional
Economics, Vol. 5.
[55] Lofstrom, M. (2002). "Labor Market Assimilation and the Self-Employment Decision of
Immigrant Entrepreneurs." Journal of Population Economics, 15:1, 83-114.
[56] Lofstrom, M., Bates, T. and Parker, S. (2014). "Why Are Some People More Likely to Become Small-Businesses Owners than Others: Entrepreneurship Entry and Industry-Speci…c
Barriers." Journal of Business Venturing, 29:2, 232-251.
[57] Mazzolari, F. and Neumark, D. (2012). "Immigration and Product Diversity." Journal of
Population Economics, 25:3, 1107-1137.
[58] McKinney, K. and Vilhuber, L. (2008). Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics. LEHD
Infrastructure Files in the Census RDC-Overview: Revision 219.
[59] McKinney, K. and Vilhuber, L. (2011). LEHD Infrastructure Files in the Census RDC:
Overview of S2004 Snapshot. CES 11-13.
[60] Monti, D.J., Smith-Doerr, L. and MacQuaid, J. (2007). "Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Industry." Immigrant Learning Center, Boston, MA.
[61] Moser, P., Voena, A., and Waldinger, F. (2014) "German Jewish Emigres and U.S. Invention." American Economic Review, 104:10, 3222-3255.
[62] Nathan, M. (2015). "Same Di¤erence? Minority Ethnic Inventors, Diversity and Innovation
in the UK." Journal of Economic Geography, 15:1, 129-168.
[63] Ottaviano, G. and Peri, G. (2006). "The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence
from US Cities." Journal of Economic Geography, 6:1, 9-44.
[64] Patel, K. and Vella, F. (2013). "Immigrant Networks and their Implications for Occupational
Choice and Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:4, 1249-1277.
[65] Peri, G. (2007). "Higher Education, Innovation and Growth." In Brunello, G., Garibaldi, P.
and Wasmer, E. (eds.) Education and Training in Europe, Oxford University Press, 56-70.
[66] Peri, G., Shih, K. and Sparber, C. (2015). "STEM Workers, H-1B Visas and Productivity
in US Cities." Journal of Labor Economics, 33:S1, S225-S255.
[67] Puri, M. and Zarutskie, R. (2012). "On the Lifecycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital- and
Non-Venture-Capital-Financed Firms." Journal of Finance, 67:6, 2247-2293.
[68] Samila, S. and Sorenson, O. (2011). "Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship and Economic
Growth." Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 338-349.
30

[69] Saxenian, A. (1999). "Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs." San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California.
[70] Saxenian, A. (2002). "Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant High-Growth Entrepreneurs." Economic Development Quarterly, 16, 20-31.
[71] Schuetze, H.J. and Antecol, H. (2007). "Immigration, Entrepreneurship and the Venture
Start-Up Process. The Life Cycle of Entrepreneurial Ventures." In Parker, S. (ed.) International Handbook Series on Entrepreneurship, Vol. 3, Springer, New York.
[72] Stephan, P. and Levin, S. (2001). "Exceptional Contributions to US Science by the ForeignBorn and Foreign-Educated." Population Research and Policy Review, 20:1, 59-79.
[73] Unger, J.M., Rauch, A., Frese, M. and Rosenbusch, N. (2011). "Human Capital and Entrepreneurial Success: A Meta-Analytical Review." Journal of Business Venturing, 26:3,
341-358.
[74] Van Der Sluis, J., Van Praag, M. and Vijverberg, W. (2008). "Education and Entrepreneurship Selection and Performance: A Review of the Empirical Literature." Journal of
Economic Surveys, 22:5, 795-841.
[75] Wadhwa, V., Saxenian, A., Rissing, B. and Gere¢ , G. (2007). "America’s New Immigrant
Entrepreneurs." Durham, NC: Duke University.
[76] Zucker, L., Darby, M., and Brewer, M. (1998). "Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth
of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises." American Economic Review, 88:1, 290-306.

31

A

Data Appendix: LEHD, Immigration, and Firms

This appendix explains in more detail how the LEHD data are structured and what types of issues
are likely to arise when attempting to follow persons and …rms over time within the LEHD. It is
meant to provide guidance and useful suggestions for researchers interested in utilizing these data
to study immigration and entrepreneurship at the …rm level. Our analysis …les for the current
study and some previous studies (Kerr and Kerr, 2013; Kerr et al., 2015b) are available for
researchers within the Census RDC network. We can also provide any SAS and Stata programs
that have been redacted for any company identi…cation to researchers who do not have access
to the Census RDC network, although these …les are likely to be of limited use without access
to the raw data.

A.1

LEHD File Structure and Key Identi…ers

The LEHD is available for researchers at the Census Research Data Centers. Access to the
LEHD requires an approved project and security clearance. This section gives an outline of
the LEHD and is geared towards building a …rm sample using the LEHD and auxiliary Census
Bureau data sets. The LEHD structure is described in greater technical detail in three Census
Bureau documents: McKinney and Vilhuber (2008, 2011) and Abowd et al. (2008). We provide
here a short description of the relevant data …les and variables for the construction of a …rm
panel, omitting details of other LEHD structure …les and variables for brevity. Prospective users
of the LEHD are highly encouraged to review the full technical documentation, as well as any
previous studies utilizing the LEHD, since the database has complications and issues for which
researchers are building codi…ed and tacit knowledge.
The LEHD data are currently available for research purposes for a total of 31 states. All states
have signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to include their data in the LEHD, and
once entered into the LEHD they will also retroactively include the data series as far back in
time as their state’s information and records permit. It is not yet clear when the remaining
states will be included in the database. Discussion below includes more details on the partial
state coverage and practical concerns that it raises.
The LEHD covers all private companies operating in the United States, and it allows researchers to analyze these companies and their workers at a very detailed level over a long
period of time. Firms and their business units are identi…ed in the LEHD by three main variables: SEIN, EIN, and ALPHA. The SEIN is a state tax identi…er, the EIN is a federal tax
identi…er, and ALPHA is the Census Bureau’s identi…er of overall …rms. In addition, as …rms
can have multiple establishments within a state, the LEHD also provides the SEINUNIT number that corresponds to the SEIN reporting unit (i.e., establishment). These variables uniquely
identify a …rm and its establishments within a calendar quarter and state. The person identi…er
(PIK) uniquely identi…es a worker across all jobs that the individual holds, is derived from Social
32

Security Numbers, and is anonymized to protect the person’s identity.
The LEHD consists of several separate …les describing the …rm, worker, and job that the
person holds within the …rm. These …les are organized separately by state, and they have a
uniform structure across all states. First, data contained in the employer characteristics …le
(ECF) and the employment history …le (EHF) are essentially provided at the establishment
level (i.e., by SEIN and SEINUNIT). As SEINs are only uniquely associated to a speci…c …rm
during a given calendar quarter within a given state, creating a …rm-level panel requires …rst
assigning each SEIN to a single ALPHA that can then be linked to a single …rm entity. This
process is discussed in detail below. The person-level information contained in the individual
characteristics …le (ICF) can then be easily linked to the EHF using the PIK.
The Business Register Bridge (BRB) …les are the key for creating …rms that combine all
multi-unit entities into a single company across all states. The BRB consists of two separate
…les: the BR list and the ECF list.13 The former contains the full list of EINs belonging to each
ALPHA and is organized by year, EIN, state, county, four-digit SIC, and Census File Number
(CFN). The ECF list reports all SEINs belonging to each EIN, and each record is identi…ed by
SEIN, SEINUNIT, year, and calendar quarter. The dual nature and di¤ering record structures
of the BRB …les make them somewhat cumbersome to use, and creating a full mapping of SEINs
for each company name in our sample requires several data cleaning steps and additional research
for unclear cases. These steps are documented in more detail later in this appendix.
The individual-level information contained in the ICF includes person characteristics such
as the date of birth, gender, race, place of birth, and citizenship status. Similarly, the …rm-level
information in the ECF describes location, industry, payroll, and other …rm characteristics at
the SEIN and SEINUNIT levels. In turn, each job that a person holds in any of the companies
covered by the LEHD is recorded in the EHF. The EHF tells for each calendar quarter how much
the person earned while employed in each company that they worked for. The EHF (merged
with the ICF) is crucial for calculating statistics on the company workforce over time.
The key ICF variables for identifying immigrants are the place of birth (POBST)14 , the
indicator for foreign place of birth (POBFIN), and the indicator for ever being an alien (ALIEN).
These variables allow us to construct a "country of birth" variable.15 On the other hand, the
13
The BRB …les are further separated into two vintage …les. The older vintage …les cover years until 2001, and
the newer vintage …les cover years 1997-2004. While data for the overlapping years should be mostly identical,
there are instances where the linkage information di¤ers between the two …les. We prioritize the later vintage
information where con‡ict exists.
14
The LEHD country codes are based on the o¢ cial country codes used, for example, by the Department of
Defense. They require some additional processing due to the fact that countries have changed over time and the
LEHD records the country as written down by the person in their application for a Social Security Number. For
example, Germany can show up as GM, BZ, GC or GE depending on the time of application. In unclear cases
we used the city of birth variable (POBCITY) to resolve con‡icts.
15
Kerr et al. (2015b) further aggregates these into 10 country groups: [1] China, Hong Kong, and Macao, [2]
India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, [3] other Asian countries, [4] English-speaking countries, [5] Russia and former
member states of the Soviet Union, [6] other European countries, [7] Middle East, [8] Africa, [9] Central and
South America, and [10] other countries. A detailed breakdown of the country codes is available from the authors
by request.

33

LEHD is missing some information that would be relevant for a study of high-skilled immigration,
or indeed for many other economic topics. First, it does not contain information on the job
characteristics such as occupation, position held, hours worked, or hourly wage. The employment
data do not identify reporting relationships or similar attributes of the corporate hierarchy.
Second, the ICF does not report the person’s actual education (an imputed version is provided)
or their immigrant status (e.g., green card, H-1B visa), or changes in these characteristics. We
would ideally like to know the person’s initial year of entry into the United States, as well as
any changes that have occurred in their immigrant status over time.

A.2

Other Census Data Required for Firm Identi…cation

The LEHD can be used (and is perhaps most naturally used) at the SEIN level, which for most
companies roughly corresponds to an establishment, and for single-unit …rms contains the entire
…rm. In theory, researchers can construct larger "Census …rms" by using the BRB to identify
all SEINs that belong to a single ALPHA, and then consider the ALPHA to be the unique
company identi…er. This approach often works …ne if one is primarily interested in looking at
the cross-section of …rms at a speci…c point in time, but the approach does not work well when
one needs to track large, multi-unit companies over time. It is true that most large …rms have
one core ALPHA under which most of their employment falls within any given year, and this
identi…er is mostly …xed over time. However, a more careful look at the larger, multi-unit …rms
studied in Kerr et al. (2015b) …nds corporate events such as mergers, acquisitions, spin-o¤s, etc.
substantially weaken the exclusive use of ALPHAs for longitudinal analyses. In other words,
an ALPHA with a large number of employees may temporarily disappear, switch to a di¤erent
ALPHA, or lose (or gain) a very large number of employees from one year to the next as a result
of corporate restructuring.
This is undesirable if one is interested in describing changes in a …rm’s workforce related to
a speci…c phenomenon, such as high-skilled immigration. Some of our prior work (Kerr et al.,
2015b; Kerr and Kerr, 2013) thus pursues the creation of composite …rm entities.16 Such steps
require identifying all of the ALPHAs from the company’s workforce during the period of study.
With that objective, we …nd the best approach to be to [1] identify the relevant …rms by their
names as recorded in the LBD/SSEL and [2] use the LBD/SSEL to identify all ALPHAs that are
ever associated with the company name. In other words, the company name becomes the unique
…rm identi…er, and this approach works best when building records for large companies present
across the full time period. The most reliable process of identifying ALPHAs for target companies
involves a careful review of company histories to identify signi…cant mergers, acquisitions, and
16

There can also be conceptual concerns. For example, if the research goal is to study whether immigrants
are displacing natives in …rms, corporate restructurings need to be very carefully considered. Strictly speaking,
an acquisition includes the simultaneous hiring of many immigrant and native workers from the acquired …rm,
which would have substantial e¤ects on the estimated relationship, but this is not conceptually what studies are
after. Kerr et al. (2015b) pursues the creation of composite …rms to remove these biases.

34

spin-o¤s that take place during the period of interest. The review of company histories is likely
to result in a long list of such events. In addition, one should conduct additional research around
cases where there is, based on the LBD, a very large shift in the …rm employment from one year
to the next. These cases often turn out to be mass layo¤s, …rms going out of business, or other
normal events in the …rm life-cycle. In some cases, however, one …nds overlooked corporate
events that should again be accounted for in the compiling of composite …rms.
Researchers should further search the LBD by company name and name variations, including
the companies that have merged into the original sample companies. For each company and its
acquisitions, one needs to collect all ALPHAs that are contained in the LBD under any of the
name variations. For example, if company AAA has acquired companies BBB and CCC, we
would …nd three (or more) separate ALPHAs in the LBD and group these with a composite
company identi…er that is used in subsequent work. This process produces a unique company
name, along with the full list of ALPHAs that should be combined together in the LEHD for
each company. Kerr et al. (2015b) further describes the application of this manual process for
the study’s group of 319 large …rms and major patenting …rms. These …rm lists and associated
identi…ers are available to researchers with appropriate approvals and data access.

A.3

Identi…cation of Firms in the LEHD

Once the full list of company names and the various ALPHAs belonging to each of the companies
are obtained from the LBD, the next step is to use the BRB to identify all EINs ever belonging
to those ALPHAs. While the BRB uniquely associates EINs to an ALPHA within a calendar
quarter and state, EINs are not necessarily stable over time, potentially creating abrupt changes
in the …rm employment series that will cause measurement error. The same is true for the
SEINs that need to be linked to the ALPHAs via the EIN using the ECF-list. Indeed McKinney
and Vilhuber (2008) note that the EIN and SEIN exist for tax administrative purposes, and
warn that no straight-forward method exists for linking multiple SEINs into a single …rm. Our
preferred approach is described in greater detail below.
As LEHD identi…ers do not uniquely capture a complete …rm entity, we suggest using the
cleaned version of company name from the LBD as a unique …rm identi…er. As explained above,
each of these …rms may contain one or more ALPHAs, and almost certainly contain more than
one EIN and SEIN. Using the BR-list, one can create a list of ALPHAs that are ever associated
with each EIN. Similarly, using the ECF-list, one can create for each SEIN the full list of EINs
that the SEIN was ever associated with. Combining these two lists provides the full list of
SEINs that ever appeared with an ALPHA. Using the groupings of ALPHAs derived from the
LBD, one assembles the full list of SEINs that ever belonged to a composite company. At
this point, there are a number of SEINs that appear to belong to multiple companies, and this
multiplicity requires careful attention. Also, as some of the company restructuring takes place at
the establishment level (e.g., the sale of a plant or division), there are also cases where a speci…c
35

EIN or SEIN belongs to multiple companies during the sample period. These cases require some
additional research and data cleaning that is also described below.

A.4

Cleaning up EIN and SEIN Associations

The data thus far contain unique SEINs for which the LEHD data needs to be collected. Before
proceeding, one needs to check whether each SEIN in the company sample is a unique match
or requires special attention. In the latter cases, researchers are best served prioritizing cases
for review through the employment levels of SEINs. Reviewing the employment series is also
helpful when verifying whether the SEIN overlap is caused by a corporate event that had not
been recognized in the initial …rm sample construction. The cleaning process at this stage is
fairly manual, and may involve searches for company events. Our preferred method in residual,
unclear cases is to assign the SEIN based on the number of years that it is associated with
companies.

A.5

Partial LEHD State Coverage

Appendix Table 1 provides a breakdown of the states included in the LEHD by the year in
which their data series begins. As the aim of Kerr et al. (2015b) and similar work is to study
the evolution of companies and their employment structures, it is problematic if large shifts in
company workforce result simply from the fact that new business units are added into the data
when a large state enters the LEHD. We often utilize balanced panels of states that begin at
one of three points: 1992 (once Florida joins), 1995 (once Texas joins), or 2000 (once the bulk of
states enter). Second, one should consider dropping …rms for which the included states do not
meet a certain threshold in terms of included employment. For example, one may want to exclude
…nance …rms that have much of their employment in New York, even if they have establishments
present in covered states, as one cannot reliably represent the …rm and its employment patterns
using the LEHD states. These coverage ratios can be determined using the LBD.

A.6

Merging External Firm-Level Data into the LEHD

There are many …rm-level data sources that are of interest for the analysis of …rms and immigration. For example, researchers may want to incorporate Labor Condition Application (LCA)
data from the Department of Labor (DOL), which is a …rst step in the application for an H-1B
visa from the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). While the USCIS
does not release systematic data on the number of H-1B applications and granted visas by …rm,
microdata on LCAs are available by …rm from the DOL.17 These data contain all LCAs starting
from 2001 and include the employer name, address, the number of jobs they wish to …ll, and the
speci…c job characteristics (title, occupation, proposed wage, etc.).
17

The data can be retrieved from: http://www.‡cdatacenter.com/CaseH1B.aspx

36

The …rm names in the LCA database are entered as they appear on the original application.
Since the applications are sent separately by di¤erent company locations, there may be variations
of the company name that need to be dealt with before aggregating the LCAs under the overall
company name. For example, 7-Eleven may submit LCAs under slight name variations such as
"7-Eleven", "7 Eleven", "7-Eleven Inc", and "7-Eleven Incorporated". Also, the issues related
to corporate restructurings resurface here as well. Once the names in the LCA data are cleaned
and aggregated, we create a crosswalk for the company names to merge the LCA data into the
LEHD data. The aggregated LCAs can then be easily merged into the LEHD by the clean …rm
name.
A second example is the merger of patent data into the LEHD-LBD to study innovation outcomes. Again, as …rm naming conventions vary between the LBD and the USPTO data, another
name cleaning step is required. Researchers also must aggregate multiple USPTO assignees into
parent …rms. Finally, for many purposes it would be useful to know more about the actual …rms
than is reported in the LEHD. One example of an external …rm-level data set is the Compustat
company database. Compustat provides standardized company …nancials for publicly traded
companies. These data are merged via bridge …les or crosswalks similar to those described. All
bridge …les are available to approved Census projects but should be explicitly requested in initial
research proposals to the Census Bureau.

A.7

Merging Internal Person-Level Data into the LEHD

While merging the company-speci…c data into our LEHD platform is relatively easy using the
company name, person-speci…c data matches require the use of the PIK created by the Census
Bureau. Three internal data sources can be directly linked to the LEHD: [1] long-form responses
from the 1990 and 2000 Decennial Censuses, as well as the related American Housing Surveys, [2]
the Current Population Survey (CPS), and [3] the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP). For the purposes of our study, the Census and the CPS contain some very relevant
information that is not present in the LEHD, including occupation and actual education. As the
LEHD contains the CPS person and household identi…cation numbers, as well as the years during
which the PIK matches the CPS identi…er, it is relatively straight forward to combine CPS data
into the LEHD. The CPS does not provide a time series of observations for each respondent, and
the occupation is a point-in-time snapshot for each person that does not necessarily correspond
to the actual job that the person is doing in the LEHD. Similarly, the Census data is easy to link
into the LEHD using the PIKs. Household characteristics can be linked to each of the matched
persons using the household identi…ers that are internal to the Census Bureau data.
Most person-level record in the LEHD have a one-to-one match to the CPS and Census.
We exclude the few cases where we …nd multiple CPS or Census observations (e.g., in di¤erent
states). As such persons make up less than 0.01% of the sample, including them either multiple
times or randomly allocating the information from one of the CPS or Census observations makes
37

no di¤erence in terms of the results of the statistical analysis.

A.8

Possible LEHD Interfaces

We close this appendix by describing potential future interfaces between the LEHD and other
data products. The weakest dimension of the LEHD for entrepreneurship research relates to
the identi…cation of business founders/owners, and our approach in this study is not perfect.
Indeed, we envision that future work can greatly expand and improve on the current approach by
linking in founder/owner data from additional sources. These include, for example, the business
ownership data from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form K-1, the Doing-Business-As …lings
from State Secretaries, data on the Legal Form of the Organization (LFO) that could identify
sole proprietorships, and perhaps also the forthcoming longitudinal Survey of Business Owners
(SBO-X) as well as the existing 2007 and 2012 cross-sectional SBOs.
More speci…cally, the IRS collects data on business ownership by U.S. individuals via the K-1
form (http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/f1120ssk.pdf). Provided that the Census Bureau could
assign each of the K-1 owners a PIK to merge into the LEHD, these tax records would provide one
avenue for linking the owner information from the K-1 data to the LEHD. The second potential
data e¤ort is related to the State Secretaries’corporate information that comes from the DoingBusiness-As (DBA) registration process (http://www.secstates.com/). Each state collects these
data, and they are held by the Secretaries of State. The registration data generally contain the
name and address of the business and the name and other details of the owner, and could in
principle be brought into the Census Bureau for the purpose of assigning of company and person
identi…ers.
The SBO data also contain details of business owners, including their age, gender, race and
whether they are born in the United States. This level of detail would be su¢ cient for linking
the SBO ownership percentages into the LEHD, for better identi…cation of whether the owner is
among the persons who are on the company payroll. This of course would not cover the entire
LEHD, given the survey design of the SBO, but it would help validate/re…ne de…nitions and
enable analysis of interesting data on the company’s start-up and expansion capital.
As unincorporated businesses are not included in the LEHD, we envision utilizing the ILBD
database to also cross-verify the status of the owner. The ILBD can be then used to provide descriptive details of the unincorporated businesses, while the Census and ACS provide a
description of the characteristics of the entrepreneurs/owners.
For employer sole proprietors, our approach of identifying …rm founders is likely not satisfactory as the business owner will not be on the payroll. Indeed, some fraction of new employer
businesses start as sole proprietorships and may later change their legal form of organization.
Recent research using the Kau¤man Firm Surveys found that about one in three …rms begin as
a proprietorship, while almost as many begin as limited-liability companies and as corporations.
Of course, not all sole proprietorships are among employer …rms. Cole (2011) provides data
38

that suggests that the share of …rms that start as employer sole proprietorships is smaller than
one-third; the average sole proprietorship has 0.6 employees. That provides some guidance as
to the error that may be introduced by ignoring the LFO in the LEHD context. We hope that
future research continues to bring together these data elements to provide ever sharper metrics
for entrepreneurship and the role of immigrants.

39

Figure 1: LEHD state coverage

Stars indicate 11 states whose coverage begins by 1992

Notes: The figure indicates with shading the states that are covered by the 2008 version of the LEHD used in this study. Alaska is
not covered. Stars indicate the 11 states whose coverage begins by 1992. The wider sample used in this study includes all shaded
states excepting Arkansas. Coverage for all states ends in 2008.

Figure 2: LEHD immigrant entrepreneurship trends
Entrepreneurs are defined as top three initial earners in business

Notes: See Table 2a. Sample includes 11 states present in the LEHD by 1992: CA, CO, FL, ID, IL, LA, MD, NC, OR, WA, and WI. New
firms are defined through the LBD and retain their entering status for the first three years of the firm's life. Entrepreneurs are
defined as top three initial earners in business.

Figure 3a: LEHD-CPS comparison for immigrant worker shares
Workers in the private sector in 11 focal LEHD states

Notes: Samples from both data sources include 11 states present in the LEHD by 1992: CA, CO, FL, ID, IL, LA, MD, NC, OR, WA, and
WI. Included individuals are aged 25 to 50, employed in the private sector, and meet certain educational and work history
restrictions. An immigrant is defined as a person born outside of the United States.

Figure 3b: LEHD-CPS for immigrant entrepreneurial shares

Entrepreneurship and self-employment in the private sector in 11 focal LEHD states

Notes: See Figure 3a. LEHD entrepreneurs are defined as top three initial earners in business and retain this status for the first
three years after the firm’s start. CPS entrepreneurs are defined as those entering incorporated self-employment.

Figure 3c: LEHD-CPS for immigrant entrepreneurial rates

Comparison of immigrant entrepreneurial measures to immigrant population

Notes: CPS measures include the overall incorporated self-employment rate for immigrants in the sample, which retains selfemployed owners who have held their business for many years, and the Kauffman Foundation's Index that is derived from the CPS
through new entry into self-employment. LEHD measures are provided with one- and three-year windows for comparison.

Table 1: Previous studies on immigrant entrepreneurship
Immigrant
Founding rate
entrepreneur share among immigrants

Founding rate
among natives

Study

Data sources

Sample design

Period

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Saxenian (1999)

Dun & Bradstreet, surveys

Silicon Valley tech firms

1980-1998

24%

n/a

n/a

Anderson & Platzer
(2006)

Thomson Financial, survey,
internet

340 publicly-traded, venturecapital backed firms,
independent in 1990-2005

1990-2005

25%

n/a

n/a

Wadhwa et al.
(2007)

Dun & Bradstreet, surveys

US tech firms with >$1m sales
and >20 employees

1995-2005

25%

n/a

n/a

Reynolds & Curtin Panel Study of Entrepreneurial New founders who plan to
(2007)
Dynamics
grow firm to 50+ employees

1999

15%

n/a

n/a

Monti et al. (2007)

2006

26%

n/a

n/a

2000, 19962007

17%

0.4%

0.3%

Fairlie (2008)

MA Biotech Council member
list

New England biotech firms

Census IPUMS 2000, Current Working-age business owners,
Population Survey 1996-2007
work >15 hours per week

Hart & Acs (2010)

Survey

"High-impact" high-tech
companies

2002-2006

16%

n/a

n/a

Robb et al. (2010)

Kauffman Firm Survey

High- and medium-tech firms
founded in 2004
Firms founded in 2004 that
survived until to 2008

2004

10.3%

n/a

n/a

2008

9.4%

n/a

n/a

Hunt (2011)

NSCG 2003

College degree holders,
working in 2003

1998-2003

n/a

0.8%

0.6%

Fairlie (2012)

Survey of Business Owners
2007, Current Population
Survey 1996-2010

Owners of businesses in 2007,
Workforce in 2010

2007, 2010

13%

0.6%

0.3%

Notes: The immigrant share of entrepreneurs in Saxenian (1999) covers only Chinese and Indian ethnic groups, based on the CEO surnames. The founding rate in Hunt (2011)
covers firms founded between 1988 and 2003 that have at least 10 employees in 2003. The founding rates in Fairlie (2008, 2012) are monthly. Fairlie (2008) defines the immigrant
entrepreneur share as the percentage of new companies that had at least one immigrant founder (of all business owners 12.5% are immigrants). Hart and Acs (2010) use Corporate
Research Board’s American Corporate Statistical Library (ACSL) listings to identify the set of "high-impact" companies and obtain survey responses from 29% of them.

Table 2a: Trends in immigrant entrepreneurship and participation in new firms

Year
(1)

Immigrant
Immigrant
Column 5
Share of
Share of
Immigrant
entrepreneur
entrepreneur restricted to top
entering
Immigrant
Immigrant share, defined
quartile of
LEHD SEINs entering LBD
share of
rate, defined
as top three entrepreneurial with one or
firms with
Column 9
rate of
share of
workers in
as top three
more
one or more entering LBD weighted by
employment initial earners employment initial earners income in start
in new firms in business in new firms in business
year
immigrant
immigrant
employment
firms
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

6.3
6.4
6.2
6.1
6.2
6.1
6.0
5.9
6.1
6.3
6.3
6.0
5.5
4.9

1.6
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.0

20.6
21.0
21.5
21.9
22.0
22.7
23.5
24.7
25.2
25.7
25.7
25.6
25.4
25.6

16.7
19.3
21.0
22.1
22.6
23.2
24.3
25.6
26.6
27.0
27.1
27.2
26.9
27.1

15.6
15.5
16.3
16.9
16.9
18.5
18.8
20.0
19.4
20.3
20.7
19.8
19.7
20.1

29.8
30.9
31.7
32.4
33.5
34.2
35.6
36.7
36.0
35.8
35.9
35.9
34.2
35.6

31.1
33.1
33.0
33.8
34.3
35.9
36.6
38.5
38.6
36.8
37.4
37.8
36.0
37.0

19.3
20.3
20.5
20.8
21.3
22.1
23.6
25.1
25.7
24.9
25.3
26.3
25.2
26.2

18.8
19.4
19.8
20.0
20.2
20.9
22.6
23.4
24.0
24.1
24.0
24.4
24.4
24.8

Mean
Ratio 08/95
Ratio 05/97

6.0
0.78
1.02

2.2
1.24
1.22

23.7
1.24
1.20

24.1
1.62
1.29

18.5
1.29
1.27

34.2
1.19
1.13

35.7
1.19
1.13

23.3
1.36
1.23

22.2
1.32
1.21

Notes: Table provides broad trends related to employment in new firms by natives and immigrants in the LEHD and LBD. The sample includes 11 states present in the
LEHD by 1992: CA, CO, FL, ID, IL, LA, MD, NC, OR, WA, and WI. Columns 2 and 3 consider immigrant participation rates in new firms relative to the total
immigrant workforce in the LEHD. Columns 4-10 consider immigrant shares of activities relative to natives. New firms are defined through the LBD as described in the
text and retain their entering status for the first three years of the firm's life. Caution should be exercised with Column 2 and 3's trends from 2006 onwards due to
declines in match rates for the Business Registry Bridge between the LEHD and LBD late in the sample. Caution should also be used for Column 3's entry rates in 1995
and 1996 due to ongoing initialization that required minor extrapolation. Share-based calculations in Columns 4-10 are substantially less sensitive to these issues. The
appendix provides complementary statistics: [1] considering shorter series for 28 states present in the LEHD by 2000, [2] adjusting the definition of new firms to apply
to the first year of business entry only, and [3] separating one-digit SIC industries.

Table 2b: Table 2a for firms backed by venture capital

Year
(1)

Immigrant
Immigrant
Column 5
Share of
Share of
Immigrant
entrepreneur
entrepreneur restricted to top
entering
Immigrant
Immigrant share, defined
quartile of
LEHD SEINs entering LBD
share of
rate, defined
as top three entrepreneurial with one or
firms with
Column 9
rate of
share of
workers in
as top three
more
one or more entering LBD weighted by
employment initial earners employment initial earners income in start
in new firms in business in new firms in business
year
immigrant
immigrant
employment
firms
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

1.1
1.4
1.8
1.6
2.0
2.2
2.1
1.7
1.4
1.3
1.9

0.06
0.08
0.09
0.12
0.14
0.17
0.16
0.13
0.11
0.10
0.10

28.3
28.4
24.3
24.3
24.2
23.5
26.0
26.1
27.2
24.6
28.5

24.7
24.7
25.6
27.0
27.1
27.8
30.5
32.9
31.2
30.4
30.0

20.1
25.1
25.1
24.0
27.4
26.4
38.5
31.5
33.1
31.3
29.1

50.8
49.6
53.7
55.5
57.5
62.0
57.2
59.1
54.8
59.9
57.9

61.6
73.3
64.4
74.1
76.1
87.9
76.1
83.0
77.7
79.3
79.4

23.6
25.5
23.6
28.9
28.4
31.7
33.6
37.7
35.4
35.7
34.9

18.6
22.7
20.8
24.4
26.1
27.4
31.0
35.7
36.0
33.9
33.3

Mean
Ratio 05/95
Ratio 05/97

1.7
1.73
1.06

0.11
1.71
1.08

25.9
1.01
1.17

28.4
1.21
1.17

28.3
1.45
1.16

56.2
1.14
1.08

75.7
1.29
1.23

30.8
1.48
1.48

28.2
1.79
1.60

Notes: See Table 2a. Companies backed by venture capital investors are identified through firm names and locations as described in the text. Venture capital matching is
available through 2005. Inclusion in the venture capital group occurs if venture capital financing is ever received, rather than being specific to the first years of the firm.

Table 3: Trends for samples used in analytical work

Year
(1)

Full sample

Firms backed by venture capital

Immigrant
Share of
entering firms
entrepreneur
with one or
share, defined
more
as top three Column 2 with
immigrant
initial earners employment
weights
in business
entrepreneur

Immigrant
Share of
entrepreneur
entering firms
share, defined
with one or
as top three Column 2 with
more
initial earners employment
immigrant
in business
weights
entrepreneur

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

19.2
20.2
20.5
20.7
21.2
22.2
23.6
25.0
25.6
24.9
25.2

18.1
18.4
19.3
19.2
19.4
20.6
21.9
22.3
23.3
23.5
23.2

23.7
25.1
25.5
25.9
26.7
28.1
29.4
30.8
31.3
30.3
30.6

22.3
21.9
25.2
28.1
28.0
28.7
30.1
34.4
30.9
32.0
31.2

15.2
17.4
23.3
17.0
25.1
21.6
24.5
26.8
25.1
22.7
27.0

35.6
42.6
39.4
44.0
48.5
49.4
53.8
58.0
52.1
57.5
49.5

Mean
Ratio 05/95
Ratio 05/97

22.6
1.31
1.23

20.8
1.28
1.20

27.9
1.29
1.20

28.4
1.40
1.24

22.3
1.78
1.16

48.2
1.39
1.26

Notes: Table provides descriptive statistics for the sample of firms used for analytical work. The sample includes firms
founded 1992-2005 in a PMSA within a state present in the LEHD since 1992. Relative to Tables 2a and 2b, several data
preparation steps are undertaken to exclude entrants that are multi-unit LBD entering firms and entrants lacking complete
information for considered LBD and LEHD metrics (e.g., reported payroll). Metrics focus on the immigrant-native
composition of the top three initial earners. The sample ends with 2005 entrants to allow observation of LBD outcomes to
2011 and to circumvent issues with the LEHD-LBD match in later years. Employment weights are capped at 50 initial
employees.

Table 4a: Growth tabulations and immigrant entrepreneurship share, 3-year horizon
Row headers group
by initial employment:

Closed

1-4 empl.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Employment after three years:
5-9 empl.
10-19 empl.
20-99 empl.
(4)

(5)

(6)

100+ empl.

Total

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Distribution of outcomes by initial firm size, full sample (rows sum to 100%)
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.392
0.356
0.385

0.448
0.167
0.040

0.110
0.281
0.087

0.034
0.144
0.209

0.014
0.049
0.246

0.001
0.003
0.033

Panel B: Starting immigrant entrepreneurship share in new firms by outcome distribution
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.226
0.208
0.200

0.220
0.206
0.207

0.205
0.180
0.202

0.200
0.182
0.179

0.205
0.213
0.181

0.212
0.187
0.166

0.220
0.196
0.190

Total

0.220

0.219

0.196

0.187

0.191

0.173

0.212

Panel C: Starting immigrant employment share in new firms by outcome distribution
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.230
0.213
0.215

0.224
0.209
0.217

0.209
0.183
0.203

0.205
0.187
0.182

0.213
0.221
0.197

0.240
0.218
0.232

0.224
0.200
0.203

Total

0.226

0.222

0.199

0.191

0.204

0.232

0.217

Notes: Table describes transition/growth properties over 3-year horizon for entering cohorts 1992-2005, with outcomes measured after three years for
each entrant (e.g., 2004 for a 2001 entrant). Panel A tabulates the share of entrants for each starting size category that grow to the level indicated by
column headers, with rows summing to 100%. Panel B provides for each cell the average initial immigrant entrepreneurship share for grouped firms.
Entrepreneur definitions use top three initial earners, independent of whether these individuals remain with the firm or as a top earner in the firm.
Panel C provides for each cell the average initial immigrant employment share for grouped firms.

Table 4b: Table 4a with a 6-year horizon
Row headers group
by initial employment:

Closed

1-4 empl.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Employment after six years:
5-9 empl.
10-19 empl.
20-99 empl.
(4)

(5)

(6)

100+ empl.

Total

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Distribution of outcomes by initial firm size, full sample (rows sum to 100%)
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.571
0.536
0.566

0.299
0.130
0.037

0.082
0.180
0.065

0.032
0.105
0.136

0.015
0.046
0.171

0.001
0.003
0.024

Panel B: Starting immigrant entrepreneurship share in new firms by outcome distribution
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.226
0.208
0.198

0.215
0.192
0.199

0.203
0.178
0.206

0.198
0.174
0.175

0.201
0.203
0.173

0.221
0.178
0.155

0.220
0.196
0.190

Total

0.220

0.213

0.196

0.183

0.186

0.170

0.212

Panel C: Starting immigrant employment share in new firms by outcome distribution
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.230
0.212
0.214

0.219
0.195
0.205

0.206
0.179
0.204

0.203
0.180
0.177

0.209
0.209
0.189

0.241
0.220
0.215

0.224
0.200
0.203

Total

0.225

0.216

0.198

0.188

0.198

0.221

0.217

Notes: See Table 4a. Outcome distributions use a 6-year horizon for each entrant (e.g., 2007 for a 2001 entrant).

Table 5a: Regressions of 3-year outcomes using LBD firms
Traits of surviving firms in the third year
Employment
Establishment (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year
growth
Payroll growth count growth employment employment employment is (0,1) received
Fraction alive
relative to
relative to
relative to exceeds initial exceeds 100 in top decile venture capital
level
support
in third year firm's average firm's average firm's average
of industry
workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0086
0.0921
329,260

0.0848
0.2787
329,260

0.0027
0.0515
535,580

Panel A: Summary statistics
Mean
SD
Observations

0.6418
0.4866
535,580

0.2726
0.6823
329,260

0.2449
0.7216
329,260

0.0033
0.0567
329,260

0.5133
0.4998
329,260

Panel B: Estimation with cohort fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
entrepreneur share
ß / Mean of DV

-0.00335
(0.00186)

0.03130
(0.00301)

0.00037
(0.00356)

-0.00025
(0.00022)

0.01919
(0.00241)

0.00159
(0.00036)

0.00362
(0.00109)

0.00232
(0.00020)

-0.005

0.115

0.002

-0.076

0.037

0.185

0.043

0.872

Panel C: Estimation with cohort-PMSA-industry fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
entrepreneur share
ß / Mean of DV

0.01851
(0.00247)

0.00190
(0.00483)

-0.02375
(0.00569)

-0.00024
(0.00036)

0.00656
(0.00384)

0.00047
(0.00064)

0.00298
(0.00184)

0.00045
(0.00031)

0.029

0.007

-0.097

-0.073

0.013

0.055

0.035

0.169

Notes: See Tables 3 and 4a. Table quantifies how the outcomes of new firms vary by the share of the top three initial earners who are immigrants. The sample
includes firms founded 1992-2005 in a PMSA within a state present in LEHD since 1991. Outcome variables are measured through 2011 using the LBD. Columns
2-4 measure growth by comparing the change during the period to the average of the start and end values for the firm. Regressions are unweighted, report robust
standard errors, and control for the initial traits of starting log employees and log payroll of the venture. Observation counts are approximated per Census Bureau
requirements.

Table 5b: Table 5a with a 6-year horizon
Traits of surviving firms in the sixth year
Employment
Establishment (0,1) 6th-year (0,1) 6th-year (0,1) 6th-year
growth
Payroll growth count growth employment employment employment is
Fraction alive
relative to
relative to
relative to exceeds initial exceeds 100 in top decile
level
in sixth year firm's average firm's average firm's average
of industry
workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.5362
0.4987
233,000

0.0102
0.1003
233,000

0.0842
0.2776
233,000

Panel A: Summary statistics
Mean
SD
Observations

0.4350
0.4958
535,580

0.3097
0.7403
233,000

0.3643
0.7984
233,000

0.0034
0.0591
233,000

Panel B: Estimation with cohort fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
entrepreneur share
ß / U.S. mean

-0.01365
(0.00188)

0.04678
(0.00393)

0.00876
(0.00468)

0.00047
(0.00029)

0.02899
(0.00290)

0.00233
(0.00048)

0.00386
(0.00134)

-0.031

0.151

0.024

0.138

0.054

0.228

0.046

Panel C: Estimation with cohort-PMSA-industry fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
entrepreneur share
ß / U.S. mean
Notes: See Table 5a.

0.01795
(0.00243)

0.00760
(0.00665)

-0.02769
(0.00794)

-0.00032
(0.00038)

0.01326
(0.00489)

0.00157
(0.00087)

0.00029
(0.00245)

0.041

0.025

-0.076

-0.094

0.025

0.154

0.003

Table 6a: Split sample regressions for estimations with cohort fixed effects
Traits of surviving firms in the third year
Employment
Establishment (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year
growth
Payroll growth count growth employment employment employment is (0,1) received
Fraction alive
relative to
relative to
relative to exceeds initial exceeds 100 in top decile venture capital
level
support
in third year firm's average firm's average firm's average
of industry
workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Estimation with cohort fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Full sample

-0.00335
(0.00186)

0.03130
(0.00301)

0.00037
(0.00356)

-0.00025
(0.00022)

0.01919
(0.00241)

0.00159
(0.00036)

0.00362
(0.00109)

0.00232
(0.00020)

Low-wage firms

0.01380
(0.00247)

0.00410
(0.00394)

-0.00157
(0.00478)

-0.00045
(0.00024)

0.00320
(0.00331)

0.00000
(0.00038)

-0.00285
(0.00125)

0.00006
(0.00006)

High-wage firms

-0.02681
(0.00280)

0.06039
(0.00463)

0.00316
(0.00531)

-0.00023
(0.00038)

0.04215
(0.00353)

0.00273
(0.00064)

0.00848
(0.00180)

0.00484
(0.00045)

Low-tech firms

-0.00015
(0.00193)

0.03169
(0.00312)

-0.00220
(0.00368)

-0.00018
(0.00023)

0.01994
(0.00252)

0.00169
(0.00037)

0.00271
(0.00112)

0.00092
(0.00014)

High-tech firms

-0.02383
(0.00627)

0.02898
(0.01116)

0.02307
(0.01346)

-0.00126
(0.00083)

0.01794
(0.00822)

-0.00021
(0.00145)

0.01088
(0.00422)

0.00988
(0.00160)

VC-backed firms

0.03990
(0.03374)

-0.11521
(0.05524)

-0.11576
(0.07042)

-0.00624
(0.01009)

-0.01279
(0.02701)

-0.07686
(0.02287)

-0.09093
(0.04436)

n.a.

Notes: See Panel B of Table 5a. Each entry in table is a coefficient from a separate regression with the indicated sample.

Table 6b: Split sample regressions for estimations with cohort-PMSA-industry fixed effects
Traits of surviving firms in the third year
Employment
Establishment (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year
growth
Payroll growth count growth employment employment employment is (0,1) received
Fraction alive
relative to
relative to
relative to exceeds initial exceeds 100 in top decile venture capital
level
support
in third year firm's average firm's average firm's average
of industry
workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Estimation with cohort-PMSA-industry fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Full sample

0.0185
(0.0025)

0.0019
(0.0048)

-0.0238
(0.0057)

-0.0002
(0.0004)

0.0066
(0.0038)

0.0005
(0.0006)

0.0030
(0.0018)

0.0005
(0.0003)

Low-wage firms

0.0280
(0.0037)

-0.0337
(0.0076)

-0.0186
(0.0093)

-0.0002
(0.0005)

-0.0209
(0.0064)

0.0003
(0.0008)

-0.0027
(0.0026)

0.0000
(0.0001)

High-wage firms

0.0000
(0.0039)

0.0464
(0.0076)

-0.0216
(0.0087)

-0.0007
(0.0006)

0.0370
(0.0058)

-0.0005
(0.0011)

0.0089
(0.0031)

0.0009
(0.0007)

Low-tech firms

0.0222
(0.0027)

0.0001
(0.0051)

-0.0271
(0.0060)

-0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0062
(0.0041)

0.0008
(0.0007)

0.0018
(0.0019)

0.0002
(0.0002)

High-tech firms

-0.0022
(0.0085)

0.0258
(0.0180)

-0.0084
(0.0221)

-0.0001
(0.0016)

0.0254
(0.0135)

-0.0021
(0.0027)

0.0133
(0.0071)

0.0023
(0.0025)

VC-backed firms

0.0319
(0.0871)

-0.2620
(0.1549)

-0.3500
(0.1868)

0.0101
(0.0138)

-0.0709
(0.0792)

-0.0311
(0.0557)

-0.1061
(0.1163)

n.a.

Notes: See Panel C of Table 5a. Each entry in table is a coefficient from a separate regression with the indicated sample.

Table 7: Distributions of child immigrant entrepreneurship
Row headers group
by initial employment:

Closed

1-4 empl.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Employment after three or six years:
5-9 empl.
10-19 empl.
20+ empl.
(4)

(5)

(6)

Total
(7)

Panel A: Share of immigrant entrepreneurs who migrated as children, 3-year distribution
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.344
0.329
0.493

0.366
0.455
0.455

0.450
0.329
0.343

0.462
0.438
0.337

0.333
0.410
0.503

0.372
0.373
0.464

Total

0.391

0.379

0.394

0.403

0.469

0.400

Panel B: Share of immigrant entrepreneurs who migrated as children, 6-year distribution
1-4 employees
5-9 employees
10+ employees

0.348
0.349
0.484

0.379
0.368
0.211

0.449
0.361
0.375

0.426
0.478
0.358

0.419
0.424
0.504

0.372
0.373
0.464

Total

0.392

0.368

0.410

0.418

0.477

0.400

Notes: See Tables 4a and 4b. Values document the share of immigrant entrepreneurs in each cell that migrated to the United States
by age 18. The sample is restricted to immigrant entrepreneurs aged 20-54 in 2000 who are surveyed by the long form of the
Decennial Census.

Appendix Table 1: Initial year of state inclusion in the LEHD
Year

States entering LEHD

Cumulative state count

(1)

(2)

(3)

1991 or before
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

CA, CO, ID, IL, LA, MD, NC, OR, WA, WI
FL
MT

10
11
12
12
16
18
19
25
26
28
28
29

HI, NM, RI, TX
ME, NJ
WV
GA, IA, IN, SC, TN, VA
UT
OK, VT
AR

Notes: LEHD files for states run through 2008 in version used in this study. The start year differs
by state and is tabulated in this table. Parts of the records for Georgia and Indiana (EHF, ECF)
start earlier than 1998.

Appendix Table 2a: LEHD trends using all earners and 3-year new firm definition

Year
(1)

Total share of Immigrant rate
Immigrant
Count of
Count of other
Count of
Count of other immigrants in
of
Native rate of
share of
immigrants in
immigrant natives in new native wage
LEHD
employment in employment in employment in
wage workers
workers
workforce
new firms
firms
new firms
new firms
new firms
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

6.3%
6.4%
6.2%
6.1%
6.2%
6.1%
6.0%
5.9%
6.1%
6.3%
6.3%
6.0%
5.5%
4.9%

4.7%
4.8%
4.8%
4.8%
4.9%
4.9%
4.7%
4.5%
4.6%
4.7%
4.8%
4.6%
4.3%
3.8%

20.6%
21.0%
21.5%
21.9%
22.0%
22.7%
23.5%
24.7%
25.2%
25.7%
25.7%
25.6%
25.4%
25.6%

6.0%
6.0%
6.1%
6.2%
5.9%
5.5%
4.9%

4.6%
4.6%
4.6%
4.6%
4.4%
4.1%
3.7%

20.5%
20.9%
21.6%
22.0%
22.1%
22.1%
22.1%

Panel A: LEHD states present by 1992
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

203,480
223,590
238,330
254,720
272,660
289,120
299,620
299,430
309,820
326,070
332,780
319,490
275,820
226,920

3,036,760
3,293,330
3,624,270
3,901,610
4,155,360
4,435,670
4,665,730
4,735,170
4,753,190
4,847,310
4,940,650
5,004,690
4,755,270
4,419,640

785,550
839,190
870,560
908,040
964,550
986,950
975,540
915,030
918,170
943,290
960,510
926,830
808,390
659,940

15,790,590
16,570,810
17,448,260
18,140,570
18,732,440
19,356,100
19,723,010
19,397,310
19,079,330
19,095,630
19,146,990
19,177,940
18,114,770
16,640,660

16.4%
16.8%
17.4%
17.9%
18.4%
18.8%
19.3%
19.9%
20.2%
20.5%
20.8%
20.9%
21.0%
21.2%

Panel B: LEHD states present by 2000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

441,390
445,890
467,010
480,550
463,750
406,860
337,480

6,934,120
6,992,490
7,158,580
7,321,280
7,449,540
7,046,720
6,546,090

1,707,180
1,684,910
1,691,990
1,706,910
1,636,550
1,430,920
1,188,780

35,645,500
35,077,100
35,131,620
35,252,440
35,356,850
33,340,470
30,801,120

16.5%
16.8%
17.2%
17.4%
17.6%
17.7%
17.7%

Notes: Table provides counts and statistics related to employment in new firms by natives and immigrants in the LEHD. Panel A presents statistics
for 11 states present in the LEHD by 1992. Panel B presents statistics for 28 states present by 2000. Appendix Table 1 lists states. New firms are
defined through the LBD as described in the text and retain their new firm status for the first three years of the firm's life. Caution should be
exercised with trends from 2006 onwards due to declines in match rates for the Business Registry Bridge between the LEHD and LBD late in the
sample. Observation counts are approximated per Census Bureau requirements.

Appendix Table 2b: LEHD trends using all earners and 1-year new firm definition

Year
(1)

Total share of
Immigrant
Count of
Count of other
Count of
Count of other immigrants in Immigrant rate Native rate of
share of
immigrants in
immigrant
natives in new native wage
LEHD
of employment employment in employment in
new firms
wage workers
firms
workers
workforce
in new firms
new firms
new firms
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

2.1%
2.2%
2.3%
2.1%
2.2%
2.1%
2.2%
2.2%
2.1%
2.0%
2.0%
2.1%
2.2%
2.1%
1.7%
1.4%
1.2%

1.6%
1.7%
1.7%
1.6%
1.7%
1.6%
1.7%
1.7%
1.6%
1.4%
1.4%
1.6%
1.6%
1.6%
1.3%
1.2%
0.9%

17.6%
18.3%
19.0%
20.8%
21.4%
21.9%
21.8%
22.1%
23.4%
25.2%
26.1%
25.6%
26.0%
25.8%
25.0%
23.9%
24.9%

2.1%
2.0%
2.0%
2.0%
2.1%
2.0%
1.7%
1.3%
1.2%

1.6%
1.4%
1.4%
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
1.3%
1.1%
0.9%

19.4%
20.9%
22.0%
21.1%
22.3%
22.2%
21.8%
20.7%
21.1%

Panel A: LEHD states present by 1992
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

44,770
51,640
59,350
69,060
78,990
79,920
89,420
96,200
99,720
97,340
98,290
107,280
113,290
108,710
89,640
69,370
53,730

2,138,260
2,333,490
2,523,290
3,171,180
3,437,930
3,782,690
4,066,900
4,331,820
4,625,080
4,867,410
4,936,300
4,955,730
5,060,100
5,164,720
5,234,540
4,961,720
4,592,830

210,120
229,890
253,490
262,370
289,720
285,110
320,520
338,820
326,510
289,260
278,210
311,420
322,450
312,650
268,900
220,510
161,870

12,714,680
13,581,600
14,236,840
16,313,760
17,120,320
18,033,710
18,728,090
19,358,170
20,016,540
20,409,280
20,034,130
19,686,080
19,716,470
19,794,860
19,835,880
18,702,570
17,138,720

14.4%
14.7%
15.1%
16.4%
16.8%
17.4%
17.9%
18.4%
18.8%
19.3%
19.9%
20.2%
20.5%
20.8%
20.9%
21.0%
21.2%

Panel B: LEHD states present by 2000
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

145,660
142,060
143,950
145,430
163,690
159,460
131,500
100,410
79,880

6,725,760
7,105,810
7,231,560
7,292,940
7,461,900
7,642,370
7,781,790
7,353,160
6,803,680

603,720
538,650
510,020
542,420
570,290
559,920
471,920
385,290
299,580

36,644,220
37,404,240
36,842,660
36,219,590
36,253,320
36,639,440
36,521,490
34,386,140
31,690,320

15.6%
16.0%
16.5%
16.8%
17.2%
17.3%
17.6%
17.7%
17.7%

Notes: See Table 2a. Table adjusts the definition of new firms to apply to the first year of business entry only.

Appendix Table 3a: Immigrant rate of employment in new firms by SIC group
Year

SIC1

SIC2

SIC3

SIC4

SIC5

SIC6

SIC7

SIC8

Low Tech

High Tech

VC funded

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

5.3
5.6
5.5
5.1
5.2
5.1
5.1
5.0
5.1
5.2
5.0
4.6
4.2
4.1

6.4
6.4
6.2
6.2
6.2
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.2
6.5
6.5
6.2
5.7
5.1

5.4
5.7
5.7
5.4
6.0
6.7
6.5
5.9
5.8
5.1
4.9
4.6
3.9
3.4

1.1
1.4
1.8
1.6
2.0
2.2
2.1
1.7
1.4
1.3
1.9
1.4
0.9
0.3

Panel A: LEHD states present by 1992
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

9.4
9.2
8.5
8.4
8.2
7.9
7.5
7.5
7.7
8.0
8.4
8.1
7.4
6.3

5.2
5.3
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.3
4.3
4.5
3.9
4.6
4.7
4.5
4.1
3.2

3.2
3.3
3.4
3.1
3.0
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.6
2.2
1.9

5.2
5.3
5.1
4.8
5.2
5.0
5.3
5.4
5.7
5.9
5.4
5.0
5.4
4.8

8.2
8.2
8.1
8.0
7.8
7.7
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.6
7.6
7.3
6.8
6.2

4.5
4.7
4.8
5.2
5.4
5.4
5.2
5.3
6.1
6.4
6.6
6.2
5.2
4.3

8.4
8.5
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.3
8.3
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.6
7.1
6.3
5.8

Appendix Table 3a, continued
Year

SIC1

SIC2

SIC3

SIC4

SIC5

SIC6

SIC7

SIC8

Low Tech

High Tech

VC funded

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

4.8
4.7
4.9
4.7
4.4
4.1
3.9

6.0
6.0
6.2
6.3
6.0
5.6
5.1

6.0
5.7
5.2
4.9
4.7
4.2
3.8

1.5
1.2
1.2
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.3

Panel B: LEHD states present by 2000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

7.6
7.5
7.8
8.1
7.7
7.3
6.4

4.0
3.6
4.0
4.1
4.0
3.6
2.9

2.9
3.0
3.0
2.9
2.7
2.3
2.2

5.4
5.4
5.5
5.2
4.8
5.2
4.7

7.8
7.8
7.7
7.7
7.4
7.0
6.3

5.0
5.6
5.8
6.1
5.6
4.8
4.1

7.6
7.5
7.4
7.6
7.2
6.6
6.0

Notes: The one-digit SIC codes cover the following industries; SIC1: Metal Mining, Coal Mining, Oil & Gas Extraction, Nonmetal Minerals (except Fuels), General
Building Contractors, Heavy Construction (excl. Building), Special Trade Contractors, SIC2: Food & Kindred Products, Tobacco Products, Textile Mill Products, Apparel &
Other Textile Products, Lumber & Wood Products, Furniture & Fixtures, Paper & Allied Products, Printing & Publishing, Chemicals & Allied Products, Petroleum & Coal
Products, SIC3: Rubber & Misc. Plastics Products, Leather & Leather Products, Stone & Clay & Glass Products, Primary Metal Industries, Fabricated Metal Products,
Industrial Machinery & Equipment, Electronic & Other Electric Equipment, Transportation Equipment, Instruments & Related Products, Misc. Manufacturing, SIC4:
Railroad Transportation, Local & Interurban Passenger Transit, Trucking & Warehousing, Water Transportation, Pipelines (except Natural Gas), Transportation Services,
Communications, Electric, Gas & Sanitary Services, SIC5: Wholesale Trade - Durable Goods, Wholesale Trade - Nondurable Goods, Building Materials & Garden
Supplies, General Merchandise Stores, Food Stores, Automotive Dealers & Service Stations, Apparel & Accessories Stores, Furniture & Home Furnishings Stores, Eating &
Drinking Places, SIC6: Depository Institutions, Nondepository Institutions, Security & Commodity Brokers, Insurance Carriers, Holdings & Other Investment Offices, SIC7:
Hotels & Other Lodgings Places, Personal Services, Business Services, Auto Repair & Services & Parking's, Miscellaneous Repair Services, Motion Pictures, Amusement &
Recreation Services, SIC8: Health Services, Legal Services, Educational Services, Social Services, Museums & Botanical & Zoological Gardeners, Membership
Organizations, Services NEC. The high-tech industries are based on the three-digit SIC classification as shown in Hecker (1999).

Appendix Table 3b: Immigrant share of employment in new firms by SIC group
Year

SIC1

SIC2

SIC3

SIC4

SIC5

SIC6

SIC7

SIC8

Low Tech

High Tech

VC funded

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

16.0
16.6
16.8
16.8
17.0
17.5
18.4
19.4
20.8
21.9
21.9
22.0
22.1
22.8

20.4
20.9
21.3
21.8
22.0
22.5
23.3
24.6
25.2
25.8
25.6
25.7
25.5
25.7

22.9
22.5
22.9
22.8
22.0
23.6
24.6
25.4
25.4
24.8
24.6
24.7
24.7
24.4

28.3
28.4
24.3
24.3
24.2
23.5
26.0
26.1
27.2
24.6
28.5
26.9
26.3
28.1

15.9
16.8
18.0
18.2
18.3
18.4
18.8

20.4
20.8
21.6
22.0
22.1
22.2
22.2

21.9
22.0
21.5
21.7
21.5
21.5
21.2

22.7
23.4
21.0
24.6
23.7
23.1
25.3

Panel A: LEHD states present by 1992
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

13.7
14.1
14.2
14.9
15.6
16.6
17.3
18.2
19.3
19.6
19.7
19.9
19.9
19.6

33.2
33.8
32.6
34.4
34.9
33.4
33.0
33.6
31.6
31.0
30.9
30.4
30.4
28.9

27.9
25.7
26.7
26.5
25.8
28.0
28.7
28.2
26.3
25.9
25.9
25.5
25.7
24.6

16.8
16.8
17.1
17.5
19.1
20.8
21.4
23.3
23.6
23.1
23.3
23.0
21.0
21.6

24.5
25.7
26.6
26.8
26.8
26.8
27.5
29.7
30.1
31.3
31.8
31.4
31.1
30.8

14.1
14.8
15.3
16.0
16.0
16.4
16.6
17.7
19.1
19.7
19.9
20.1
19.6
19.4

20.0
21.2
21.8
22.4
22.9
24.0
25.8
26.8
26.3
27.0
26.9
27.0
26.7
27.0

Panel B: LEHD states present by 2000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

16.1
16.6
17.0
17.1
17.2
17.5
17.5

25.3
23.7
24.3
24.7
24.7
24.4
23.3

Notes: See Appendix Table 3a.

22.1
21.5
21.8
21.6
20.9
20.5
20.2

17.3
16.9
17.4
18.3
18.8
18.4
18.3

25.5
26.3
27.1
27.9
28.0
28.3
27.9

14.5
15.6
16.3
16.6
16.8
16.5
16.4

22.9
22.6
23.4
23.7
24.1
24.1
24.0

Appendix Table 4: LEHD comparisons of immigrant and native employees in new firms
Trait
(1)

Immigrants
Mean
SD
(2)

(3)

Natives
Mean

SD

(4)

(5)

Immigrant/ Difference
native ratio
p-value
(6)

(7)

Panel A: Traits of initial employees in new firms, full sample
Age
Male
Average quarterly earnings in year before founding
Average quarterly earnings in year of founding
Average quarterly earnings in year after founding
N

37.6
61.8
$7,335
$9,305
$10,199
1,605,970

9.2
48.6
$25,140
$155,301
$23,236

36.2
57.7
$9,028
$10,236
$11,339
5,700,570

9.9
49.4
$29,878
$31,949
$33,915

1.037
1.071
0.812
0.909
0.899

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel B: Panel A for firms backed by venture capital
Age
Male
Average quarterly earnings in year before founding
Average quarterly earnings in year of founding
Average quarterly earnings in year after founding
N
Notes: Descriptive traits are developed from LEHD.

34.8
0.71
$21,160
$20,137
$24,957
18,650

8.2
0.46
$102,666
$20,603
$23,524

34.6
0.64
$19,516
$18,525
$23,503
48,910

8.9
0.48
$134,875
$21,456
$28,566

1.008
1.100
1.084
1.087
1.062

0.000
0.000
0.089
0.000
0.000

Appendix Table 5: 2000 Census comparisons of immigrant and native employees in new firms
Trait
(1)

Immigrants
Mean
SD
(2)

Mean

SD

Immigrant/
native ratio

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

1.032
1.064
1.235
1.429
1.109
0.868
1.149
1.074
1.001
0.949

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Natives

(3)

Difference
p-value

Traits of employees in new firms, full sample
Age
Male
Married
Number of children
Bachelor's education and higher
Home owner
Home value (max=$1 million)
Implied rental value
Move-in date
Household income (max=$2.5 million)
Year of arrival to United States

38.1
60.0%
66.4%
1.40
25.2%
56.6%
$188,172
$165,472
1994.2
$65,737
1984.0

9.2
49.0%
47.3%
1.39
43.4%
49.6%
$169,972
$84,305
5.7
$74,124
9.7

36.9
56.5%
53.7%
0.98
22.7%
65.3%
$163,722
$154,054
1992.7
$69,286

10.0
49.6%
49.9%
1.17
41.9%
47.6%
$152,863
$88,127
7.7
$72,430

Notes: Descriptive traits are developed from 2000 Decennial Census match to LEHD. Implied rental value of dwelling is 20x monthly rent.

Appendix Table 6a: Table 5a with immigrant share of all initial employees
Traits of surviving firms in the third year
Employment
Establishment (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year (0,1) 3rd-year
growth
Payroll growth count growth employment employment employment is
Fraction alive
relative to
relative to
relative to exceeds initial exceeds 100 in top decile
level
in third year firm's average firm's average firm's average
of industry
workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.5133
0.4998
329,260

0.0086
0.0921
329,260

0.0848
0.2787
329,260

Panel A: Summary statistics
Mean
SD
Observations

0.6418
0.4866
535,580

0.2726
0.6823
329,260

0.2449
0.7216
329,260

0.0033
0.0567
329,260

Panel B: Estimation with cohort fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
employee share

-0.01017
(0.00182)

0.03382
(0.00295)

-0.00062
(0.00350)

-0.00047
(0.00019)

0.01913
(0.00238)

0.00479
(0.00032)

0.00881
(0.00097)

ß / Mean of DV

-0.016

0.124

-0.003

-0.142

0.037

0.557

0.104

Panel C: Estimation with cohort-PMSA-industry fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
employee share

0.01753
(0.00244)

0.00298
(0.00479)

-0.02772
(0.00566)

-0.00039
(0.00033)

0.00629
(0.00383)

0.00454
(0.00054)

0.01103
(0.00167)

ß / Mean of DV

0.027

0.011

-0.113

-0.118

0.012

0.528

0.130

Notes: See Table 5a.

Appendix Table 6b: Table 5b with immigrant share of all initial employees
Traits of surviving firms in the sixth year
Employment
Establishment (0,1) 6th-year (0,1) 6th-year (0,1) 6th-year
growth
Payroll growth count growth employment employment employment is
Fraction alive
relative to
relative to
relative to exceeds initial exceeds 100 in top decile
level
in sixth year firm's average firm's average firm's average
of industry
workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.5362
0.4987
233,000

0.0102
0.1003
233,000

0.0842
0.2776
233,000

Panel A: Summary statistics
Mean
SD
Observations

0.4350
0.4958
535,580

0.3097
0.7403
233,000

0.3643
0.7984
233,000

0.0034
0.0591
233,000

Panel B: Estimation with cohort fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
employee share
ß / U.S. mean

-0.02096
(0.00183)

0.05274
(0.00386)

0.01198
(0.00461)

-0.00012
(0.00023)

0.02953
(0.00286)

0.00552
(0.00043)

0.00967
(0.00122)

-0.048

0.170

0.033

-0.035

0.055

0.541

0.115

Panel C: Estimation with cohort-PMSA-industry fixed effects and controls for initial traits
Firm's immigrant
employee share
ß / U.S. mean
Notes: See Table 5b.

0.01591
(0.00236)

0.01240
(0.00663)

-0.02835
(0.00789)

-0.00039
(0.00038)

0.01319
(0.00490)

0.00484
(0.00078)

0.00779
(0.00228)

0.037

0.040

-0.078

-0.115

0.025

0.475

0.093

